A L8E;D8IB V@:KFIP =FI DFD<JK@: WFIB<IJ:
New Convention Establishes First Global Labor
Standards for Millions of Women and Girls
By Nisha Varia and Jo Becker
If someone had told me 45 years ago that we would be here today, I
would not have believed it. We do not have to be slaves anymore.
—Myrtle Witbooi, chair of the International Domestic Workers
Network and former domestic worker from South Africa, Geneva,
June 10, 2011
On June 16, 2011, with the world’s attention consumed by street protests in
the Middle East and a stubbornly bleak global economy, a quiet revolution
took place. Overcoming initial skepticism and resistance, members of the
International Labour Organization (ILO)—governments, trade unions, and
employers’ associations—voted overwhelmingly in favor of a new groundbreaking
treaty that, for the first time, established global labor standards for
the estimated 50 to 100 million domestic workers worldwide who clean, cook,
and care for children and the elderly in private households.
ILO Convention 189 Concerning Decent Work for Domestic Workers did not
topple any dictators, but it does radically change how domestic workers—the
vast majority of whom are women and girls—and their work inside the home
are valued, recognized, and protected. Its desperately needed and long overdue
protections shake deeply entrenched gender discrimination in social and
legal norms, and, in some countries, the lingering legacies of slavery.
Many countries exclude domestic workers from labor laws partially or completely,
denying them basic labor protections that most other categories of
workers can take for granted, such as a minimum wage or limits to hours of
work. Such exclusion—together with discrimination and a profound devaluation
of work associated with traditional, unpaid female roles has—led to a
wide and disturbing range of abuses against domestic workers around the world, many of whom are migrants and an estimated 30 percent of whom are
children under the age of 18.
Over the past 10 years, Human Rights Watch’s research in countries as
diverse as Indonesia, Saudi Arabia, the United States, Morocco, Guinea, and
El Salvador has documented pervasive abuses and labor exploitation, including
excessively long working hours without rest; unpaid wages for months or
years; forced confinement in the workplace; food deprivation; verbal, physical,
and sexual abuse; and forced labor including debt bondage and trafficking.
Domestic workers who suffer such abuses typically have little access to
redress.
Governments overwhelmingly voted in favor of the ILO convention, which
guarantees domestic workers labor protections equivalent to those of other
workers, including for working hours, minimum wage coverage, overtime compensation,
daily and weekly rest periods, social security, and maternity leave.
The new standards oblige governments to address the minimum age for children
in domestic work and their right to attend school, protect domestic
workers from violence and abuse, regulate recruitment agencies and fees,
and set out measures for effective monitoring and enforcement.
While adoption of the convention was a major victory worthy of celebration,
the toughest work lies ahead: ensuring that the convention is ratified, incorporated
into domestic laws worldwide, and enforced. This essay describes
the situation that domestic workers currently face, analyzes how a constellation
of forces came together in 2011 to get the ILO convention adopted, and
outlines steps that need to be taken now to ensure that this positive development
leads to tangible improvements in the lives and working conditions of
domestic workers.
Abuses against Domestic Workers
I woke up at 5 a.m., cleaned the house and made breakfast for the
children and worked all day. I went to sleep at 3 a.m. I never got a
chance to rest…. The wife of the employer shouted and beat me
every day…. The employer had my passport. The door was locked.
I was not allowed to go out or even talk to the neighbors. I never
received my salary.
—Chain Channi, Cambodian domestic worker, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia, April 12, 2011
Domestic workers play a critical economic role globally, helping households
manage responsibilities of child care, cooking, and cleaning. They also free
up their employers to participate in the workforce themselves and provide
care for the industrialized world’s increasingly aging population. Migrant
domestic workers send home billions of dollars in remittances to developing
countries each year, but despite their economic contributions, sending governments
have largely ignored protection concerns.
Domestic workers, who often make extraordinary personal sacrifices to support
their families, have routinely been denied basic protections guaranteed
others workers and are among the most exploited workers in the world. Gaps
in legal protections, isolation in private homes, and social norms that have
sanctioned exploitation of a “servant” class have given rise to abuses ranging
from endemic labor exploitation in which workers toil around the clock for little
or no pay, to trafficking into domestic servitude and slavery.
In a review of 72 countries’ labor laws, the ILO found that 40 percent did not
guarantee domestic workers a weekly rest day, and half did not limit hours of
work. Many national child labor laws currently exclude domestic workers,
meaning employers can employ young children and make them labor for long
hours, often at the cost of their education and health. A Human Rights Watch
study in Indonesia found that only 1 in 45 child domestic workers interviewed
was attending school.
Many domestic workers are international migrants who confront additional
risks posed by language barriers, precarious immigration status, excessive
recruitment fees, and employers’ confiscation of passports. Human Rights
Watch investigations across Asia and the Middle East have documented the
failure of many governments to monitor recruitment agencies that impose
heavy debt burdens or to ensure that migrant domestic workers have access
to courts, information about their rights, and support services when they face
abuse.
Trade unions have begun organizing domestic workers in recent decades in
places such as South Africa, Hong Kong, and Brazil, but for the most part the
organized labor movement has been slow to take up domestic workers’ concerns
and the particular risks faced by children and migrants. The process of
negotiating global labor standards on domestic work brought together a
diverse alliance of domestic worker organizations, NGOs, and trade unions
working to reverse this dynamic.
Forging Global Labor Standards
The lack of protection for domestic workers represents a significant
gap in the coverage of international labor standards…. Domestic
workers around the world are looking to the ILC [International
Labour Conference] to adopt a convention that would help to
overcome past injustices and give domestic workers a better future.
—Maria Luisa Escorel, minister counselor, permanent mission
of Brazil, Geneva, June 2011
The ILO convention adopted in June 2011 was unthinkable just a few years
ago. It represents the culmination of years of efforts by domestic workers,
advocates, and officials to shine a spotlight on a long-ignored but significant
sector of the workforce. These efforts properly focused on the ILO, with its
unique tripartite structure in which workers’ groups, employers’ groups, and
governments (183 countries are members) negotiate international standards,
with all three component groups having a vote.
The push for new global labor standards began in earnest in March 2008
when domestic worker advocacy groups, migrants’ groups, and global trade
unions successfully pressed to get domestic work formally on the ILO agenda.
This was followed by a series of intensive consultations with ILO members
and opportunities for them to comment on draft instruments between 2008
and 2010, and two rounds of on-the-floor negotiations at the International
Labour Conference in Geneva in June 2010 and June 2011.
Many governments initially expressed hesitation or direct opposition to a
legally binding convention on domestic work, citing the impracticality of monitoring
work in private households and their reluctance to add to a growing
body of international labor standards, many of which had poor rates of ratification.
However, the ILO survey of laws and practices around the world, opening
statements at the negotiations by the workers’ group and key governments,
and lobbying by domestic workers’ organizations and NGOs made a
strong case that the pervasive exploitation and abuse in this sector could no
longer be neglected.
The workers’ position was formally represented by the International Trade
Union Confederation (ITUC), the global umbrella for national trade union federations,
and supported by the ILO unit assisting workers (ACTRAV). The
newly formed International Domestic Workers Network (IDWN), supported by
the main global trade union for food workers (IUF), ensured domestic workers’
voices were represented in the negotiations. They brought domestic
workers from around the world to participate in and observe the negotiations,
and several of them were selected for their country’s official worker delegations,
including those from Mexico, Brazil, South Africa, Jamaica, the US, and
the United Kingdom. Anti-Slavery International facilitated a delegation of
child domestic workers to share their experiences and recommendations to
the negotiating committee.
The employers’ position was formally represented by the International
Organization of Employers (IOE), which had little previous experience with the
issue.
From the outset of the negotiations, the employers pushed strongly for a nonbinding
recommendation in lieu of a legally binding convention, and were
particularly concerned by additional regulation of private employment agencies
that they feared was unrealistic and impractical. However, a change in
leadership between the second and third years of negotiations, engagement
with NGOs to learn more about abusive practices by recruitment agencies in
some parts of the world, and a clear signal of overwhelming support for a
binding convention led the employers to back down from their opposition.
The employers’ representative spoke strongly on behalf of the new standards
during the final vote, and more than half of the employers cast their votes in
favor of adopting the convention.
Some of the most contentious debates during the negotiations included regulation
of employment agencies, elements of written contracts for domestic
workers, provisions on social security and a healthy working environment,
and how to account for working hours when domestic workers are not actively
working but must be available to be “on-call.” Surprisingly, provisions on
monitoring and inspections of private homes garnered little controversy during
the final debate.
From the outset of negotiations, key governments provided decisive support,
advocating strongly for binding standards that would extend equal labor protections
to domestic workers. Delegates from Australia, Brazil, South Africa
(speaking on behalf of the Africa group), the US, Argentina, and Uruguay
spoke up repeatedly to introduce and defend strong provisions and to point
to effective country-level examples of legislation and implementation.
Although European Union countries, with the exception of the UK and the
Czech Republic, cast their final votes in favor of the convention, the EU
played a disappointing role during the negotiations, often attempting to
weaken suggested provisions. In part, this emanated from the EU’s desire to
avoid highly politicized debates on migrants’ rights in their home countries
and, in general, to work around specific provisions in EU directives and reflect
existing national legislation. ILO members made a number of concessions in
order to accommodate EU concerns, hoping to win their support and avoid
the credibility problems faced by the United Nations Migrant Worker Convention, which has been primarily ratified by migrant-sending countries
and ignored by migrant-receiving countries.
As negotiations progressed, support for the convention grew. Some states
with initially hostile attitudes changed their positions as they heard evidence
of the abuses against domestic workers and concrete examples of how legislation
in a diverse array of countries could improve domestic workers’ rights.
Members of the Gulf Cooperation Council (Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, the
United Arab Emirates (UAE), and Saudi Arabia), along with Bangladesh,
Indonesia, and India, reversed early opposition to a legally binding convention
and expressed support in the final vote.
On June 16, 2011, the newly negotiated standards won overwhelming support,
with 396 delegates (representing governments, workers, and employers’
associations) voting for the convention, 16 voting against, and 63 abstaining.
Swaziland was the only government to vote against the convention.
Translating Standards into Change on the Ground
While we celebrate this historic moment, we also know that there
are many challenges to face in our struggle to ensure that these
rights, now enshrined in Convention form, are upheld, protected,
and defended.
—Migrant Forum in Asia, statement, Manila, June 16, 2011
Adopting a new convention is only the first step in a long, difficult campaign
for widespread ratification and implementation. However, the process of
negotiating the convention has already played a critical role in raising awareness
about a labor sector once largely hidden from public view. This has
already begun to shift attitudes away from perceiving household work as
informal labor, to recognizing it as work deserving of comprehensive protections.
The negotiations also served as a focal point to mobilize a diverse array
of actors committed to enshrining these standards in national laws and practices
on the ground.
Two ratifications are required for the convention to come into force, and several
countries have already expressed their intention to ratify, including
Belgium, Brazil, Namibia, Norway, Peru, the Philippines, and Uruguay.
National consultations on the convention are taking place in others. Whether
governments are close to ratifying the convention or not, they will feel pressure
to respect the standards it sets forth. For example, several countries are
currently drafting or revising legislation on domestic work, such as Kuwait,
the UAE, Lebanon, Indonesia, and the Philippines, and they will consult the
standards as they finalize their laws. Singapore and Malaysia, two of the nine
countries that did not vote in the convention’s favor, will find it in their interest
to introduce reforms anyway to remain an attractive destination for
migrant domestic workers who can increasingly opt for better working conditions
and pay elsewhere.
Discrimination and exploitative practices are deeply entrenched and recognition
and respect for domestic workers’ rights will not improve overnight. To
make the new standards count, domestic workers’ groups, migrants’ groups,
trade unions, the ILO, NGOs, and other advocates must strengthen efforts at
the national level to replicate their success in Geneva at the international
level. They must also raise public awareness among key constituencies such
as national labor officials, employers, trade unions, and media. They will then
need to mobilize and build momentum around national consultations, ILO
ratification, and related legislative reforms.
Because the strength and diversity of the domestic workers’ movement varies
greatly by country and region, a third priority is to provide international support
to national and regional groups as needed. This may entail working to
ensure freedom of association for domestic workers, providing financial and
organizational support to fledgling groups, or building alliances among
domestic workers, labor, migrants, women’s rights, and children’s rights
organizations.
Finally, dissemination of best practices and lessons learned, particularly on
experiences with implementing domestic worker protections and instituting monitoring mechanisms, will be crucial for ensuring that strong global standards
turn into concrete improvements in local practices.
As Myrtle Witbooi, the IDWN chair quoted earlier, said when celebrating adoption
of the ILO convention:
The fight is not over. We need to go back home. We need to campaign.
We need to be sure that what we vote for is implemented.
We must not rest until our governments ratify the convention.
We cannot be free until we free all the domestic workers.
Nisha Varia is senior researcher in the Women’s Rights Division at Human Rights
Watch; Jo Becker is advocacy director of the Children’s Rights Division.
