A Shrinking Realm:
Freedom of Expression Since 9/11
By Dinah PoKempner
When one speaks of the danger to the norm against torture since 9/11, it is fairly
obvious what that means. Torture, after all, draws up rather specific images of the
individual under assault, despite the Bush administration’s attempts to muddy
the issue. But the same is not true for freedom of expression, a norm that applies
to an expansive range of human activity.
The right to free expression protects everyone from the man on the public soapbox
to the anonymous blogger; from the woman who prefers hijab to the crossdresser;
from the persecuted defender of human rights to the repellant genocide
denier. The erosion of the norm against torture is alarming precisely because the
norm is absolute: under the law, there are no other interests to balance. But the
right to free expression can be qualified in light of public safety, national security,
public order, morality, and the rights of others. The communities concerned with
these many aspects are often fragmented, and the precise contours of the right
are more fluid. It is easy to lose track of the whole picture.
This is why some five years after 9/11 it is especially important to try to take stock
of the scope of free expression. The view is not reassuring. Responses to terrorism
combined with dynamics that long predate 9/11 have produced an array of
threats to free expression.
From Iraq to Russia to the Philippines, journalists are being treated as partisans,
even combatants, and are now more frequently targeted for attack than at any
time in recent memory. Global migration (witness the tensions surrounding the
integration of Muslim immigrants in Europe) and the steady growth of civil society
in many formerly closed countries (witness conditions in Russia and China) are
fueling governmental urges to restrict expression. Counterterrorism has given new
vigor to some old forms of censorship, and created new ones. Crimes of “glorification”
of terrorism, once rare, are proliferating, and hate speech is increasingly
becoming the rationale for imposing criminal or administrative sanctions against
those thought to be extremists. Despite (or because of) the continuing cyberrevolution, states are also moving quickly to fence and filter the internet, and new
technologies are fueling an explosion of state surveillance, often justified in the
name of counterterrorism.
Cataloguing the new rents in the fabric of the right to free expression is important
in itself but then we need to step back to understand better how these affect the
cloth as a whole. When communications are subjected to unwarranted surveillance,
or when new speech-based crimes are created, the entire context for deciding
whether an article can be published, a sermon preached, or a certain garment
worn is changed. Moreover, the effect of new restrictions in states with long
records of protecting free expression is global; restrictive precedents give fresh
cover and encouragement to states with a history of trammeling this right. The
effect of these developments is greater than the sum of discrete instances.
With this in mind, it is plain that mending the fabric will require more than just a
patch here and there. This essay sketches some of the damage and suggests
ways to respond. We must overcome the tendency to look at each restriction in
isolation from others and only in local context. And we must be vigilant in
responding to each assault on this freedom, systematically and repeatedly, if we
are to protect all other rights.
Frederick Douglass, the abolitionist and publisher, spoke to what is at stake:
Liberty is meaningless where the right to utter one’s thoughts
and opinions has ceased to exist. That, of all rights, is the dread
of tyrants. It is the right which they first of all strike down. They
know its power.1
Journalists in the Crosshairs
The press has often been subject to attack, both physically and legally. But there
is reason to believe that both contemporary armed conflicts and the so-called war
on terror have rendered it more precarious than ever to be a journalist.
In Russia, it has become extremely dangerous to report on the conflict in
Chechnya in any way. Most recently, the world was shocked by what seemed like
the contract killing of investigative journalist Anna Politkovskaia on October 7, 2006, potentially in retaliation for her searching and critical writing on Chechnya.
Earlier in the year, the government had convicted the director of the Russian-
Chechen Friendship Society of “inciting racial hatred” through articles he published
in the group’s journal, and then shut down the nongovernmental organization
itself for good measure.
Though war correspondents enjoy immunity under the laws of armed conflict,
they work in precarious circumstances and are vulnerable. Even so, the toll on
journalists in Iraq by any measure has been extraordinary, with 137 journalists
and media assistants killed since March 2003, sometimes in attacks specifically
directed at reporters and media organizations.2 Also troubling is the frequency
with which Iraqi and coalition forces have detained journalists without charge.3
In the larger view, it is undeniable that the overthrow of Saddam Hussein enabled
independent journalism to become established in Iraq, despite general security
conditions that make it a life-threatening enterprise. But even there the picture is
mixed. During both coalition and subsequent Iraqi administrations, authorities
have laid limits on reporting news that could in any way be seen as promoting the
views of insurgents or adherents of Saddam Hussein.4
For the purpose of taking stock, the practices of the US with regard to press freedom
are important to examine, as historically the US has often been on the cutting
edge of legal protection for speech, its constitutional standards often exceeding
other countries’ legal safeguards. Unfortunately, under the Bush administration,
there have been significant steps backwards.
The Bush administration was notably more hostile to releasing information to the
press than prior administrations, moving to reclassify information that had been
in the public domain, to reverse the presumption toward disclosure under the
Freedom of Information Act, and to greatly restrict public access to presidential
papers, an important source of information on public policy.5 The government
also showed an unusual determination to force investigative reporters to disclose
confidential sources, while Congress yet again failed to create a federal “shield
law.”6 When scandals surfaced that could impugn the administration, its first
reaction was to retaliate by announcing leak investigations against the press, as
when the Washington Post revealed the existence of secret Central Intelligence Agency detention centers (“black sites”), and when the New York Times disclosed
that the National Security Agency was illegally snooping on millions of domestic
and international calls.
In the US, reporters on the receiving end of official leaks generally do not face
prosecution, but there were signs that this may change. Figures in both the
administration and the political right-wing press called for espionage prosecutions
of newspapers in the wake of these scandals. In August 2005 the federal
government indicted two former lobbyists for the American Israel Public Affairs
Committee (AIPAC) for receiving leaked national defense information from a US
official and then repeating it to foreign officials and reporters. The AIPAC case
raised concern as a stepping stone to future prosecutions of journalists, as it
involves a novel application of a 1917 law that has typically been interpreted as
applying only to leakers, rather than recipient publishers, of national defense
information.7
It is important to remember that apart from these particular fronts, the press
remained in the crosshairs of rights-abusing governments the world over. Cuba in
2006 held some 25 journalists in prison for political crimes, and in Venezuela the
Chavez administration further restrained critical reporting through “gag” laws and
control of the courts.8 In Sudan, security forces have been arresting and detaining
journalists, banning newspaper editions and performing pre-print inspections—
and this is apart from routine restrictions on media reporting on Darfur.9
Burma, Turkmenistan, and North Korea continue to be black holes for press freedom
(and many other freedoms besides) while Iran and Saudi Arabia have kept
journalists on a tight leash even as online communications have taken off. The
list of literal and legal attacks on the press goes on and on, with Reporters
Without Borders listing, at this writing, 95 journalists and media assistants killed
in 2006, an increase over the prior four years, and 135 imprisoned.10 A rare bright
spot was a decision by the UK House of Lords to restore a measure of balance to
that country’s notorious libel law by providing greater protections for information
that is of public interest.11
New Offenses in the Age of Counterterrorism: “Glorification” or
“Apologie” and “Indirect” Incitement
Incitement to commit a crime is an offense in many legal systems around the
world, and specific laws prohibiting incitement to terrorist acts are increasingly
common. Such conduct sometimes can be reached through accomplice liability
and conspiracy laws as well. The crime of direct incitement generally requires that
the message directly encourage the commission of a crime, and that the speaker
intend this, whether or not a criminal act results. In the United States, constitutional
jurisprudence requires that the incitement present a risk of “imminent”
criminal action; in Europe, the courts tend to allow somewhat more latitude with
respect to the risk of proximate causation.
What is new on the scene is the proliferation of crimes of “indirect incitement,”
that is, criminalization of speech which is thought to have some potential to
incite criminal action, but which may be less targeted in message or audience
and less obviously a proximate cause of actual criminal acts. These laws are often
ambiguous on whether the proscribed speech must merely portray terrorism or
terrorists—variously or vaguely defined—in a favorable light to an outside observer,
or whether it must be specifically intended to spur violent criminal acts and
present a real risk of doing so under the circumstances.
In 2004 only three European countries had laws against “apologie” or “glorification”
of terrorism, but by mid-November 2006 some 36 countries had signed the
Council of Europe Convention on Terrorism which requires states to criminalize
“provocation” of terrorism, a crime that could include indirect incitement.12 The
new crime is catching on in domestic law. Spain and France had apologie laws on
the books prior to 2001; the United Kingdom and Denmark have more recently
adopted laws on promotion or glorification of terrorist acts, while Turkey and
Russia in 2006 amended terrorism legislation in ways that would punish speech
characterized, respectively, as “propaganda” for terrorism or support of
“extremism.”
Australia has been considering following the model of the UK Terrorism Act of
2006, which outlaws “glorification” where it is reasonable to infer that the audience
would understand the speech as encouraging emulation of terrorist conduct.
There is no qualification in the UK law, however, for either imminent danger that a
terrorist act would be committed, or the speaker’s intention to cause such a
result. It is important to recognize that acts of glorification or apologie are the
basis for more than penal consequences: they also may lead to blacklisting of
organizations for the purpose of halting fundraising or freezing assets, as in the
UK, or to deportation of aliens, as in France.
The crime of indirect incitement has to be seen as an effort to go beyond situations
where the evidence shows that the speaker clearly intends to provoke the
audience to criminal conduct. There are strong reasons to question whether there
is, in fact, room for principled distinction between controversial but protected
political speech and indirect incitement.13 In the UK, some have sought to distinguish
between those who carry placards praising the perpetrators of the London
7/7 attacks and those whose placards urge murder of critics of Islam. Others have
worried that glorification laws could be used against Muslims who speak in favor
of armed resistance against occupation, expression which is typically viewed as a
form of protected, if controversial, political speech. Prime Minister Tony Blair’s
statement that juries would understand glorification “when they see it” underscored
the fears of minorities that the definition would be subject to the popular
prejudices of the moment.14
If counterterrorism has been the motive for new speech-restrictive laws in Europe,
it also has become a pretext for repression of political dissent in places such as
Uzbekistan. Treated as an ally in the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks by Washington
and Moscow, Uzbekistan significantly intensified its persecution of independent
reporters and human rights monitors, justifying this crackdown as a legitimate
counterterrorism response. And it did so with particular energy against those who
contradicted the government’s claims that Islamist terrorists, rather than government
agents, were responsible for massacring hundreds of unarmed civilians in
Andijan in May 2005.15 Despite commitments to reform its laws, Jordan still prosecutes
writers for criminal defamation of government leaders and officials or for
material that endangers foreign relations. In June 2006 the state jailed four parliamentarians
who paid a condolence call to the family of Abu Mus’ab al-Zarqawi;
one of the four also allegedly called al-Zarqawi “a martyr and a fighter.” The
charge against the four was stirring up sectarian or racial tension or strife among
different elements of the nation.16
But it is in Spain that one finds one of the stranger prosecutions for apologie,
which ended in acquittal in November 2006. Impelled by the Association of
Terrorism Victims, the government indicted a Basque punk rock band for allegedly
praising separatist terrorism in the lyrics of its songs. The group denied supporting
terrorists and explicitly disavowed supporting the armed ETA insurgency when
it was alleged that their songs were hurtful to the ETA’s victims. Under the
European Court’s jurisprudence, works of art and political speech are both to be
given an extra degree of latitude. Even so, the prosecutor sought not only to
imprison the band, but to bar them from working as musicians.17
New Twists on Old Offenses: Hate Speech and Blasphemy
As the examples above suggest, there is a good deal of blurring between the
rationales of hate speech and of indirect incitement. The formulation of indirect
incitement, praising terrorism as “just and necessary” or holding up for admiration
known terrorists, is often intertwined with derision or denigration of victims
or opponents. Although there are differences in the two types of proscriptions,
both derive from an appreciation of the power of speech to facilitate mass violence.
The state has a legal option to limit speech to protect national security or other
state interests. But prohibiting hate speech is obligatory under several major
human rights treaties, including the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights (ICCPR) and the later Convention on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination (CERD). The ICCPR does not require states to punish hate speech
as a crime, but many states interpret CERD as requiring criminal proscription of
hate speech. Many states have entered reservations or interpretations to these
provisions in consideration of protecting the right to free expression.18
Hate speech is indeed hateful. It can also be deeply harmful, even when it does
not incite imminent violence or criminal acts, in that it can provoke public and
self-denigration, and a great deal of psychological pain. The point of freedom of
expression, however, is to preserve space for highly controversial or even deeply
offensive speech, as socially acceptable messages seldom need protection. The
hate speech provisions of the ICCPR were negotiated by parties with fresh memories
of the Holocaust, and their concern was less to spare group sensibilities from insult than to establish that hate speech, even when not direct incitement, often
played a key role in facilitating violence and state discrimination against minorities.
19
In the decades following the Holocaust, however, the goal of social equality
became a more prominent rationale for hate speech prohibitions, particularly in
Europe. Laws and prosecutions for hate speech often seemed focused on limiting
certain content no matter the context, and seemed unmoored from hard analysis
of whether the speech in question, however repugnant, had any potential actually
to incite violence or any other criminal action by third parties. The shift to this
rationale could be seen in the controversial trial court judgment of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda in the Nahimana case, where the court
construed hate speech as a basis for “persecution” as a crime against humanity.
It wrote:
Hate speech is a discriminatory form of aggression that destroys
the dignity of those in the group under attack. It creates a lesser
status not only in the eyes of the group members themselves
but also in the eyes of others who perceive and treat them as
less than human. The denigration of persons on the basis of
their ethnic identity or other group membership in and of itself,
as well as in its other consequences, can be an irreversible
harm.20
The competition between two rationales—hate speech as a catalyst of criminal
acts, versus hate speech as a harm to dignity in and of itself—has not always
been obvious, nor have the problems of assessing harm to dignity in a democratic
society or a world of global communications. The Danish cartoon scandal
brought these tensions into vivid relief.
On September 30, 2005, the Danish newspaper Jyllands-Posten published twelve
cartoon depictions of the Prophet Mohammed that it said were solicited in an
effort to overcome self-censorship. The cartoons were highly offensive to
Muslims, because Islam is frequently interpreted to prohibit depictions of the
Prophet and some of the depictions were extremely derogatory, for example, by
associating him, and by implication all Muslims, with terrorism. Denmark
declined to take action against the publishers, citing its own obligations to protect free expression. Beyond this, it also declined to apologize for the cartoons.
By February 2006, massive and often violent protests against the cartoons
and against Denmark spread throughout the Muslim world.
The context for the protests included the invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq, tensions
in Israel/Palestine, rising Western prejudice and suspicion against Muslims
as “terrorists,” and an associated sense of persecution and social alienation on
the part of Muslim minorities in many parts of the world. Against the backdrop of
travel restrictions, debates over the public acceptability of women in hijab, terrorism
blacklists, deportations, and investigations of Muslim charities, the cartoons
were felt as particularly denigrating, and to some Muslims may have conveyed a
quality of threat.
Criticism of the cartoons, however, seldom focused on their directly provoking
discrimination or violence against Muslim communities, but rather they focused
on equality issues more generally. The unwillingness of Denmark to either take
action against the newspaper or apologize was contrasted with the proliferation
of Holocaust-denial laws and blasphemy laws protecting Christianity in Europe.
The discourse on whether the media had a right to publish the cartoons became
confused with whether the media were right to do so. While the European emphasis
on equality and non-discrimination as values prompted much soul-searching
as to whether Denmark had taken the proper course, Muslim states by and large
did not respond to retorts that they permit abusive depictions of and speech
about religious minorities in their jurisdictions; indeed, Iran sponsored an anti-
Semitic Holocaust denial cartoon contest in response.
The after-effects of the controversy have been significant. Governments with large
Muslim populations, including Jordan, Yemen, Syria, India, and Algeria, pressed
charges against editors and journalists who reproduced the cartoons, and newspapers
were censored, suspended or closed in Malaysia, Saudi Arabia, Yemen,
Belarus, South Africa, and Russia. The Organization of the Islamic Conference criticized
Denmark and has sought a UN General Assembly statement banning
attacks on religious beliefs. On September 8, 2006, the United Nations General
Assembly adopted a global counterterrorism strategy that contained the phrase,
“and to promote mutual respect for and prevent defamation of religions.” In a speech before the UN General Assembly on September 20, 2006, Pakistan’s
President Pervez Musharraf called for a ban on the “defamation of Islam.”21
This response, in essence an international endorsement of blasphemy laws as
part of counterterrorism strategy, is exactly the wrong direction for any state that
values robust discourse and democratic values. While critics are right to point to
the selectivity of existing European blasphemy laws in protecting only
Christianity, the key question here is why any religious system should be legally
shielded from criticism or even ridicule when political beliefs, aesthetic views, or
cultural opinions are not. Speech which targets religious believers for criminal
acts should not be protected, but speech which derides only religious ideas
should not be punished.
This approach avoids imposing criminal penalties for either blasphemous or hateful
speech that threatens dignity but not crime. It is more consistent with the primary
articulation of the ban on hate speech in article 20 of the ICCPR than an
approach which places whole categories of speech outside protection. Article 20
requires states to prohibit “any advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred
that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence” (emphasis
added). The term “advocacy” implies that there must be a conscious intent to
spur hatred, rather than just approval of or inadvertent contribution to hatred. The
fact that the advocacy of hatred must additionally constitute incitement points to
provocation of an action, rather than merely fostering negative feelings (since
that is already specified by “hatred”), and violence and discrimination are two
species of criminal acts. But what has never been clear is exactly what “hostility”
entails, although the construction implies something beyond hatred, involving
overt manifestation of hatred against another. An argument can be made that the
sort of hostility that calls for imprisonment for speech in a democratic society
must amount at minimum to a criminal level of harassment, and not to expression
of repugnant opinions or impugning of reputation.22
Genocide Denial: Incitement or Hate Speech?
The rationale for genocide denial laws has undergone a shift similar to that for
hate speech. In the wake of World War II, Germany’s strict laws prohibiting the
use of Nazi symbols or the promotion of Nazi ideology were designed to stifle any revival of the movement or the passions of anti-Semitism. But rather than fading
away with the passage of time, Holocaust denial laws proliferated in Europe right
through the 1990s, more as political statements against anti-Semitism than as
responses to some genuine prospect of incitement to genocide. Indeed, it may
have been the increasing marginality of Holocaust deniers that made laws somewhat
easier to propose and pass than in the immediate aftermath of WWII.
In 2006 France’s legislature considered criminalizing denial of the Armenian
genocide, but hardly because there was a live prospect of repetition, much less in
France. Also in 2006, a Belgian cabinet minister proposed a denial law for the
Rwandan genocide. It is safe to assume this was more likely a political gesture in
view of Belgium’s historical role in Rwanda than an admission that Belgium is a
serious incubator of renewed violence against Tutsi.
Joel Simon, executive director of the Committee to Protect Journalists, describes a
dynamic common to many African countries since the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda convicted individuals of inciting genocide over the radio.
Political parties are often organized along ethnic or tribal lines; reporting on government
failings ignites political protests; and the government then takes action
against the media on the basis of “incitement to rebellion” or “incitement to
hatred,” citing the need to avert large-scale ethnic violence. This dynamic is particularly
evident in Rwanda, where charges of “divisionism” or “negationism” (the
latter, in essence, genocide-denial) are frequently launched against perceived
government opponents and critics, including Rwanda’s one independent newspaper,
Umuseso.23
The potential of genocide denial laws for abuse should make us think hard about
their rationale. In Rwanda the blood of genocide is barely dry and there would
seem to be a more compelling case for outlawing genocide denial. And yet the
government’s use of genocide denial laws to stifle critics is cautionary.
Prosecuting genocide denial to protect victims from insult or the genuine harm
that denial of their suffering inflicts can easily be taken to extremes. And taken to
extremes, such laws can create new means of persecution that could well stifle
political and social debate and undermine pluralism. The criminalization of genocide
denial seems more plausibly grounded in concerns over inciting violence or
even genocide, and the evaluation of whether speech should be suppressed should take into account the likelihood of inciting criminal acts in the particular
context.
Making genocide denial a crime of political correctness has rather obvious deleterious
effects. It makes martyrs of cranks, as has been the case with Austria’s conviction
of David Irving, a Nazi apologist whose fade into obscurity was only halted
by his trial in February 2006. It invites expansive interpretations of “denial” and
“genocide” and the slide into new crimes of ideological deviance, as governments
are often eager to rally support by tarring critics as threats to national
security or human rights. And it cheapens the concept of genocide in the process,
arguably making governments less willing to intervene or call the deliberate
destruction of peoples by its true name.
That said, genocide denial, even when not amounting to incitement to a crime, is
often a type of hate speech that inflicts serious harm, both to the group and to
individual members. The state’s duty regarding genocide denial does not begin
and end with the criminal law. Above all, the state should recognize the crime of
genocide where the evidence establishes it, and provide appropriate avenues of
reparation and prevention, including positive acts of acknowledgment, education,
and debate. Genocide deniers should be marginalized, and even subject to
other forms of sanction where they cause real harm, but they should not be subject
to incarceration except where their actions amount to incitement to violence.
In this regard, it is notable that Australia allows those harmed by public expression
of racial hatred to apply to the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Commission for conciliation and relief, and generally reserves criminal sanction
for acts of racial vilification that intentionally cause criminal menace or harassment.
24
The state’s duty to recognize genocide and similar mass crimes where they have
been committed flows not only from the harm done to individual or group survivors
through denial, but the harm done to humanity itself. Denial is a form of
desecration of the dead, a violation of one of the most basic human norms. It brutalizes
us, and facilitates repetition of atrocity. As a corollary to the duty to recognize
and remember genocide and crimes against humanity, the state should not
do so selectively, favoring some victims and ignoring or denying others. In this
context, it is particularly reprehensible that some Turkish writers continue to be prosecuted for “insulting Turkishness” under article 301 of the criminal code
when they probe into the mass killing of Armenians in 1915 or suggest that those
actions might have been genocide.25
Technology as a Restraint: Internet Censorship and Surveillance
Access to information is integral to free expression: speech is an empty right if it
means talking into a box rather than communicating and sharing information and
ideas with others.26 The internet, in this sense, is a powerful engine for free
expression, creating global audiences and global sources of information, and it is
understandable that states have sought to monitor and restrict it for both good
reasons and bad. Privacy plays a less obvious, but equally important role in free
expression in a democracy. The inability to choose one’s audience or to seek
ideas and information without monitoring, inhibits thought, speech, and association.
And even for those not easily inhibited, surveillance is invasive. For that reason
alone, privacy merits protection to ensure human dignity and integrity.27
The “war on terror” did not cause, but did exacerbate, the trend towards restriction
of the internet and the proliferation of surveillance through modern technology.
Governments that once invoked child pornographers as a good reason to censor
internet publications shifted emphasis to terrorism as a rationale.
Corporations became willing assistants in the fencing and filtering of access, even
while justifying their cooperation with repressive governments in terms of
expanding public access to information (and of course, their own access to markets).
Surveillance and data collection grew exponentially, not only because
developments in modern technology made such practices more economically feasible,
but also because security fears made them more politically palatable.
Some governments have been eager to grasp the internet as a tool for economic
and educational development but are wary that losing control over information
will also cause them to lose control over their population. A number of Middle
Eastern governments have embraced the cause of improving public access to the
internet, but at the same time use advanced filtering and surveillance technology
to monitor online expression. Egypt, Tunisia, Iran, and Syria prosecute and
imprison online writers for politically objectionable material, and these as well as
many other countries in the Middle East block websites for political, human rights, or Islamist content in addition to pornography and gambling, and monitor
internet cafes.
In 2005 Tunisia hosted the World Summit on the Information Society to showcase
its commitment to internet access. What also fell into the global spotlight was the
government’s robust censorship, harassment, and prosecution of online critics for
offenses such as false news, defamation, or terrorism, expansively defined and
interpreted. Tunisia strictly controls internet service providers, regulates internet
cafes, and uses filtering technology to block political, news, and human rights
sites. It has cited counterterrorism and the need to curb incitement to hatred and
violence as among its justifications for censoring information online. Yet tests
that Human Rights Watch ran in September 2005 on 41 radical Islamist sites
found only four blocked, and numerous sites relating to weapons manufacture
and purchase were also readily available. In contrast, the website of Reporters
Without Borders was blocked as were numerous opposition political and news
sites, discrediting the government’s justifications for censorship.28
The Great Firewall of China is a case of corporate collaboration in censorship.
Press liberty has deteriorated since 2003 when President Hu Jintao took office,
and the government has taken harsh steps to control and suppress peaceful political
and religious dissent, including jailing journalists and bloggers. China operates
the most sophisticated internet filtering and surveillance apparatus in the
world, employing tens of thousands, but also relying on the active cooperation of
major internet companies in proactive censorship. Yahoo! has provided user
information to government authorities that enabled China to convict four government
critics, and it has censored the results generated by its search engine to
eliminate politically controversial terms and sites. Microsoft and Google also
proactively censor their Chinese search engines, in anticipation of what the government
would require them to block.
Censorship has not always been transparent, with companies sometimes providing
minimal notice that results have been filtered, but no indication of what is
missing or why. Skype also censored text-chats, but without notifying users that it
was doing so.29 Pressure is on internet companies to create a voluntary code of
conduct to guide their dealings with governments that do not respect freedom of
expression or information. It is unlikely, however, that this alone will avert a “race to the bottom” in human rights standards without government regulation to put
the brakes on proactive censorship and the lack of transparency.
While China is probably the most advanced in filtering and monitoring its slice of
the internet, it is hardly alone. China has exported its technology to censor and
monitor electronic communications to Robert Mugabe’s government in Zimbabwe.
Other governments are trying to reproduce China’s success in fencing in cyberspace
and purging it of unwanted ideas, among them Iran, Yemen, Vietnam, and
Tunisia. Burma monitors emails and uses software in internet cafes that records
what is displayed on the screen every five minutes, while Uzbekistan fines cafe
surfers for accessing banned political sites.30
As important as it is to free speech, the internet is only one arena for burgeoning
state surveillance. The US requires telephone companies to have a surveillance
capability, and has pressed for internet voice telephony to have surveillance
capability embedded into the service as well.31 In most jurisdictions, governments
have easy access to both telephone traffic data and internet traffic data as
collected by internet service providers, in distinction to the substantive content of
calls, which usually requires judicial warrant. Internet traffic data, however, gives
far more information than telephone traffic data—for example, websites and
pages visited, chat partners, searches—enabling the monitor to create a thorough
profile of individuals. EU nations have sometimes considered whether to require
retention of electronic communications records for a period of time so that they
may be searched, a measure the US supports.32 Governments are creating enormous
databases of personal information in many other ways (from data collected
during travel, corporate records, national identity documents) that can be shared.
These days, the person standing on the soapbox in Hyde Park is likely to be preserved
by the government on film; London has one of the highest densities of
public surveillance cameras in the world. Many are unaware of this surveillance
explosion, which is likely to continue and deepen as technological ability to track
people improves. But when surveillance pierces the consciousness, as the intensive
monitoring of Muslim charities has in the US, it can have a profoundly intimidating
effect.33
Assessing the Erosion
Cataloguing, even anecdotally, the many encroachments on free expression since
9/11 is a little like writing about global warming. The danger is real, catastrophic,
accelerating, and yet almost invisible. So many things are going on at so many
levels we fail to see the interconnections.
Among the interconnections is the chill that one instance of censorship throws
upon other speakers (as, for example, in the selective prosecution of reporters)
but also the pall that violations of related rights throw onto free expression. When
it is unsafe to assemble, it is usually unsafe to speak as well, or even to express
one’s identity in other ways. When the internet is monitored, blogging becomes
unsafe, and freedom of opinion and information suffer. And the repression of
speech can swiftly lead to other rights violations, as when a controversial speaker
is first arrested, imprisoned, and then tortured, or when candid messages on preventing
AIDS through condoms and safe sex are banned, leading to more cases of
risky sex, and ultimately more preventable deaths from the disease. Had the
White House and Pentagon managed to suppress all photographs of Abu Ghraib,
it is difficult to imagine that the issue of torture and permissible interrogation
techniques would have received the Congressional or global attention it did.
National security anxiety also connects many of the new developments. Security
has justified restrictions on what electronic information may be accessed, what
headgear or facial hair can be worn, what scholars may be invited to speak, what
political arguments can be voiced, and what newspapers will dare to publish. And
this is no new phenomenon.
In 1995 a group of eminent scholars met in Johannesburg to consider the relation
between national security and freedom of expression. The resulting Johannesburg
Principles are often invoked as reflecting the best practices of many domestic
jurisdictions. They define as a “legitimate” national security interest only those
interests whose genuine purpose and demonstrable effect is to protect a country’s
existence or its territorial integrity against the use or threat of force, or its
capacity to respond to the use or threat of force. Protecting the state against
embarrassment, industrial unrest, exposure of wrongdoing, ideological deviance,
or muckraking are not interests that can justify censorship.34
Our fragmented perspective on the problem is reinforced by the infrequency with
which most people encounter new restrictions or perceive them. We do not suffer
bullets or subpoenas, we are not accused of glorification of terrorism or hate
speech, and we are mostly unaware of internet censorship or most forms of surveillance.
That is, unless we are Muslims in Europe, Islamists in Egypt, journalists
in Sudan, rights advocates in Uzbekistan, democracy activists in Vietnam, or
Uighurs in China. Members of these targeted groups experience the full cumulative
force of many forms of restriction and are painfully aware of the narrowing
space they have for expression.
How can the rest of us be less like the frog placed in a pot on a stove that eventually
boils to death because it fails to notice the gradual rise in the temperature?
There is not just one practice to protest and reverse but a myriad of them, with
each contributing to a new and more illiberal world.
One precept that has stood the test of time is, do not unto others as you would
not have them do unto you. This works fairly well as a pocket “rule of engagement”
to test our reactions. It is clarifying on the issue of torture to imagine how
we would want our own troops treated as prisoners. Similarly, when evaluating
concepts such as defamation of religion, we should imagine our co-religionists on
trial for blaspheming another faith.
Another precept is that criminal penalties should be reserved for criminal actions
and not for insults or falsehoods, however hurtful. Blasphemy laws should be
repealed. There are other means to rectify many of the harms associated with
hate speech than loss of liberty. A corollary is insisting on rigorous justification
for each restriction of speech, with scrutiny of the magnitude and immediacy of
the threats it presents, rather than opting for a categorical approach that lumps
art along with incitement, debate with criminal demagoguery.
A third precept is that governments should cultivate a sense of global responsibility
in policy. They should be mindful of how their own well-intentioned but restrictive
laws and practices can take on a life of their own domestically, when different
groups are perceived as threatening, pressure to censor spreads, or zealous
prosecutors target types of expression not originally contemplated. Moreover,
laws and policies that tread the margins of free expression can also wreak damage internationally, when removed from their domestic context and held up
as a template by states that wish to justify crackdowns on critics or disfavored
minority groups. Taking responsibility for policy also means not shifting blame—
to unregulated corporations, answerable only for profits, or to multilateral fora,
where broad mandates to combat support for terrorism can be translated domestically
into laws that significantly encroach on free expression.
It is possible to repair the damage already done, but doing so will require a wideangle
perspective and a better appreciation that these days, silencing dissent in
one group invariably imperils expression—and myriad other rights—worldwide.
Dinah PoKempner is general counsel of Human Rights Watch.
1 Frederick Douglass, speaking in the Boston Music Hall after an anti-slavery meeting had
been broken up. David J. Brewer, World’s Best Orations (St. Louis: Ferd. P. Kaiser, 1899),
vol. 5, pp.1906-1909. Also at http://douglassarchives.org/doug_a68.htm.
2 Reporters Without Borders, “War in Iraq,” undated,
http://www.rsf.org/special_iraq_en.php3.
3 Ann Cooper, “Jailing Iraqi Journalists,” Dangerous Assignments, October 4, 2005,
http://www.cpj.org/Briefings/2005/DA_fall05/comment/comment_DA_fall05.html. Abdul
Ameer Younis Hussein, a CBS cameraman, was held by US forces without charge for almost
a year and his case ultimately dismissed in April 2006 for lack of evidence. Bilal Hussein, a
photojournalist with Associated Press whose pictures of Fallujah won the Pulitzer Prize, is
in his seventh month of detention by US forces at this writing.
4 See, for example, Mariah Blake, “From All Sides: In the Deadly Cauldron of Iraq, Even the
Arab Media are Being Pushed Off the Story,” Columbia Journalism Review (2005),
http://www.cjr.org/issues/2005/2/onthejob-blake.asp, and Committee to Protect
Journalists, “Iraq: Government instructs media to promote leadership’s positions,”
November 12, 2004, http://www.cpj.org/news/2004/Iraq12nov04na.html. Most recently,
the authorities closed two television stations for broadcasting images of Iraqis protesting
the sentencing of Saddam Hussein to death, adding to the media blackout caused by temporary
official suspension of the major newspapers. Reporters Without Borders, “
http://www.rsf.org/article.php3?id_article=19599.
5 See Floyd Abrams, “The State of Free Speech,” New York Law Journal, vol. 236 (2006).
6 Although a majority of states have enacted “shield laws” to protect reporters from having
to disclose their confidential sources, various bills to provide a federal privilege have been
stuck in both houses of Congress. For an account of both legislative developments and various
reporters who have been jailed for refusing to divulge their sources, see Reporters
Committee for Freedom of the Press, “Special Report: Reporters and Federal Subpoenas,”
October 13, 2006 http://www.rcfp.org/shields_and_subpoenas.html#shield.
7 Adam Liptak, “In Leak Cases, New Pressure on Journalists,” New York Times, April 30,
2006.
8 “IAPA meeting ends with severe criticism of press freedom in the hemisphere,” Inter
American Press Association news release, March 14, 2005, http://www.sipiapa.org/
pressreleases/chronologicaldetail.cfm?PressReleaseID=1336.
9 “Sudan: Press Under Pressure,” Human Rights Watch news release, November 6, 2006,
http://hrw.org/english/docs/2006/11/06/darfur14514.htm.
10 Reporters Without Borders, “Press Freedom Barometer,” covering data from January to
October 2006, http://www.rsf.org/rubrique.php3?id_rubrique=113. The Committee to
Protect Journalists lists 46 confirmed cases of journalists killed in 2006 as of November 7,
2006, http://www.cpj.org/killed/killed06.html.
11 Jameel v. Wall Street Journal Europe, UKHL 44 (October 11, 2006).
12 The treaty was adopted in May 2005. At this writing only Bulgaria and Russia have ratified
it; the treaty requires six ratifications to enter into force. Article 5.1 of the treaty defines
“public provocation to commit a terrorist offence” as making a message available to the
public, through either direct or indirect advocacy, with the intent to incite the commission
of a terrorist offense and causing a danger that such an offense be committed. Council of
Europe Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism, May 16, 2005, CETS No. 196, http://conventions.
coe.int/Treaty/EN/Treaties/Html/196.htm. Security Council Resolution 1624
adopted on September 14, 2005, also calls on states to legally prohibit “incitement” to
commit terrorist acts, but with explicit reference in its preamble to the boundaries created
by the international right of free expression.
13 See Opinion of the Commissioner for Human Rights, Alvaro Gil-Robles, on the draft
Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism, Strasbourg, February 2, 2005,
BCommDH(2005), para. 26 (Gil-Robles notes, “The question is where the boundary lies
between indirect incitement to commit terrorist acts and the legitimate voicing of criticism.”).
14 Jon Silverman, “Glorification law passes ‘first test,’” BBC News Online, February 16,
2006, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/4720682.stm.
15 Human Rights Watch, Burying the Truth: Uzbekistan Rewrites the Story of the Andijan
Massacre, vol. 15, no. 6(D), September 2005, http://hrw.org/reports/2005/uzbekistan0905/
and “Uzbekistan: Journalist Assaulted after Reporting on Massacre,” Human
Rights Watch news release, November 11, 2005,
http://hrw.org/english/docs/2005/11/11/uzbeki12007.htm.
16 “Jordan: Rise in Arrests Restricting Free Speech,” Human Rights Watch news release,
June 17, 2006, http://hrw.org/english/docs/2006/06/17/jordan13574.htm.
17 “Band Sozidad Alkoholika denies lyrics aimed at praising terrorism,” EITB 24, November
2, 2006, http://www.eitb24.com/portal/eitb24/noticia/en/politics/
national-court-trial-band-soziedad-alkoholika-denies-lyricsaimed?
itemId=B24_18543&cl=%2Feitb24%2Fpolitica&idioma=en/.
18 International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, Prosecutor v. Kordi and Cerkez,
Case No. IT-95-14/2-T, Judgment (Trial Chamber) of 26 February 2001, sec. 209 n.272.
19 See Manfred Nowak, CCPR Commentary (Kehl: N.P. Engel, 1993), p.366, para. 15.
20 International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, The Prosecutor v. Nahimana et al., Case No.
ICTR-99-52-T, Judgment (Trial Chamber) of 3 December 2003, p.351, sec. 1072.
21 Just as the original furor appeared to be quieting, a video came to light of activists from
the far-right Danish People’s Party at a summer camp drawing more derogatory images of
the Prophet Muhammad. Iran and Indonesia summoned their Danish ambassadors to
protest, and the Danish prime minister denounced the drawing of the cartoons, if not the
airing of the video. Danish imams who had traveled abroad to rally support to protest the
original cartoons, however, stated they would not let themselves be provoked this time.
“Row over Danish cartoons escalates,” BBC News Online, October 10, 2006,
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/6037597.stm. The action of Denmark in criticizing the
cartoons was significant, and highlights the difference between the state moving to repress
the publisher of offensive speech, and the state taking measures to repudiate the offensive
and discriminatory message.
22 Manfred Nowak has argued that article 20, while providing an additional basis for
restricting free expression, cannot authorize restrictions beyond the terms of what article
19 allows, so that, for example, it would not permit punishing freedom of opinion, nor permit
pre-censorship, nor would it allow for sanctions to attach without consideration of the
interests enumerated in article 19.3 in respect of which speech may be restricted. Nowak,
CCPR Commentary, pp. 368-369. This view finds support in the Human Rights Committee’s
General Comment 11 on article 20, which states, “In the opinion of the Committee, these
required prohibitions are fully compatible with the right of freedom of expression as contained
in article 19, the exercise of which carries with it special duties and responsibilities.”
UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment 11, Article 20 (Nineteenth session,
1983), Compilation of General Comments and General Recommendations Adopted by
Human Rights Treaty Bodies, U.N. Doc. HRI\GEN\1\Rev.1 at 12 (1994). Although it is permissible
under article 19 to enact laws against defamation, criminal penalties are strongly disfavored
under international jurisprudence. Human Rights Watch’s policy on hate speech
treads a middle ground between US constitutional practice and article 20 of the ICCPR by
accepting the criminalization of hate speech where there is a danger of inciting imminent
violence, discrimination or hostility, with “hostility” understood to entail criminal harassment
or intimidation.
23 Joel Simon, “Hate Speech and Press Freedom in Africa” (“Simon Speech”), remarks at
conference on “International Criminal Tribunals in the 21st Century,” American University
Washington College of Law, September 30, 2005, pp.1-2.
24 Racial Vilification Law in Australia, Race Discrimination Unit, HREOC, October 2002,
http://www.hreoc.gov.au/racial_discrimination/cyberracism/vilification.html#other.
25 Orhan Pamuk, a Nobel Prize-winning author, for example, was charged with this crime in
December 2005 after saying in a newspaper that 30,000 Kurds and one million Ottoman
Armenians were killed in Turkey yet nobody in the Turkish population would dare talk about
it. The trial was dismissed by the Turkish Ministry of Justice at the beginning of 2006. The
novelist Elif Shafak was also indicted under this provision but charges were dropped in
September 2006. Daniel Dombey and Vincent Boland, “Why Turkey’s long journey west is
in jeopardy,” Financial Times, November 7, 2006.
26 Indeed, the guarantee of free speech in the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights provides so explicitly. Article 19(2) states, “Everyone shall have the right to freedom
of expression; this right shall include freedom to seek, receive and impart information and
ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in print, in the form of
art, or through any other media of his choice.”
27 The protection of privacy in international law is from “arbitrary” or “unlawful” interference.
See International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, art. 17, and General Comment
16 of the United Nations Human Rights Committee, interpreting these qualifiers.
28 Human Rights Watch, False Freedom: Online Censorship in the Middle East and North
Africa, vol. 17, no. 10(E), November 2005,
http://hrw.org/reports/2005/mena1105/index.htm.
29 See Human Rights Watch, Race to the Bottom: Corporate Complicity in Chinese Internet
Censorship, vol. 18, no. 8(C), August 2006,
http://www.hrw.org/reports/2006/china0806/index.htm.
30 Reporters Without Borders, The Internet Black Holes, “Burma,” undated,
http://www.rsf.org/int_blackholes_en.php3?id_mot=86&annee=2006&Valider=OK, and
“Uzbekistan,” undated,
http://www.rsf.org/int_blackholes_en.php3?id_mot=105&annee=2005.
31 Electronic Privacy Information Center, “Internet Telephony,” undated,
http://www.epic.org/privacy/voip/.
32 “US Data Access Proposal Shows Need for More Protection, EU Official Says,”
Communications Daily, May 15, 2000.
33 Neil Macfarquhar, “Fears of inquiry dampen giving by U.S. Muslims,” New York Times,
October 30, 2006.
34 The Johannesburg Principles on National Security, Freedom of Expression and Access to
Information, adopted October 1, 1995, U.N. Doc. E/CN.4/1996/39 (1996), principle 2.