Abusing Patients:
Health Providers’ Complicity in Torture and
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
By Joseph Amon
In 2002 Human Rights Watch documented a network of Chinese psychiatric facilities
where dissidents were detained alongside the mentally ill. One “patient,” Tan
Guihua, was detained on September 12, 1999. She was sent to the Jiaozhou
Mental Hospital in Shandong province for supporting and practicing Falungong, a
form a spiritual meditation. Because she refused to renounce her beliefs she was
repeatedly tortured by medical personnel using electroshock therapy, and was
force-fed antipsychotic medicines.1
The human rights community’s attention to the complicity of doctors and other
health workers in torture or cruel and inhuman treatment has generally been
focused on cases like that of Tan Guihua and other political prisoners in detention
settings. Most notorious was the “Doctor’s Trial” of Nazi physicians at
Nuremberg in 1946-47. More recently, the participation of US military psychiatrists
and psychologists in “Behavioral Science Consultation Teams” to prepare and
provide feedback to interrogators at the Guantanamo Bay detention facility has
drawn attention and controversy.
Yet torture and cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment conducted by medical
providers is not confined to political prisoners or counterterrorism efforts.
Increasingly, attention has focused on the complicity of medical personnel in
such abuses in medical or rehabilitation settings. In healthcare facilities, juvenile
detention centers, orphanages, drug treatment centers, and so-called social rehabilitation
centers, health providers unjustifiably, discriminatorily, or arbitrarily
withhold treatment, or engage in treatment that intentionally or negligently
inflicts severe pain or suffering and has no legitimate medical purpose. These
actions—and inactions—may be done in compliance with state medical policies,
in contradiction to them, or in their absence, but when they do occur they can be
described as torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment (CIDT), in which
case both the medical provider and the state must be held accountable.
A precise definition of CIDT has yet to be articulated, but the possibility of CIDT
being inflicted in health settings has been clearly anticipated. The International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), the first international treaty to
explicitly address torture and CIDT, provides, in article 7, that “no one shall be
subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
In particular, no one shall be subjected without his free consent to medical or scientific
experimentation.” Article 16 of the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Convention against
Torture), and interpretations by the European Court of Human Rights and the
United Nations special rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment suggest that, at a minimum, CIDT covers “treatment
as deliberately caus[ing] severe suffering, mental or physical, which in the particular
situation is unjustifiable.”2 The special rapporteur, Manfred Nowak, suggests
that CIDT is distinguished from torture in that CIDT may occur out of intentional
and negligent actions.3
The ethical guidelines of health providers also uniformly prohibit providers from
any form of participation in torture or CIDT. The World Medical Association’s
Declaration of Tokyo expressly condemns medical participation in torture, cruel
and inhuman or degrading treatment, or “any act to diminish the ability of the victim
to resist such treatment.”4 The Hippocratic Oath declares that physicians
must treat all patients to the best of their abilities, respect patient privacy, and do
them “no harm or injustice.”
Despite these declarations and oaths, and calls for a permanent “International
Medical Tribunal” to prosecute medical personnel who violate human rights, the
complicity of medical providers in torture or CIDT is routinely reported, and states
and professional associations have shown little interest in or ability to ensure
accountability. Where specific medical practices are questioned, courts have traditionally
shown deference to medical “expertise” or been reluctant to evaluate
competing claims of appropriate medical practice. International human rights
bodies like the European Court of Human Rights have had few opportunities to
adjudicate on whether particular acts by medical practitioners constitute torture
or CIDT.
What, then, can be done?
Recognize Abuses of Patients as Torture and Cruel, Inhuman,
or Degrading Treatment
Human Rights Watch has reported on a wide range of abuses against patients
and individuals under medical supervision, including the practice of forcible anal
and vaginal exams, female genital mutilation, and the failure to provide life-saving
abortion, palliative care, and treatment for drug dependency. While these
abuses are sometimes understood as torture or CIDT, too often the denial of care
resulting in torture or CIDT is understood more narrowly—both by the human
rights community and the medical community—as abuses interfering with the
“right to health.” This interpretation puts these abuses within a context of the
vast demands upon the state, and undermines the absolute prohibition required
of states to prevent and protect individuals from torture and CIDT. Health
providers, their respective professional associations, and human rights actors
therefore too rarely act forcefully to stop provider abuse and end abusive state
policies.
As a first step toward addressing these abuses, human rights advocates and
medical practitioners and associations need to recognize how medical provider
behaviors and state health policies can constitute torture or CIDT. The following
represent just a few examples from Human Rights Watch’s own research.
Forcible Anal and Vaginal Exams
State-sponsored forcible anal exams have been recognized as torture by the
United Nations Committee against Torture, and invasive virginity exams have
been recognized as torture by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights. Human
Rights Watch found that medical providers in Egypt, Libya, and Jordan have
engaged in such procedures with impunity.
In Egypt, men arrested on suspicion of engaging in homosexual activity in violation
of that country’s legal codes banning “debauchery” are subject to forcible
anal exams by physicians. Exams involve anal probing, dilating, and penetration.
While prosecutors describe the exams as integral to establishing criminality,
examining physicians have admitted that the exams do not determine whether
sexual activity took place. In 2003 Human Rights Watch documented the use of such exams by police officials and medical personnel in a report entitled “In a
Time of Torture.”5 One man, Ziyad, described the humiliation and abuse he suffered
during such an exam. Ziyad said that upon entering the examination room
the “head man” commanded him to strip and kneel. The man shouted at Ziyad,
commanding him to bend over, and to raise his buttocks into the air. While Ziyad
cried and protested, the head man and six other doctors forcibly pulled his buttocks
apart and examined him using fingers and other objects.
In both Libya and Jordan Human Rights Watch documented how medical
providers conduct “virginity exams” without consent. In Libya these took place in
“social rehabilitation” centers, where women and girls were detained under suspicion
of transgressing moral codes, sometimes indefinitely.6 In Jordan Human
Rights Watch research found that police referred women, including in cases where
no evidence of a crime was present, to medical providers who conducted such
tests, upon the request of their families.7 In both countries, medical personnel
play an indispensable role in establishing these women’s “culpability.” Although
they have no medical accuracy, the exams were performed to establish virginity
for prosecutorial purpose or to inform the family’s decision on whether to abandon,
institutionalize, or harm the woman.
Female Genital Mutilation (FGM)
In 2009 Human Rights Watch found that health providers in Iraqi Kurdistan were
involved in both performing and promoting misinformation about the practice of
female genital mutilation. FGM is defined by the World Health Organization (WHO)
as all practices “involving partial or total removal of the external female genitalia
or injury to the female genital organs for non-medical reasons.”
The investigation found that FGM was practiced by midwives, but that its prevalence
and harm were routinely minimized by physicians and government medical
officials. For example, one physician explained to Human Rights Watch that she
counselled patients that “circumcision is nothing; it does not influence life
because a woman is sensitive in all her parts.”8 Government medical providers
routinely told Human Rights Watch that FGM was uncommon—despite surveys
finding nearly half of all girls to be circumcised—and promoted false information
in media campaigns. One woman told Human Rights Watch that on television “a [government] doctor explained that FGM is normal.... The doctor said, ‘If you do it
or not it’s still the same.’”
The UN Human Rights Committee has said that FGM violates protections against
torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment found in the ICCPR. The UN
Committee against Torture has repeatedly said that practices such as FGM violate
the physical integrity and human dignity of girls and women. In Iraqi Kurdistan,
medical personnel are both complicit in action, performing FGM or providing
patients patently false information about it, and inaction, failing to halt the practice
in their role as government officials.
Drug Dependency Treatment
The withholding of medical treatment for drug dependency and withdrawal has
also been identified by some medical professionals and human rights experts
and courts as amounting to CIDT. Yet, as with FGM, medical providers often minimize
or dismiss the suffering that can result from this denial of care.9
Government policies that prohibit effective treatment for individuals who use
drugs, and instead endorse forced labor and detention, can meet the specific criteria
of torture as set out in article 1 of the Convention against Torture: the intentional
infliction of severe pain and suffering by government officials as punishment
for addiction, or based upon discrimination due to a characterizing feature
(in these cases, drug use).
In China our research has found that alleged drug users could be forcibly confined
to drug detoxification centers for up to seven years under administrative law
for a single “dirty urine.” As in Cambodia, where we have also investigated government-
run compulsory drug detention centers, the purpose of detention is supposedly
for “treatment.” Yet there is no need for treatment for many individuals in
these centers who are not actually dependent upon drugs, and no treatment
available for those who are. In both countries, we found that drug detention centers
typically provide neither medicated withdrawal nor evidence-based, effective
drug dependency therapy.10 Instead, individuals in these centers are physically
and sometimes sexually abused, and forced to work long hours without pay.
Abortion
Absolute prohibitions on abortion, even in life-saving emergencies, further illustrate
the potentially harmful and coercive effects of state medical policies.
Nicaragua is one of the few remaining countries in the world where abortion is
unlawful under all circumstances, including to save the life of the mother. Human
Rights Watch found in 2007 that a blanket ban on abortion (and the criminalization
of doctors who perform abortions) results in the denial of life-saving care and
avoidable death.11 A physician in Managua told us, “It was clear that [a woman]
needed a therapeutic abortion. No one wanted to carry out the abortion because
the fetus was still alive. The woman was here two days without treatment until
she expulsed the fetus on her own. And by then she was already in septic shock
and died five days later.”
The Human Rights Committee has found that criminalization of abortion, including
in cases of rape, violates the prohibition against cruel, inhuman, and degrading
treatment in article 7 of the ICCPR. Some human rights groups have argued
that Nicaragua’s enactment of the ban despite forewarning of the law’s detrimental
effect on women’s health constitutes intent by the government to inflict harm
for discriminatory purpose—meeting the Article 1 definition of torture.
Palliative Care
In 2009 Human Rights Watch documented the failure of the government of India
to take steps to ensure that patients suffering from severe, treatable pain were
able to access adequate pain medication.12 Our report found that fewer than 4
percent of the roughly 1 million terminal cancer patients in India who suffer
severe pain every year were able to receive adequate treatment. Even though the
majority of patients who arrive at regional cancer centers come at an advanced
stage of cancer, and in severe pain, most cancer hospitals have no palliative care
departments, do not offer any palliative care services, and do not even stock morphine—
globally recognized as an inexpensive and effective drug for pain relief.
HIV and tuberculosis (TB)-infected patients also spoke to Human Rights Watch of
the pain they experienced. In the case of one patient we met, TB had infected his
spine and caused his legs to twist abnormally, forcing his toes up and causing excruciating pain. Despite the fact that TB requires lengthy, sustained treatment,
his doctors prescribed only a weak painkiller and assured him that the pain
would subside on its own as his TB improved. The pain continued, unabated, for
six months.
The UN special rapporteur on torture recently recognized that outdated and
unnecessarily restrictive drug control laws contribute to widespread failures of
states to provide pain relief to patients in moderate and severe pain. The special
rapporteur further categorized the “de facto denial of access to pain relief, where
it causes severe pain and suffering” as CIDT, saying that “all measures should be
taken to ensure full access and to overcome current regulatory, educational and
attitudinal obstacles to ensure full access to palliative care.”13
Empower Medical Providers to Challenge Abusive State Policies
After recognizing the forms of abuse described above—both the specific acts and
the denial of care—as torture or CIDT, a crucial next step is eliminating laws and
policies that require, condone, or facilitate these abuses. Empowering medical
providers and their professional associations to challenge these laws and policies
is essential to reform efforts.
Healthcare providers are naturally caught in a difficult bind when there is conflict
between their obligations to their patients and abusive laws and policies that
restrict their actions. In Nicaragua, as noted above, providers may face criminal
charges if they perform life-saving abortions. In settings with repressive drug
laws, medical providers can also be harassed or prosecuted for simply trying to
comply with patients’ medical needs—whether for pain relief or effective drug
dependency treatment.
In Ukraine Human Rights Watch interviewed physicians specializing in drug
dependency treatment who had been harassed by drug control authorities. One
physician reported, “They inspected me every week. My name was discussed at
meetings. They said that I was giving out drugs to drug users... [The] Department
for Combating Illegal Drug Circulation told me not to play tricks. They said if they
had found any violations, they would have put me in jail.” He said his patients had also been harassed, driving some away from treatment and back to illicit
drug use.14
But laws and policies can also be used as a shield by health providers to evade
their responsibility to protect their patients from harm, discrimination, torture, or
CIDT. In these cases, outspoken advocacy from professional organizations is critical—
to support those providers refusing to be complicit, to shame or stigmatize
those who are, and to engage governments in the reform of abusive laws or policies.
In advocating against conducting FGM in hospitals in Egypt or virginity
exams by physicians in Turkey, advocacy by medical societies has been influential.
At a global level, the World Medical Association has encouraged doctors to “honour
their commitment as physicians to serve humanity and to resist any pressure
to act contrary to the ethical principles governing their dedication to this task; to
support physicians experiencing difficulties as a result of their resistance to any
such pressure or as a result of their attempts to speak out or to act against such
inhuman procedures.” The organization has also explicitly criticized governments
for “any involvement of, or any pressure to involve, medical doctors in acts of torture
or other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.”15
At the national level, healthcare providers and human rights advocates should
encourage—and hold accountable—professional organizations to speak out about
abusive laws and policies and the ethical and international legal obligations of
their members.
Develop Stronger Accountability Mechanisms
Beyond the actions of healthcare providers, other actors—for example, victims,
patients’ rights, and broader human rights organizations, and the international
human rights protection system—must also be empowered to combat abuses
occurring in health settings. Prohibitions against torture and CIDT in international
human rights treaties open multiple, largely underused, international avenues of
redress for victims of such abuses. In addition, stronger systems of accountability,
especially at national and regional levels, that address abusive government
health policies should be developed.
The UN Human Rights Committee emphasizes that article 7 of the ICCPR “protects,
in particular ... patients in teaching and medical institutions.”16 The UN
Manual on Reporting also notes, “Article 7 protects not only detainees from illtreatment
by public authorities or by persons acting outside or without any official
authority but also in general any person. This point is of particular relevance
in situations concerning ... patients in ... medical institutions, whether public or
private.”17
Focusing attention on the absolute and non-derogable nature of torture and CIDT
in examining health-related abuses strengthens the opportunity for accountability
beyond mechanisms related to the right to health. Claims under the Convention
against Torture provide aggrieved individuals with a specific forum to seek a remedy;
and the treaty obligates states to take specific steps to prevent torture and
CIDT from occurring. The Convention against Torture also contains a mechanism
to permit the Committee against Torture to investigate systematic torture, and
states must submit periodic reports for Committee review. Further, the Optional
Protocol to the Convention against Torture (OPCAT) has a Sub-Committee for the
Prevention of Torture, which can conduct its own country visits to signatory countries,
and mandates that states that adopt OPCAT establish an independent body
to monitor places of detention. The Human Rights Committee reviews reports concerning
compliance with the ICCPR, including its prohibitions against torture, and
the UN special rapporteur on torture is another mechanism to investigate and
report on torture and CIDT. Increased recognition of the role of abuses in healthcare
settings constituting torture or CIDT contrary to the Convention against
Torture and ICCPR provisions therefore opens a range of expanded options for
redress available to victims of such abuses.
In addition to capitalizing on the opportunities for redress under international
human rights law, victims of health provider abuses also need to have available
to them strengthened accountability mechanisms at the domestic level.
Professional association ethical codes and state criminal codes should contain
explicit prohibitions on the types of practices described above if they do not
already, and disciplinary committees and state courts should expand investigatory
and prosecutorial capacity to target abuses occurring in healthcare settings or
under the supervision of healthcare providers. Additionally, at the regional and international level, state law and health policies that contravene torture and CIDT
provisions need to be routinely addressed.
Conclusions
The actions and inactions of health providers—whether consistent with, in conflict
with, or unregulated by, state laws and policies—that result in the intentional,
unjustifiable infliction of severe physical or mental pain must be recognized,
condemned, and combated. Only by expanding recognition of these abuses,
engaging in joint advocacy between health and human rights activists, and
strengthening accountability and redress mechanisms, will abusive laws and policies
be effectively addressed and torture and CIDT in healthcare settings be prevented.
Perhaps then, the Hippocratic pledge that providers do no harm or injustice
can be realized.
Joseph Amon is the director of the Health and Human Rights Division
at Human Rights Watch.
1 Human Rights Watch and Geneva Initiative on Psychiatry, Dangerous Minds: Political
Psychiatry in China Today and its Origins in the Mao Era (New York: Human Rights Watch,
2002), http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2002/08/13/dangerous-minds.
2 M. Nowak, “What Practices Constitute Torture?” Human Rights Quarterly 28(2006), p.
821, quoting from A. Boulesbaa, The UN Convention on Torture and the Prospects for
Enforcement (Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1999).
3 M. Nowak and E. McArthur, The United Nations Convention Against Torture. A
Commentary (New York: Oxford University Press, 2008), p. 553.
4 Declaration of Tokyo, World Medical Association G.A. Res (1975).
5 Human Rights Watch, In a Time of Torture,The Assault on Justice in Egypt’s Crackdown
on Homosexual Conduct (New York: Human Rights Watch, 2003),
http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2004/02/29/time-torture-0.
6 Human Rights Watch, Libya – A Threat to Society? Arbitrary Detention of Women and
Girls for “Social Rehabilitation,” vol. 18, no. 2(E), February 2006,
http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2006/02/27/libya-threat-society.
7 Human Rights Watch, Honoring the Killers: Justice Denied For “Honor” Crimes in
Jordan, vol. 16, no.1(E), April 2004, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2004/04/19/honoring-
killers-0.
8 Human Rights Watch, Iraq –They Took Me and Told Me Nothing (publication pending).
9 See, for example: Human Rights Watch, Rehabilitation Required: Russia’s Human
Rights Obligation to Provide Evidence-based Drug Dependence Treatment, vol. 19, no.
7(D), November 2007, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2007/11/07/rehabilitationrequired-
0, p. 46.
10 Human Rights Watch, An Unbreakable Cycle: Drug Dependency Treatment, Mandatory
Confinement, and HIV/AIDS in China’s Guangxi Province, 1-56432-416-8, December
2008, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2008/12/09/unbreakable-cycle-0; and Human
Rights Watch, Cambodia – Skin on the Cable (publication pending).
11 Human Rights Watch, Over Their Dead Bodies: Denial of Access to Emergency
Obstetric Care and Therapeutic Abortion in Nicaragua, vol. 19, no. 2(B), October 2007,
http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2007/10/01/over-their-dead-bodies.
12 Human Rights Watch, Unbearable Pain: India’s Obligation to Ensure Palliative Care, 1-
56432-555-5, October 2009, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2009/10/28/unbearablepain-
0.
13 Report of the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment, Manfred Nowak to the Human Rights Council, A/HRC/10/44,
January 14, 2009.
14 Human Rights Watch, Rhetoric and Risk: Human Rights Abuses Impeding Ukraine’s
Fight Against HIV/AIDS, vol. 18, no. 2(D), March 2006,
http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2006/03/01/rhetoric-and-risk-0.
15 World Medical Association Declaration Concerning Support for Medical Doctors
Refusing to Participate in, or to Condone, the Use of Torture or Other Forms of Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment, Adopted by the 49th WMA General Assembly
Hamburg, Germany, November 1997.
16 Committee on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights, General Comment No. 20, UN
Doc. A/47/40 (1992), paras. 5 and 7.
17 E. Rosenthal and C.J. Sundram, “International Human Rights in Mental Health
Legislation,” New York Law School Journal of International and Comparative Law 21/469
(2002), p. 515.