ACADEMIC FREEDOM
Extremism thrived in countries where assaults on academic freedom fostered
a climate of ignorance and intolerance. In Afghanistan, the ruling Taliban’s
first actions were to shut down most higher education and ban women and
girls from attending school. But in less extreme forms, governments around the
world justified violations of human rights by casting all critical thought as an attack
on public morality, national security, or cultural purity. In the wake of the attacks
on New York City and Washington, several academics in the United States and
Canada came under official or public pressure for questioning various aspects of
their governments’ past or projected policies.With another international conflict
simmering, violations of academic freedom were likely to increase around the
globe.
Even before September 11, 2001, academic groups were growing increasingly
aware of the importance of international cooperation and coordination in support
of their colleagues’ freedom. The international Network on Education and Academic
Rights (NEAR) was created in June 2001 to serve as a repository and clearinghouse
for information about academic freedom cases. With initial funding from
UNESCO, the network promised to expand on the existing contact and cooperation
between academics and academic groups. As the network’s name indicated,
NEAR’s understanding of academic freedom embraced not just the civil and political
rights of scholars and their students, but also the social, economic, and cultural
rights associated with the fundamental human right to education.
The right to education and academic freedom suffered numerous violations
around the globe.Oppressive governments punished academics for exercising their
right and responsibility to question and criticize their societies. In a troubling
development, several armed opposition groups also resorted to this method of
silencing their critics. Ideological controls over the nature and content of academic
material were apparent around the world, and students who in many countries
served as leaders in social development were targeted and persecuted. Many governments
also blocked the access of vulnerable and disenfranchised segments of
their population to education through their acts or omissions.
REPRESSION OF ACADEMICS
The Chinese government’s detention of several academics was the year’s most
publicized example of an assault on academic freedom and the subject of an international
campaign by Human Rights Watch. The arrest, conviction, and eventual
release of several of the detained scholars, and the broad international support on their behalf, demonstrated both the importance of concerted action in defending
academic freedom and the fragility of this right. An undetermined number of
scholars were detained during this crackdown;while some were released after a few
days, others remained in detention for over a year. Those released all said that they
had been warned by the Chinese government against publicizing the details of their
incarceration.
Xu Zerong, a political scientist at the Guangdong Academy of Social Sciences as
well as at Zhongshan University, was detained on June 24, 2000, and formally
arrested a month later. Others seized were Li Shaomin, a business professor at the
City University ofHong Kong detained on February 11, 2001, and Gao Zhan, a sociologist
pursuing her research at the American University in Washington, D.C.,
detained on February 11, 2001. Several of the detainees studied at universities in the
United States or the United Kingdom and resided outside China for significant
lengths of time. Li, a naturalized U.S. citizen, studied at Harvard and Princeton
Universities, in the U.S.; Gao, a resident of the U.S., studied at Syracuse University
and worked at American University, both also in the U.S., and Xu studied at Oxford
University in the U.K.
The detention of these scholars prompted a worldwide campaign on their behalf
by Human Rights Watch and academic groups in the U.S. and abroad. Because of
their personal links to the United States, Gao and Li’s cases received significant
international attention. Some of the greatest media scrutiny focused on an
unprecedented petition signed by over four hundred China scholars from some fifteen
countries asking the Chinese government either to release the detained scholars
or to immediately address the charges against them in a court in accord with
international standards of due process. Partly in response to this pressure, and
partly in an effort to improve its relations with the United States, China eventually
expelled these scholars from the country after summarily convicting them of ”espionage.”
The trials were widely criticized for falling short of international and
domestic standards; each lasted only a few hours, and the defendants did not have
any meaningful time to prepare for their defense.
While the release of some of the detained scholars showed the effectiveness of a
well-coordinated international response from the academic community, Xu, along
with an unknown number of other scholars, remained in detention. Furthermore,
many China scholars publicly stated that they curtailed their research activity to
avoid subjects potentially offensive to the Chinese government.
The same pattern of persecuting academics in order to curb their intellectual
activity recurred around the world. In Iran, a number of prominent academics were
arrested in March and April as part of a broader campaign of stifling dissent apparently
aimed at countering the widespread support for reform of Iran’s political system.
In the weeks immediately preceding Iran’s presidential elections, authorities
arrested at least ten scholars among a group of forty-two figures associated with the
liberal Iran Freedom Movement, a banned but previously tolerated political party.
Among the scholars arrested were Gholam-Abbas Tavassoli, a sociologist at Tehran
University and formerly chancellor of Isfahan University, Hadi Hadizadeh, a
prominent physicist, Ghaffar Farzadi,Mohammad Mehdi-Jafari, Habibollah Peyman,
Reza Raisdoosti, and Mohammad Maleki. Tavassoli was released two days
after his arrest, but several other academics remained in jail.
In response, more than one hundred faculty members from Iran’s universities
signed an appeal to the government requesting the release of their colleagues.
Widespread student protests in support of the detained academics also occurred at
universities in Tehran and other cities, and were met by heavy handed police reaction.
These attacks on academic freedom formed the backdrop to a critical rise in the
“brain drain” phenomenon among Iran’s academics and university graduates.
According to a report issued by the Iranian government in May 2001, tens of thousands
of academics and professionals left Iran for Western countries in the preceding
twelve months. Commenting on this report, chancellors from several Iranian
universities blamed the mass exodus of educated Iranians on the “continual psychological
insecurity on the campuses.”
In Egypt, Saad Eddin Ibrahim, a prominent sociologist and a critic of the government,
went on trial on charges of impugning Egypt’s international reputation
(having reported on Egypt’s flawed October 2000 parliamentary elections), accepting
foreign funds without authorization (based on a grant from the European
Union), and ”embezzlement.” On May 21, 2001, Ibrahim and twenty-seven colleagues
from his think tank, the Ibn Khaldun Center for Development Studies,were
convicted in a trial criticized by observers from Human Rights Watch as having predetermined
its ruling. Twenty-one defendants (nine of whom were tried in absentia)
received one-year suspended sentences and six others (one tried in absentia)
received sentences ranging between two and five years’ imprisonment with labor.
The six serving custodial sentences at the time of writing were: Saadeddin Ibrahim,
Khaled Ahmed Mohamed al-Fayyad,Usama Hashem Mohamed ‘Ali and Mohamed
Hassanein ‘Amara (held at Tora Mazra’at Prison), and Nadia Mohamed Abdel Nour
and Magda Ibrahim al-Bey (held at the Women’s Prison in Qanater. Ibrahim was
sentenced to seven years in prison.
A flawed trial surrounded the death sentence handed down in the case of
Dr.Yunas Shaikh, a physiologist who taught at Nishtar Medical College in Pakistan.
Dr. Shaikh was accused of ”blasphemy”by students affiliated with the Majlis Tahaffuz
Khatm-i-Nabuwat (The Committee for the Protection of the Finality of
Prophethood), a fundamentalist religious organization, based on his remarks during
class that the Prophet Mohammad may not have followed Islamic hygienic precepts
before he received the revelation that called him to prophethood. According
to eyewitnesses, dozens of members of the Majlis Tahaffuz appeared at his trial in
an effort to intimidate the court during the proceedings. Dr. Shaikh’s conviction
came under a law that allows any citizen to initiate a prosecution for blasphemy,
although this law has been widely criticized by political and religious leaders. Dr.
Shaikh appealed the verdict.
In Tunisia,Human Rights Watch issued a joint statement with several academic
groups to protest the escalating attacks on academics advocating democratic
reforms and the rule of law.The statement ofMarch 2001 noted two attacks against
Khedija Cherif, a sociologist at the University of Tunis and a prominent advocate
of women’s right. On March 1, Cherif was beaten, sexually harassed, and verbally
abused as she was attempting to attend a meeting of the National Council on Liberties
in Tunisia (Conseil National des Libertes en Tunisie,CNLT). In the same incident,
the unidentified assailants also attacked Abdel Kader Ben Khemis, a professor at the University of Sousse. The Tunisian government also continued its harassment
of Dr. Moncef Marzouki, the CNLT’s former spokesperson. In December
2000, he received a one-year sentence, later suspended on appeal, on trumped-up
charges of “belonging to an illegal organization” and “disseminating false information,”
stemming from his former activity with the CNLT. Marzouki had already
been improperly dismissed from his position teaching public health at the University
of Sousse and barred from any other type of employment, which resulted in
extreme economic hardship.He is under constant surveillance and is only allowed
intermittent telephone contact. At this writing it is unclear whether he will be
allowed to leave the country to assume a teaching position abroad; an attempt in
March 2001 to leave for a two-year faculty post in France was thwarted at the airport
despite assurances from judicial authorities that he could leave.
Dayan Dawood, rector of Syiah Kuala University in Banda Aceh, capital of the
restive Aceh province of Indonesia, was killed on September 5 by unidentified men.
He was the second Acehnese rector to be killed in as many years.Aceh has witnessed
increased violence in recent years as pro-independence guerrillas battle counterinsurgency
forces of the Indonesian military and police. Both groups have been
responsible for political assassinations and both sides have accused the other in
Dawood’s murder. Dawood met with Human Rights Watch in December 2000 and
discussed his hope that the university could play a role in forming a nonviolent resolution
to the conflict in Aceh.
Attacks by army-linked paramilitaries on academics were rampant in Colombia,
where over two dozen scholars and students were killed over the last eighteen
months. Most of the attacks were carried out by paramilitary groups contesting
what critics described as the left-wing academic environment of Colombia’s thirtytwo
public universities. As set out in a 2001 report by Human Rights Watch, these
groups enjoyed tacit, and at times explicit, support from certain Colombian military
units. In May,Miguel Angel Vargas, the president of a regional university teachers
union, was assassinated by gunmen in the northeastern Colombian city of
Valledupar, the home of the Universidad Popular de Valledupar.His brother Lisandro
Vargas, also a professor, was gunned down two months ago in Barranquilla, the
capital of Atlantico province. The University of Atlántico witnessed the greatest
number of attacks: In October 2000, forty-six-year-old Alfredo Castro, a critic of
corruption at the university, was shot by unidentified assassins in front of his family.
On August 26, 2000, Luis Meza, also from the university, was killed by gunmen.
Similar tactics were used by the militant Basque separatist movement, Euzkadi
Ta Askatasuna (ETA). The group took taken credit for several attacks on universities
and academics in the Basque region of Spain after the beginning of the 2000
academic year. ETA admitted that it had left a parcel bomb in an elevator in Lejona
Campus of the University of the Basque Country on December 18, 2000.The bomb
misfired, narrowly missing Edurne Uriarte, an outspoken critic of ETA’s tactics. She
subsequently stopped teaching out of fear of further assassination attempts.Mikel
María Azurmendi and José María Portillo also stopped teaching at universities in
the Basque region and moved abroad after attempts on their lives.
CENSORSHIP AND IDEOLOGICAL CONTROLS
In many countries where academics were not physically assaulted or barred
from carrying out their responsibilities, governments attempted to muzzle scholars
through restrictive regulations on the substance of their work. Censorship and
pre-publication previews of scholarly work is still the norm in China,North Korea,
Iran, and, to varying degrees, in much of the Arab world from Iraq to Morocco.
In May and June, a Human Rights Watch investigation in Turkey found that universities
there were subject to a strict system of centralized control established by
the military after the 1980 coup d’etat. This system was administered by a central
body known by its Turkish acronym,YOK,which controlled every aspect of higher
education in Turkey, including budgets and academic placement at every level.The
organization had fostered a climate of fear and self-censorship in Turkey’s universities
by accusing any critical academics of harboring leftist, religious, or separatist
tendencies—and sometimes all at the same time.
Human Rights Watch interviewed some forty academics from more than a
dozen universities around Turkey who had been punished under YOK’s ideological
controls. Aside from being subject to criminal sanctions, academics could be
banned from teaching for life, or internally exiled to any academic institution in the
country.While it was academics with religious tendencies who at this time faced the
brunt of the repression, YOK targeted any academic work that contained “leftist”
ideas or that acknowledged the existence of problems for ethnic minorities in
Turkey. In one particularly egregious example last year, YOK attempted to shut
down a private university, Fatih University, because of allegations that it was sympathetic
to religious political groups.This claim was rejected by the judicial system,
but YOK continued to harass Fatih University.
Ideological controls returned, or increased, in several states of the former Soviet
Union. In Belarus, Yury Bandazhevsky was convicted in June 2001 of ”accepting
bribes” from students and was sentenced to eight years of imprisonment.He was a
leading researcher into the health effects of radiation fallout from the Chernobyl
disaster, a subject that was highly politicized in Belarus. Amnesty International
named Bandazhevsky a prisoner of conscience in August 2001.
In Central Asia, the government of Turkmenistan continued its campaign
against academic freedom and intellectual activity. In January, the country’s largest
library shut its doors; the library had served as a haven for academics and was the
country’s last window to foreign scholarship. By June, the last operating Islamic
school was also closed.
Russian scholars and their colleagues elsewhere expressed alarm about a new set
of regulations issued by the Russian Academy of Sciences governing all contact and
cooperation between the country’s 53,000 scientific researchers and outside institutions.
These regulations required greater monitoring, and possible restriction of,
such contact.While some academics feared that this signaled a return to Soviet-era
policies, it was not clear how broadly these regulations would be implemented.
Anecdotal reports suggested that scientists working in areas of “hard” science—
physics, biotechnology, chemistry—had decreased cooperation with foreign counterparts
due to the new requirements that they inform their superiors of any contact with foreign scholars or institutions and that all research proposals must be
vetted by the Russian Academy of Sciences.
India also instituted regulations governing attendance of foreigners at international
academic meetings held in India. The Indian Home Ministry issued a circular
ordering security clearance before holding such gatherings, singling out
participants from Afghanistan, Bangladesh, China, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka. Similarly,
the ministry issued an edict requiring prior approval for all international academic
meetings.
India’s governing Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party continued its policy
of “Hinduizing” education at all levels. India’s University Grants Commission
earmarked funds for university courses in astrology, a move that sparked strong
opposition from India’s academic community. A lawsuit brought by a group of
academics contesting the new university program was before the Supreme Court
of India.
SUPPRESSION OF STUDENT ACTIVISM
University students, typically among the most politically active groups of civil
society, were frequent targets of government repression. Some of the worst abuses
occurred in the Horn of Africa, where the governments of Ethiopia and Eritrea
both cracked down on student.With the end of the ruinous border war between
these two countries, students were among the first groups to register public dissatisfaction
with their governments’ conduct.
Ethiopian security forces used excessive force in dealing with student protests in
April 2001, and used the protests as an excuse for attacking civil society. Students at
the university were at the forefront at a nation-wide movement for greater political
freedom.Students at Addis Ababa University were engaged in ongoing negotiations
with Minister of Education Genet Zewde over their request to resume publication
of a banned campus magazine and the removal of security troops currently stationed
on campuses. A number of attacks by security forces culminated in an effort
on April 17 to force the students to end their protests.
Heavily armed members of the Special Forces branch of the security forces
raided the Addis Ababa University campus, confronting students and civilians as
protesters disaffected with government policies joined the clashes in support of
the students.At least forty people were killed by security forces in the ensuing disturbances,
and eyewitnesses testified that security forces fired live ammunition at
protesters and beat unresisting bystanders, including children. More that two
thousand students were detained during the raids; while most were released
within a few days, an undetermined remained in jail. Some one hundred students
escaped the government crackdown by going to Kenya, and seventy escaped to
neighboring Djibouti. These students were being held at internment camps under
harsh conditions.
Across the border, in Eritrea, students also expressed their disillusionment with
government policies after the war with Ethiopia. A broad clampdown on civil society
and critical political voices was apparently triggered by an increasingly tense
standoff between the government and university students demanding greater academic freedom and social liberties.The focus of student protest at the University of
Asmara, the country’s only university, was a mandatory summer work program
during which students performed public service around the country during their
holidays. In 2001, the students protested the appalling conditions of previous
camps. On July 31, the police arrested the president of the Asmara University student
council, Semere Kesete, and he remained in jail without charge.
On August 10, four hundred students protesting Kesete’s arrest were rounded up
and sent to a work camp in Wia, a desert site near the Red Sea where daytime temperatures
hovered at about 38 degrees Celsius (100 degrees Fahrenheit). Eventually
some 1,700 other students were taken to the camps.The government acknowledged
that at least two students died of heatstroke. Parents of students who were protesting
the treatment of their children were also arrested. The students were ultimately
allowed to return to the university, but at this writing at least twenty members of
the student union remained in detention.
In Papua, Indonesia’s easternmost province, students played an important part
in the broad civilian independence movement that emerged alongside a decadesold
armed insurgency. In a spiraling cycle of violence, police killed three students
and beat up and tortured dozens of others following a December 2000 rebel attack
on a police post in Abepura, near the provincial capital Jayapura.
ACCESS TO EDUCATION
As pointed out by the U.N.Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
academic freedom was rooted in the fundamental human right to education.
Another key component of this right was that governments must educate their citizens
without discrimination through their acts or their omissions.
A groundbreaking report by Human Rights Watch based on its research in South
Africa demonstrated that the high incidence of rape and sexual assault against girls
in schools constituted a serious obstacle to the education of girls in that country.
Irrespective of their race or social class, thousands of girls suffered gender-based
violence at the hands of their teachers and classmates. The report found that the
government of South Africa,which had one of the highest rates of rape in the world,
has been remiss in addressing this violence: school officials were often unaware of
or unwilling to enforce disciplinary procedures against violators, and many girls
were discouraged by their schools or families from pursuing criminal sanctions.
The release of Human Rights Watch’s report, Scared at School, in March 2001
prompted a widespread and heated national debate. South African authorities
pledged to take concrete steps to coordinate appropriate responses between educational
and judicial authorities and to develop a national plan to protect South
African girls and provide them with an adequate education.
In a letter to Iran’s Guardian Council, the body dominated by religious clergy
that must approve all new laws, Human Rights Watch denounced the decision to
block a parliamentary bill that would have extended to Iranian women the same
rights as men to study at universities abroad. Women could study abroad—but
only with permission from a male guardian, and only men could receive financial
assistance for studying overseas. In January 2001, the Guardian Council overturned the decision of Iran’s parliament, which voted by a two-to-one margin to
amend a law that prohibited women from studying abroad without the permission
of a male guardian.While the percentage of girls and women participating at
all levels of education rose over the past two decades since Islamic rule began in
Iran, women still faced significant legal discrimination in personal status matters,
in the ability to travel freely, and in choosing freely how to pursue higher education.
As a result of the massive public outcry, the law eventually passed with some
slight amendments.
Discrimination based on race, ethnicity, and sexual orientation too often kept
students from receiving an adequate education.A 2001 Human Rights Watch investigation
found that Israel provided its Palestinian Arab citizens with a markedly
inferior education when compared with their Jewish peers. Discrimination based
on caste status was also a concern, as evident in the widespread cases of discrimination
against members of India’s Dalit community, which belong to the lowest
rung of the traditional caste hierarchy. (See Children’s Rights.)
Human Rights Watch also criticized Israel for interfering with the ability of university
students in the Palestinian-governed areas of the West Bank to pursue their
education. Since September 2000,Bir Zeit University, located outside Ramallah, has
faced a military blockade that often prevented students from attending classes and
at times shut down the university completely. On March 7, 2001, a few hours after
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon took office, the Israeli Defense Forces cut the only road
connecting Bir Zeit University to Ramallah, located about five miles away. An IDF
checkpoint, frequently supported by an armored personnel carrier, had since then
stopped traffic on the road, obstructing access to the university.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Israel: Second Class: Discrimination Against Palestinian Arab Children in Israel’s
Schools, 12/01
Indonesia: Violence and Political Impasse in Papua, 7/01
Hatred in the Hallways: Violence and Discrimination Against Lesbian,Gay, Bisexual,
and Transgender Students in U.S. Schools, 5/01
Scared at School: Sexual Violence Against Girls in South African Schools, 3/01
