Afghanistan
Life for the average Afghan remains short, miserable, and brutal. Average lifespan
for men and women hovers at around 45 years. According to the United Nations,
nearly a third of all Afghans, some 6.5 million people, suffer from chronic food
insecurity. Afghans face escalating violations of their human rights at the hands
of a variety of abusers: the Taliban and other anti-government insurgent groups,
including Gulbuddin Hekmatyars Hezb-e Islami and tribal militias, criminal
groups and local warlords (many with government affiliations), and, increasingly,
the Afghan government itself. The insurgency in the south undermines development
and reconstruction in the comparatively peaceful north, and as predicted,
destabilizes neighboring Pakistan. The United Nations assessment of areas considered
most dangerous and thus out of bounds for nearly all aid workers doubled
in 2007 to cover one-third of Afghanistan.
Where there are signs of development and economic progress, much of it is driven
by a narcotics industry that is burgeoning, despite more than a billion dollars
from the United States and the United Kingdom for counter-narcotics efforts.
Afghanistan produces some 95 percent of the worlds total supply of heroin. The
narcotics industry penetrates ever more deeply into all areas of the Afghan economy
and political system, weakening the rule of law and perverting the political
process.
Nevertheless, there were a few bright spots where international assistance
allowed Afghans to improve their living conditions, for instance by allowing hundreds
of thousands of children to return to school if they were not hampered by
security, indicating that helping Afghanistan does not pose an intractable problem.
Violence and Insecurity
2007 was a bloodier year than any since the US-led forces ousted the Taliban in
2001. Casualty rates were at least 25 percent higher than the previous year.
Civilians were increasingly caught in fighting between anti-government forces and
government forces and their international supporters. Anti-government forces
also routinely violate the laws of war by launching attacks from civilian areas, or retreating to such areas, knowingly drawing return fire. NATO and US-led Coalition
forces killed more than 300 civilians, although it is possible that the number is
higher, given the difficulty of Western forces in distinguishing combatants from
civilians and their extensive use of airpower. The Taliban began using anti-personnel
mines in Helmand province again, complicating efforts to eradicate mines
from one of the most mine-infested countries in the world.
Stymied by NATO from establishing clear control over more territory, in particular
larger urban centers, anti-government groups carried out a record number of suicide
bombings and attacks on civilian targets, destabilizing parts of the north and
west of the countryincluding areas adjacent to Kabulwhich had previously
been relatively quiet. At this writing, such attacks have killed 374 Afghan civilians
in 2007 and injured at least 631 civilians.
The Taliban increasingly relied on public executions to terrorize and rule populations
living in areas under their influence. They carried out at least 28 beheadings,
several of them filmed and broadcast on the internet. For instance, in April
the Taliban distributed video footage of a clearly prepubescent boy beheading
Ghulam Nabi, a Pakistani militant accused of betraying a top Taliban official killed
in a December airstrike. The Taliban targeted humanitarian aid workers, journalists,
doctors, religious leaders, and civilian government employees, condemning
them as spies or collaborators. In June they publicly hanged four elders in
Helmand province because they were perceived as cooperating with NATO forces.
Insurgent groups killed at least 34 aid workers in Afghanistan in 2007.
At this writing, anti-government groups have kidnapped at least 41 Afghan civilians
in 2007 and killed at least 23 of them, including journalist Ajmal Naqshbandi
and driver Sayed Agha in Helmand. Anti-government groups also targeted foreign
aid workers. The Taliban claimed responsibility for killing a German national
whom they had taken hostage. In July the Taliban abducted a group of 23 South
Koreans affiliated with a Christian organization. The Taliban killed two of the
hostages before eventually releasing the rest.
Government Abuses and Failures
The Afghan government continues to lose public legitimacy because of widespread
corruption, failure to improve living standards, and lack of progress in
establishing the rule of law even in areas under its control.
In a troubling sign, President Hamid Karzais government did very little to implement
the Action Plan for Peace, Reconciliation and Justice, a five-year plan for
implementing transitional justice in Afghanistan, which is part of the Afghanistan
Compact and which he officially initiated on December 12, 2006. The warlords
and criminals entrenched in the Afghan parliament attempted to pass several
pieces of legislation designed to curtail human rights. In a highly controversial
move, a group led by Abdul Rabb al Rasul Sayyaf, Burhanuddin Rabbani, and Taj
Mohammad, all of whom have been implicated in war crimes and other serious
human rights abuses, attempted to pass a blanket amnesty law. Facing unprecedented
public opposition, the bill was amended to allow individuals to file criminal
and civil cases against perpetrators, though these provisions are unlikely to
be effective because of a lack of political will and severe threats and intimidation
against witnesses and complainants. President Karzai did not sign the legislation
and its legal status remains unclear.
The Afghan parliament made other attempts to restrict human rights. On May 21
the lower house of parliament voted to suspend parliamentarian Malali Joya, one
of Afghanistans most outspoken defenders of human rights, for her televised criticism
of her colleagues. The parliament also attempted to enact significant limits
on the freedom of the press, but in the face of strong pressure from Afghan and
international journalists the parliament eased some of the proposed restrictions.
The legislation has not been enacted as of this writing.
Unable to stem the growing crime wave associated with increasing militia activity
and narco-trafficking, Karzai bowed to pressure from ultra-conservative groups
and authorized the execution of 15 criminals in October by firing squad at the Puli
Charkhi high security prison outside Kabul.
The National Directorate of Security, recipient of significant financial and operational
support from the US, increasingly abuses prisoners. Many of them, including some originally detained by NATO forces, are held in unofficial or secret prisons.
Women
Afghan women and girls rank among the worlds worst off by most indicators,
such as life expectancy (46 years), maternal mortality (1,600 deaths per 100,000
births), and literacy (12.6 percent of females 15 and older). Women and girls still
confront significant barriers to working outside the home and restrictions on their
mobility; for example, many still cannot travel without an accompanying male relative
and a burqa.
Children
As part of their campaign of terrorizing the civilian population, the Taliban target
schools, and in particular girls schoolsthe government reported that insecurity
shut down 450 schools throughout the country, including 40 percent of schools in
the south. On June 12, Taliban killed two schoolgirls in front of a girls school in
Logar, near Kabul, and injured three others and a teacher. The United Nations
Childrens Fund (UNICEF) said these incidents stalled or reversed the progress
achieved in female education since the fall of the Taliban regime, and had already
caused a significant drop in attendance in secondary schools. While the number
of girls in school increased quickly after the Talibans ouster in 2001, only onethird
of school-age girls attended school in 2007.
According to the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission, child labor was
widely prevalent throughout the country and ranked alongside insecurity as one
of the top reasons for children not attending school.
Refugees and Displacement
Insecurity and armed conflict continued to cause new displacement and deter
millions of Afghans from returning to their homes. Tens of thousands of Afghans
in the southern provinces of Helmand, Kandahar, Oruzgan, and Farah left their
homes to escape fighting, leaving them particularly vulnerable to malnutrition
and disease and with very limited access to humanitarian aid.
Nearly two million Afghan refugees have returned to their country, mostly from
Pakistan. But the United Nations continues to report the presence of three to four
million Afghan refugees in Pakistan and Iran. Between April and June the Iranian
government forcibly deported nearly 100,000 registered and unregistered
Afghans living and working in Iran (see Iran chapter).
Key International Actors
Despite a strong UN mandate, Afghanistans chief international supporters continue
to dither over their role and responsibilities in Afghanistan. The existing military,
political, and economic resources are poorly coordinated. There is no coherent
mechanism for assisting civilians injured or displaced by NATO forces. One
sign of this is that, five years after the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) was created, there are not nearly enough UNAMA human
rights monitors.
Taking into account Afghanistans population and size, the 40,000 NATO and USled
coalition forces in the country are a small fraction of the security forces
deployed in other recent post-conflict areas like the Balkans and Timor-Leste.
Many are limited by national laws to comparatively safe areas in Afghanistan or
cannot act to protect ordinary Afghans adequately. Despite significant overlap
between NATO and the European Union, the international security effort in
Afghanistan has been hobbled by insufficient resources and the failure to effectively
address the security concerns of the Afghan population. For instance, the
160 police trainers fielded by the EU were too few to train the needed number of
officers, resulting in a police force rife with corruption and lacking in public legitimacy.
The US military operates in Afghanistan without an adequate legal framework,
such as a Status of Forces Agreement with the Afghan government, and continues
to detain hundreds of Afghans without adequate legal process. In a singular
exception to an otherwise poor record of accountability, on February 13, 2007, a
US federal court sentenced David Passaro, a CIA contractor found guilty of assault
in the beating death of Abdul Wali in June 2003, to eight-and-a-half years in
prison.