Afghanistan
Despite some improvements, Afghanistan continued to suffer from serious
instability in 2004. Warlords and armed factions, including remaining
Taliban forces, dominate most of the country and routinely abuse
human rights, particularly the rights of women and girls. The international
community has failed to contribute adequate troops or resources
to address the situation, and basic human rights conditions remain poor
in many parts of the country, especially outside of Kabul.
Progress was made in stabilizing Afghanistan’s system of governance.
Afghans began exercising their right to participate in the political
process by approving a new constitution in January 2004, and selecting
Hamid Karzai to a five-year term as president in a generally peaceful
election in October—the country’s first universal suffrage, direct vote
for the presidency. Afghans, including notable numbers of women, participated
widely in both processes, but the legitimacy of both processes
suffered due to inadequate preparation by the international community
and the absence of sufficient security and monitoring.
These advances are offset by the blossoming Afghan drug economy and
the continuing effects of widespread poverty. Afghanistan was the
largest worldwide producer of opium and heroin in 2004. Escalating
drug profits stifle efforts to reestablish rule of law and increase reconstruction
and development efforts. Average per capita expenditures for
Afghans—the amount of money an average Afghan spends on food and
essential non-food items in one year—is only U.S. $165. Literacy rates
and school enrollment rates countrywide climb, but still remain
extremely low, especially for women. And the country continues to suffer
from extremely high levels of preventable morbidity and health
problems.
U.S. forces operating against Taliban insurgents continue to generate
numerous claims of human rights abuses against the civilian population, including arbitrary arrests, use of excessive force, and mistreatment of
detainees, many of whom are held outside the protection of the Geneva
Conventions.
Warlordism and Insecurity
Political repression, human rights abuses, and criminal activity by warlords—
the leaders of militias and remnants of past Afghan military
forces, who were brought to power with the assistance of the United
States after the Taliban’s defeat—are consistently listed as the chief concerns
of most Afghans. However, the marginalization of two major warlords—
Marshall Fahim, the first vice president and defense minister,
and Ismail Khan, self-styled Emir of Herat—raised hopes that President
Karzai and the international community had begun to reverse their policy
of relying on warlords to provide security.
Local military and police forces, even in Kabul, have been involved in
arbitrary arrests, kidnapping, extortion, torture, and extrajudicial
killings of criminal suspects. Outside Kabul, commanders and their
troops in many areas have been implicated in widespread rape of
women, girls, and boys, murder, illegal detention, forced displacement,
and other specific abuses against women and children, including human
trafficking and forced marriage. In several areas, Human Rights Watch
documented how commanders and their troops seized property from
families and levied illegal per capita “taxes” (paid in cash or with food or
goods) from local populations. In some remote areas, there are no real
governmental structures or activity, only abuse and criminal enterprises
by factions.
In July 2004, President Karzai dropped Mohammad Qasim Fahim from
the vice president’s spot on his presidential ticket. The first vice president
and minister of defense for most of 2004, Marshall Fahim, is a factional
leader and for the last three years has resisted many efforts to disarm his forces or to replace factional commanders whom he appointed
to high-level positions in the ministry.
The western city of Herat descended into violence on two occasions
after President Karzai dismissed the the main warlord there, Ismail
Khan, from his post in September 2004. The factional violence led to
the temporary suspension of U.N. and NGO humanitarian operations.
Ongoing factional rivalries impede aid delivery and development in several
provinces in the north and west of the country.
Many districts remain insecure because of violence caused by factions
ostensibly affiliated with the government. The medical aid organization
Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF, Doctors Without Borders), decided to
pull out of Afghanistan after five MSF workers were killed in the northwest
of the country in June 2004—a momentous decision given that
MSF worked in Afghanistan through the worst violence of the early
1990’s. Overall, nearly fifty aid workers and election officials were killed
in 2004, far higher than in any previous period.
In the south and southeast of the country, Taliban remnants and other
anti-government forces outside Afghanistan’s political framework have
continued to attack humanitarian workers and coalition and Afghan
government forces. As a result of attacks, international agencies suspended
many of their operations in affected areas, and development and
humanitarian work has suffered as a result. In some areas—like Zabul
and Kunar province—whole districts are essentially war zones, where
U.S. and Afghan government forces engage in military operations
against Taliban and other insurgent groups. Hundreds of Afghan civilians
were killed in 2004 during these operations—in some cases because
of violations of the laws of war by insurgents or by coalition or Afghan
forces.
In many areas around Afghanistan, poppy production has reached
record highs, and many factions—including Taliban and anti-government forces—are suspected of engaging in drug trafficking. U.N. and
U.S. officials estimated that in 2004 Afghan-produced opium and heroin
accounted for approximately 75 percent of the entire world supply,
and approximately 90 percent of that consumed in Europe. The drug
revenue amounts to approximately U.S.$2.5 billion—half of Afghanistan
Gross Domestic Product. The inflated profits provide warlords with an
independent source of income which make it especially difficult to
establish rule of law.
The Presidential Election and the Bonn Process
On October 9, 2004, Afghanistan held its first-ever presidential election.
Surprisingly few problems occurred on election day and over eight
million votes were cast. But the international community failed to supply
adequate numbers of international monitors to observe the election,
and the majority of election sites were not adequately monitored. In
many cases Afghans were able to vote relatively freely, but in many
other places—especially rural areas—voters did not receive adequate
civic education about the secrecy of the ballot and were likely threatened
by local leaders how to vote. Independent political organizers
unaffiliated with factions or their militia forces faced death threats and
harassment and in many areas struggled just to organize. In the months
before the election, Human Rights Watch documented continuing
political repression by local factional leaders.
The presidential elections represented another major milestone in the
political process initiated by the 2001 Bonn Agreement, an accord
signed by representatives of the militia forces who fought with the U.S.-
led coalition against the Taliban, representatives of the former King of
Afghanistan, Zahir Shah, and representatives of various other exiled
Afghan groups. The agreement brought President Karzai to power as
the first interim leader of Afghanistan. Two national Loya Jirgas (grand
councils) were held in 2002 and 2003, and a constitution approved, but both processes were marked by widespread threats and political repression
by warlord factions.
There has been some progress in realizing the aspirations of the Bonn
Agreement. The Afghan government has gradually re-built some of the
apparatus of state power in Kabul. Development efforts have begun in
provinces outside of Kabul, including construction of roads, schools,
and hospitals, contributing to the growth of Afghanistan’s economy.
And although the majority of school-age girls lack adequate educational
opportunities, millions of girls have returned to school, and universities
are functioning. Training has begun of a new Afghan army and central
police force. The Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission,
created under the Bonn Agreement, expanded its activities. Limited
legal reform processes and training of judges and lawyers have begun.
However, many of the Bonn Agreement’s most important provisions
have been either forgotten or ignored. Militia forces occupying Kabul
were never withdrawn from the city, no significant disarmament of militia
forces nationwide has taken place (demobilization goals were
reduced to a target of less than 40 percent before the October elections,
which in any case was not met), and many militia leaders have retained
their autonomous leadership over what are essentially private armies.
Women and Girls
Women and girls continue to suffer the worst effects of Afghanistan’s
insecurity. Conditions are better than under the Taliban, but women
and girls continue to face severe governmental and social discrimination,
and are struggling to take part in the political life of their country.
Afghan women who organize politically or criticize local rulers face
threats and violence. Soldiers and police routinely harass women and
girls, even in Kabul city. Many women and girls continue to be afraid to
leave their homes without the burqa. Because many women and girls continue to fear violence by factions, many continue to spend the
majority of their time indoors and at home, especially in rural areas,
making it difficult for them to attend school, go to work, or actively
participate in the country’s reconstruction. The majority of school-age
girls in Afghanistan are still not enrolled in school.
U.S. Military Operations
U.S. and coalition forces active in Afghanistan under Operation
Enduring Freedom since November 2001, continue to arbitrarily detain
civilians, use excessive force during arrests of non-combatants, and mistreat
detainees. There are also credible reports of Afghan soldiers
deployed alongside U.S. forces beating and otherwise mistreating people
during arrest operations and looting homes or seizing the land of
those being detained.
Ordinary civilians caught up in military operations and arrested are
unable to challenge the legal basis for their detention or obtain hearings
before an adjudicative body. They have no access to legal counsel.
Release of detainees, where it did occur, is wholly dependent on decisions
of the U.S. military command, with little apparent regard for the
requirements of international law—whether the treatment of civilians
under international humanitarian law or the due process requirements
of human rights law. Generally, the United States does not comply with
legal standards applicable to their operations in Afghanistan, including
the Geneva Conventions and other applicable standards of international
human rights law.
Key International Actors
Without adequate international support, the government has continued
to struggle in addressing Afghanistan’s security and human rights problems.
The central government has acted to sideline several abusive commanders,
but in most cases the government has negotiated and cooperated with leaders implicated in abuses, as have U.S. government officials
in the country, who continue to be influential actors in Afghanistan’s
political processes.
In late 2003 NATO took over the U.N.-mandated International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF), fielding between six thousand and
eight thousand security troops. ISAF is still mostly limited to Kabul city,
with a small outpost in the northern city of Kunduz. NATO leadership
has repeatedly stated that it wants to expand its geographic scope, but
member nations have not contributed enough additional troops and
logistical support. As a result, planned expansion stages have been
repeatedly postponed.
The United States, along with coalition partners including Germany,
New Zealand, and the United Kingdom, has been expanding small
Provincial Reconstruction Teams (PRTs) of fifty to one hundred troops
to several areas, but they have had only limited successes in improving
human rights protections and security. The small size of the teams, their
vague mandates, and their sometimes close working relationship with
local Afghan militias—the very forces who are creating abusive and
insecure environments in the first place—have stymied further progress.
The United States, the most important and involved international actor
in the country, has started addressing Afghanistan’s security problems
more seriously, but has not taken the steps necessary to lead other
nations in providing security, troops, funding, and political leadership to
secure Afghanistan’s future. NATO member states and other potential
troop contributors are also to blame for not providing more troops to
ISAF and adequate overall funding for international efforts in
Afghanistan.
The general failure of U.N. member states to provide an underlying
security framework for reconstruction in Afghanistan has made it
impossible for the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA )to carry out many parts of its mandate.
But the leadership of UNAMA has also limited its criticisms of Afghan
warlords and its efforts to monitor human rights and security. As a
result of these decisions, there is little detailed and comprehensive
human rights reporting by the international community in Afghanistan.