Afghanistan
By late 2006 Afghanistan was on the precipice of again becoming a haven for
human rights abusers, criminals, and militant extremists, many of whom in the
past have severely abused Afghans, particularly women and girls, and threatened
the stability of the country, the region, and the world.
Resurgent Taliban forces, tribal militias, and rearmed warlords exploited the
power vacuum in many parts of the country. These groups increasingly used
bombings and assassinations, including attacks on “soft targets” such as
schools, teachers, and religious figures, to terrorize ordinary citizens and demonstrate
the central government’s inability to protect them. Much of the violence
and insecurity was driven and financed by another record-setting year for poppy
production, which exceeded 2005’s crop by 60 percent and generated nearly half
of the country’s income and 92 percent of the world’s supply of heroin.
As NATO forces in the United Nations-mandated International Security Assistance
Force finally extended their reach across the entire country, the insurgency they
confronted in southern and southeastern Afghanistan escalated into open warfare.
In other parts of the country, Afghans were routinely subject to abuses and
oppression by regional warlords and militias, most of them ostensibly allied with
the government. Throughout the country, including Kabul, Afghans were disappointed
and frustrated by insufficient and poorly coordinated international security
and financial assistance. They also suffered from the poor governance and corruption
of the government of President Hamid Karzai, which often lacked the will
or the capacity to protect the rights of ordinary Afghans.
Despite an increase in the country’s average per capita income (much of it fueled
by the narcotics trade), economic growth remained mostly limited to urban areas,
in particular Kabul. Human rights abuses, poverty, and insecurity increased
markedly with distance away from city centers. The armed clashes and insecurity
seriously hampered, and even reversed, economic development in many parts of
Afghanistan, which remains one of the poorest countries in the world.
Reconstruction was particularly hurt in the south, adding fuel to local resentments.
Violence and Insecurity
At this writing, more than 1,000 civilians have been killed in 2006 as a result of
violence related to the insurgency, most of them in southern Afghanistan. Overall
more than 3,000 Afghans have died in the violence in 2006, twice as many as in
2005 and more than in any other year since the 2001 fall of the Taliban. The
United Nations estimated that the violence displaced 15,000 families—about
80,000 people—in southern Afghanistan.
In a new development, Taliban and other anti-government forces carried out more
than 80 suicide bombings, mostly killing civilians. In a sharp rise from 2005, antigovernment
forces carried out hundreds of attacks against teachers, students,
and schools; these attacks constituted war crimes because of their civilian targets.
In entire districts, attacks have closed all schools and driven out teachers
and NGOs providing education. More than 200,000 students who were in school
in 2005 were consequently deprived of an education in 2006.
More than 170 foreign troops died in the fighting in 2006. While NATO and US-led
coalition forces tried to minimize harm to civilians, there were serious concerns
about NATO’s ability to distinguish between combatants and civilians due to
extensive reliance on aerial bombardment to compensate for insufficient numbers
of ground troops.
In southern Afghanistan, tribal chiefs like senator Sher Mohammad Akhundzada,
who was removed as governor of Helmand due to allegations of corruption and
involvement in the drug trade, have been allowed to operate abusive militias with
the blessing of President Karzai. Across the country, warlords with records of war
crimes and other serious abuses during Afghanistan’s civil war in the 1990s, such
as parliamentarians Abdul Rabb al Rasul Sayyaf and Burhanuddin Rabbani, Gen.
Abdul Rashid Dostum, and Vice President Karim Khalili, continue to hold and misuse
positions of power.
Government Failures
President Karzai’s government did not credibly attempt to quell rampant corruption
or rein in abuses by militias and warlords. Too often, the government bowed
to demands for political repression justified by the insecurity, though such moves alienated ordinary Afghans and weakened the government’s legitimacy. In June
the National Directorate of Security (NDS, the state intelligence agency) distributed
to Afghan journalists a list of restrictions intended to curtail their reporting
on the deteriorating security situation. The NDS increasingly resorted to intimidation
and strong-arm tactics to gather information and silence government critics.
In May Karzai seriously undermined the crucial process of reforming
Afghanistan’s police by appointing several known human rights abusers and warlords
such as Baseer Salangi and Ghulam Mustafa as regional police chiefs,
although they had failed to meet human rights standards for senior police
appointments. Kabul police under the command of Amanullah Guzar in July used
excessive force to quell demonstrations in Paghman against illegal land grabs by
Abdul Rabb al Rasul Sayyaf, a member of parliament with a notorious record of
human rights abuses.
Women and Girls
Afghan women and girls continue to suffer extremely low social, economic, and
political status. They rank among the world’s worst off by most indicators, such as
life expectancy (46 years), maternal mortality (1,600 deaths per 100,000 births),
and literacy (12.6 percent of females 15 and older). Women and girls confront barriers
to working outside the home and restrictions on their mobility; for example
many still cannot travel without an accompanying male relative and a burqa.
While the number of girls in school increased quickly after the fall of the Taliban
in 2001, only 35 percent of school-age girls were in school in 2006. The violence
directed at schools hit girls’ schools particularly hard.
Women active in civil or political affairs braved violence and intimidation, such as
death threats often conveyed through “night letters.” Safia Amajan, a prominent
educator, women’s rights activist, and government official was assassinated in
Kandahar in September. Malalai Joya, a member of parliament from Herat, was
physically attacked in parliament and threatened with death when she criticized
members of parliament notorious for past and current human rights abuses.
Violence against women remains endemic, with few avenues for redress. The
Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission registered 704 cases of violence against women, including 89 cases of forced marriages and 50 cases of selfimmolation,
in 2006—significant increases over 2005. The AIHRC believes these
numbers seriously under-represent the true scale of the violence due to factors
such as social stigma and poor response from the justice system. More than onethird
of all marriages were forced, according to the Ministry of Women’s Affairs,
and more than half of girls were married before the age of 16, the legal age for
marriage.
The government took several steps that weakened the already weak government
commitment to women, in part because of pressure from ultra-conservative political
supporters, and in part to counter anti-Western propaganda by opposition
groups. In June, Karzai sent the Afghan parliament a proposal for reestablishing
the Department for the Promotion of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice, which
under the Taliban had established a record of arbitrary abuses, notably for beating
and harassing women and girls for traveling without male guardians and for
even slight infractions of stringent dress requirements. At this writing the National
Assembly had not debated the proposal. In November, parliament began debating
the possibility of closing the Ministry of Women’s Affairs, which, although
weak in terms of implementing programs, served as an important symbol of support
for Afghanistan’s women.
Delivering Justice
Karzai failed to adequately implement the Transitional Justice Action Plan, a fiveyear
process to gather information about Afghanistan’s legacy of warfare and violence
and to consider methods of achieving accountability. His cabinet approved
the plan in December 2005, but it has languished pending the required presidential
announcement.
The Taliban and other anti-government forces used the government’s failure to
confront warlords in the government to gain public support and discredit Karzai’s
administration and its international backers. The Taliban have reintroduced their
brutal brand of justice in southern Afghanistan, taking advantage of the failure of
the international community to provide promised assistance in reestablishing
Afghanistan’s judiciary.
Assadullah Sarwari, who headed Afghanistan’s brutal intelligence agency during
the communist government of the late 1970s, was sentenced to death in March
2006 after a trial that violated basic due process standards. At this writing the
sentence had not been carried out.
The Afghan judiciary in September released the chief suspect in the 2004 murder
of five staff members of Medecins sans Frontieres. The suspect had been acquitted
in January 2006 for lack of evidence but had remained in custody pending a
prosecution appeal. He was released because the judiciary said it had lost his file
and he had already been detained for the maximum time allowed by Afghan law.
Key International Actors
International military and economic aid to Afghanistan since the fall of the Taliban
was, and remains, a fraction of that disbursed in other recent post-conflict situations.
On January 31–February 1, 2006, high-level delegations from more than 60
countries attended a conference in London to establish a framework for
Afghanistan’s development. This framework, known as the Afghanistan Compact,
replaced the Bonn Agreement that had guided Afghanistan’s political process
after US forces ousted the Taliban. The London conference netted Afghanistan
pledges totaling about US$11 billion over the next five years, significantly less
than the $28 billion viewed as necessary by the World Bank and the Afghan government.
Similarly, international security assistance to Afghanistan (a total of 40,000
troops under NATO and US command) was far less than deemed adequate by military
experts. While the US reversed its plan to draw down its forces, other NATO
countries have been reluctant to meet the coalition’s request for greater manpower
and logistical support.
Anti-government forces and drug traffickers traveled widely and sought refuge in
the border areas between Pakistan and Afghanistan, raising suspicions of
Pakistani government negligence or complicity.