Afghanistan
Afghans feel enormous anxiety as the 2014 deadline for withdrawing international
combat forces from Afghanistan looms, and powerbrokers jockey for position.
The Afghan government’s failure to respond effectively to violence against
women undermines the already-perilous state of women’s rights. President
Hamid Karzai’s endorsement in March of a statement by a national religious
council calling women “secondary,” prohibiting violence against women only for
“un-Islamic” reasons, and calling for segregating women and girls in education,
employment, and in public, raises questions about the government’s commitment
to protecting women. The minister of justice’s description of battered
women shelters as sites of “immorality and prostitution” deepens that skepticism.
Government efforts to stifle free speech through new legislation and targeting
individual journalists were a worrying new development in 2012, while a crackdown
on a political party that advocates prosecuting warlords provided a troubling
indication of the government’s approach to the rights to freedom of association
and expression of political parties ahead of the 2014 presidential election.
Civilian casualties from the civil armed conflict remained alarmingly high, and
re-vetting of the Afghan Local Police (ALP) was underway due to abuses by these
forces. Rising numbers of “green on blue” attacks where members of the Afghan
security forces target foreign soldiers prompted joint operations with foreign
troops to be curtailed during the year.
Taliban laws-of-war violations against civilians continued, particularly indiscriminate
attacks causing high civilian losses. Following the end of the United States
military “surge,” many areas of Afghanistan remained under Taliban control,
where Taliban abuses, particularly against women and girls, were endemic.
Violence and Discrimination against Women and Girls
A series of high-profile attacks on women highlighted the heightened danger
that the future holds for Afghan women. The Law on Elimination of Violence
Against Women, adopted in 2009, remains largely unenforced. Women and girls
who flee forced marriage or domestic violence are often treated as criminals
rather than victims. As of spring 2012, 400 women and girls were in prison and
juvenile detention for the “moral crimes” of running away from home or sex outside
marriage.
The late December 2011 arrest and subsequent trial of the in-laws of Sahar Gul—
a girl sold into marriage at 13, locked in a basement, and tortured by her in-laws
after she refused their demands that she become a prostitute—underlined the
threat posed to Afghan girls by unchecked violence against women.
The unsolved February murder in Bamiyan of an adolescent girl named Shakila
led to street protests in Kabul and Bamiyan, and complaints from Bamiyan officials
to President Karzai over what was seen as a cover-up by government officials
of a murder. In July, a videotaped public execution of a woman in Parwan
for the alleged “crime” of adultery followed by the assassination of the head of
the government’s Department of Women’s Affairs in Laghman highlighted the
erosion of legal protections for Afghan women.
In the spring and summer, a series of “poisonings” at girls’ schools in several
provinces, alleged by the Afghan government to have been perpetrated by opponents
of girls’ education, escalated fear for schoolgirls and their families. World
Health Organization (WHO) investigations of some cases pointed to mass hysteria
as the likely cause. The Afghan government made several arrests, prompting
the United Nations to accuse the Afghan government of extracting forced confessions
from the alleged perpetrators.
Armed Conflict
The security transition moved rapidly, with international forces handing over
large areas of the country to Afghan security forces. NATO claimed no increases
in insurgent attacks in most areas, while evidence emerged of the failure by
Afghan security forces to maintain control in other areas including formerly peaceful Bamiyan province. Afghan security forces increasingly assumed a leadership
role in military operations, according to NATO, including controversial
“night raids.”
The Afghan government continues to allow well-known warlords, human rights
abusers, corrupt politicians, and businesspeople to operate with impunity, further
eroding its public support. Worries about the potential for a civil war along
geographic and ethnic lines following the withdrawal of international forces led
to reports of re-arming and preparations for conflict by warlords.
Civilian casualties from fighting remained high with 3,099 civilian casualties
(1,145 civilians killed and 1,954 injured) in the first 6 months of the year, down
from 2011’s high of 3,654 civilian casualties (1,510 killed and 2,144 injured) during
the same period, according to the UN. Most civilian casualties were due to
Taliban attacks that failed to distinguish between combatants and civilians, or
sometimes intentionally targeted civilians.
Pro-government security forces were also responsible for abuses against civilians.
In September, concerns about the US-backed ALP prompted a temporary
suspension of training of new recruits while all 16,300 members of the program
were re-vetted. While ALP abuses included reports of extortion, assault, rape,
and murder of civilians, ALP “reform” by the US and NATO focused solely on
measures to halt the rapidly escalating number of “green on blue” killings
where members of Afghan security forces, including possible Taliban infiltrators,
attack their international military mentors.
In May, a number of “uprisings” against the Taliban began in Ghazni as apparently
spontaneous community reactions and spread to other provinces. The
view that these local actions could help solidify government control of the country
were tempered by the apparent involvement of Hezb-i-Islami, an insurgent
Taliban-rival group. In September, the suggestion by International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) Commander John Allen that the US might support arming
these groups raised the specter of yet another untrained, undisciplined militia
operating with impunity.
Negotiations for a political settlement with the Taliban made little progress in
2012. Preliminary discussions between the Taliban and the US, ongoing since 2011, were widely reported to have broken down in March over failure to agree
on a US transfer of key Taliban prisoners from the US military facility at
Guantanamo Bay to Qatar.
Efforts by the Afghan government and some international experts to portray the
Taliban as significantly reformed since 2001 were undermined by the Taliban’s
continued abuses. These included the Taliban’s March attack on a Kabul restaurant,
its announcement in May of a spring offensive specifically aimed at killing
key civilians— including senior government officials, members of parliament,
High Peace Council members, contractors, and “all those people who work
against the Mujahideen”—and its order in April that schools in Ghazni be
closed, which led to local uprisings against the group in some communities.
The Taliban also continued to attack schools and to recruit children, including
as suicide bombers. The UN reported 34 attacks against schools in the first 6
months of 2012 (6 of which involved targeted assassinations of school staff or
education officials),
Ethnic violence between Tajiks and Hazaras in Kabul in September renewed
fears of rising sectarian strife, which has plagued neighboring Pakistan but has
so far been largely avoided in Afghanistan.
Abuse of Prisoners and Detainees
A March agreement between the Afghan and US governments set a deadline of
September for full transfer of the US-run Bagram detention facility to the Afghan
government. The handover occurred, but amid recriminations as the US refused
to hand over a number of prisoners, as well as disagreement over the continuing
role of the US in holding and interrogating detainees.
Provisions of the Afghan-US agreement also obliged the Afghan government to
establish an administrative detention system, which would permit the government
to hold conflict-related detainees without charge. Agreed upon in secret,
Afghan lawmakers criticized the deal as unconstitutional under Afghan law.
However, both governments agreed on plans for the US to maintain custody of
approximately 50 non-Afghan “third country national” prisoners being held indefinitely at Bagram without trial until the US makes arrangements for their
transfer or release.
The January 2012 transfer of responsibility for the Afghan prison system back to
the Ministry of Interior from the Ministry of Justice raised serious concerns about
potential torture and other ill-treatment of prisoners. The government had shifted
responsibility for prison operations from the former to the latter in 2003 as
part of an effort to reform the justice system and reduce torture by the abusive
Interior Ministry.
In March, additional concerns about the transfer were raised when a newly
appointed Ministry of Interior warden ordered invasive vaginal searches of all
female visitors at Pul-i-Charkhi, Kabul’s main men’s prison.
In September, Karzai’s appointment of Asadullah Khalid to head the National
Security Directorate, the country’s intelligence service, sparked domestic and
international dismay. Khalid, a former governor of Ghazni and Kandahar
provinces, has been accused of abuses that include operating a private, unlawful
prison where torture was routine during his tenure as governor of Kandahar
from 2005-2008. The intelligence service has a long and well-documented history
of torture of detainees.
Human Rights Defenders and Transitional Justice
The Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission (AIHRC) is an independent
government agency that has been praised globally as an example of an
effective human rights body. However, in December 2011, Karzai announced the
dismissal of three of its nine commissioners. The three positions remained
vacant at this writing. The move effectively disabled the commission. A fourth
position has been vacant since January 2011 when the commissioner responsible
for children’s rights was killed with her husband and four children in a Kabul
supermarket bombing.
Karzai may have sought to undermine the AIHRC by intervening to block the
release of one of the commission’s key projects—a 1,000-page report that maps
war crimes and crimes against humanity in Afghanistan since the communist era. Completed in December 2011, it is needed to provide a foundation for
future steps to prosecute those implicated in past abuses.
Freedom of Expression and Association
The rights to freedom of expression and association of the media and political
parties, hailed as one of the few clear human rights success stories since 2001,
came increasingly under threat in 2012. In March, the Afghan government supported
calls for banning and prosecuting a political party that sponsored a
protest calling for prosecution of suspected war criminals, some of whom are
current government officials. The Afghan government repeatedly lashed out at
journalists. In April, one reporter was detained without charge after his TV station
broadcast a show critical of the Kabul mayor.
In May, the government accused a foreign journalist of being a spy after she
alleged government corruption, but took no further action, and in November
reacted harshly to an International Crisis Group (ICG) report, calling the group’s
activities “detrimental to Afghanistan’s national interests” and said it was
“assessing the ICG’s operations in the country.”
In June, the government presented a new draft media law that sought to dramatically
tighten government control of media through measures including establishing
a government-controlled media complaints body, creating a long list of
media “violations,” limiting broadcast of foreign programming, and establishing
special courts and attorneys across the country to deal with media violations.
The draft law was significantly revised following outcry from Afghan journalists,
but the October creation of a new media standards committee raised concerns
that the government was simply taking a new approach in its effort to crack
down on the media. In September, the media commission instructed the attorney
general’s office to launch criminal investigations of two Afghan media
organizations accused of broadcasting “immoral” programs.
Key International Actors
Growing international fatigue with Afghanistan negatively impacted human
rights in 2012, particularly by reducing political pressure on the government to respect women’s rights. In spite of efforts by many countries to sign partnership
agreements with Afghanistan, and pledges of goodwill and support at the 2012
Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan, commitments to support human rights in
Afghanistan remain glaringly short on details.
Diplomats admit behind closed doors that willingness to continue high-level
support to Afghanistan is fading fast, and the planned military drawdown by
2014 is already prompting further disengagement when it comes to using political
pressure and providing aid. Cuts in international aid are already leading to
the closure of some schools and health clinics.
Afghanistan remained under preliminary analysis by the prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). Since 2007, the court has been looking into
allegations of crimes, including torture, recruitment of child soldiers, attacks on
humanitarian targets and the UN, and attacks on objects or locations protected
under international law that are not military targets.