Afghanistan
Preparations for the end-2014 withdrawal of international combat troops continued
in 2013, with international troops largely departed, sequestered in bases,
and focused on the logistics of shipping military equipment out of the country.
The Afghan army and police stepped forward to lead the fight against the
Taliban and other insurgents, with mixed results.
The ability of Afghan security forces to hold government-held territory, let alone
retake insurgent-controlled areas, is unclear, and security concerns for much of
the population remain high. The United Nations recorded a 23 percent rise in
civilian casualties for the first six months of 2013 compared to 2012, most
caused by insurgents, with the Taliban explicitly targeting civilians they see as
supporting the government. The security concerns are reflected in the fact that
almost half of the 7,000 polling centers planned for the 2014 presidential election
face serious threats.
There was continued instability and declining respect for human rights in the
country over the past year. This was reflected in attacks on women’s rights,
growing internal displacement and migration, and weakened efficacy of the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission (AIHRC). Impunity for
abuses was the norm for government security forces and other armed groups.
These problems raised concerns about the fairness of the upcoming presidential
election.
Women’s Rights
With international interest in Afghanistan rapidly waning, opponents of
women’s rights seized the opportunity to begin rolling back the progress made
since the end of Taliban rule. A May parliamentary debate on the groundbreaking
Law on the Elimination of Violence Against Women (EVAW Law), passed by
presidential decree in 2009, was halted after 15 minutes after numerous lawmakers
argued for the law’s repeal and spoke out against legal protections for
women and girls. The law remains valid, but enforcement is weak. The EVAW
debate heralded, and perhaps triggered, subsequent attacks and setbacks
within the government during the year, including:
• A call by Abdul Rahman Hotak, a new AIHRC commissioner, to repeal
the EVAW Law;
• A decision by parliament to reduce the 25 percent of seats set aside for
women on Afghanistan’s 34 provincial councils;
• A revision by the Ministry of Justice to the new criminal procedure
code, adding a provision that bans family member testimony in criminal
cases that makes it extremely difficult to prosecute domestic violence
and child and forced marriage— and the law’s subsequent passage
by the lower house of parliament;
• The release from prison after just one year of the parents-in-law of
Sahar Gul, the 13-year-old bride of their son whom they had starved
and tortured for months. The in-laws had initially received a 10-year
sentence.
A string of physical assaults in 2013 against high-profile women highlighted the
danger to activists and women in public life. These included:
• July 5: Former parliamentarian Noor Zia Atmar revealed that she was
living in a battered women’s shelter due to attacks from her husband.
She later confirmed that she was seeking asylum abroad.
• August 7: Unknown attackers shot Rooh Gul, a parliamentarian in the
upper house, as she travelled by road through Ghazni province. She
and her husband survived, but her eight-year-old daughter and driver
were killed.
• September 4: A self-described Taliban breakaway group dragged
Sushmita Banerjee, an Indian woman married to an Afghan health
worker, from her house in Paktika province, shot her repeatedly, and
dumped her body outside a religious school.
• September 16: Lieutenant Nigara, the highest ranking female police
officer in Helmand province, was shot and killed on her way to work
less than three months after the July 3 assassination of her predecessor,
Lt. Islam Bibi.
Security Transition
Overall declining international interest in Afghanistan contributed to mounting
fears among Afghans for the country’s future.
Afghan security forces filled in many of the gaps left by departing international
forces. Some 400 Afghan security force members were killed each month during
the 2013 “fighting season,” and attrition rates reached 50 percent in some
units.
Preparations for the April 2014 presidential election were plagued with difficulties,
with voter registration off to a slow start; delays in the adoption of necessary
legislation; controversy over the membership of the Independent Election
Commission and the Electoral Complaints Commission; low rates of female
voter registration; and concerns about the ability of Afghan security forces to
provide adequate security on election day.
Candidacy by individuals implicated in serious human rights abuses raised
questions about the efficacy of vetting processes, and increased cynicism
among potential voters.
Internally Displaced Persons and Refugees
Deteriorating security and growing fears for the future contributed to an increasing
number of Afghans fleeing their homes for other parts of the country, other
countries, or choosing not to return home from overseas. The United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) documented an increase of over
106,000 in the number of internally displaced people from January through June
2013, bringing the total to over 583,000. The main causes of displacement were
armed conflict and diminished security.
The number of Afghans seeking safety outside the country also grew, with some
making dangerous journeys from Afghanistan through the mountains into Iran
toward Europe or by boat to Australia. The number of refugees returning to
Afghanistan from neighboring countries has fallen in recent years, according to
the UNHCR.
Afghans arriving in other countries often faced increasing hostility, including
draconian new policies in Australia diverting asylum seekers to third countries and governmental proposals in European countries, including the United
Kingdom and Norway, to deport unaccompanied Afghan children back to
Afghanistan.
Abusive Security Forces
In recent years, the government has largely denied documentation by the UN
and the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission that Afghan police
and the intelligence service tortured detainees. However, on February 10, 2013,
a government investigation that President Hamid Karzai ordered into allegations
of ill-treatment acknowledged widespread torture. Karzai followed up on
February 16 with a decree ordering anti-torture measures, including prosecuting
officials responsible for torture.
In September, Karzai issued an order creating a new government committee to
investigate prison conditions. However, at time of writing there was no indication
that torture prosecutions had advanced, or that Karzai’s actions had substantially
reduced torture and other ill-treatment in detention.
Abuses by the Afghan Local Police (ALP)—a network of local defense forces
established largely by the US military in cooperation with the Afghan government—
continued to be a serious problem. Designed to operate in areas with
limited Afghan police or army presence, the ALP has been plagued from its
beginnings in 2010 by structural problems that include poor vetting of recruits,
weak command and control structures, and lack of accountability mechanisms.
These problems persist, as do allegations of ALP involvement in murder, rape,
theft, extortion, and child recruitment.
Human Rights Defenders and Transitional Justice
Although praised globally as an effective human rights body, the AIHRC—the
independent government agency—was largely in limbo from December 2011
until June 2013 due to multiple commissioner vacancies that President Karzai
did not fill for a year-and-a-half.
However, after donors set a deadline for filling these positions as part of the
follow-up to the 2012 Tokyo Conference, at which donors pledged US$16 billion
in development aid in return for commitments by the Afghan government including support for human rights, Karzai in June 2013 filled all vacant seats,
albeit without the consultation with civil society that the Paris Principles on
national human rights commissions requires. Several of the five new
appointees had little or no experience in human rights or had expressed overt
hostility to the concept of universal human rights. Abdul Rahman Hotak, a former
member of the Taliban government, after his appointment publicly criticized
the EVAW Law. In June, the UN high commissioner for human rights took
the unusual step of raising “serious concerns” about the appointments and
called for the Afghan government “to reconsider the recent appointments and
re-open the selection process.”
One of the AIHRC’s key achievements in recent years was the completion of an
800-page report that maps war crimes and crimes against humanity in
Afghanistan since the communist era. Completed in December 2011, it will provide
a foundation for future steps to prosecute those implicated in past abuses.
However, at time of writing there was no planned release date for the report:
President Karzai has blocked the release with the encouragement of international
donors including the US and UK, which have argued that releasing the
report could be destabilizing in the current tense security environment since it
likely implicates a number of powerful figures.
Freedom of Expression and Association
The rights to freedom of expression and association of media and political parties,
hailed as one of Afghanistan’s clear human rights successes since 2001,
came increasingly under threat in 2013.
Two credible Afghan media organizations, Nai and the Afghanistan Journalists’
Safety Committee, compiled statistics demonstrating a rise in the risks faced by
journalists during 2013 as compared to 2012. Both groups documented around
40 attacks on journalists in the first six months of 2013, compared to around 20
attacks in the same period in 2012. The attacks included threats, armed
assaults, and kidnappings. Of particular concern was the growing number of
cases where the attacks implicated government officials, including members of
the Afghan security forces. There were also cases in which journalists who were
attacked sought help from the security forces but were denied assistance or
subjected to abuse by the security forces.
Key International Actors
International fatigue with Afghanistan among most countries that have contributed
troops or significant amounts of aid post-2001—particularly the US,
which has had the largest military and aid involvement—negatively impacted
human rights in 2013 by reducing political pressure on the government to
respect human rights, especially those of women.
While many countries are pledging continued aid to Afghanistan, political
engagement is waning sharply and the US is scaling back most forms of assistance.
A sense that involvement in Afghanistan is ending is palpable in discussions
with diplomats, and cuts in international aid are already leading to the
closure of some schools and health clinics.
The end-2014 deadline for the withdrawal of international military troops will
further hasten disengagement. Disagreements between the Afghan and US governments,
including over the opening of a Taliban office in Doha, Qatar,
delayed the pending Bilateral Security Agreement (BSA), expected to set out US
support for Afghanistan’s security post-2014. Similar agreements with other key
foreign partners were on hold pending resolution of the BSA. These delays have
increased the sense of uncertainty and instability in Afghanistan.
In April 2013, President Karzai admitted that the CIA had been dropping off
bags of cash, totaling tens of millions of dollars, at his office for more than a
decade. The acknowledgement led the ranking member of the US Senate
Foreign Relations Committee to put a temporary hold on certain assistance programs
while he sought more information.
Afghanistan remained under preliminary analysis by the prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, who since 2007 has been looking into allegations
of serious international crimes, including torture, recruitment of child soldiers,
attacks on humanitarian objects and the UN, and attacks on schools.