NEW LIFE FOR AFRICAN MULTILATERALISM
The outlook for human rights in Africa at the close of 2002 was more hopeful
than it had been for several years. During the year, there were significant moves
towards resolving longstanding conflicts in Angola, Sudan, and the Democratic
Republic of Congo (DRC).At the same time,African leaders made significant commitments
to transparent and accountable governance and respect for human rights
with the creation of the African Union (A.U.), and its adoption of the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), a comprehensive economic and political
reform program. Yet, African leaders had promised reform on many previous
occasions while continuing to embezzle national funds and to violate human
rights. In addition, new or ongoing crises in the Central African Republic, Côte
d’Ivoire,Madagascar, and Zimbabwe; continued war in Liberia, Burundi, and the
DRC; as well as longstanding repression in countries such as Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Gabon, Sudan, Swaziland, and Togo continued to undermine progress
towards respect for human rights and the rule of law across the continent.
The African Union officially replaced the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
at the July summit of African heads of state in Durban, South Africa. The creation
of the A.U. was the culmination of a process that began with an extraordinary OAU
summit in 1999. The Constitutive Act of the A.U. proposed future institutional
reforms that would make the A.U. less a loose collection of states that meet once a
year and more akin to the European Union (E.U.). The Constitutive Act of the A.U.
also included significant new language for the promotion of human rights, democratic
principles and good governance. Further, the Act empowered the A.U. to
“intervene in a Member State pursuant to a decision of the Assembly in respect of
grave circumstances, namely war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity.”
In addition, noncompliance with A.U. decisions and policies might lead to sanctions.
At the Durban summit, the A.U. formally adopted NEPAD and the related
African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM) and Declaration on Democracy, Political,
Economic, and Corporate Governance. NEPAD—the final incarnation of
reform proposals put forward over several years by South Africa and Senegal, with
the support of Algeria, Egypt and Nigeria—put forth a comprehensive,multi-sectoral
development program, outlining a partnership between Africa and the West,
Africa’s leaders and the African people, and among the leaders themselves. It proposed that the industrialized world provide financial, political and strategic support
for Africa as its leaders embraced responsibility for Africa’s development,
political as well as economic. NEPAD included a significant commitment to good
governance, peace, security, and democracy, as prerequisites for effective economic
development, although its main emphasis was on economics and infrastructure.
Despite the welcome commitments to political and economic reform and
respect for human rights, the NEPAD document failed to acknowledge the particular
needs of Africa’s most marginalized and vulnerable people—women, children,
refugees, the internally displaced, and those affected by HIV/AIDS. According to
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),African countries
hosted 3.3 million refugees at the beginning of 2002, almost 30 percent of the
world’s refugee population; a Norwegian Refugee Council survey commissioned by
the United Nations (U.N.) and published in June found that around 13.5 million or
more than half of the world’s twenty-five million internally displaced persons were
in Africa (concentrated in Angola, the DRC, and Sudan). NEPAD was silent on the
protection and other needs of these uprooted people.NEPAD spoke of “promoting
the role of women in social and economic development” and “assuring their participation
in political and economic life,” but failed to address issues of systemic
violence, including rape and harmful traditional practices, and discrimination
against women. NEPAD made a welcome reaffirmation of the Millennium Development
Goals with respect to children, including in the areas of infant and child
mortality and primary schooling. But it offered few concrete strategies to ensure
children’s rights are a priority focus for development.
NEPAD and the A.U.would also be challenged to deal with the HIV/AIDS crisis
that continued to engulf the continent. In June, the U.N. projected that between
2000 and 2020, some fifty-five million Africans would die prematurely because of
AIDS, underlining the continuing catastrophic impact of the epidemic on the continent.
Sexual abuse of women and girls, often those orphaned by AIDS, contributed
significantly to the spread of HIV among women across Africa, especially
in conflict zones where rape was systematically used as a weapon of war.During the
year, Human Rights Watch investigated appalling reports of extreme sexual violence—
gang rape, violent abduction followed by repeated rapes, amputation of
breasts and sexual organs—in several conflicts, including in the ongoing war in the
DRC and during the past civil war in Sierra Leone. The horror that confronted victims
of these attacks was often compounded by their contracting HIV/AIDS from
their attackers, leading to even greater discrimination and ostracism.
In several countries, including South Africa where sexual violence remained at
levels constituting a crisis for all women, the police force and justice system provided
little protection or redress against violent sexual crimes. In addition, increasing
poverty, including the food crisis in southern Africa, led to a high rate of school
drop out among girls in many countries. Once out of school, girls were pressured
to work, often becoming prostitutes or domestic laborers subject to sexual harassment
and abuse and thus at high risk of HIV/AIDS.Research in Zambia conducted
by Human Rights Watch found that this kind of abuse was particularly widespread
among the rapidly growing population of children orphaned by AIDS. Numerous
girl orphans reported that their male guardians had sexually abused them. In some cases, the abuser suggested that they could not refuse sexual advances because no
one else would take care of them.
NEPAD’s peer review mechanism was generally viewed as the lynchpin for
NEPAD’s success.The mechanism would function on a voluntary basis: submission
to peer review would be an additional step to membership in NEPAD, itself a separate
commitment to membership in the A.U. Those countries that chose to participate
would be expected to reform their governance to meet the standards
specified by the Declaration on Democracy, Political, Economic, and Corporate
Governance.Their progress towards and commitment to political reform would be
evaluated through regular investigations of governance practices and policies by an
appointed team of reviewers. These evaluations would be presented to and discussed
by the APRM members and subsequently made public. No sanctions were
specified for noncompliance.
The APRM was pivotal to NEPAD’s success because NEPAD’s programs would
be largely dependant on an inflow of funds from foreign “partners.”These partners,
individually and collectively,made it clear that their support would come only with
a demonstrated commitment from Africa to political and economic reform.
Though the proof of the initiative would come in future practice, the APRM in concept
broke new ground for African multilateralism. Unlike other regional African
organizations and OAU programs, the APRM asked its members to surrender a
certain degree of political sovereignty and to subject themselves to collective governance;
sub-regional bodies such as the Southern African Development Community
(SADC) and the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
were conceived to encourage economic cooperation and did not seek to hold each
other accountable. At a November 2002 meeting in Abuja, Nigeria, twelve states
signed a declaration of intent to accede to the APRM: Algeria, Republic of Congo,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Mali, Mauritius, Mozambique, Nigeria, Rwanda
and South Africa.
Despite the enormous potential of the APRM and the optimism it embodied, it
was not clear that the mechanism, as it stood, would successfully instigate political
reform. There would be little reason for oppressive, non-declaration-compliant
governments to join the APRM and submit themselves to review. States such as
Algeria, Angola or Nigeria whose revenue was derived almost entirely from oil or
other natural resources, would have little additional incentive to submit to standards
designed in large part to attract foreign aid, foreign investment, and debt
relief. Further, the APRM would evaluate compliance with Declaration standards
against a country’s overall level of development. This decision created an opening
for subjective and politically motivated evaluations.
NEPAD was also heavily criticized as a top-down—or even top-top—initiative.
African and international civil society organizations (CSOs) repeatedly stated that
information about NEPAD was not readily accessible and was poorly distributed.
CSOs charged that NEPAD’s designers had placed greater importance on addressing
the priorities of NEPAD’s Western partners than those of African actors and
stakeholders. The poor efforts that were made to actively involve civil society were
especially concerning given that NEPAD’s governance programs would depend
heavily on strong nongovernmental voices: NEPAD would not undertake direct implementation of its initiatives; rather, it would rely on national governments.
The nongovernmental community would, therefore, play a key role in holding governments
accountable.
Events in Madagascar raised additional questions about the A.U.’s capacity to
influence its members and African governments’ ability—individually and collectively—
to oppose international pressures. For much of the year, disputes over the
December 2001 presidential elections kept Madagascar on the brink of civil war
between supporters of incumbent President Didier Ratsiraka and challenger Marc
Ravalomanana. In April, Zambian President Levy Patrick Mwanawasa, the outgoing
OAU chairman, and Senegal’s President Abdoulaye Wade, as well as other heads
of state, sought to facilitate a resolution of the ongoing conflict; these efforts were
ultimately unsuccessful though Ravalomanana was subsequently inaugurated.
A.U. leaders initially refused to recognize Ravalomanana, saying the election had
not been legally constituted. But, the larger international community did not follow
the A.U., and Senegal’s President Wade soon broke with the A.U. decision. The
A.U. was essentially forced to reconsider its position in September when the U.N.
invited Ravalomanana to the World Summit on Sustainable Development and thus
cemented Ravalomanana’s authority.
AMBIGUITY AND DUPLICITY ON HUMAN RIGHTS
African leaders’ efforts throughout 2002 demonstrated a commitment to peace
and stability but sent ambiguous messages as to the primacy of human rights. The
A.U. successfully pressured Rwanda and Uganda to reach an agreement with President
Joseph Kabila’s government to move towards an end to the war in the DRC;
as of this writing both Rwanda and Uganda had for the most part disengaged from
the war in the DRC. However, the A.U. gave no indication of what, if anything,
would be done to hold Rwandan and Ugandan forces and other parties accountable
for human rights violations and war crimes committed in the DRC.
Even more disconcerting was the A.U. decision to select Libya, with its long
record of human rights abuse, as chair for the 2003 session of the U.N.Commission
on Human Rights (UNCHR). Libya had a long record of detaining government
opponents without charge or trial, prohibiting the formation of political parties or
independent nongovernmental groups, and muzzling its press.The Libyan government
had also been responsible for torture,“disappearances” and the assassination
of political opponents abroad. In selecting Libya to chair the UNCHR,African leaders
demonstrated disrespect for the commission and for human rights in general.
Meanwhile, oppressive governments continued to deny basic freedoms and new
or renewed conflicts led to greater repression, increased human rights abuse, and
large numbers of refugees and displaced persons, without any effective African
response. In the context of the strong NEPAD and A.U. commitments to promoting
and protecting human rights, African leaders’ customary silence on many of
these developments was all the more discouraging. One commonly cited example
of this silence was African endorsement of the election in Zimbabwe. The election
was strongly criticized within and outside Africa for not being free and fair. It took place amidst widespread, politically motivated violence by supporters of President
Robert Mugabe’s Zimbabwe African National Union Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF)
against supporters of the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC), the main
opposition party. These abuses were highly publicized in the international and
African press. Yet, SADC’s official monitors—though not, significantly, the SADC
parliamentarians’ delegation—determined that the elections were legitimate.
African leaders, including South Africa’s President Thabo Mbeki and Nigeria’s
President Olusegun Obasanjo, two of NEPAD’s architects and champions, failed to
speak out against the violence inflicted on MDC supporters. However, in the end,
both Mbeki and Obasanjo voted to suspend Zimbabwe from the Commonwealth
in the “troika” set up by that intergovernmental body to consider irregularities during
the elections.
African leaders may have been justified in criticizing Western governments for
placing undue emphasis on events in Zimbabwe when they had overlooked so
many other oppressive situations in Africa, including the simultaneous election crisis
in Madagascar. But African leaders also said little as across the continent, in
country after country, endemic human rights abuse continued, and daily violations
of civil and political liberties persisted. There were several nations in sub-Saharan
Africa that were all but invisible to public attention and scrutiny where severe
human rights abuse went unabated in 2002, including Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Gabon, Swaziland, and Togo. In Swaziland and Eritrea, political pluralism was
banned.The only party allowed to operate in Eritrea was the government-affiliated
People’s Front for Democracy and Justice. In both countries, civil liberties were
basically nonexistent and civil society was severely restricted. Labor unions were
the only CSOs allowed in Swaziland, and they were allowed only in the interest of
maintaining trade relations with the United States (U.S.). The Swaziland government
maintained tight control of the media; in Eritrea the government completely
silenced the private press and arrested all the editors and publishers except those
who managed to flee abroad. In June, the Swazi nongovernmental organization
Lawyers for Human Rights filed a complaint with the OAU’s African Commission
on Human and Peoples’ Rights against King Mswati for consistent human rights
abuses despite Swaziland’s 1995 ratification of the African Charter on Human and
Peoples’ Rights.
The hostile environment often faced by civil society in sub-Saharan Africa was
yet another example of the ambiguity that characterized African leaders’ statements
in support of human rights. In general, nongovernmental organizations, human
rights defenders and other CSOs operated in highly limiting political environments
and faced serious security risks. Research and advocacy efforts were significantly
constricted and even entirely shut down in many countries, among them
Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, the DRC, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Liberia,Mauritania, Sudan,
and Togo. Nevertheless, human rights advocates and defenders managed to
increase the pressure on their governments to address human rights abuses and
hold accountable those who committed human rights violations.And, a handful of
countries, including Botswana, Kenya, Mauritius, Malawi, Mali, Nigeria, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, South Africa, and Tanzania, enabled civil society to operate in an environment
of relative freedom and openness.
SOUTH AFRICA AND NIGERIA: REGIONAL LEADERS
South Africa was a key political force throughout the year. President Thabo
Mbeki was one of the five principal NEPAD architects and was the de facto point
person for dealings with the Group of Eight (G8) industrialized countries in the
run-up to the June Kananaskis G8 Summit—at which he presented the NEPAD
program. Mbeki was elected inaugural A.U. chair at the Durban summit. South
Africa’s leaders were active participants in the many controversies and challenges
that faced the region during the year. Recognizing that the international “face-off”
surrounding Zimbabwe’s presidential election threatened NEPAD’s future, Mbeki
balanced competing pressures to preserve relations between Africa and the West.
Western leaders looked to Mbeki as a spokesperson for all of Africa,pressuring him,
as a symbol of the new African commitment to good governance, to denounce
Zimbabwe’s President Robert Mugabe and reject the election results. Meanwhile,
many Africans judged such pressure to be based on concerns for the white farmers
in Zimbabwe—an assessment ably played upon by Mugabe himself—and judged
Mbeki’s words and actions as indicators of whether NEPAD truly meant African
leadership or was simply pandering to Western interests for foreign aid. Others
were simply appalled at this politicization of the African response to the precipitate
descent of a relatively prosperous and stable country into a self-reinforcing cycle of
ever-worsening disrespect for the rule of law, economic chaos and hunger.
Mbeki was the principal mediator in the DRC peace process.He was a constant
voice for peace and compromise from the initial Inter-Congolese Dialogue in Sun
City, through the conversations between DRC President Joseph Kabila and Rwandan
President Paul Kagame during the A.U. Summit, and into the talks in Pretoria
that led to the signing of a “memorandum of understanding” on the withdrawal of
Rwandan troops from the DRC and the disarming and disbanding of the ex-FAR
(former Rwandan armed forces) and the Interhamwe (Rwandan Hutu militia)
forces in the DRC. In the last week of October, Mbeki again hosted the Congolese
factions in Pretoria to reach an agreement on an interim power-sharing government.
South Africa also played a key role in bringing Burundi closer to peace.Without
incident, South African troops, deployed late in 2001, protected the interim powersharing
government. The interim government had been agreed to in 2001 during
talks mediated by former South African President Nelson Mandela. South African
Deputy President Jacob Zuma made numerous attempts to bring all fighting parties
to the negotiating table for a peace based on the 2000 Arusha Accord. On October
7, the transitional government signed a cease-fire with two rebel factions at the
Great Lakes summit convened by regional African leaders. The leaders gave two
hard-line factions thirty days to begin talks for a cease-fire agreement.
President Olusegun Obasanjo of Nigeria, like Mbeki, was outspoken about the
need for change in Africa and the importance of good governance and human
rights.Yet his actions cast serious doubts on the veracity of his words.At this writing,
Obasanjo was under impeachment by the National Assembly: he was charged
with violating the constitution by not implementing the approved national budget, abetting corruption, and ordering army forces to attack civilians in two incidents
in 1999 and 2001.
Since Obasanjo took office in 1999, inter-communal violence and ethnic tensions
escalated in Nigeria and threatened to undermine elections scheduled for
2003. The authorities made little effort to prevent conflicts or limit the escalation
of political violence.Human rights abuses by the Nigerian police forces abounded
in 2002. This pattern of abuse, coupled with the general failure of Nigerian authorities
to provide security, spurred vigilante activity. In some instances, state governments
supported these vigilante groups as they committed brutal executions,
systematic torture and unlawful arrests. In August and September, efforts were
made to crack down on vigilante activity in the southeast but little was done to
address the underlying conditions that had led to its proliferation. Further, the
efforts of the Independent National Electoral Commission to register voters were
marked by significant irregularities, and in a closed decision process, the commission
approved only three new parties. Given Obasanjo’s leading role in NEPAD and
the A.U., the significant level of ongoing human rights abuse in Nigeria did not
reflect well on the degree of reform to be expected from other African leaders.
TOWARDS PEACE IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA?
Moves towards peace were not limited to the Great Lakes. Fighting in Angola
came to an end in 2002, prompted by the February 22 death of Jonas Savimbi,
leader of the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA). In
March,President José Eduardo dos Santos,under considerable pressure from Western
and African leaders, as well as Angolan civil society, announced that the government
and the UNITA rebels had agreed to a truce.The cease-fire went into effect
on April 4. Shortly thereafter, the UNITA soldiers were quickly demobilized and the
various UNITA factions began unity talks, which were successfully completed in
early October. Lasting peace would depend largely on the Angolan government’s
ability to rehabilitate and reintegrate demilitarized UNITA combatants and
Angola’s displaced—4.1 million internally displaced persons and 430,000 refugees,
according to UN sources.
Sierra Leone moved closer to ongoing stability after January 18 when President
Ahmad Tejan Kabbah declared that the decade-long civil war had ended. Kabbah
lifted the four-year state of emergency on March 1. Then in May, presidential elections
were successfully completed with little violence. The successful disarmament
of combatants by the U.N.Mission in Sierra Leone and their subsequent rehabilitation
through British-led efforts contributed significantly to prospects for continued
and ongoing peace and stability. Major steps were made towards justice and
accountability with the establishment of the Special Court for Sierra Leone and the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission. However, the poor performance of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) cast serious doubts over the
Special Court. In addition, concerns for Sierra Leone’s peace rose as the year progressed
and the civil war in neighboring Liberia intensified. (See below.)
Peace was, for the first time in at least twenty years, a possibility in Sudan due to the joint efforts of the U.S., the United Kingdom (U.K.) and Norway. U.S. Special
Presidential Envoy for Peace in Sudan John Danforth brokered four significant
agreements between the Sudan government and the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement/Army (SPLM/A) in early 2002, all of which specifically highlighted the
importance of human rights. In particular, the government and the SPLA agreed to
end attacks on civilians and civilian objects in the south, with independent international
monitoring.
Subsequently, the Sudan government and the SPLM entered peace negotiations,
which were sponsored by the Kenya-led Inter-Government Authority on Development.
The parties signed a peace protocol in Kenya on July 20, agreeing that after
an interim period of six and a half years, a self-determination referendum would be
held to determine whether the south wished to secede. The interim period would
begin after a final peace agreement had been signed. They also agreed that shari’a
(Islamic law) would not apply in the south for the interim period. Although, during
negotiations, the government continued to deny humanitarian access in the
south and to bomb oil-rich areas despite the presence of civilians, on October 15
the parties agreed to a military standstill until December 31 and later agreed to full
humanitarian access during that period.
Elsewhere on the continent, these positive trends were contradicted. In mid-
September, Côte d’Ivoire erupted in conflict when roughly 750 soldiers mutinied
out of anger over their imminent dismissal, returning the country to the instability
that took hold following a 1999 military coup. The incident provoked rapid international
support of the government,with Nigeria and Ghana committing military
support to government efforts to suppress the rebellion. ECOWAS dispatched a
mediation team of high-level delegates to Bouaké, the rebel stronghold, in early
October, and on October 21 the rebels conceded to sign a cease-fire agreement.
Multinational ECOWAS troops under Nigerian leadership were dispatched to
monitor the peace. However, concerns arose over Côte d’Ivoire’s long-term
prospects for stability as violence caused by reignited ethnic, religious and political
tensions spread independently of rebel activity. It was uncertain that this violence
would subside once the rebels and the government had come to terms.
While concerted regional efforts seemed to prevent the Côte d’Ivoire rebellion
from escalating into civil war, internal conflicts continued in Liberia and Uganda,
and abuses in these countries received little attention. Fighting between the Liberian
government and Liberians United for Reconciliation and Democracy (LURD)
threatened stability in the Mano River Union area (Liberia, Sierra Leone, and
Guinea) as Liberians sought refuge in neighboring countries such as Guinea,where
serious violations of their human rights were documented. While abuses inside
Liberia were generally worse in areas under government control, both government
and LURD forces committed serious human rights violations against civilians,
including killing, torture, rape, forced labor and forced recruitment. Liberia’s President
Charles Taylor declared a state of emergency for a large portion of the year,
enabling the government to harass all perceived opponents or rebel supporters.
Civilians in northern Uganda and southern Sudan were subjected to similar
abuses due to fighting between the government and the rebel Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA). LRA forces in particular targeted civilians, though the Ugandan army also committed abuses. The LRA raided and looted villages and refugee camps and
abducted children, forcing them to fight as child soldiers. It also attacked humanitarian
aid workers and camps. As in Liberia, the Ugandan government arbitrarily
arrested and detained those suspected of being rebel sympathizers or political
opponents. In addition, the already limited political activity permitted under
Uganda’s no-party “Movement” system was further constrained when the parliament
passed the Political Organizations Law.
DE FACTO INTERNATIONAL DISENGAGEMENT
At the Kananaskis summit, the G8 pledged its support for NEPAD and highlighted
the centrality of embracing good governance and human rights.Previously,
Western governments had denounced Africa’s leaders for continued “cronyism”
when they failed to reject President Robert Mugabe’s victory in Zimbabwe’s March
election.Yet, the international community’s actions in 2002 suggested that Africa—
despite its many conflicts and human rights crises—generally remained a low priority.
When Africa did receive international attention, human rights took a back
seat to geopolitical interests.
Throughout 2002, the international community emphasized the importance of
peace in the DRC.The U.N. and the E.U.both condemned any violations of the tentative
truce that had been reached in 2001.U.S. President George W. Bush met with
presidents Kagame and Kabila, and the U.K. also played a key role in brokering the
eventual agreement between Rwanda and the DRC, which Uganda subsequently
joined. But, amidst these concerted international efforts, the U.N. mission in the
DRC (MONUC) did little to address the ongoing fighting between DRC rebel
groups, whether home-grown or sponsored from outside by the same powers that
had nominally withdrawn. Granted insufficient troops and resources by the U.N.
Security Council, MONUC also failed to protect civilians. Once Rwanda, Uganda
and Zimbabwe had signed a peace agreement with the DRC, international interests
turned to monitoring the withdrawal of foreign troops, with little concern for
issues of international justice and accountability for war crimes. Calls for an international
tribunal by Kabila and other Congolese were essentially brushed aside. In
mid-October, the U.N. Security Council was presented with a report detailing how
Rwandan, Ugandan and Zimbabwean officers, as well as Congolese authorities,
manipulated internal conflicts to facilitate the looting of natural resources. The
report also stated that the withdrawal of foreign troops would not end this exploitation.
At this writing, there had been no indication that the Security Council
intended to take further steps to end the plundering of the DRC’s resources.
International commitment to justice was also lacking vis-à-vis the ICTR.
Encouragingly, several important genocidaires were arrested and rendered to the
ICTR during the year, including Augustin Bizimungu, chief of staff of the former
Rwandan army, but the ICTR was understaffed and under-funded.However, these
were not the most significant problems: Kagame’s government effectively refused
to cooperate if the ICTR prosecutor insisted on indicting soldiers from the current
Rwandan government (the Rwandan Patriotic Front, RPF) for war crimes. In response, both the U.S. and the U.N. pressured Kagame not to disrupt the prosecution
of Hutu genocidaires but did not insist on prosecuting RPF members. If the
RPF were granted this de facto immunity, the legitimacy of the entire justice
process would be undermined.
With respect to Angola, the U.N. and the E.U. pledged support for the demobilization
and reintegration of UNITA combatants, giving reason to be cautiously
hopeful of sustained peace. However, the cease-fire revealed a humanitarian crisis
of widespread malnutrition and medical neglect,which received insufficient international
attention.Humanitarian agencies repeatedly stressed the need for greater
U.N. commitment to the dire conditions facing the internally displaced but the
international community did little in 2002 to address these concerns. In August, the
United Nations Mission in Angola (UNMA) was established and mandated to assist
the Angolan government in protecting human rights. However, little material
improvement resulted for the internally displaced; they continued to be physically
harassed and abused by the security forces. They were also subjected to violations
of their freedom of movement and forced removal from camps.
France responded rapidly to the rebellion in Côte d’Ivoire, focusing on providing
safety for French nationals (roughly twenty thousand inhabitants) and evacuating
those in highly unstable areas. As of October, significant numbers of French
nationals were still trapped in the rebel-controlled northern city of Bouaké. France
also deployed reinforcements for the standing force of six hundred troops it maintained
in Côte d’Ivoire: by late October, a total of seven hundred French troops were
securing the areas between rebel-controlled and government-controlled territory.
It was proposed that an ECOWAS peacekeeping force would take over from the
French.
The primacy of the “war on terrorism”for the Bush administration affected U.S.
policies towards Africa in two ways: The U.S. gave even less attention to much of
the continent than might otherwise have been expected, and, in those few African
countries with a strategically valuable role to play, particularly in the Horn of
Africa, the U.S. de-emphasized human rights issues. The E.U. and the U.N. both
denounced the Eritrean government’s continued human rights abuses and the E.U.
largely limited aid to humanitarian aid. In October, the U.S. State Department
publicly rebuked Eritrea for human rights abuses. In contrast, the U.S., considering
Ethiopia to be a well-positioned potential ally, continued non-humanitarian
aid to Ethiopia and was markedly quiet about ongoing human rights violations.
Also in October,U.S. defense officials confirmed that they were planning to establish
a military headquarters in the Horn of Africa to help in the hunt for suspected
terrorists.
Sudan, governed by an Islamist party, received significant attention from the
Bush administration and the U.S. Congress as well as from a grassroots movement
concerned in part about the treatment of Christians in Sudan. U.S. attention contributed
to the year’s substantial progress towards peace in Sudan, as it did in the
DRC. Like the E.U. and the U.K., the U.S. administration and Congress also focused
on the deteriorating situation in Zimbabwe, calling for President Mugabe to respect
the rule of law, denouncing irregularities in the elections, and urging President
Mbeki of South Africa to take the lead in an African response to the situation.
Energy security was a key concern for the Bush administration in 2002. The
administration specifically highlighted its interest in pursuing African oil resources
as substitutes for oil from the Middle East.Although the U.S. periodically raised the
issue of transparency and good governance in countries like Angola, it appeared to
place a greater priority on solidifying relationships with major and emerging
African oil producers. For example, during a July visit to Nigeria, Assistant Secretary
of State for Africa Walter Kansteiner focused his public statements almost
entirely on the importance of Nigerian oil to the U.S. (Nigeria was its fifth largest
supplier). No mention was made of the extrajudicial killings and other abuses by
Nigerian security forces in the Niger Delta oil region or elsewhere. In contrast,
international nongovernmental voices continued to pressure oil companies about
human rights abuses. In fact, an international human rights campaign may have
been partially responsible for the decision by Talisman Energy Inc., a Canadian oil
company, to sell its Sudan assets.