AFRICA OVERVIEW
MAJOR POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS
Longstanding wars continued to plague several countries in sub-Saharan
African countries; in others, political leaders and parties engaged in elections, some
of them more satisfactory than others. Everywhere, human rights defenders continued
the struggle to improve respect for basic human rights. The year 2001 saw
new international attention to Africa, mainly focused on combating the scourge of
diseases related to HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) and on efforts to counter
impoverishment aggravated by the globalization of the world economy. But
African human rights issues, from those related to public health crises and the
economy to the stark immediacy of repression, lost visibility as the international
community turned to combating terrorism in the wake of the September attacks in
the U.S.
THE SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACKS:
COLLATERAL DAMAGE IN AFRICA
Just how big an impact would the September 11 attacks in the United States have
on Africa? It was a question which was on the minds of state and non-state actors
alike across the continent as the year closed.Though everything remained fluid, the
devastation wrought by the attacks could mean:
Political Fallout in a Number of Countries
Pre-existing political tensions between Muslim and Christian populations in a
number of African countries threatened to become more inflamed, and increasingly
violent. Côte d’Ivoire,Ethiopia,Kenya,Nigeria, South Africa, and Tanzania all
faced the possibility of worsening communal tensions. Bloody riots between Muslims
and Christians in Kano, northern Nigeria, following demonstrations against
the U.S. bombing of Afghanistan, had already left a high death toll. A pro-Taliban
demonstration was also reported in Kenya’s predominantly Muslim coastal city,
Mombasa.
Restrictions on Political and Civil Rights
Governments in the region might manipulate and redefine terrorism to justify crackdowns on legitimate dissension.The U.S.“with us or against us”mantra could
set a trend in Africa with African leaders labeling their opponents as terrorists
and justifying restrictions on civil liberties that would previously have seemed
unacceptable. In the aftermath of the attacks, President Abdoulaye Wade of Senegal
proposed the adoption of an African pact against terrorism. He said the move
would help the continent “to team up with the world coalition against this evil”and
commit each African state “not to accept on its territory individuals or groups with
terrorist intentions.” Responding to President Wade’s call, more than ten heads of
state and delegates from twenty other African countries attended a one-day summit
on October 18 in Senegal to discuss terrorism-related issues and closed the
meeting with a declaration against terrorism. In particular, there were growing concerns
that these steps would detrimentally affect refugee populations, particularly
Muslim refugees, and encourage growing xenophobia and anti-refugee sentiment.
Subordination of Human Rights Concerns
to Diplomacy’s Antiterrorism Priorities
The Horn/East Africa region,where a number of al-Qaeda cells were suspected,
was seen as a likely focus of U.S. interest. Sudan enthusiastically announced its
cooperation in the fight against terror, leveraging its intelligence resources regarding
al-Qaeda to reshape its bilateral relations.Kenya,Ethiopia, and Eritrea appeared
ready to use the opportunity to marginalize reformist elements. African governments
in a position to contribute to the global fight against terrorism by providing
access to intelligence, airfields, and military bases might take advantage of a willingness
on the part of more powerful nations like the U.S. to overlook abuses which
might previously have come under greater scrutiny. For example, an October massacre
by the Nigerian army of at least two hundred people in Benue State went all
but unremarked during President Obasanjo’s visit to the United States just a few
weeks later to discuss the antiterrorism campaign.
Declining Economic Activity
Falling consumer demand in Western economies as a recession took hold might
send commodity prices, already depressed, into a slump, and export-oriented
countries into a nosedive; investment inflows would be dampened because of the
combined effect of heightened perceptions of risk and the fall in prices for Africa’s
exports.Almost every sector would be affected: travel and tourism, a mainstay of a
number of countries,would be badly disrupted, and recession and unemployment
among African immigrants in the diaspora would decrease remittances sent to support
their relatives at home.
Reduced Humanitarian and Development Assistance
The expected global downturn and a ratcheting up of security and defense
expenditures in the west, could translate into major cuts in both development and
humanitarian aid. President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa warned on October 3 that: “We have to ensure that there is no possibility of these attacks creating negative
consequences, whereby the development issues that we have been grappling
with for decades are sidelined to the margins of the global agenda.The countries of
the world must simultaneously deal decisively with terrorism and effectively
address and defeat poverty and underdevelopment.”
HIV/AIDS STRAIGHT TALK:
AFRICA TAKES STEPS TO CHANGE
To many Africans, the continent’s key challenge was the response to HIV/AIDS.
Of the estimated twenty-two million people to have died of AIDS-related illness
worldwide by the end of 2000, seventeen million were Africans. The most severely
affected region was southern Africa, including Botswana, with the highest known
prevalence of HIV/AIDS in the world, and South Africa,with the largest number of
people living with AIDS in any country in the world. There were around twentyfive
million Africans living with AIDS, 3.8 million of whom were infected in 2000
alone.
In the past year, AIDS in Africa gained an unprecedented level of media coverage.
With it came some public and political will to fight the worst epidemic in the
history of mankind, as well as growing scrutiny of the pandemic’s root causes.
Nearly every government from tiny Gabon to repressed Mauritania engaged in
high-level discussions about the problem, and the failure or success of their programs.
At a special summit of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) in Abuja,
Nigeria, in April 2001, OAU member states pledged to use 15 percent of their
annual budgets to fight AIDS, tuberculosis, and other infectious diseases.Whether
this would happen, particularly in countries with notoriously opaque budgets, was
yet to be seen. Even with the Abuja Declaration, the current cost of the recommended
drug treatments remained unfeasible in much of Africa.
There was global pressure on the pharmaceutical industry to remedy this situation,
through lowered prices, donations, and relaxation of patent laws. In April, following
a sustained campaign against them, pharmaceutical companies dropped a
court challenge to a South African law enacted in 1997, but not yet promulgated,
that would allow the production and importation of generic AIDS drugs. It was a
major victory for the treatment lobby both in South Africa and internationally,
with potentially important benefits for health and human rights. A similar law was
passed in Kenya in March, and was pending in other countries, but the flow of
cheap drugs was yet to be seen. Drug firms in Uganda also appealed to the government
to allow them to produce anti-retroviral drugs locally.
Botswana, a relatively rich country, announced that, hopefully by 2002, all such
drugs would be free for its 350,000 infected citizens. In the first week of September,
Nigeria announced that it would be the first country in Africa to launch trials with
generic drugs, which, in initial phases, would treat 15,000 Nigerians, for around
U.S. $350 a year per person. Several countries moved first to provide the cheap,
effective, and easy to provide drug nevirapine to women before giving birth in
order to prevent mother-to-child transmission. But South Africa, despite its economic resources and success in facing down the drug industry, was held back by the
embarrassing performance of President Thabo Mbeki, who persisted in questioning
the link between HIV and AIDS. An NGO, the Treatment Action Campaign,
went to court to force the government to provide drug treatment that, it argued,
would even save the government money.
SOUTH AFRICA AND NIGERIA—
THE ANCHOR COUNTRIES?
Since the extraordinary political and constitutional transition of 1994, South
Africa had established a reputation for openness, transparency, and rational leadership
on a turbulent continent.But in 2001, President Thabo Mbeki’s government
seemed to prefer to invest political capital in fighting public relations skirmishes
rather than addressing the economic and social challenges that confronted the
country. In February, there were extraordinary allegations by Steve Tshwete, the
minister for police, of a conspiracy by three politicians-turned-businessmen to
oust Mbeki from office.Observers were alarmed by the willingness to use the tools
of state security to tackle what seemed to be an internal party issue. The government
was plagued by corruption scandals in connection with a multi-million rand
arms deal. African National Congress Chief Whip Tony Yengeni, former chair of
parliament’s committee on defense, was charged with corruption, perjury, and
fraud; other arrests were anticipated. President Mbeki’s refusal to confront his
country’s catastrophic AIDS epidemic risked undermining all other achievements.
Although the president’s reputation and standing had been damaged, most
observers thought the situation was retrievable.By general consensus, the transformation
of South Africa’s political landscape over the previous seven years had been
so profound that it was irreversible. South Africa could still count on one of the
most progressive constitutions in the world, guarded by an impeccable Constitutional
Court; vigorous independent news media, unions, and academia; ample provision
for a constitutional opposition; and government policies that—despite
ongoing controversies on their direction—generally managed to negotiate reconciliation
of the demands for radical redistribution of wealth with the needs of economic
growth.
South Africa’s continued regional leadership was demonstrated late in the year,
as the first of about seven hundred South African peacekeeping troops arrived in
Burundi. Their task was to form a protection force for politicians returning from
exile to join a power-sharing transitional government that was sworn in on November
1.
In Nigeria, the continent’s most populous country, it seemed as though time
might be running out for President Olusegun Obasanjo. In May 1999, sixteen years
of military rule had ended. Though many Nigerians were skeptical, they had nonetheless
hoped that the new civilian government would take the difficult steps to
restore accountable government and the rule of law, as well as Nigeria’s standing in
the world.More than two years later, the country was a land of rising discontent,and
questions multiplied about the president’s leadership capabilities.
In the past year, Nigeria saw a surge of religious and ethnic conflicts at the cost
of thousands of lives.Riots, the ravaging of churches and mosques, violent demonstrations,
military and police abuses, and a general lawlessness continued to tear at
the daily lives of Nigerians. In October, the Nigerian army was responsible for massacring
at least two hundred unarmed civilians in central Benue State, in an area
torn by ongoing ethnic conflict. Corruption remained rampant, despite the adoption
of anti-corruption legislation in 2000, distorting economic management, corrupting
law enforcement, and starving desperately needed public services. In his
Independence Day speech on October 1, the president conceded that his administration
had failed to lift most Nigerians out of poverty, end violence, and solve other
huge obstacles that the country confronted. Yet he offered little hope that these
issues would be addressed in the remainder of his term.
Nigeria still enjoyed a comparatively greater degree of freedom in contrast to the
dark days of military rule, and a commission set up in 1999 to investigate human
rights abuses committed under previous governments had somewhat dented the
historical wall of impunity. But the country desperately needed a democratically
enacted constitution, accountable politicians and civil servants, and restored
respect for the rule of law. With government revenue coming almost exclusively
from a single source, Nigeria’s substantial oil and gas deposits, it would remain
extremely difficult to create a functioning democracy.
BUCKING THE TREND?
A few countries registered success in strengthening or maintaining democratic
institutions. Botswana and Mauritius headed the table, and South Africa remained
an example in many ways, but Mali, Mozambique, Ghana, and Senegal were also
strong contenders for Africa’s first division status. Botswana had the highest credit
rating in Africa from the international ratings agency Moody’s—four notches
above that of South Africa—and ranked alongside central European countries.
Mauritius was ranked second (behind Tunisia and ahead of Botswana) out of
twenty-four countries surveyed in the World Economic Forum’s Africa Competitiveness
Report.
The connection between economic prosperity and stable political institutions
was underlined by the September 13, 2000 elections in Mauritius. An opposition
alliance, of the Mouvement Socialiste Mauricien (MSM) and Mouvement Militant
Mauricien (MMM), swept into power in a landslide victory with high turnout.
Outgoing Prime Minister Navinchandra Ramgoolam gracefully accepted defeat. In
terms of the electoral pact, the MSM leader Sir Anerood Jugnauth would be prime
minister for the next three years and then hand over the reins to the MMM leader,
Paul Berenger, for the final two years. In the meantime, they would introduce a constitutional
amendment to give the president, a ceremonial figure, more power; Sir
Anerood would become president. Berenger would be the first non-Hindu to
occupy the premiership since Mauritius won independence in 1968.
Ghana saw a peaceful transfer of power when, on January 7, President Jerry
Rawlings, who came to power in two coups and retained power through two subsequent elections, stepped down from his nineteen year presidency and surrendered
power to John Kufuor. Like Mali and Senegal, Ghana looked set to become
one of the “democratic dominos” in West Africa. Once in power, the new president
promised sweeping human rights improvements. In July, Ghana’s parliament voted
unanimously to repeal the criminal libel law first introduced by the British colonial
administration.At this writing,debate was underway regarding legislation to establish
a mechanism for truth telling and reconciliation in relation to past abuses.
Kufuor also agreed to exhume for positive identification and proper reburial the
bodies of eight generals who had been executed in 1979 on charges of corruption
and treason. This was the first official step towards confronting and resolving various
extrajudicial executions which took place both before and during Rawlings’
reign.
Mozambique remained another African success story, though it faced some serious
threats during the year. The country’s post-conflict stability continued to be
reinforced by the generally human rights-friendly leadership of President Joachim
Chissano, and by robust economic growth.The economy grew by nearly 15 percent
in the first half of the year, recovering strongly from the devastating 2000 floods.
But the government’s reputation was tarnished by attacks against journalists. In
November 2000, unknown attackers gunned down journalist Carlos Cardoso, editor
of the independent Metical who had been sharply critical of hard line elements
in both the ruling party and the opposition in the wake of political clashes that left
forty-one people dead. In a separate attack later the same day, a gang stopped Radio
Mozambique journalist Custodio Rafael on his way home from work. The attackers
reportedly told him, “You talk a lot,” before beating him and cutting his tongue
with a knife. In January, a Mozambican parliamentary commission visited northern
Cabo Delgado province to investigate the suffocation-deaths of more than one
hundred imprisoned opposition demonstrators in the town of Montepuez. The
commission had joint government and opposition membership. A Mozambican
human rights group that carried out its own inquiry blamed the tragedy on both
police negligence and retaliation for the killing of six police officers during the
protests.
ELECTIONS, BUT NOT NECESSARILY DEMOCRACY
A number of other African countries held presidential or parliamentary elections
during the year.However, all were characterized by intimidation of the media
and opposition, killings, and gross and widespread vote rigging. Leaders in Guinea,
Malawi,Namibia,Zambia, and elsewhere attempted or were reported to be considering
constitutional amendments to overcome term limits and remain in power.
Political and social unrest continued to plague Côte d’Ivoire during 2001, following
presidential and parliamentary elections in late 2000. Laurent Gbagbo,
leader of the Front Populaire Ivorien (FPI), was installed as president despite very
serious concerns surrounding the legitimacy of the October presidential elections—
over the widespread violence and the exclusion of principal opposition
leader Alassane Ouattara from the contest. Gbagbo then used the same methods as his predecessor during the December parliamentary elections, including incitement
of religious and ethnic hatred. Ouattara was once again not allowed to run.
In both October and December security forces arrested, tortured, and killed perceived
opposition supporters, including foreigners and members of northern ethnic
groups.After assuming office,Gbagbo failed to acknowledge the flawed manner
in which he had become head of state, to promise new elections, to seek accountability
for the violence, or to take adequate steps to ensure that, under his leadership,
Côte d’Ivoire would be characterized by the rule of law, not by ethno-religious tension
and military impunity.
In Benin, presidential elections in late March 2001 saw the reelection of President
Mathieu Kerekou. Kerekou failed in the first round to gain a majority, so a
runoff with the runner-up, Nicephore Soglo, was called. Soglo, citing widespread
fraud, dropped out before the final round, and encouraged his supporters to boycott
as well. The runoff was further delayed by the resignation of several members
of the electoral commission in protest at the way the vote was organized. The third
place contender also pulled out, leaving only the fourth-place primary finisher,
Bruno Amoussou. This dubious run-off slate gave Kerekou the presidency,with 84
percent of the votes. Earlier in the year, on January 19, police beat up two journalists
working for private media and violently broke up a demonstration they were
covering in the capital, Cotonou.
The election campaign in Chad was marred by intimidation and violence, but
on May 27 Idriss Deby was re-elected president with more than 67 percent of the
vote. Opposition candidates alleged fraud and called for the result to be annulled,
appealing to the constitutional court. A quarter of the members of the electoral
commission resigned in protest in advance of the announcement of Deby’s victory.
On May 28,Brahim Selguet, an opposition activist, was shot and killed by the police
as they violently broke up an opposition meeting. Six opposition presidential candidates
were briefly detained at the meeting, and were again arrested in the morning
ofMay 30 with some thirty other opposition activists and trade unionists.They
were all released without charge the same day, but two of the opposition leaders,
Ngarledjy Yorongar and Abderhamane Djesnebaye, were reportedly tortured,
including being beaten with iron bars, during their detention.
Uganda’s March presidential election and May parliamentary elections were
both marred by manipulation and human rights abuses.As political parties are not
allowed to operate freely in Uganda, opposition presidential candidates had to
mobilize support and resources as individuals. Incumbent president Yoweri
Museveni, however, relied on the administrative and political officials of the ruling
“movement system” to bring in the vote. Harassment of journalists and editors,
self-censorship, and inequality in media access intensified as the date for the poll
neared. Supporters of opposition candidates were also threatened and harassed
when campaigning for their candidates. In January, unidentified gunmen killed a
member of President Museveni’s campaign task force, and, in a separate incident,
two supporters of opposition presidential candidate Dr. Kizza Besigye.At least one
person was killed when members of the Presidential Protection Unit opened fire on
opposition demonstrators on March 3. Both international observers and Ugandan
human rights groups expressed concern at the role played by the Ugandan army in the election and that elections took place on a far from level playing field.Museveni
was declared the winner.At least seven people were shot dead on June 27, in violence
surrounding parliamentary elections. On July 6, the Foundation for Human
Rights Initiative, a national NGO, criticized the government’s treatment of Besigye
and strongly condemned what it called the authorities’ “persistent, consistent and
violent intolerance and disrespect for divergent views.”
Gambia’s tense presidential election was held on October 18. After pressure
from the international community, President Yahya Jammeh had lifted a ban on
opposition parties in July, inviting former politicians who had sought political asylum
in other countries to return. On August 27,President Jammeh expelled Deputy
British High Commissioner Bharat Joshi for attending an open press conference,
which Jammeh alleged was an opposition party rally. The day before the election,
security forces opened fire on a crowd of opposition supporters, killing at least one.
In the days following the election, private radio station Citizen FM was shut down
and state security agents reportedly detained its owner for four hours.
On November 28, 2000,Mauritania’s 40th anniversary of independence, President
Ould Taya promised democratic reform, and on December 4, the government
held consultations with political parties. It was announced that proportional representation
in the legislature would be introduced in the 2001 elections, and that
the government would fund political parties, based on their performance in
municipal polls.Not a week later,Union of Democratic Forces leader Ould Daddah
was arrested upon his return to Mauritania, and charged with “contact with terrorist
groups.”He was released on December 13. On June 14, 2001, three members of
the opposition Front Populaire Mauritanien were jailed, accused of conspiring
with Libya to foment the violent overthrow of the government. Their lawyers
alleged numerous serious irregularities in the proceedings and initially withdrew in
protest; they later agreed to represent the three men, while making clear their concern
at government interference and other fair trial concerns.
In Guinea-Conakry opposition parties criticized as a “constitutional coup d’état”
and a “masquerade”a referendum held on November 11, 2001, in which 98 percent
of those who voted supposedly supported changes to key constitutional
provisions. The proposed changes would increase presidential terms from five to
seven years and allow presidents to remain in office indefinitely, giving incumbent
president Lansana Conte the option of a third term. An 87 percent turnout was
reported, though observers estimated that only 20 percent of the population could
have voted. In Malawi too, controversy surrounded the issue of whether President
Bakili Muluzi should be allowed a third term in office when his current term
expires in 2004, something that would entail alteration of the constitution.
Malawi’s two largest churches issued separate letters warning President Muluzi
against standing for reelection, prompting a government statement in May denying
that either the cabinet or the ruling party had discussed a constitutional amendment.
But in August, a debate on whether the president should extend his rule into
a third term resurfaced.“Muluzi will stand again in 2004 because people want him.
We will change the constitution so Muluzi can stand,” said a key supporter.
In two other countries whose leaders were mooted to be set to join “third term”
campaigns requiring constitutional change, external and internal pressure provided a check on ambitions in that direction.But though President Daniel arap Moi
of Kenya hinted at an exit at the end of his second and constitutionally-last term, he
invested heavily in a careful succession plan and efforts to hinder a full constitutional
review. In Zambia,which had appeared to be losing any claims to democracy,
President Chiluba, with his party in revolt and facing massive public pressure and
predictions of large-scale violence, on May 3 abandoned his efforts to change the
constitution’s two-term limit and announced that he would step down when his
second term ended at the end of the year. The news sparked celebrations in the
country.
SILENCING THE CRITICS
In too many countries, effective mechanisms for querying,much less contesting
or contributing to, government policy and operations were lacking. In the absence
of autonomous electoral authorities, independent judiciaries, and the provision of
equal access for competing political factions to government controlled media,
opposition voices could only rely on getting their message across through the
much-harassed independent media and the grassroots influence of trade unions or
civil society organizations. Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon,
Kenya, Mauritania, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zimbabwe, and numerous other countries
remained reluctant to commit themselves to the imperatives of democracy
and respect for human rights.
In Equatorial Guinea, the government continued to use military courts, repressive
laws, and arbitrary arrests and prosecutions to restrict political freedoms. In
November 2000, hundreds of copies of the latest issue of independent weekly La
Opinion were seized by the authorities in Mongome, a town in the east of Equatorial
Guinea.The newspapers were confiscated on the order of the government’s representative
in the district.According to the government, the paper was too close to
the opposition. In February 2001, the mayor of Malabo closed the offices of the
Equatorial Guinea press association.
On April 1, 2001, President Blaise Compaore of Burkina Faso publicly apologized
for the torture and “all other crimes” committed by his government in a blanket
act of state contrition. However, the 1998 killing of journalist Norbert Zongo
remained a source of both national and international outrage. To commemorate
the two-year anniversary of Zongo’s death, human rights advocates and opposition
parties along with members of the international press attempted to gather in Ouagadougou
in December 2000 to demand that the perpetrators be found and prosecuted.
Many journalists were prevented from entering the country by security
forces and riot police thwarted commemoration activities.
In Cameroon, police in Yaounde dispersed supporters of the opposition Social
Democratic Front as they marched on November 27, 2000, to demand the creation
of an independent electoral commission. Five opposition parties walked out of parliament
on December 7, 2000, as the house passed a bill creating an election-monitoring
body known as the Observatoire National des Elections, its members to be
appointed single-handedly by President Paul Biya. In July 2001, police raided the offices of independent newspaper Mutations, seized copies of the paper, and summoned
the publisher,Haman Mana, to a hearing, accusing him of having published
confidential state documents.Mana refused to reveal his source, citing Cameroonian
law; he was released on August 3. On October 3, 2001, police summoned
Jean-Marc Soboth, editor-in-chief of the independent La Nouvelle Expression and
demanded that he reveal his sources for a story about security measures in the
country’s English-speaking provinces. The authorities maintained that the newspaper
revealed a “defense secret.”The journalist refused to do so, again citing privilege,
and was released the same day.
Togolese police used tear gas on August 14, 2001, to break up a demonstration
by opposition parties and human rights activists demanding the release of opposition
leader Yawovi Agboyibor, sentenced to six months imprisonment for defamation.
He had reportedly said in 1998 that the prime minister, Messan Kodjo, was
associated with a militia whose members killed supporters of his party, the Comité
Action pour le Renouveau.
Guinea Bissau saw new problems following an alleged coup plot in November
2000. General Ansumane Mané, the former leader of the disbanded military junta,
was killed in early December 2000 in mysterious circumstances after challenging
the president over military promotions. Despite national and international
appeals, there was no independent investigation of his death. Ten opposition leaders,
including several parliamentarians, who had also criticized the government
handling of the promotions,were arrested without warrant between November 24
and 26, 2000. They were not freed until March. Journalists were also under threat.
In March, the deputy procurator-general threatened to bomb a radio station,Radio
Bombolom, in order to interrupt a radio debate about the alleged coup attempt. In
mid-September the attorney general reportedly went to Radio Pidjiquiti and
threatened its workers after they refused to give him the tapes of a program on
which journalists had commented on his appointment.
Gabon’s President Bongo promoted a constitutional amendment to give former
heads of state immunity from legal prosecution. Several privately owned radio stations
and television channels were regularly threatened with withdrawal of their
broadcasting licenses by the authorities.But some news from Gabon was good.The
satirical weekly La Griffe, banned two years before, was authorized in late July by the
National Communication Council to begin publishing again.Two of its publishers,
who had been sentenced to eight years in prison, received a presidential pardon on
October 29th, 2000. Another satirical publication, La Cigale Enchantée, closed
down at the same time for accusing the minister in charge of infrastructure of corruption,
remained banned.
In the Horn of Africa, political liberties faced serious threats. Eritrea’s strongman
President Isaias Aferwerki cracked down harshly on those who dared to speak
out. In February, the president removed the minister of local government after he
questioned the country’s leadership. In May, fifteen members of the seventy-five
strong central committee of the ruling party published an open letter demanding
reforms. Among the signatories were several former ministers and ambassadors,
and three generals. On September 18 and 19, the government arrested without
charge eleven signatories of the “G-15” letter—three others were abroad and one had previously retracted his signature of the letter. In July, the government arrested
student leader Semere Kesete for strongly protesting the government’s management
of the university’s mandatory summer work program. On September 19, the
government withdrew the licenses of all eight independent newspapers in the
country, claiming they had violated media law and undermined national unity.The
minister of information (previously the security chief) announced that he would
review each newspaper to determine whether it could reopen.At this writing, none
had reopened. The government-controlled media were left as the only source of
information for Eritrea’s citizens.
In neighboring Ethiopia, there was a marked erosion of civil liberties during
2001. The government jailed civil rights advocates, political rivals, students, and
journalists without formal charges, and police used excessive force against
unarmed civilians. In March, key members of the Tigrayan People’s Liberation
Front, the lead party in the government coalition, issued a twelve-point critique of
the prime minister’s policies. The dissenters, joined by members of other government
parties, complained that the government had concluded a premature and
unfavorable peace agreement with Eritrea. They also accused the prime minister,
Meles Zenawi, of corruption.
In Rwanda, the government continued to disregard the constitution’s guarantee
of the right to form political parties. The ruling Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF)
maintained a ban on the activities of all other parties,while the RPF itself recruited
new members and campaigned in district elections. The government barred former
president Pasteur Bizimungu from organizing a new political party and
harassed party members and journalists reporting the story.
Tanzania’s image was badly tarnished by serious abuses in the semi-autonomous
islands of Zanzibar during late January and early February. Police blocked a
demonstration by opposition supporters against the much-criticized 2000 elections,
marred by serious violence and described by the Commonwealth as a “shambles.”
A climate of harassment and repression of political activity continued for the
better part of the year. On October 9, 2001, a deal was signed by the Zanzibar
authorities and the opposition agreeing on tension-reducing measures including
electoral reform, provision of equal access to all parties on state media, and the
holding of by-elections for seats that remained vacant after the disputed 2000 elections.
Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe’s indifference to legal norms and
encouragement of political violence persisted—threatening the entire southern
African subregion with instability. Against the backdrop of a worsening economic
crisis precipitated in part by the violent seizure of white-owned commercial land,
the government continued its hard line attitude towards the political opposition,
media, and judiciary.Widespread violence was visited on opposition supporters,
especially in rural areas, and on the owners and residents of white-owned commercial
farms by veterans of the liberation war and supporters of the ruling party.
The police did little or nothing to intervene to protect those who were the victims
of this violence; human rights organizations noted increasing politicization of the
criminal justice system. The year saw the forced resignation of the chief justice,
Anthony Gubbay, on the grounds that the government, which had itself scorned court orders, could no longer guarantee his personal safety. Leading opposition
leaders were also subjected to arrests on controversial charges of inciting violence
and harassment of supporters of the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC)
had worsened severely by the end of the year. In November,more than twenty MDC
activists were arrested in Bulawayo, on charges of involvement in the murder of a
war veteran leader; the MDC suggested that the veteran had been killed by the security
forces to silence him. Zimbabwe faced increasing diplomatic isolation, including
the first public criticism from its neighbors in the Southern African
Development Community (SADC).
Also in the south the year was a difficult one for King Mswati of Swaziland.
Under pressure to implement governmental reforms, faced with increased HIV
infection in his population, a worsening economy, and an outspoken media, King
Mswati attempted to maintain iron-fisted control. For its part, the opposition
demanded an end to the twenty-seven-year ban on political parties and the state of
emergency, and called for the creation of an interim government. In January, leaders
of this movement were arrested and charged with “misconduct.” Royal Decree
No.2, promulgated on June 24, gave the king the power to ban any book, magazine
or newspaper, prohibited anyone from impersonating or ridiculing the king, prevented
legal challenges to any of the monarch’s executive decisions, and eliminated
bail for a range of crimes, including holding illegal public demonstrations. The
decree also gave the justice minister the power to appoint and fire judges at will, and
prohibited newspapers from challenging publishing bans. But one month later, the
king bowed to international pressure and revoked the decree. After a four-month
court battle the Guardian, an independent weekly, had a banning order against it
overturned on September 3. In November, amid a crackdown on the opposition,
President Joachim Chissano of Mozambique, speaking on behalf of SADC,
expressed concern that the situation in Swaziland threatened the stability of the
subregion.
Namibia,which had boasted one of the most liberal constitutions at the time of
its independence in 1990, saw serious threats to its liberties during 2001. President
Sam Nujoma’s outspoken attacks on gays, lesbians, foreigners, and white Namibians,
as well as his dismissal of several judges, created a troubling environment for
human rights during the year. In March, the government imposed an advertising
boycott on the independent Namibian, claiming the paper was too critical of its
policies.
There was some good news on a different front. The internet became an ever
more useful tool for the dissemination of information on the continent—despite
the efforts of governments such as Zimbabwe’s, where the pending Post and Communications
Act would give the government unfettered powers to intercept postal
and electronic communications.At this writing, however, eleven African countries
had no private sector involvement in providing Internet service. In those countries,
such as Ethiopia and Niger, costs remained exorbitant for local users, and government
monitoring of communication easy. Lines could be cut off with no explanation,
access to websites blocked, and owners of cyber cafés forced to supply
government intelligence officials with copies of e-mails sent or received by them.
Even in Mauritania, where the private sector was not barred, the two private Internet
service providers had very close ties to the president.
SMOLDERING FIRES
Wars continued to smolder and flare across the continent, most seriously in
Angola,Burundi,Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Liberia, and Sierra Leone.
Despite repeated commitments to peaceful resolution of conflict, the warring parties
remained heavily engaged in armed operations. In the Great Lakes area, the
warring factions’ forced recruitment of civilians, including children, appreciably
escalated.
The war in the DRC continued to be characterized by shocking brutality. Talks
meant to forward implementation of the Lusaka agreements to end hostilities
resumed following Joseph Kabila’s assumption of the presidency in January. International
pressure on Uganda and Rwanda to withdraw their troops from Congo
increased. A preliminary inter-Congolese dialogue took place in Gaborone in mid-
August, with follow up “national dialogue” convened on October 15 in Addis
Ababa.But incessant disagreements between Congolese rebels and the government
and a shortfall in funding prevented much progress being made at the talks. Relations
between Rwanda and Uganda worsened, owing to a combination of personal
animosities between the top leadership and colliding interests in the DRC war, and
further undermined progress towards a solid cease-fire and a political solution to
the conflict.
Burundi endured its eighth year of civil war—intertwined with conflicts in
neighboring DRC and Rwanda—with both governmental and rebel forces guilty of
killing, raping, and assaulting civilians and destroying their property.Civilian casualties,
however, were fewer than in previous years, and there were fewer large-scale
massacres. Late in the year the government and opposition political parties hobbled
towards implementing the Arusha Accord signed in August 2000. Following installation
of a transitional government on November 1, rebel movements stepped up
combat; one of them abducted hundreds of schoolboys, apparently to force them
to become child soldiers.
In West Africa, the countries of the Mano River Union—Liberia, Sierra Leone,
and Guinea—were caught up in an ongoing subregional conflict which spilled
across borders. From late 2000 to April 2001 fierce fighting occurred between Sierra
Leonean rebels and their Liberian government allies in a series of border clashes
with the armed forces of neighboring Guinea. Thousands of Liberian and Sierra
Leonean refugees in Guinea were trapped in the border attacks. For their part, the
Guinean authorities allowed Liberian rebels to operate from their territory, and
seemed at minimum to have provided logistical support and sponsored cross-border
incursions into Liberia.The rebel incursion into northern Liberia continued to
make gains, with serious abuses against civilians by both rebel and Liberian government
forces. Thanks in large part to the deployment of British forces in 2000
and their continued presence, together with some 17,000 U.N. peacekeepers’move
into former rebel strongholds in Sierra Leone, and the disarming of over 20,000
Sierra Leonean rebel and government troops, there was at year’s end some hope of
a lasting peace in Sierra Leone. However, there appeared to be no end to the
renewed civil war in Liberia, and the continued instability in the subregion.
There also seemed no end to conflict in Angola, as attacks by the rebel National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) led by Jonas Savimbi, and to
a much lesser extent government troops, resulted in yet more civilian casualties.
The continuing violence formed a grim backdrop to hints of a political deal to
break the deadlock between the warring parties. In August, President José Eduardo
dos Santos’ announcement that he would not run in the country’s next elections
was greeted with surprise and skepticism.Many were aware of the reality that the
refusal by the government to re-enter negotiations for a political solution would
leave the country stuck in a military standoff.
In Sudan, war raged on, with President al-Bashir continuing his practice of
dropping bombs on civilians in the south and preventing humanitarian aid from
getting to them. Oil money,which first began to flow into the government’s coffers
in late 1999, continued to fuel intensified fighting in the south, with predictable
results for human rights.
Just over a year after a U.N. peacekeeping force had been fully wound down in
February 2000, the Central African Republic was plunged into an ongoing political
and human rights crisis when former President Andre Kolingba spearheaded his
third coup attempt in five years on May 28. Reports said fifty people were killed in
the fighting to regain government control after rebels took over the airport, radio
station, and other parts of Bangui’s infrastructure. Although the coup was swiftly
put down by the forces of President Ange-Félix Patassé, with the assistance of
Libyan troops (not to mention Chadian troops and rebel troops from DRC), unrest
continued in the months following as unarmed civilians, particularly members of
the Yakoma ethnic group to which Kolingba belongs, were targeted for arbitrary
detention and arrest. The government reportedly tortured and killed numerous
civilians and members of the security forces.
The Republic of Congo (Brazzaville) continued to limp back to normalcy after
the ferocious civil wars of 1993, 1997, and 1998. The past year was officially one of
“national reconciliation,” and a “non-exclusive dialogue” which was scheduled to
end in April. A reconciliation convention was held, but no election date had been
set at this writing.
FLEEING WARS, ONLY TO FIND MORE WOES
War continued to swell the tide of refugees and internally displaced persons,
spawning bleak, overcrowded camps, where responsible authorities were barely
able to provide the necessities of life and violence often seemed uncontrolled.As of
January 2001, there were at least 3,346,000 refugees in Africa out of a total
14,544,000 worldwide. The numbers of internally displaced people also remained
high,with Angola, Sierra Leone, Eritrea, and Sudan having the largest populations.
In many conflicts more people were internally displaced than crossed international
borders: about 4.4 million Sudanese were internally displaced and 420,000 were
refugees in neighboring countries.Yet international law and structures for protecting
the internally displaced remained weaker than those for refugees.
The major refugee crisis of the year occurred in Guinea, which experienced
enormous upheaval while serving as host to some 400,000 refugees from Sierra Leone and Liberia. Several months of fierce cross-border fighting between Guinean
government forces and Sierra Leonean rebels acting together with Liberian government
troops drove refugees and local residents alike from their homes in border
regions.At the same time, the Guinean government closed its border to new Liberian
refugees who were trying to escape the civil war. As refugees moved inland to
escape the border violence, they remained vulnerable to beatings, strip searches,
extortion, sexual assault, arbitrary arrest and detention, and widespread intimidation
at the hands of the Guinean authorities. Sierra Leonean refugees who fled the
dire conditions in Guinea by walking home through Revolutionary United Front
(RUF) territory were raped, killed, and abducted for fighting or forced labor by the
RUF rebels as they attempted to reach Sierra Leonean government-held towns.The
Office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the Guinean
government finally agreed to move the camps further inland and to provide facilitated
return by boat from Conakry to Sierra Leonean refugees who wanted to
return home. The situation in Guinea remained difficult for both refugees and
NGO workers through April 2001. By May 2001, an organized relocation program
had moved some 60,000 refugees inland. Some 35,000 refugees were returned to
Sierra Leone. By mid-2001, the situation seemed significantly calmer.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS:
RESILIENT IN A RISKY ENVIRONMENT
The human rights community remained one of the most dynamic segments of
civil society in Africa. But while human rights organizations were able to operate
without hindrance from state agencies in countries such as Botswana, Ghana,Mauritius,
Nigeria, Senegal, and South Africa, security forces in numerous other countries
closely scrutinized their activities.Activists were arrested, beaten and detained
in Angola, Burundi, Cameroon, Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Zimbabwe,
and elsewhere. In Sierra Leone and DRC, among other places, an active
human rights community challenged abuses despite a hostile environment.
In Guinea-Bissau, soldiers and state security police arrested Fernando Gomes,
former president of the Liga Guineense dos Direitos Humanos (LGDH), at his
home on November 25, 2000. He was severely beaten in the presence of his family
and neighbors and, although seriously ill as a result of the beating, was denied medical
treatment while in detention. After his release on November 30, 2000, he was
refused permission to travel abroad for treatment until January 2001.
In Angola, Rafael Marques, a leading critic of the government and representative
of the Open Society Foundation, faced harassment by government officials
twice during the year. In December 2000,Marques was prevented from leaving the
country. In July 2001,Marques was assaulted and arrested by police for taking pictures
of tents in the Viana resettlement camp. A week prior to Marques’ arrest, government
demolition of houses in the Boa Vista section of Luanda, in order to force
residents to Viana, had resulted in two deaths. Yet the Angolan government did
allow greater discussion of concerns about the ongoing war.
Four members of Cameroon’s Collectif contre l’Impunité were arrested in April and detained at the central police station in Douala. The authorities alleged they
had held an illegal demonstration, though it appeared that their detention was in
fact related to an investigation of the January “disappearance” of nine youths. The
U.N. Human Rights Committee in June ruled that the government of Cameroon
pay U.S. $137,000 to Cameroonian human rights activist Albert Mukong, in compensation
for abuses committed against him by Cameroonian authorities in 1988
and 1990,when his book Prisoner Without a Crime was banned and he was detained
incommunicado.
In Chad, the period following the May election saw a violent crackdown on
human rights defenders. The government banned gatherings of more than twenty
people. On June 11, tear gas canisters and what was believed to be a grenade were
hurled into a crowd of peaceful demonstrators gathered in front of the French
embassy in the capital N’Djamena.Among those injured was leading activist Jacquy
Moudeina.Numerous pieces of shrapnel lodged in her leg and she was hospitalized.
Several human rights defenders fled Liberia and applied for political asylum. The
Liberian Bar Association conducted a boycott of the courts in October to protest
the harassment of colleagues who were detained for calling for due process protections
in the courts.Despite intensifying state harassment, a few brave activists continued
to work undaunted.
The head of Amnesty International in Gambia,Mohammed Lamin Sillah, was
detained incommunicado for four days in late October after he had been picked up
by state security agents for “questioning.” Sillah’s arrest was one among a reported
score of arrests in the wake of the presidential poll.
There were efforts to tighten regulatory regimes on NGOs in a number of countries
including Eritrea, Ethiopia, Mauritania, Rwanda, and Uganda. In Uganda,
NGOs operated generally quite freely and became more outspoken during 2001 in
their critique of the human rights practices of their government.But a draft law, the
Nongovernmental Organizations Registration (Amendment) Bill, would require
that NGOs obtain a special permit from the registration board before they could
operate. It would also increase the registration board’s powers to reject or revoke an
NGO’s registration; and it would stiffen the penalties for operating without official
sanction, potentially criminalizing legitimate NGO activities.
In Rwanda, a restrictive NGO law came into force in April, giving the government
wide-ranging powers to interfere with the work of NGOs, and to suspend or
dissolve associations. The Rwandan government was also preparing a decree to
increase the government’s control over the day-to-day work of NGOs. The government
stepped up harassment of the leading human rights NGO LIPRODHOR after
the organization published a statement critical of prison conditions.
In neighboring Burundi, local authorities threatened a human rights observer
from Ligue Iteka, one of the main human rights NGOs in the country, who was
leading an investigation into the government’s arming of civilians.
Conditions for human rights defenders worsened in the Horn.The Eritrean government
tolerated the operation of only one human rights organization,Citizens for
Peace in Eritrea, but only so long as it limited advocacy to the rights of war victims.
In Ethiopia, police arrested two leading activists, Professor Mesfin Woldemariam
and Dr. Berhanu Nega, in early May and held them in custody until June. The government leveled spurious charges against both that they had “incited students to
riot.”Mesfin was the founding president of the Ethiopian Human Rights Council
(EHRCO). On the day of the arrests, the government raided and sealed the EHRCO
offices, although the closure was lifted after ten days.
Two of the main human rights organizations in Mauritania, SOS-Esclaves
and the Association Mauritanienne des Droits de l’Homme (AMDH) continued to
be denied registration by the government and were therefore restricted in their
activities.
African activists Kodjo Djissenou and Ndungi Githuku, of Togo and Kenya
respectively, were two of the four winners of the Reebok Human Rights Award for
activists under age thirty. Kodjo Djissenou, a youth activist, had been working to
protect human rights in Togo since the age of twelve. Ndungi Githuku, who had
used his talents as a playwright, graphic artist, and performer since the age of nineteen
to raise awareness of police torture, political corruption, and democratic principles,
became the first artist to win the award. In October,D. Zacarias Camuenho,
president of the Bishops’ Conference of Angola and Sao Tome, won the Sakharov
peace prize—indicating the growing role of the churches as a possible mediator
between the two parties in the Angolan conflict.
REGIONAL INTERGOVERNMENTAL BODIES
African Union:
Making Over the Organization of African Unity
The year marked what was touted as the beginning of a new era for African
cooperation. At the July summit of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) in
Lusaka,members agreed to set up a new organization, the African Union (A.U.); its
first summit would be held in 2002, in Pretoria, South Africa. Ivorian diplomat
Amara Essy was elected secretary-general after an all-night round of voting. The
A.U., like the OAU, would be based in Addis Ababa.
The treaty establishing the A.U. had important new provisions strengthening
the (theoretical) commitment of its member states to human rights. The A.U.
would also be looking into a common currency, a continental parliament, and a
court of justice. The summit decided to incorporate the OAU mechanism for conflict
prevention, management, and resolution as one of the organs of the A.U. It
conspicuously failed to do the same for the African Commission on Human and
People’s Rights, also an OAU body—this was said to be an oversight that could be
corrected.
The launching of the African Union coincided with the introduction of the New
African Initiative (NAI), intended to address Africa’s chronic failure to address its
economic and political problems. The plan was announced by the outgoing chair,
President Frederick Chiluba of Zambia, and was later formally launched on October
23 at a ceremony in Abuja,Nigeria, attended by presidents Olusegun Obasanjo
of Nigeria, Thabo Mbeki of South Africa, Abdoulaye Wade of Senegal, and Abdelaziz
Bouteflika of Algeria.The NAI was a merger of the Millennium Partnership for the African Recovery Programme (MAP) proposed by the governments of South
Africa, Nigeria, and Algeria and the OMEGA plan proposed by President
Abdoulaye Wade of Senegal. In October, the NAI was renamed the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development (NEPAD).
At first glance, the concept of the African Union looked promising. But, apart
from words, it was far from clear that it represented any real progress.The core ideal
continued to be that continental cooperation should be a means to facilitate and
consolidate respect for democracy and human dignity across the continent.But the
obstacles that had prevented the OAU from achieving these aims remained. The
African Union would need to overcome the same ingrained clash of cultures and
egos that perennially split the Anglophone, Francophone, and Arab constituencies
of the organization.The refusal of member states to surrender their veto power had
ensured that the OAU had served merely as a clearinghouse for discussions that
could be ignored at will.Moreover, the OAU had failed to insist that its members
respect democratic and human rights norms. The much stronger human rights
language of the African Union might prove no less difficult to enforce.At the World
Conference Against Racism, held in Durban, South Africa, just a few weeks after the
last OAU summit, African countries largely refused to see racism and other forms
of intolerance as a problem that affected them internally—except with regard to
black-white relations especially in southern African countries—and focused
instead on the demand for reparations for the Atlantic slave trade.
Clear leadership from South Africa and Nigeria in particular would help to
address these issues. President Olusegun Obasanjo expressed a strong determination
to make the new initiatives succeed. In his words: “Within and outside Africa
we must put the Afro-pessimists and other cynics to shame by coming together to
work for the success of NAI.”Most probably President Obasanjo meant well. But it
would take more than presidential assurances to deliver a system that could be
relied on to fight effectively for peace, good governance, human rights, and economic
development.
Southern African Development Community
The Southern African Development Community (SADC),which had struggled
to find common ground and speak with a unified voice in 2000, hit its stride in mid-
2001 and made significant progress toward increasing its ability to engage in conflict
resolution in the region.SADC tended toward greater cohesion in the past year,
attending the G8 conference in Genoa as a block instead of as individual states, and
in its efforts to resolve the Zimbabwean crisis—seen as a threat to the entire subregion.
Considered the most significant step taken by SADC in its twenty-year history,
but with unclear consequences for human rights, was the creation of a
southern Africa free trade zone, which came into effect on September 1, 2000.
At a meeting in Windhoek in March, through a Protocol on Politics,Defense and
Security Cooperation, SADC turned the chairmanship of its security organ into a
one-year rotating position with clear reporting lines to the heads of state. President
Robert Mugabe had held this position since 1999; he was replaced by President
Joachim Chissano of Mozambique. This summit committed the community’s fourteen members to resolving conflicts in the region and for the first time adopted
operational principles and rules for the security organ.Nevertheless, going into the
August summit in Blantyre, Malawi, all sources pointed to a continuation of low
key “quiet diplomacy” towards Zimbabwe. But the final communiqué of the Blantyre
summit for the first time publicly “expressed concern on the effects of the Zimbabwe
economic situation on the region,” and in the months following,SADC took
a more active role in trying to find a solution.When an initially promising deal brokered
in August by the Commonwealth in Abuja, Nigeria, started to break down,
SADC leaders convened a further meeting in Harare in September.There they were
reported to have pressed President Mugabe to settle the crisis, and some appeared
ready to break ranks with him, a big change from “quiet diplomacy.” The meeting
ended with a recommitment by Harare to end land seizures in exchange for funding
by Britain of its land reform program; once again, the commitment seemed to
have little effect.Meanwhile on September 20,SADC agreed to create a special ministerial
task force on land issues in the region, the Food, Agriculture and Natural
Resources Directorate.
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Like its southern African counterpart, ECOWAS added force to its Protocol
relating to the Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management, Resolution,
Peace-keeping and Security, signed in Lomé, Togo in December 1999. However,
human rights considerations remained low on the various diplomatic agendas pursued,
and ECOWAS member states demonstrated a general unwillingness to criticize
each other’s human rights records.
ECOWAS took the lead in rejuvenating the troubled Sierra Leonean peace
process by facilitating a ceasefire agreement between the government of Sierra
Leone and the rebel Revolutionary United Front (RUF), signed on November 10,
2000 in Abuja,Nigeria. In December 2000, the heads of state of the fifteen-member
organization directed the deployment of a force along the borders of Guinea,
Liberia, and Sierra Leone.But the entire plan was abandoned after it ran into major
hurdles. Guinea argued that force’s mandate was too weak; neither Guinea nor
Liberia signed the status of forces agreement; and ECOWAS insisted upon U.N.
Security Council involvement and funding.
In May 2001, the ECOWAS Mediation and Security Council, the United
Nations, the Government of Sierra Leone, and the RUF met in Abuja to review the
implementation of the peace deal. The review meeting stressed the need for the
Sierra Leonean government to facilitate the restoration of authority to areas previously
under RUF control where UNAMSIL, the U.N. peacekeeping force, had been
deploying.During the meeting, a six-member RUF delegation agreed to withdraw
its combatants from Kambia district, a point of departure for infiltration into
neighboring Guinea.The withdrawal would enable the deployment of troops from
the Sierra Leone Army to ensure the cessation of armed incursions into the two
countries.
Some progress was also recorded towards the implementation of the Plan of
Action of the April, 2000 Accra Declaration on War-Affected Children in West Africa. In March,ECOWAS and Canada signed an agreement for the establishment
of a Child Protection Unit within the ECOWAS Secretariat.
THE INTERNATIONAL RESPONSE
Human Rights on Hold?
The events of September 11, 2001, seemed destined to reduce yet further the
chances of serious diplomatic attention to human rights issues in Africa by the
wider international community.With the spotlight on efforts to build and maintain
a global anti-terrorism coalition, there was likely to be more tolerance towards
countries that had previously been castigated as human rights abusers.At this writing,
it was already evident that talk about human rights, good governance, and
accountability was markedly reduced, and abuses more easily tolerated, as the U.S.
in particular became more preoccupied with short-term considerations such as
access to intelligence, airfields, and military bases.
But the more the international community uncritically aligned itself with autocratic
regimes in exchange for their support, facilities, and cooperation, the more it
risked unwittingly creating long-term instability, perfect conditions for further terrorist
support. A more prudent policy would seek to prevent security issues from
disproportionately influencing dealings with Africa. First, it would be essential to
continue to support movement toward democracy and respect for human rights on
the basis of explicit benchmarks. Second, as supplements to human rights protection,
economic and social uplift would be key. Third, external pressure—rather
than silence and condemnation—would be a prerequisite for meaningful political
and economic development.
United Nations
The U.N. was engaged in a wide variety of African crises, including those in
Angola, DRC, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, and showed a greater
sense of urgency and commitment than in the previous year.
There was a renewed focus on demobilization, the peace process, political dialogue,
and economic rehabilitation in the DRC. Two groundbreaking reports, in
which the U.N. showed an increased willingness to “name and shame” individuals
involved in the illicit arms-for-diamonds trade, examined the link between the
exploitation of natural resources and the fueling of conflict. On Liberia/Sierra
Leone, U.N. efforts centered on deploying targeted sanctions to stem the flow of
illicit diamonds and arms flows; in May 2001, the purchase of diamonds exported
from Liberia (believed to originate mainly from rebel-held territory in Sierra
Leone) was banned; and in December 2000 and November 2001 the committee
monitoring these sanctions followed the example of the Angola committee in issuing
hard-hitting reports. There was also some forward movement toward the setting
up of a special court for Sierra Leone and enhancing the capability of the U.N.
peacekeeping force to protect the civilian population there—though the human rights agenda was still often trumped by political considerations.With respect to
Angola, the main activity concentrated on monitoring and verification by the sanctions
panel on arms and illicit diamonds and on improving the response of government
and U.N. agencies to the needs of internally displaced persons.
The U.N. began to engage with the issues surrounding HIV/AIDS, so key for
Africa. The Security Council discussed AIDS three times over eighteen months,
including a meeting in the summer of 2000 in which, for the first time, the pandemic
was characterized as a security concern. In late June 2001, the first ever General
Assembly session about a disease was held. Secretary-General Kofi Annan
officially declared the creation of a Global Fund to fight AIDS, tuberculosis, and
malaria, hoping to raise U.S. $7-10 billion for the purpose. However, nothing like
this sum had been pledged by November, while NGOs criticized a lack of transparency
in administering the fund and an implicit refusal to use the money for
treatment as well as prevention. Annan also met with the executives of the seven
major drug firms to investigate ways of lowering the price of HIV/AIDS drugs.Both
the World Health Organization (WHO) and UNAIDS welcomed the offers by
Indian pharmaceuticals manufacturer Cipla to provide drugs at low prices. The
WHO advocated “differential pricing” of drugs on the basis of a country’s economic
strength to the World Trade Organization; though this was partly a concession
to drug company resistance to a global reduction in prices. The International
Labor Organization put out guidelines on AIDS in the workplace and joined
UNAIDS. The World Food Programme launched several special feeding projects
for people living with HIV/AIDS, including one in Congo. Though criticized as
tokenistic, they were at least a recognition of the need.
European Union
Though the lack of coherence in European Union (E.U.) policy towards Africa
endured, there were attempts to remedy the problem through improved coordination.
France and the United Kingdom, the dominant players, continued to state a
commitment to ending their tradition of competitive foreign policies toward
Africa, though the practice did not always live up to the rhetoric. Clear policy differences
among key European players remained, and were evident in policy conflicts
among E.U. member states, especially the U.K. and France, regarding Côte
d’Ivoire, the Mano River Countries, the Great Lakes, and Zimbabwe.While Britain
spoke out strongly against President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe, for example,
France’s President Jacques Chirac received the president in Paris after a special OAU
summit in Libya focusing on the African Union. The British foreign office was
quoted as being shocked by the French decision.
Under the Swedish presidency, the E.U. appointed Hans Dahlgren, the state secretary
of the Swedish Ministry of Foreign Affairs, as its special envoy to Guinea,
Liberia, and Sierra Leone, responsible for framing a coordinated E.U. policy on the
three countries and promoting cooperation with the U.N. and the Economic
Community ofWest African States. Dahlgren affirmed the E.U.’s support for sanctions
against Liberia. An E.U. delegation led by Dahlgren visited Mali, Guinea,
Sierra Leone, and Liberia between May 29 and June 1. Talks focused on the serious humanitarian and political crisis in the region.The visit included meetings with the
presidents of the four states and representatives of relief organizations and civil
society. The E.U.’s special envoy to Ethiopia and Eritrea, Sen. Rino Serri, appointed
in December 1999, played an important role in ensuring that human rights issues
were highlighted in Europe’s response to the conflict between and developments
within the two countries.
The E.U. invoked article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement, the human rights clause
of the document regulating its relations with members of the African-Caribbean-
Pacific (ACP) group of countries, in relation to Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia, and Zimbabwe
in 2001, calling for consultations on worsening respect for human rights,
democratic principles, and rule of law. The E.U. also acted in unison in protest at
the crackdown by the Eritrea government on dissenters.All member states recalled
their ambassadors for consultations after Eritrea expelled the Italian ambassador
following his critical comments about the government’s human rights record.At a
meeting in October with the heads of state of Algeria, Nigeria, Senegal, South
Africa, and the representative of Egypt’s head of state, E.U. officials committed the
union to supporting the NAI.
However, the same coordinated approach was absent in policy regarding the
Great Lakes, where the E.U. seemed to defer to Belgian and French leadership. The
United Kingdom continued its support for Rwanda and Uganda,while other member
states, especially France and Belgium, leaned more toward Kinshasa. On June
30, Belgian Prime Minister Guy Verhofstad signaled the resumption of bilateral
cooperation with the DRC by signing a new aid package, dedicated to health, education,
and infrastructure.He also pledged to use Belgium’s six-month presidency
of the E.U. to lobby other member states to reengage with the DRC. The E.U.’s
special envoy for the Great Lakes, Aldo Ajello, continued to be active on the diplomatic
front for the E.U. The region was also visited by several high-level European
delegations, including the Belgian prime minister and foreign minister, and E.U.
commissioner Poul Nielson. For his part, French Foreign Minister Hubert Vedrine
visited the region in August.
The ACP-E.U. Joint Parliamentary Assembly sent a delegation on a fact-finding
mission to Sudan from June 26 to July 2, 2001. In a September report, the delegation
urged the Sudanese government to improve its record in human rights and
also noted that the record of rebel groups on human rights “is also very far from
being acceptable.” By resolution of November 1, 2001, the ACP-E.U. Joint Parliamentary
Assembly stated that it believes the SPLM/A should not seek formal control
over any E.U. funding, which would then allow for resumption of E.U.
humanitarian assistance to SPLA areas. It also called on the government of Sudan
to take more effective action against torture, discrimination against Christians, and
abductions (which particularly affect women and children).
United Kingdom
Prime Minister Tony Blair of the United Kingdom pledged to make Africa a priority
of the Labor Party’s second term. In July 2001, during the G-8 Summit in
Genoa, the prime minister announced plans to build on the launch of the U.S. $1.5 billion U.N. global health fund with a five-point “modernization plan” for Africa
linking trade, aid, investment, conflict resolution, and the fight against AIDS to
combat poverty in the world’s poorest continent. Britain would provide $200 million
to the U.N. fund.While debt campaigners criticized the fund as “inadequate”
and “a gimmick,” it did at least represent a commitment to the continent rare
among Western leaders. Britain was one of the few wealthy countries that actually
increased aid to Africa during the year, though from a low base. Government officials
linked the commitment to a government white paper of December 2000 entitled
“Eliminating World Poverty: Making Globalization Work for the Poor.” Like
other European countries, however, Britain refused to accede to the demand made
at the World Conference Against Racism that the historical slave trade be acknowledged
as a crime against humanity for which reparations were due.
The United Kingdom backed the “New African Initiative,” under which poor
countries would receive financial help and better access to rich Western markets in
return for cleaning up their governments and economic reform. The prime minister
renewed his pledge in September at a meeting with six “reforming”African presidents—
of Botswana, Ghana, Mozambique, Nigeria, Senegal, and Tanzania—
focused on trade, good governance, and conflict resolution. The only public statement
from the meeting, however, was a response to the September 11 attacks and
the question of terrorism.
Additionally, the U.K. continued to play a central role in the stabilization of
Sierra Leone. Jonathan Riley, the then British brigadier commanding in Sierra
Leone, pledged in January that British troops would stay until the RUF was either
defeated militarily or diplomatically. The U.K. also continued its commitment to
rebuild the Sierra Leonean army and police. From June 2000 through September,
some six hundred British troops were involved in training 8,500 Sierra Leonean
Army soldiers. After September 2001, the 360 U.K. military personnel who
remained would continue to play a major role in advising and directing military
operations, including the staffing of key positions within the Sierra Leonean
defense headquarters. Other sectors which benefited from British aid included
demobilization programs, human rights and civil society groups, rehabilitation of
the legal system, humanitarian aid and programs, and the restoration of local government.
Concerns remained, however, that among the newly-trained soldiers
were many human rights abusers.
International Development Minister Clare Short showed unusual interest in the
DRC. In early August, she made a focused three-day visit to the country. On top of
her agenda was the role the United Kingdom could play in supporting the demobilization
and reintegration of armed groups in the region. In previous years, she had
focused her attention principally on Rwanda and Uganda—problematically offering
uncritical support for those governments.
France
France reiterated previous statements of the main elements of its rethought
Africa policy: loyalty to a tradition of commitment and solidarity, modernization
of France’s cooperation machinery, and the opening up of France’s policy to embrace the whole of the continent. In April, Prime Minister Lionel Jospin insisted
that his country’s approach marked a new era: a break with the imperialist past and
a new pragmatism which would be based on noninterference in domestic African
issues. During an official visit to South Africa, Prime Minister Jospin insisted that
Paris had decided to break with its networks of influence in its former colonies.
South Africa, he said, was a country he called “a strategic axis not only in French
African policy but also in French international policy.” His statements were supposedly
put to the test by an attempted coup d’état in the Central African Republic.
France did not intervene in Bangui. However, France was also reluctant to
openly criticize “old friends,” or apply diplomatic pressure aimed at improving
human rights in former French colonies, including Burkina Faso, Togo, and Côte
d’Ivoire (where new president Laurent Gbagbo’s longstanding links to socialist
politicians in Paris protected him from serious pressure to ensure accountability for
election atrocities).
France’s military training program in Africa, the Renforcement des Capacités
Africaines de Maintien de la Paix (Recamp), continued. In May, military officers and
diplomats from fifteen African countries and twenty non-African partners met to
prepare for a military exercise scheduled for Tanzania in February 2002, the first big
Recamp event in non-francophone southern Africa. Britain, previously skeptical
about the initiative, also attended; future U.S. cooperation was discussed, with its
own Africa Crisis Response Initiative up for review. However, Recamp did not
effectively screen trainees for the purpose of excluding known human rights
abusers.
International Monetary Fund and World Bank
In February 2001, the heads of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and
World Bank undertook an unprecedented tour of Africa, visiting Kenya, Mali,
Nigeria, and Tanzania, and meeting leaders from most of sub-Saharan Africa. The
Bank’s vice-president for Africa asserted, “We are working with Africa very differently
from the way we have worked in the past,” underlining a shift in jargon of the
Bretton Woods institutions over the previous two years from the predominance of
“structural adjustment” to “poverty reduction.”
The two institutions worked more proactively toward rapid implementation of
the Highly Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) program in twenty-three countries,
nineteen of which were in Africa. Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Gambia,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mozambique,
Niger, Rwanda, Senegal, São Tomé and Príncipe, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia
reached their “decision point,” at which it was decided that they qualified for relief
under the enhanced HIPC Initiative. The twenty-three countries were receiving
relief which could amount to some U.S. $34 billion over time.Uganda and Mozambique
reached “completion point,” indicating they had established a track record of
good performance under the original HIPC initiative and qualified for additional
relief. Zambia ($2.5 billion), Tanzania ($2 billion), Mozambique ($2 billion),
Cameroon ($1.3 billion) and Uganda ($1 billion) topped the December 2000 list of
the African countries receiving the greatest dollar value of committed debt relief.
Guinea-Bissau had the greatest percentage of debt reduction, at over 80 percent.Yet
the World Bank itself acknowledged that any benefits expected from HIPC would
likely be wiped out by a worldwide slump in commodity prices. In the wake of the
September 11 attacks, the IMF gave assurances that it would be ready to make additional
resources available to African countries experiencing problems as a result of
a downturn in the world economy.
The IMF, backed by the U.S. and U.K., refused to renew lending to Kenya in
August, citing corruption. In September, responding to the crisis in Zimbabwe, the
IMF announced that it had barred the country from future IMF loans or use of its
general resources. An agreement with Nigeria, however, was extended in August,
despite the failure of the government to observe the conditions set, and both the
World Bank and IMF ramped up their support for the DRC. They facilitated the
preparation of the government’s program for a meeting of bilateral and multilateral
donors in early July in Paris. In late July, the IMF approved a staff-monitored
program and a U.S. $50 million grant for the economic recovery program. The two
institutions also expressed willingness to assist the DRC to address its debt of U.S.
$800 million owed to them.
The World Bank, under the leadership of James Wolfensohn, came to see
HIV/AIDS as one of the central issues it had to address. However, instead of the
debt reduction hoped for in severely AIDS-affected countries, the bank played an
old tune, offering U.S. $500 million in additional loans for sub-Saharan Africa, to
be used almost exclusively for prevention.
United States
Even before the September 11 attacks, Africa had low expectations of the new
U.S. administration under President George W. Bush.During his campaign for the
presidency Bush barely mentioned Africa.When specifically asked about his vision
for the continent, his reply was terse: “While Africa may be important, it doesn’t fit
into the national strategic interests, as far as I can see them.”
But after coming into office, the administration’s approach was somewhat
nuanced.Confronted by the continuing armed conflicts that ravaged large parts of
Africa, including the wars in Angola, Burundi, DRC, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, the
administration started sending signals that it would continue to play a role in
resolving Africa’s crises and in particular would seek to play a more neutral role in
the Great Lakes wars. But U.S interest in peacemaking or peacekeeping remained
minimal and official statements still focused mainly on trade and investment,
revealing a fundamental lack of engagement with human rights issues. However,
the administration exhibited some interest in training African armies to perform
peacekeeping functions, and the U.S. trained battalions during the year from
Ghana, Nigeria, and Senegal, and prepared to train troops from Guinea. Walter
Kansteiner, assistant secretary of state for African affairs, told Congress at his May
confirmation hearing:“Sub-Saharan Africa is a priority for this administration.We
are not immune from Africa’s problems,” and proceeded to list them as being the
spread of HIV/AIDS, rampant poverty, and civil strife. In line with this tack, it was
not surprising that senior U.S. officials argued that the mandate of UNAMSIL, the U.N. peacekeeping force in Sierra Leone, should be extended not because of the
civilian population at risk, but because of the criminal networks in the country that
would undermine U.S. economic and political interests.
Secretary of State Colin Powell undertook a trip to the region in May, visiting
Mali,Uganda,Kenya, and South Africa. Powell stated: “We cannot ignore any place
in the world, and Africa is a huge continent in great need—so we have to be
engaged.”A major focus of the trip was HIV/AIDS.He also discussed regional conflicts,
including with leaders of the DRC and Sudan, but the broad message
throughout the trip appeared to be that Africa’s future depended on the actions of
its own leaders, not the international community. Echoing the administration’s
plans to use trade as a major tool and to send aid primarily to countries it viewed
as making economic and political progress, Powell said,“Money loves security and
stability.” The United States Trade Representative for Africa revisited this theme in
a speech to the Congressional Black Caucus on September 28, when he reiterated
the administration’s belief that the Africa Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA)
was the primary vehicle for U.S. trade and development in Africa. This underlined
the continuity in Africa policy since the Clinton administration. Although there
was a change in attitude and style towards Africa, the strategic priorities remained
the same, namely economic. For the Bush team, this implied greater interest in free
trade and open markets; though the concessions to Africa offered by AGOA were in
fact limited.
Notwithstanding Colin Powell’s vow of engagement, in practice the Bush
administration remained detached from African issues, seemingly preferring,with
the exception of Sudan, to defer to the Europeans, or to the so-called anchor states
of South Africa and Nigeria. Sudan galvanized sustained high-level attention
because of a powerful coalition of religious and conservative forces that pressured
the administration to take a stronger line against the Khartoum government. The
establishment in September of the position of special envoy to Sudan mirrored that
pressure. President Bush named former U.S. Senator John Danforth to the position,
saying, “Sudan is a disaster for all human rights.We must turn the eyes of the
world upon the atrocities in Sudan.”
The withdrawal of the U.S. delegation from the World Conference Against
Racism,Racial Discrimination,Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, held in South
Africa from August 31 to September 8, showed disregard for African activists as
well as the efforts devoted to the event within the region.What could have been an
excellent opportunity for the U.S. to contribute to the understanding and remedy
of such serious issues as discrimination against refugees, sexism, and the disproportionate
impact of HIV/AIDS on people of color resulted instead in disappointment.
In the wake of the September attacks, it was likely that the administration’s interest
would be focused on the Horn and East Africa (embracing Sudan, Eritrea,
Ethiopia,Kenya, Somalia, and Tanzania). Sudan was reported to have offered extensive
cooperation with the U.S., including sharing intelligence on the al-Qaeda network.
Reports suggested that beyond Afghanistan, Somalia might be a target of U.S.
military operations in pursuit of al-Qaeda cells. That would significantly reshape
U.S. relations with the subregion, with potentially serious human rights implications.
Throughout the continent, there was concern that enhanced cooperation with the U.S. on the terrorism agenda would silence criticism of allies’ attacks on
domestic political enemies. National security adviser Condoleezza Rice insisted
that in building alliances, it was “clear our job is to make certain that we draw a line
in all our discussions between legitimate dissent or legitimate movements for the
rights of minorities, and the fact that there may be international terrorism in various
parts of the world.”However, past conduct by the U.S. on making such human
rights issues a priority—prior to the September attacks when the stakes for the U.S.
were much lower—did not back her assurances.
For example, in the case of Ethiopia, the U.S. had rarely spoken out and exerted
no meaningful pressure when abuses—including excessive force against demonstrators,
silencing of dissent, and the violent repression of minorities in restless
regions—were perpetrated by the government. On the contrary, the government
was rewarded with generous aid packages. In the wake of September 11, exchanges
between Ethiopia and the U.S. increased, but were focused exclusively on antiterrorism
rather than any human rights concerns. In one of the only three telephone
calls to African leaders reported prior to launching the strikes against Afghanistan,
President Bush spoke with Prime Minister Meles of Ethiopia on October 5, thanking
him for his offer to cooperate in the campaign against terrorism and discussing
his intent to take action against terrorists and their sanctuaries. Mainstreaming
human rights considerations was not on the agenda.
Colin Powell, during his whirlwind tour of Africa, had praised democratic
trends in Kenya but emphasized the importance of constitutional rule, hinting at
Kenya’s need for a thorough constitutional review. His comments were widely
viewed by observers as a diplomatic way of saying that President Moi should step
down from the presidency in 2002, as he was required to do so by the constitution.
But September 11 might have pushed such concerns to the back burner.According
to a White House press release, the president spoke with President Moi of Kenya on
October 5, emphasizing the need for cooperation on many fronts—financial, intelligence,
diplomatic, and military. He suggested further talks between the United
States and Kenya on how to meet the challenges ahead.Again, there appeared to be
no room for valuing human rights as integral to regional security.
When a State Department spokesperson was asked about the implications of
coalition making for U.S. policy regarding Sudan, he responded that cooperation
with the U.S. would not relieve Sudan of its responsibility to terminate its abusive
domestic practices, including denial of humanitarian access, bombing attacks on
humanitarian operations and civilian targets, and religious discrimination. The
spokesperson contended that all those issues remained firmly fixed on the U.S
agenda despite an alignment with Sudan to fight terror. It remained to be seen,
however, whether the demands of the terrorism coalition would override human
rights and humanitarian concerns, in this and other cases.
THE WORK OF HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
While focusing on areas of prolonged conflict,Human Rights Watch continued
to cover all of sub-Saharan Africa and to expand monitoring of French-speaking
countries.We carried out research and advocacy on Angola,Burundi, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Eritrea, Ethiopia,Guinea-Conakry, Kenya,
Liberia,Nigeria,Mozambique, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sudan, Tanzania,
Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. Additionally, the Africa division tackled
cross-country, thematic research on arms flows, natural resources and corporate
responsibility, national human rights commissions, and the rights of children,
women, refugees, and the internally displaced.We also increased the level and scope
of our monitoring of non-state actors, placing special focus on the violence perpetrated
by rebel forces, and practical methods to influence them through dialogue
and third country leverage.
We fielded investigative and advocacy missions to Angola, Burundi, Côte
d’Ivoire, DRC, Gambia, Guinea-Conakry, Kenya, Nigeria, Rwanda, South Africa,
Tanzania,Uganda,Zambia, and Zimbabwe.Human Rights Watch maintained field
offices in Kigali, Rwanda; Freetown, Sierra Leone; and Bujumbura, Burundi.
Human Rights Watch continued its strong collaboration with national human
rights organizations. Behind the scenes,we continued to build the capacity of local
NGOs to effect change on the human rights record in their countries.When human
rights defenders were harassed,Human Rights Watch pushed for diplomatic measures
to end the problem. In October 2001,Human Rights Watch published a briefing
paper, Freedom of Association at Risk: The Proposed NGO Bill and Current
Restrictions on NGOs in Uganda, about a new law before the Ugandan parliament
that would severely limit or curtail the rights of NGOs whose work did not conform
with “government policies or plans.”
The Great Lakes region remained a priority, as the conflict in the DRC continued
to involve and spill over into all neighboring states. In meetings with senior
officials in Washington,New York, Brussels, Berlin, London, and in the region, and
in presentations to United Nations bodies, Human Rights Watch continued to
highlight the exploitation of resources and illegal importation of arms that added
fuel to the conflagration. In a March 2001 report,Uganda in Eastern DRC: Fueling
Political and Ethnic Strife,we explicated the role of Uganda in escalating the conflict
in eastern Congo, and called on the Ugandan government and rebel groups to alleviate
the suffering they were causing there.
Enhancing the organization’s work on economic and social rights, Human
Rights Watch published two reports addressing the indivisibility of human rights.
In Uprooting the Rural Poor in Rwanda, we detailed the government practice of
forced villagization and dispossession of land of tens of thousands of impoverished
Hutu and Tutsi in the countryside. In Unequal Protection: The State Response to Violent
Crime on South African Farms,we highlighted rural violence and abuses against
farm workers. Another report on South Africa, Scared at School: Sexual Violence
Against Girls in South African Schools, complemented previous work on violence
against women in South Africa by considering the danger girls faced in schools as a
violation of the right to education.
Human Rights Watch extended its Africa-wide advocacy through the publication
of a major report on the performance of government-sponsored human rights
commissions, Protectors or Pretenders? Government Human Rights Commissions in
Africa.The study reported on the often disappointing record of these commissions,
which had received large sums of money for their creation from the donor community.The report found that many commissions did more to deflect international
criticisms of their government than to solve human rights problems, but also singled
out the commissions of Uganda, Ghana, and South Africa as exceptions. The
study was widely circulated amongst donors to national human rights institutions—
including the Office of the U.N.High Commissioner for Human Rights and
the United Nations Development Program—as well as to high-level government
officials and the human rights commissions themselves, and catalyzed a larger
debate about the roles and expectations of such commissions.
Violence surrounding elections was a particular focus of the division during the
year, with a report on the manipulation of the electoral system and accompanying
violence in Uganda (Uganda: Not a Level Playing Field) and a detailed report on
Côte d’Ivoire (The New Racism: The Political Manipulation of Ethnicity in Côte
d’Ivoire) published at the time of the World Conference Against Racism in Durban.
The latter report chronicled wide-scale torture, murder, and rape, and the official
manipulation of ethnic tensions during presidential and parliamentary elections in
Côte d’Ivoire in late 2000, garnering intense media interest. Human Rights Watch
also alerted the international community to governmental interference and irregularities
in local elections in Rwanda.
Throughout the year we remained active on international justice issues.Human
Rights Watch experts took part in genocide trials in Belgium and at the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) in Arusha, Tanzania, acting as expert
witnesses on the human rights situation in the Rwanda.We also called upon the
international community to invest in the future of Sierra Leone by funding its
special court for the prosecution of crimes related to the decade long conflict.
Human Rights Watch intervened regularly to protest abuse of refugees and internally
displaced. Our report on the treatment of refugees in Guinea,Refugees Still
at Risk: Continuing Refugee Protection Concerns in Guinea,documented harassment
and assault of Sierra Leonean and Liberian refugees by Guinean security personnel
and civilians, leading to changes in the provisions for those in refugee camps there.