A=K<I K?< F8CC:
Hopes and Lessons 20 Years after the Collapse
of the Soviet Union
By Rachel Denber
Twenty years ago, in July 1991, I was poised to start a job researching human
rights violations in the Soviet Union. A month later, the failed coup to unseat
Communist Party leader Mikhail Gorbachev precipitated rapid political
changes that would ultimately lead to the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
Watching these events, my family told me I would no longer have a job when
the position was to start in September. Like many of us, they assumed that
the end of communism would usher in a new era of democracy, rule of law,
and human rights protection in the Soviet Union’s successor states. I started
my new job as planned and it took five minutes to see that such assumptions
were wrong.
Now is a good time to take stock of some lessons learned from 20 years of
efforts to bring better human rights protections to former Soviet Union
countries. Where were our assumptions faulty? What could be done better, or
differently, to promote human rights during tectonic societal shifts? It is an
exercise worthy in its own right, and one that has relevance beyond the
region, particularly given the ongoing historic upheaval in the Middle East
and North Africa.
The differences between 1991 and its aftermath and the 2011 Arab uprisings
are vast, and the task of comparing these two historic moments is tantalizing
but alas beyond the scope of this essay. Still, I hope that these reflections 20
years after the fall of the Soviet Union will be relevant and useful to
observers, policymakers, and human rights communities focused on the former
Soviet Union and beyond.
1. There is Nothing Inevitable about Transitions to Democracy
The first lesson is about heady assumptions. Watching decades of
authoritarianism come to an end in Egypt and Tunisia was thrilling; who does
not hope that it will usher in a new era of democracy and rule of law? But
Soviet Union watchers have seen how the collapse of a repressive, authoritarian
regime—while it brings months of euphoria and sets complex political
transformations in motion—in no way guarantees the arrival of governments
committed to human rights protection. As the dust settles, the historical
forces that have shaped the society for decades come again to the fore and,
absent deep institutional change, can be accompanied by reemergence of
authoritarian rule.
To be sure, the end of communism ushered in freedoms unthinkable during
the Soviet era. While circumstances varied widely across the former Soviet
Union in the early years after the break-up, people could worship more freely,
travel abroad, own property, and express their ethnic identity in ways they
could not under communism. There was a vigorous debate about Soviet history
and Stalinism, even as the monstrous crimes of the Stalin era remained
unpunished.
But in many parts of the region, governments’ human rights records have
been poor. Year after year, chapters on most former Soviet Union countries in
this volume have born grim testament to that. The reasons for this vary, but in
several Central Asian countries the leaders and political classes in 1991 had
no interest whatsoever in relinquishing power. Rather than commit to a post-
Communist transition, many leaders used police, the military, intelligence
services, and the criminal justice system to consolidate their personal rule.
They worked to neuter alternative political forces demanding more profound
change. As a result, the institutional reforms necessary for accountable government,
pluralism, and effective rights protection never happened.
A focus on political elites also helps, albeit only partially, to explain why
reforms were much more far-reaching in Eastern Europe than in former Soviet
Union states. For the most part, Soviet-era political elites in those states, as well as in the Baltic states were swept aside. This left more space for new
political actors who were more serious about building strong institutions,
instituting checks and balances, and implementing legislative reforms prioritizing
due process and human rights protection. But there were certainly
other critical factors at work, such as a legacy of pre-World War II democratic
government in many cases and a real prospect of European Union membership
for most.
The Soviet successor states run the gamut in levels and styles of repression.
Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan are surely among the most repressive governments,
not only in the region but the world. Their brands of authoritarianism
fossilized very early after the 1991 collapse. Turkmenistan is a one-party state
that allows no independent civic activism, arbitrarily limits citizens’ ability to
travel abroad, and blocks virtually all independent human rights monitoring.
There is no press freedom, and the authorities imprison stringers for foreign
news outlets. In Uzbekistan the government barely tolerates a handful of
independent human rights activists, routinely sentencing them to long prison
terms on trumped up charges, and the media is heavily censored. Police torture
is endemic. The government has also imprisoned, on charges of religious
“fundamentalism,” thousands of devout Muslims who practice their faith outside
state controls or belong to unregistered religious organizations.
Russia itself is no role model. Under Russia’s “soft authoritarianism,” perfected
under eight years of Vladimir Putin’s rule, independent civil society is tolerated
but whistleblowers have been killed and threatened, and very little is
left of the media freedoms that had blossomed during the glasnost era. There
is no genuine political competition or public accountability. Putin’s
announcement in the 20th anniversary year that he would again run for president,
conceivably putting him in power for a total of 24 years, prompted parallels
to Leonid Brezhnev’s 18-year reign.
Many of the region’s political elites preside over eye-popping corruption, and
have used political power to enrich themselves and their vast patronage networks.
It is no surprise that they use authoritarian mechanisms of control—
media censorship, repression of critics, phony elections—to cling to power.
Political ouster means not only loss of power but loss of wealth and possibly
worse. In countries like Azerbaijan, Russia, Turkmenistan, and Kazakhstan
hydrocarbon wealth exponentially increases the stakes.
In much of the region, entrenched, post-Soviet authoritarian leaders allowed
for some openings, but held onto power, resulting in political and social stagnation.
In Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan this stagnation was broken by a
second round of political changes a decade after the fall of the Soviet Union,
this time driven by popular uprisings full of hope for meaningful change. In
scenes not dissimilar from those we saw in the Arab world in 2011, people in
Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan took to the streets demanding fair elections,
an end to corruption, and public accountability. But the experience of
the so-called colored revolutions of 2003 to 2005 is a sobering reminder that
popular uprisings do not automatically or necessarily lead to good human
rights outcomes.
Kyrgyzstan’s “Tulip Revolution” in 2005 succeeded in ousting then-President
Askar Akaev, but hopes for reform under his successor, Kurmanbek Bakiev,
were quickly dashed. Bakiev proved far more interested in enriching his family
and patronage networks, and within a year his government started harassing
human rights activists and independent journalists. His record deteriorated
precipitously from then through his violent ouster in April 2010.
In Ukraine’s 2004 “Orange Revolution” thousands of Ukrainian citizens
peacefully protested the government’s manipulation of the presidential election
in favor of Viktor Yanukovich. The pro-reform, pro-Western candidate,
Viktor Yushchenko, defeated Yanukovich in repeat elections. But
Yushchenko’s government found itself mired in serial political crises and corruption
and unable to deliver on social and economic reform. It was also
poorly equipped to deal with Ukraine’s myriad human rights problems,
including torture and ill-treatment in detention, violations of the rights of
migrants and asylum seekers, and violations that fuel the HIV/AIDS epidemic.
Yushchenko left office after losing badly at the polls in 2010.
Georgia’s 2003 “Rose Revolution” brought Mikheil Saakashvili to the presidency
with aspirations of judicial, police, and economic reform. Reforms
brought some positive results, but the government’s use of excessive force
against demonstrators in 2007 suggested the fragility of its commitment to
human rights and the rule of law. Today Georgia’s human rights record is
mixed. Saakashvili is bound by the constitution to leave office in 2013, but
because he has dominated the political system there are real doubts about
what will come next. Nine years later the Rose Revolution paved the way for a
leader who professed a commitment to rights, but it is not clear whether it
succeeded in creating a competitive political system that can protect rights.
2. Guard against Misplaced Blame
In the aftermath of political upheaval, many people become disillusioned as
they cope with economic, political, and social instability. Many come to
blame “democracy” for their suffering. Supporters of human rights and
democracy need to fight this misplaced blame. There are surely rocky times
ahead in the post-uprising Middle East, so this lesson has relevance there, too.
The end of the Soviet era brought about real and colossal privations for millions
who lost their life savings, jobs, and sense of identity. In Russia, for
example, corruption was seemingly boundless: privatization programs under
Yeltsin favored a handful of Kremlin cronies who bought up the most valuable
state assets at bargain-basement prices in exchange for crucial political backing.
Unsurprisingly, many blamed their struggles not on the deeply-rooted
flaws of the ancien regime or the corruption of power, but on “democracy”
and human rights movements, seeing them as the handmaiden of chaos.
Putin exploited this anger and a growing sense of public nostalgia for the
Soviet era to his advantage. His team willfully conflated chaos and democracy
to justify reforms in 2004, making it more difficult for opposition parties to
gain seats in the Duma, and instituting the appointment, rather than election,
of regional governors. After the “colored revolutions” the Kremlin accused
NGOs of being fronts for foreign governments that sought to interfere with
Russia’s internal affairs, and started a campaign of bureaucratic harassment against them. The overall result was the weakening, beyond recognition, of
the checks and balances that are inherent in an accountable political system.
A related lesson here is that Western policymakers who care about human
rights need to support institutions rather than individual leaders. The enthusiastic
support the West at times showed Yeltsin during the chaotic 1990s, or
Saakashvili during the early days after the Rose Revolution, backfired in the
long run. As popular opinion about the democratic credentials of each
soured, so too did popular backing for more far-reaching democratic and
human rights reforms.
3. Institutionalize Strong Minority Rights Protections
Both during and after the shattering of the Soviet Union, many parts of the
region succumbed to armed conflicts whose roots, for the most part, lay deep
in the Soviet past, including regime attempts to manipulate ethnic tensions
to its advantage through favoritism and calculated border designations, as
well as Soviet policies suppressing national, ethnic, and religious identity.
New governments—in some cases buoyed by national reawakening—clashed
with minority or marginalized populations, who felt strongly that the new
leadership should recognize the rights and opportunities that the previous
regime had long denied them. Toward the end of the Soviet era and after,
both the Kremlin and several Soviet successor states responded to new
nationalist demands and movements with force. In some cases, such as
Abkhazia and the first Chechnya war, governments stumbled into armed conflict.
But the consequences in both scenarios were disastrous.
It is beyond the scope of this essay to analyze the causes of secessionist
wars in Nagorno Karabakh, South Ossetia, Abkhazia, Chechnya, and
Transdnestria, and of devastating communal violence in places like Osh and
Ingushetia. (Tajikistan’s civil war took place along regional, not ethnic fault
lines, but is also worth noting). However, in each case the civilian population
bore terrible suffering from serious violations of humanitarian law, and, in
some cases, long-term displacement. Twenty years later, some of the conflicts have morphed, some are frozen, and well over a million people remain
displaced. The lasting harm of these intractable conflicts should serve as an
important warning to governments and civil societies alike in the Middle East
about the need to respect minority rights and build tolerance among minority
and majority populations.
New governments need to acknowledge and address past minority grievances,
ensure language and confessional rights, give minorities a place in
law enforcement and security agencies, act swiftly to protect minorities from
violence, and initiate public discussions that emphasize tangible common
interests that transcend interethnic and interconfessional differences. They
also need to act quickly to disarm both separatist and pro-state militias, pursue
accountability for war crimes, and undertake security sector reform.
4. International Institutions Matter
Another lesson is the importance of motivating states in transition to join
international institutions and processes that champion human rights. The former
Soviet Union is perhaps unique in this regard given the critical role in former
Soviet states of the prospect of membership in the EU and Council of
Europe. But the lesson is a more general one: the international system now
includes a panoply of institutions dedicated to human rights protection and
reform of judiciaries, security services, and other government bodies critical
to advancing human rights. These institutions should not take at face value
regional states’ ratification of human rights treaties. It is essential that they
become actively involved in supporting democratic and human rights reform
in countries “in transition.”
As prospective EU member states, many Eastern European countries were
motivated to carry out thorough reforms of their political and judicial systems.
EU membership was not in the cards for former Soviet countries, apart
from the Baltic states. But some—including Russia, Ukraine, and the South
Caucasus states—were offered membership in the Council of Europe. They
were expected to undertake significant institutional reforms as part of the
accession and membership process. For example abolishing the death penalty, overhauling the prosecutor’s office to strengthen the courts, and transferring
prisons from internal affairs to justice ministries. The impact of these
reforms should not be overstated. For example, the prosecutor’s office in
almost all of the post-Soviet Council of Europe member states is still disproportionately
powerful, and courts still lack independence. But the reforms
were historic and important.
Most important, membership has given their citizens access to the European
Court of Human Rights (ECtHR), providing them an avenue of justice when
their own deeply flawed justice systems fail them.
At the same time, each of these countries was invited to join prematurely,
before government practices had come close enough to meeting Council of
Europe standards. At the time accession proponents argued that it was better
to bring the states in sooner rather than later, even if they did not meet standards.
More would be accomplished, they argued, by continuing to engage on
reform once these states were Council of Europe members. Ten years later,
however, many of the same human rights violations that plagued these states
prior to accession have worsened, and the organization’s monitoring procedure
has struggled to secure compliance. Azerbaijan, for example, was
admitted in 2000, days after a blatantly manipulated parliamentary vote.
Elections since then have been largely empty exercises and sparked political
violence in 2003 and 2005.
Although Russia was admitted to the Council of Europe in the midst of its first
horrific war in Chechnya, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe
(PACE) had the political courage to suspend Russia’s voting rights for six
months because of grave violations of humanitarian law during the second
Chechnya conflict. However, PACE restored the voting rights without getting
any guarantees that perpetrators of massacres, torture, and forced disappearances
would be held accountable. And 10 years later, they still have not.
The Council of Europe’s addition of former Soviet states with poor human
rights records gave millions access to justice through the ECtHR, but it has
also stretched the court’s resources. This would not be an insurmountable problem, if it were not for states’ failure to implement the ECtHR’s judgments.
This failure threatens the court’s integrity and floods the court with similar
cases. A glaring example is Russia’s stubborn failure to implement roughly
170 judgments in which the European Court found Russia responsible for
enforced disappearances, torture, executions, and other serious human
rights abuses in Chechnya.
5. Establish Concrete Human Rights Benchmarks
and Give Them Teeth
Experience in the former Soviet Union region, particularly in Central Asia,
highlights the importance of setting out human rights benchmarks as a condition
for international engagement and unrelentingly pursuing their implementation.
One of the most disappointing developments in this regard was the EU’s failure
to hold firm in demanding human rights improvements in Uzbekistan as a
condition for dropping sanctions imposed on the government following the
May 2005 killings by government forces of hundreds of civilian protesters,
most of them unarmed, in the city of Andijan. The sanctions were mild and
targeted, a symbolic arms embargo and a visa ban on a handful of government
officials. But almost as soon as the sanctions were adopted several EU
states set about openly undermining them, sending mixed messages that
could not have been lost on the Uzbek government.
The EU had made the release of imprisoned human rights activists a condition
for lifting the sanctions but when it ended the sanctions regime in 2009,
12 remained in prison. In a move that could only have encouraged Uzbek government
intransigence, the EU justified the lifting of the sanctions by referring
to “positive steps” taken by the Uzbek government, such as agreeing to hold
harmless but meaningless human rights dialogues with the EU. After two
years the dialogues have had absolutely no bearing on the human rights situation
in Uzbekistan.
The lesson here is not that sanctions can never work, but that they can work
only if states are united in demanding rigorous implementation. Regional officials
are no fools. They know when their interlocutors are serious about their
rhetoric and when they are not, or when rhetoric will have real consequences
and when it will not.
A related lesson is that assigning an abusive government exceptional status
in light of its strategic importance sabotages efforts to get it to improve its
human rights record. Western policymakers EU policymakers like to point to
Kazakhstan as a regional leader in a rough neighborhood. Led by Germany
and France, the EU warmly supported Kazakhstan’s bid to chair OSCE in 2010
and host an OSCE summit, though Kazakhstan’s brand of soft authoritarianism
made it an inappropriate choice for an organization with a mandate to
promote democracy and human rights.
The gamble that the chairmanship would prod reform turned out to be misguided.
It’s been a year since the summit and chairmanship year have ended,
and Kazakhstan’s record has deteriorated. For example, they adopted a new
repressive law on religion in October, returned the prison system to Ministry
of Internal Affairs jurisdiction, and imprisoned one of the country’s top
human rights activists.
International actors should also learn from the post-Soviet experience that
viewing human rights and security interests as tradeoffs is exactly the false
choice repressive leaders want them to make, and that bargaining with
dictators over human rights concerns will not lead to a good outcome, almost
by definition.
Too often, Western actors resist seeing the leverage they have in relationships
with abusive governments. For example, eager to secure alternative
routes to Afghanistan to avoid less stable Pakistan, the US has developed the
so-called Northern Distribution Network (NDN)—a transit corridor that runs
through Russia and Central Asia—which supplies non-lethal cargo to
Afghanistan. To sweeten its relationship with Uzbekistan, a pivotal state in
the network, the US is waiving restrictions on assistance, including military aid, to the Uzbek government that were established in 2004 over human
rights concerns.
What policymakers seem to minimize are the financial and other benefits the
NDN brings Uzbekistan, which should be used to stymie bullying by Uzbek
officials over rights issues. Instead, by dropping all restrictions on aid—
including military aid—without insisting on improvements, the US is creating
a huge windfall for an extremely repressive government, and may ultimately
create long-term instability in Uzbekistan and Central Asia. It also sends the
detrimental message to ordinary Uzbeks that the US is indifferent to their
plight.
6. Support a Strong Civil Society
A resoundingly positive lesson of the last 20 years has been the importance
of support for civil society in countries in, and beyond, transition. These are
the organizations and media outlets that, in the absence of checks and balances
in post-Soviet authoritarian regimes, are doing the most to hold their
governments accountable, often providing services to help the public access
their often opaque governments and exposing government corruption and
wrongdoing.
In many countries these communities are now so deeply rooted and vibrant
that it is easy to forget that they are in fact quite new. At the same time, no
one should take their vitality for granted. The past 10 years have witnessed
how one government after another in the region adopted laws restricting
NGOs and used an arsenal of bureaucratic tools to harass and overburden
them, and, in some countries, imprison them. The creation of civil societies
throughout the region was one of the signal achievements of the glasnost
era, and policymakers need to support these communities now more than
ever.
The differences between the fall of the Soviet Union and today’s Arab Spring
upheaval are significant. But 20 years of post-Soviet experience should lead
policy makers to embrace the opportunity for change in the Middle East, guided not by heady optimism, but by an enduring commitment to universal principles,
far-reaching institutional reforms, and strong support for the people
who continue to fight for both.
Rachel Denber is deputy director of the Europe and Central Asia division at
Human Rights Watch.