Angola
Elections in Angola—the first since 1992—were postponed yet again in 2007.
Legislative elections are now scheduled to take place in 2008 and a presidential
election in 2009, but no specific dates have been announced.
Since the end of the civil war in 2002, increasing oil revenues, trade, and foreign
investment, along with a greater role in international and regional affairs, have
helped insulate Angola from international criticism regarding good governance
and human rights. Despite the nation’s strong economic growth—forecast to be
the world’s highest in 2007—the majority of Angolans continue to live in dire
poverty. Since 2001 thousands of Angolans have been forcibly evicted from their
homes by the government to make way for development projects. As of yet, most
have not received compensation or alternative housing. The environment for civil
society organizations and the media grew increasingly hostile in 2007, despite
participation of civil society organizations in civic education and observation of
voter registration.
Election Preparations
Voter registration ended on September 15, 2007, with approximately 8 million voters
registered. In May the government cancelled the registration of expatriates,
contrary to the electoral laws. The National Electoral Commission (CNE), which
supervises the registration process, issued a resolution recommending that the
government reverse the decision, to which the government has not responded.
Voter registration is carried out by the Inter-ministerial Commission for the
Electoral Process (CIPE), coordinated by the Ministry for Territorial Administration
under the supervision of the CNE. A delegation of the Parliamentary Forum of the
Southern Africa Development Community (SADC) found in March 2007 that the
division of responsibility between electoral bodies at both national and local levels
lacks transparency. Under Angolan law, elections must be announced at least
90 days in advance, but the SADC delegation urged the government to announce
the date as soon as possible, to leave sufficient time for political parties to campaign
and civil society organizations to carry out voter education.
The CNE still lacks resources to carry out its mandate at national, provincial, and
municipal levels. The president of the CNE is a Supreme Court judge. Since the
Supreme Court reviews appeals of CNE decisions on complaints arising from the
electoral process, his two functions may clash.
Cabinda
Since 1975, rebels in the oil-rich enclave of Cabinda have been fighting for independence
from Angola. In August 2006 the government and the leader of the
Cabindan Forum for Dialogue (FCD, a joint commission of the rebels and local civil
society representatives) signed a Memorandum of Understanding that purportedly
ended the conflict. However, a considerable part of local society claims the
peace talks were not inclusive and the FCD signatory of the MOU was not a legitimate
representative. Although the conflict has not reignited, armed clashes did
occur in the territory in 2007.
Freedom of association and expression in Cabinda continue to be highly restricted.
Mpalabanda, a human rights NGO and member of the FCD, was shut down by
the government in July 2006. The group has appealed the decision, but has been
unable to operate while the verdict is pending. Roman Catholic groups have continued
to express dissatisfaction at the appointment of the current bishop of
Cabinda, who for the first time is not a Cabinda native. On July 14, 2007, four men
were arrested for demonstrating against the bishop. They were brought before the
public prosecutor and formally charged on July 17—beyond the 48 hours required
by Angolan law—and released on July 23, after summary procedures. One was
released without charge, while the other three were given prison sentences that
were converted into fines and suspended for two years.
Freedom of Expression
On May 15, 2006, a new Angolan press law came into force, but its specific implementing
regulations have yet to be published. Consequently, provisions of the
law that are crucial to ensuring freedom of expression and access to information
cannot be implemented. For example, private radio stations still cannot broadcast
nationwide and community radio stations are not in operation. This situation, in
conjunction with the very limited circulation of private newspapers outside of the capital, seriously hinders the dissemination of diverse points of view in the preelection
period.
Several provisions of the press law, the electoral laws, the Law on Access to
Administrative Documents, and the Criminal Code, are highly restrictive.
Defamation is still criminalized and journalists can incur prison sentences of up
to two years if found guilty. Many of the legal limitations on media freedom and
access to information are vaguely formulated and can easily intimidate journalists
and hamper their ability to criticize the government.
On October 3, 2007, the editor of the private weekly Semanario Angolense was
sentenced for defamation and “injúria” of the former justice minister (and current
ombudsman) to eight months’ imprisonment and ordered to pay damages equivalent
to US$250,000. The Supreme Court ordered him released on November 8
pending appeal.
Housing Rights and Forced Evictions
Human Rights Watch and the Angolan organization SOS Habitat have documented
the forced eviction of an estimated 30,000 people between 2002 and 2006.
Throughout 2007 Human Rights Watch continued to receive reports of residents
whose houses were demolished without notice or compensation in Luanda and
other cities. In August police evicted approximately 70 people, including street
children, from an informal settlement in Lobito, Benguela province, without notice
or stated reason or any provision for their relocation. The Public Prosecutor’s
Office initiated an investigation into allegations of police brutality connected to
the eviction; the results of the investigation are still pending at this writing.
The legal framework for housing rights in Angola remains problematic. The Land
Law and the Law on Urban Management do not explicitly forbid forced evictions
and do not adequately ensure security of tenure. In 2007 the government
announced further plans for an extensive development and infrastructure program
in and around Luanda. Unless this and other projects are accompanied by
strong measures to protect the right to adequate housing, forced evictions are
likely to continue.
Human Rights Defenders
The environment for civil society organizations worsened during 2007. In February
a researcher from the international nongovernmental organization (NGO) Global
Witness was arrested in Cabinda. She was detained for three days, and was not
allowed to retain a lawyer of her choice but was assigned a court clerk to defend
her. She was charged with violating state security under an “open norm” that
allows for the criminal prosecution of “any act not foreseen within the law, which
endangers or could endanger state security.” Such “open norms” are contrary to
basic criminal law principles. She was eventually released and allowed to leave
Angola after providing assurances that she would return for court proceedings if
necessary. At this writing, a trial date has not been set, but nor have the charges
against her been formally withdrawn.
On July 10 the head of the government’s Technical Unit for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Aid (UTCAH), Pedro Walipi Kalenga, accused several national and
international civil society organizations of carrying out illegal activities. In previous
statements he had indicated that some organizations registered with UTCAH
might even be shut down. The local groups named by Walipi all have strong
records of defending human rights in Angola. None has ever been formally notified
of any violation of Angolan law. Statements such as this amount to harassment
and intimidation of human rights groups and are particularly worrying
ahead of elections.
The Constitutional Law grants freedom of association. The Law on Associations
and a decree-law enacted in 2003 regulate the activity of NGOs. Several provisions
of the decree-law on NGOs impose obligations that may excessively restrict
freedom of association, such as an extensive list of duties including reporting
duties to government bodies, and provision for the government to order an NGO
to be audited whenever the government sees fit. Local human rights groups claim
the decree-law is also unconstitutional because it was enacted by the government
whereas legislation on fundamental rights should only be enacted by the National
Assembly. The government is currently revising the Law on Associations and has
requested suggestions from a limited number of civil society organizations.
However, the government has not so far disclosed the final draft.
Key International Actors
Throughout 2007 Angola continued to raise its profile in international and regional
affairs. In May it was elected to the United Nations Human Rights Council and
in August took over the presidency of the SADC’s Organ on Politics, Defense and
Security. Numerous high-level government and military officials from Africa and
other regions, as well as international organizations, have visited Angola in the
past year.
This increasing international role, along with major investment and trade opportunities
mainly from the oil, diamond, and reconstruction sectors, has helped to
insulate Angola from criticism on good governance and human rights. The World
Bank and other donors have attempted to make lending to Angola conditional on
transparency and good governance, but the government has been able to avoid
these conditions by obtaining large unconditional loans from China.
Representatives of the UN Human Rights Office in Angola and the European Union
have approached the government concerning harassment of human rights
defenders but neither has issued a public statement of concern about it, nor has
any foreign government or intergovernmental organization publicly condemned
forced evictions. International partners have also generally failed to pressure
Angola to set election dates.