Angola
The slow pace of post-war reconstruction and reconciliation in the wake of
Angola’s twenty-seven year civil war, which ended in 2002, continued in
2005. While important electoral legislation was approved by the national
assembly, much remains to be done to create an environment in which free
and fair elections can take place and to extend civil and political rights to all
Angolans. The government continues to violate Angolans rights to freedom
of expression, association, and assembly. Persistent delays remain in rebuilding
roads, schools, and other infrastructure in the rural provinces. The consistent
lack of full transparency in the government’s use of ever-increasing oil
revenues remains a further impediment to enjoyment of human rights and
reconstruction in Angola. Abuses against civilians by the Angolan military
and political tension in the province of Cabinda remain causes for concern.
Preparations for 2006 Elections
In early 2005, the Angolan government and opposition political parties negotiated
a “package” of electoral laws that would form the legal basis for parliamentary
and presidential elections in 2006. Despite some opposition, the
National Assembly, dominated by the Movement for the Popular Liberation
of Angola (Movimento Popular de Libertação de Angola, MPLA) voted in
favor of the legislative package on April 26, 2005. The original legislation
barred President Jose Eduardo Dos Santos from seeking reelection, but the
Supreme Court later overruled this provision. The National Union for the
Total Independence of Angola (União Nacional para a Independência Total de
Angola, UNITA) and other opposition groups called for legislative and presidential
elections to take place simultaneously in 2006, but these dates have
still not been set. Statements by the ruling party in late 2005 that “Angola is
not ready” and that “elections must not be rushed” have raised the level of
uncertainty as to the likelihood of elections being called for 2006.
Disagreement over the composition of the National Electoral Commission,
in which the governing MPLA named seven of the eleven members, has
delayed preparations for elections.
Opposition parties raised other problems with the electoral process, notably
issues pertaining to electoral registration, electoral education, and political
party financing. Media reports in 2005 that the MPLA might use surplus
money arising from oil sales to finance its political campaign received widespread
attention. Voter registration reportedly began in some areas loyal to
the ruling party before the establishment of the national, provincial, and local
electoral commissions, and was tightly controlled and monitored by the
MPLA and its members. Official voter registration was delayed due to lack of
infrastructure and capacity outside the capital, complications related to the
identification of Angolan citizens, many of whom are returning refugees
without national identity cards, and political disagreements over the electoral
commissions. The national registration process is now slated to begin in
January 2006.
Rede Eleitoral (Electoral Network), a coalition of civil society organizations
working for free and fair elections, advocated for disarmament and reintegration
of former combatants and civic education of the police in response to
reports that much of the rural population still fear that the elections may
turn violent. The lack of access to information and limits on freedom of
expression, especially in rural areas, are also significant obstacles to free and
fair elections.
The lack of resources, conflict over land rights, and rising frustration among
ex-combatants due to the slow pace of reintegration have contributed to
increased political tension throughout Angola. The paucity of development
and reconstruction funding flowing to rural areas, especially areas that heavily
support the opposition, increased the perception that the central government
is corrupt and uninterested in reconciliation. In one incident, UNITA
accused the MPLA of involvement in the destruction of its local headquarters
in Moxico province and of attacking party supporters on April 5, 2005. The
incidents were apparently in response to the discovery of a land mine on the
runway of the Lumbala N’guimbo airport, which was blamed on UNITA.
Freedom of Expression, Association and Assembly
Press freedom remains a concern in Angola, both for journalists in private
and government-owned news outlets. While a much-debated national media
law was stuck in parliament for the greater part of 2005, the government
continued to maintain control of the airwaves in rural areas. Radio Ecclesia, a
privately-owned Catholic radio station, continued to seek permission to
broadcast outside Luanda. While this permission was not forthcoming, Radio
Ecclesia’s popular news program began playing on Vatican Radio in
November, allowing the station to be heard outside Luanda. Several incidents
demonstrated the tendency of the government to limit free speech.
Angolan National Radio suspended a popular radio talk show after its host
criticized the government in an interview on Radio Ecclesia. In April, the
Deputy Minister for Information warned journalists at the state-owned daily
newspaper “Jornal de Angola” not to criticize the government or give too
much print space to the opposition.
Restrictions on the right of people to assemble peacefully were imposed on
several occasions in 2005. On August 25, Carlos Almeida, a senior member
of the opposition Party to Support Democracy, was jailed for 45 days for
staging an unauthorized protest outside parliament. He was protesting his
party’s exclusion from the National Electoral Commission. In mid-July, the
government of the province of Cabinda refused, without explanation, the
request of a number of NGOs to hold a rally in favor of a peaceful solution
to the conflict.
Tensions in Cabinda
While the government repeatedly stated that the armed conflict against the
Front for the Liberation of the Cabinda Enclave (FLEC) in the oil-rich
province of Cabinda had ended, it continued to maintain a massive military
presence in the enclave. Fears of military escalation increased in July as local
authorities reported that a new Angolan army offensive against FLEC in
Cabinda was underway to crush the armed insurgency. The army has denied
that it stepped up the military campaign, but abuses committed by armed
forces personnel do not seem to have subsided. Violations connected to the military continued to be reported in 2005, including the brutal murder on
April 14 of a three-year old girl and allegations that the army kidnapped and
tortured members and sympathizers of Mpalabanda, a local human rights
NGO, in July. The commander of the armed forces in Cabinda claimed that
justice in these cases has been served. Asked to comment on the acts of indiscipline
committed by soldiers under his command, General Marques Banza
admitted that “there might have been isolated cases of indiscipline here and
there, and in those instances we have known how to mete out punishment.”
Reports that the Angolan government is in discussion with oil companies to
grant exploration rights for drilling on-shore, as opposed to off-shore where
most of the oil is currently produced, could exacerbate tensions in Cabinda,
and lead to a continued military presence to ensure unfettered access to these
resources.
Since March 22, 2005, there has been significant popular opposition to and
protest over the Catholic Church’s naming of an “Angolan” bishop to preside
over Cabinda. When the Archbishop of Angola traveled to Cabinda on July
18, he was met at the airport by protests which turned violent. The violence
continued as he tried to hold mass and he was forced to leave. Relations
between the Vatican and the local population and Catholic priests have
remained tense, with both Cabindans and the local Catholic clergy accusing
the Vatican of not favoring the interests of the enclave. One priest was briefly
detained by the military, and the Angolan Catholic Church suspended two
popular Cabindan priests in August and shut down the Immaculate
Conception Church in Cabinda. The governor of Cabinda accused
Mpalabanda of being involved in orchestrating the protests.
Return and Resettlement
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees said that 2005 would
be the last year that the agency would facilitate repatriation of refugees from
neighboring countries; starting in 2006, it will focus solely on reintegrating
those already repatriated. This will leave approximately 130,000 Angolan
refugees still living in neighboring countries. It is unclear whether these
refugees will independently return to Angola or remain in the countries where they are presently located. However, the repatriation of refugees from
Zambia, which began in May, and the Democratic Republic of Congo
(DRC), was delayed due to poor infrastructure and a lack of social services
such as education and health in the rural areas of the Angolan interior.
Rumors circulating in refugee camps in Zambia that a shortage of food and
medicine exists in Angola kept many from returning home. The United
Nations Children’s Fund reported in late August that rural areas in Angola
do not have access to sufficient drinking water and U.S.$440 million needs to
be invested to change the situation. The population has yet to receive any
benefit from increasing oil revenues that have come with skyrocketing oil
prices. Some refugees also reportedly fear that they will be forcefully incorporated
into the army. Returns from the DRC were also delayed due to the
outbreak of the Marburg virus epidemic in Uige province in Angola.
Key International Actors
International pressure on Angola to improve its record on transparency and
human rights has not been very effective. A U.S.$2 billion credit line granted
to the government of Angola by the Chinese Export-Import bank has
allowed the ruling party to reject calls for greater transparency. The Angolan
government also rejected several reports critical of the human rights situation
in Angola, including the report by Hina Jilani, the U.N. special rapporteur
for human rights defenders.
Donor countries have indefinitely postponed the holding of a donors conference
to help fund reconstruction efforts in Angola, largely due to the failure
of the Angolan government to come to an agreement with the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) on setting up a Staff Monitored Program, the main
precondition to holding a donors conference. Despite many in-country visits
by IMF staff and directors, an agreement does not look likely in 2005. Huge
gains in oil revenues resulting from soaring international oil prices have not
been accounted for by the government. The international donor community
is reluctant to provide development aid because the Angolan government has
largely failed to improve financial accountability and transparency, especially
in the oil sector.
While the influence of international actors such as the IMF has waned, the
role of regional actors, such as member states of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC), will increase in the run-up to elections.
The government has not made encouraging statements with respect to allowing
international observers to monitor the elections in 2006. SADC member
states and other regional actors will need to take a firmer stance in ensuring
that free and fair elections are conducted in a climate of improved enjoyment
of human rights. However, SADC’s endorsement of blatantly unfair elections
in Zimbabwe in 2005 is cause for concern.