Angola
On February 5, after minimal public discussion, Angola’s new constitution entered
into force. It was approved in late January by parliament, which has been dominated
by the ruling Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA) since
2008. The constitution consolidates the president’s de facto powers over state
institutions and prescribes a parliament-based model of electing the president,
rather than separate elections.
In April parliament passed a law to curb Angola’s endemic corruption, following
the president’s new “zero-tolerance” anti-corruption discourse. The law has not
yet been implemented.
Fundamental rights such as freedom of expression and information became more
curtailed in 2010, despite strong guarantees in the new constitution. The environment
for human rights defenders remains restricted. Several human rights organizations
have continued to struggle with unresolved lawsuits against banning
orders, administrative registration obstacles, threats, and intimidation. In
Cabinda province, two prominent human rights defenders were sentenced to
prison on trumped-up charges following politically motivated proceedings.
Arbitrary Detentions in Cabinda
An intermittent armed conflict with a separatist movement has persisted in
Cabinda since 1975, despite a peace agreement signed in 2006. The authorities
have long used the conflict to justify restrictions on the rights to freedom of
expression, assembly, and association in this oil-rich enclave. The government
has not responded to calls for an independent investigation into allegations of
torture and other serious human rights violations committed by the Angolan
Armed Forces in Cabinda for many years. Perpetrators of torture there have not
been prosecuted.
In 2010 the authorities used an armed attack on the Togolese football team on
January 8, which killed two Togolese and injured nine others, as a pretext to
arrest and convict prominent Cabindan intellectuals and government critics. The
Front for the Liberation of the Enclave of Cabinda, a separatist guerrilla group, claimed responsibility for the attack. The government has not carried out a credible
investigation into the incident.
Only two of the nine men arrested between January 8 and April 11 were formally
charged with direct involvement in the attack, and at this writing they are awaiting
trial. Six others were formally charged and tried between June and September
for unspecified “other crimes” against the security of the state, under article 26
of the 1978 law on crimes against the security of the state. This legal provision
contradicts international human rights law because it is overbroad and does not
specify the crimes for which the authorities may impose prison penalties.
Those convicted include: a Chevron worker who was arrested on January 8 and
sentenced to three years of imprisonment in June; two prominent human rights
defenders–Raúl Tati, a Catholic priest, and Francisco Luemba, a lawyer–who were
arrested in January and sentenced to five years’ imprisonment in August; and
civic activist and university professor Belchior Lanso Tati and a former policeman
who were also arrested in January and sentenced to six and three years, respectively,
of imprisonment in the same trial. In September a former activist of the
civic association Mpalabanda, arrested in January 2010, was tried and acquitted.
Another former Mpalabanda activist, António Paca Panzo Pemba, was arbitrarily
arrested in April on suspicion of having organized a public demonstration in solidarity
with these political detainees, together with two Angolan human rights
organizations. In November, charges against him were dropped for lack of evidence.
Five other activists were briefly detained and released provisionally in
April for wearing and allegedly distributing t-shirts with the faces of political
detainees printed on them. In November, two teachers were arrested and convicted
to prison sentences for “inciting to civil disobedience.” They had authored and
distributed leaflets calling on the population to abstain from Angola’s independence
celebration on November 11.
Defense lawyers in August appealed to the Constitutional Court seeking revocation
of article 26 of the 1978 state crime law. In September the Angolan Bar
Association also filed a request regarding the same legal provision at the
Constitutional Court. At this writing the Constitutional Court’s decision is pending, and despite the approval of a revised law on crimes against the security of the
state, the convicted persons remain in prison.
Media Freedom
The media environment in Angola remains restrictive, and the government continues
to limit access to information, despite the emergence of a number of new
media outlets over the past two years. The ruling party imposes a strong political
bias in the state media. Authorities routinely limit the access of private media to
official information and have curtailed space for open political debate on state
and private radio stations, particularly in the provinces. They have also obstructed
media coverage of politically sensitive events such as forced evictions. On
November 4 the parliament passed a revised law on crimes against the security of
the state, which contains provisions that restrict freedom of expression, for example
by declaring “insult” of the president a criminal offense.
In September and October two journalists of the Luanda-based Radio Despertar,
a radio station close to the opposition party UNITA, were attacked by unknown
men. On September 5 the Radio Despertar journalist Alberto Tchakussanga was
shot dead in his home. On October 22 the radio satirist António Manuel Jojó was
stabbed in the street but survived. Both ran popular programs critical of the government
and had previously received anonymous death threats. At this writing
police investigations remain inconclusive.
Defamation remains a criminal offense in the new press law. Other offenses, such
as “abuse of press freedom,” are vague and thus open to political manipulation.
No new defamation charges against journalists were reported in 2010, but a number
of previous proceedings against journalists of the weekly newspapers Folha 8,
A Capital, and Novo Jornal remain pending at this writing. Such litigation, in an
increasingly difficult economic environment for the private media, perpetuates a
widespread culture of self-censorship that restricts the public’s access to independent
information.
A new press law was enacted in May 2006 but the additional legislation required
to implement crucial parts of the law, which would improve the legal protection of
freedom of expression and access to information, have still not passed at this writing. Independent private radio stations cannot broadcast nationwide, while
the government’s licensing practices have favored new radio and television stations
linked with the ruling MPLA and the presidency. The 2006 press law contains
provisions that prevent the establishment of media monopolies and require
disclosure of shareholders of media corporations. Yet, the real shareholders of
companies registered as owners of several media corporations established since
2008, which are reportedly linked to the presidential entourage, have not been
disclosed. In June a company reportedly linked to the president bought three of
the most popular weekly newspapers known for their government criticism,
Semánario Angolense, A Capital, and 40 percent of Novo Jornal.
Freedom of Assembly and Demonstration
The new constitution guarantees freedom of assembly and peaceful demonstration,
and Angolan laws explicitly allow public demonstrations without the need to
obtain government authorization. However, in 2010 the authorities arbitrarily
banned two public demonstrations organized by civil society organizations, publicly
threatened demonstrators, and deployed security forces to prevent the
demonstrations. In November the police also temporarily detained peaceful
demonstrators and opposition party activists in Luanda who were peacefully distributing
leaflets.
In March a demonstration against mass forced evictions and demolition of houses
in Huila, organized by the human rights organization Omunga, was banned by
the governor of Benguela province. The governor deployed hundreds of police
agents and publicly rejected “any responsibility” for the resulting physical damage
or harm to the protesters. The demonstration later took place on April 10 following
local and international pressure. In May the governor of Cabinda banned a
public demonstration organized by civil society groups in solidarity with civilians
jailed on suspicion of state security crimes after the January 8 guerilla attack. The
governor deployed police and military to prevent the demonstration from taking
place on May 22. The military and police also surrounded the organizers’ houses
on the day of the demonstration, despite the demonstration being called off by
its organizers.
Housing Rights and Forced Evictions
Angola’s laws do not give adequate protection against forced eviction, nor do
they enshrine the right to adequate housing. In 2010 the government continued
to carry out mass forced evictions and house demolitions in areas that it claims to
be reserved for public construction in Luanda and increasingly also in provincial
towns. This has occurred without adequate prior notice or compensation in several
documented cases.
Between March and October an estimated 25,000 residents were forcibly evicted
from their homes in Huila, without compensation or adequate prior notice, and
resettled in peripheral areas without any infrastructure, driving many of the evicted
into extreme poverty. In March the government ordered the destruction of at
least 3,000 residences in Lubango, Huila province to clear railway lines.
Demolitions have proceeded despite massive public criticism of the evictions by
civil society organizations, the Catholic Church, opposition parties, the parliament,
and a public apology by the Minister of Territorial Administration. In
September and October the government has demolished at least 1,500 houses
and annexes at the riverside in Lubango to make way for an urban beautification
project.
Key International Actors
Angola remains one of Africa’s largest oil producers and is China’s second most
important source of oil and most important commercial partner in Africa. This oil
wealth, and Angola’s regional military power, has greatly limited leverage of other
governments and international organizations pushing for good governance and
human rights. Trade partners remain reluctant to criticize the government, to protect
their economic interests. Since 2009 falling oil and diamond prices and the
global economic crisis have forced the government to invest more efforts to seek
support from international partners, including the International Monetary Fund
with which Angola signed a Stand-by-Arangement in November 2009.
In February Angola underwent the Universal Periodic Review at the United Nations
Human Rights Council. Angola adopted a number of important recommendations
from member states. However, it did not issue a standing invitation to all UN special rapporteurs, as requested by a number of member states as well as local and
international human rights organizations. In May Angola was re-elected as a
member of the Council and reiterated its pledge to sign or ratify all major international
human rights instruments. However, none of the pending signings or ratifications
has taken place despite a previous pledge in 2007.