Angola
The governments announcement that national elections will be held in
late 2006 is a positive step towards Angolas reconstruction after twentyseven
years of civil war. Serious human rights abuses, however, continue
to be committed. Deepening poverty combined with the governments
lack of transparency and commitment to human rights could undermine
Angolas hard-won peace enjoyed in all provinces, except Cabinda. The
most pressing human rights concerns are: high levels of government
corruption; the armed conflict in Cabinda; lack of respect for womens
human rights; the return and resettlement process; violations of freedoms
of expression, association, and assembly; and expulsions of foreign
migrant workers.
Corruption and Lack of Government Transparency in Public
Financial Matters
Mismanagement of public finances is a major problem that negatively
impacts on Angolans enjoyment of human rights. As previously documented
by Human Rights Watch, U.S. $4.2 billion disappeared from
government coffers between 1997 and 2002roughly equal to all of the
social and humanitarian spending in Angola during the same time. The
government has been forced to take steps to improve transparency, as
international donors were largely unwilling to provide new assistance
until the government became more accountable. In May 2004, it
released the complete report of the Oil Diagnostic study that sought to
determine how much of Angolas oil revenue is deposited into the central
bank and, for the first time, publicly disclosed a large bonus payment
of about U.S. $300 million from ChevronTexaco for the extension
of the Block 0 oil concession. By October 2004, the government reportedly
started to audit Sonangol, the state owned oil company. Despite
these steps, the government has not taken commensurate steps to
account for expenditures. As a result of the governments limited efforts,
institutions such as the International Monetary Fund maintains a cautious stance towards the government and refuses to engage in a formal
lending program until there is greater transparency in both revenues
and expenditures.
Armed Conflict in Cabinda
The armed conflict in Cabinda, an oil-rich enclave separated from the
rest of Angola by the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), is one
of the worlds longest but least reported conflicts. For more than forty
years, Cabindans have been subjected to low intensity guerilla warfare,
as factions of the Front for the Liberation of the Cabinda Enclave
(FLEC) have fought for independence. The conflict escalated in late
2002 when the government deployed some 30,000 soldiers to Cabinda,
which led to an increase in violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights abuses against the civilian population by the Angolan
Armed Forces (FAA) and to the virtual destruction of FLECs military
forces by mid-2003.
During 2004, the human rights situation improved due to a decrease in
military operations, but the FAA continues to commit violations against
the civilian population, including killing, arbitrary detention, torture,
sexual violence, and the denial of access to agricultural areas, rivers, and
hunting grounds through restrictions on civilians freedom of movement.
Human Rights Watch found little evidence of recent abuses
against civilians by FLEC factions, probably as the result of FLECs
weakened capacity. The police and judiciary in Cabinda have also violated
due process rights guaranteed in Angolas constitution.
Womens Human Rights
Angolan women and girls are subjected to structural discrimination by
law, practice, and custom. Angola has no specific laws for domestic violence
or marital rape. Its outdated Penal Code imposes only lenient
sanctions for crimes of a sexual nature. Sexual and domestic violence against women and girls is widespread but few cases are reported to the
police and/or prosecuted. Women are reluctant to report cases to the
police given their attitude towards domestic and sexual violence, and the
judiciary is virtually non-existent in the provinces. Unmarried rape victims
in rural areas are often expected to marry the perpetrator as otherwise
they might not find a husband. Customary laws, which govern the
majority of the Angolan population, are discriminatory on family law
issues, including property and inheritance rights.
Lack of respect for Angolan womens human rights is also evidenced in
the field of education, politics and the work place. Only 54 percent of
women and girls over fifteen years are literate compared to 82 percent
of men in the same age group. This gender disparity is compounded in
older age groups and in rural areas. Only sixteen percent of parliamentarians
and three of the twenty-nine ministers are female. Women are
also often paid less than men for the same work and are frequently fired
when they become pregnant.
Women and girls (as well as boys) associated with the National Union
for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) forces were also excluded
from the Angolan Demobilization and Reintegration Program until
mid-2004, when a pilot project for a limited number of female ex-combatants
was implemented.
Return and Resettlement
Since the end of the war in April 2002, four million internally displaced
persons (IDPs) and over 250,000 refugees have resettled in Angola. The
majority, however, were resettled in ways that did not fully comply with
Angolan, international human rights, and refugee law, as areas of return
lacked basic social services and had often not been de-mined. By
September 2004, about 190,000 refugees remained outside of Angola,
and according to the government, there are still 340,000 IDPs. The
governments commitment to voluntary return appeared questionable following its announcement in September 2004 that remaining IDP
centers will be closed by the end of the year. At years end, the return
and reintegration process remained highly problematic.
Freedom of Expression, Association, and Assembly
In the run-up to the scheduled 2006 elections, the promotion and
respect of the rights to freedom of expression, association, and assembly
are crucial. In Luanda and other coastal regions, these freedoms are
generally more respected than in the provinces. Journalists criticizing
the government have been physically abused, threatened, sued, and had
defamation campaigns brought against them. Journalists have also been
denied access to official information, including data on public expenditure.
Opposition activists in the provinces were the target of violence by
the police, army, the Civil Defense Organization, and supporters of the
government. Angolan police broke up some demonstrations violently
but allowed a peace march to go ahead in Cabinda in July 2004. The
state-owned media as well as national radio and television stations routinely
exclude critical voices from their reports and are tightly controlled
by the government. The latter also continue to prevent Rdio
Ecclsia, the Catholic broadcasting station, from extending its signal
outside of Luanda and place excessive administrative and bureaucratic
burdens on civil society, which interfere with their work.
Expulsions of Foreign Migrant Workers
Since December 2003, the Angolan government has expelled about
60,000 foreign migrants from Angola. The migrants are predominantly
from the DRC and work illegally in the diamond mines in the Lundas.
In April 2004, FAA soldiers conducted brutal body searches of
Congolese migrant workers being expelled. The searches included
degrading vaginal and anal searches, beatings, and the looting of their
goods. Some who refused searches were raped or arbitrarily detained.
The government temporarily suspended the expulsions following widespread criticism, but resumed them in August 2004. Expulsions of
Congolese continue in smaller numbers conducted by the police, without
the involvement of the FAA. Fewer human rights abuses were
reported, but Congolese have been arrested and expelled without being
able to collect their family members or personal belongings. Police also
reportedly raped five Congolese women in September 2004 before they
were expelled.
Key International Actors
Donor fatigue has resulted in cut-backs to humanitarian assistance in
2004. By October 2004, less than 60 percent of the original U. N.
appeal of U.S. $262 million for humanitarian assistance to Angola had
been donated, which negatively affected the resettlement and reintegration
of returnees and IDPs. The funding situation is likely to deteriorate
as donors may be more reluctant to finance development programs
given the high levels of government corruption.
The role of the U.N. is gradually being reduced and by the end of
2005, the government will take over the responsibility for coordinating
Angolas development programs from the U.N. Transitional
Coordination Unit (TCU) created in July 2004. The TCU is also
responsible for coordinating the U.N. agencies and its partners until the
end of 2005.