Angola
Angola held general elections on August 31, 2012, reaffirming the ruling Popular
Movement for the Liberation of Angola (Movimento Popular de Libertação de
Angola, MPLA) party’s position in power and for the first time awarding incumbent
José Eduardo dos Santos, in power for 33 years, the presidency through a
vote.
The MPLA, which has ruled Angola since 1975, secured the two-thirds majority in
parliament—175 out of 220 seats—sufficient to amend the constitution without
opposition support. Forty percent of eligible voters did not vote. The constitutional
court rejected fraud complaints from three opposition parties for lack of
evidence. The main opposition party, National Union for the Total Independence
of Angola (União Nacional para a Independência Total de Angola, UNITA), filed
an additional complaint at the constitutional court challenging the constitutionality
of acts by the national electoral commission (NCE) during the preparations
of the elections. At this writing, the complaint remained pending.
The elections were generally peaceful during the campaign and on polling day,
yet fell short of international and regional standards. The playing field for political
parties was uneven, with unequal access to state resources; the media was
overwhelmingly dominated by the MPLA and the elections oversight body sided
with the ruling party by not taking any action when the ruling party violated
electoral laws. As during the last national elections in 2008, independent
observation of the elections was seriously hampered by massive delays and
restrictions in the accreditation of domestic and international observers and
international journalists.
The elections took place in a more restricted environment for the media, free
expression and peaceful assembly than in 2008. Numerous incidents of violence
by apparent police in plain clothes against peaceful protesters and
activists in the months before the elections contributed to a climate of fear.
Elections
The CNE, despite a more balanced composition than in 2008, was not able or
willing to fulfill its role as an impartial oversight body. The CNE failed to address
major violations of electoral laws, including unequal access of parties to the
public media and ruling party abuse of state resources and facilities. Moreover,
the CNE hampered independent observation through the massively delayed,
restrictive, and selective accreditation of domestic and international observers.
The CNE also obstructed the accreditation of opposition officials at the polling
stations, leaving up to half of opposition representatives without credentials on
polling day.
The police did not act impartially during the election campaign, on several occasions
arbitrarily arresting opposition activists. Most were released without
charges. On the eve of the elections, police arbitrarily detained at least 19 opposition
activists and others, including polling station officials and opposition representatives,
as well as passersby during two protests in front of the CNE’s
headquarters in Luanda, the capital. While five were released without charges,
fourteen people including activists of the opposition coalition Broad
Convergence for Angola’s Salvation–Electoral Coalition ( Convêrgencia Ampla de
Salvação de Angola- Coligação Eleitoral, CASA-CE), polling station officials, and
passersby at a protest were jailed for three days and may face charges for
allegedly having organized an illegal campaign rally.
Freedom of Media
The media face a broad range of restrictions that hamper the right to free
expression and encourage self-censorship. The state media and a number of
private media owned by senior officials are ruling party mouthpieces in which
censorship and self-censorship are common.
In addition, the 2006 press law and the criminal code provide criminal penalties
for defamation and similar offenses, such as “abuse against press freedom.” At
this writing, the necessary by-laws and other complementary laws to the 2006
press law that would at least partially lift excessive administrative restrictions on private radio and television stations and allow community radio broadcasting
were yet to be passed in parliament.
Journalists have been regularly arrested, detained, harassed and questioned by
the authorities while trying to cover protests in Luanda and elsewhere, and have
been targeted with both threats and official offers to cooperate with the ruling
party. Some journalists who have criticized the government are facing criminal
charges, some pending for years. In October 2011, a court imposed a one-year
suspended sentence and US$100,000 in damages on William Tonet, the director
of the private weekly newspaper Folha 8. Tonet’s appeal was pending at this
writing. On March 12, police raided Folha 8’s office and confiscated the paper’s
equipment, presenting a search warrant on charges of alleged “outrage against
the president,” an offense under the 2010 crimes against the law, Crimes
Against the Security of the State.
Freedom of Assembly
The 2010 constitution guarantees the rights to freedom of assembly and peaceful
demonstration, and Angolan laws explicitly allow public demonstrations
without government authorization. However, since 2009, the government has
banned a number of anti-government demonstrations and the police have prevented
the majority of peaceful demonstrations from taking place.
Since early 2011, a youth movement unconnected to any political party and
inspired by the pro-democracy Arab Spring movements, has organized a number
of demonstrations in Luanda and in the city of Benguela calling for freedom of
expression, social justice, and the president’s resignation. Since May 2012,
another set of protests has gained momentum, staged by former soldiers from
all the former armed movements in Angola. The protesters were protesting
unpaid pensions and other benefits.
The authorities have responded to protests, even small-scale protests, with
excessive force, arbitrary arrests, unfair trials and intimidation of journalists and
other observers. Since February 2011, the ruling party has spread fear among
the population by alleging that the protests could result in civil war. Such messages have an intimidating effect on the majority of the Angolan population, as
a result of a decade-long civil war that ended 10 years ago.
The main perpetrators of violence during demonstrations have been groups of
armed individuals who act in complete impunity and appear to be security
agents in civilian clothes. In the months preceding the elections campaign, the
threats and attacks against youth protest leaders and opposition activists by
these plainclothes security agents increased, appeared systematic, and included
attacks against protesters in their private homes, abductions, and forced disappearances.
In one of the most violent crackdowns on peaceful protests in 2012, on March
10, a dozen plainclothes security agents armed with wooden and metal clubs,
knives, and pistols, attacked a crowd of 40 demonstrators in Luanda’s Cazenga
neighborhood, severely injuring 3 protest organizers. On the same day, plainclothes
security agents attacked two senior politicians of the opposition party
Democratic Bloc (Bloco Democrático) in Luanda’s city center.
In another particularly serious case, two organizers of a May 27 protest for former
presidential guards who were claiming unpaid salaries, Isaias Cassule and
Antonio Alves Kamulingue, were both abducted by unidentified assailants. Their
whereabouts remain unknown. The police have rejected the requests of their
families to investigate the abductions. In September, the local lawyer’s organization
Maos Livres filed a complaint with the attorney-general’s office. Human
Rights Watch is not aware of the attorney-general taking any action since then.
Protesters who became victims of violence, threats and abductions have since
2011 filed numerous complaints with the police against their aggressors. At this
writing, Human Rights Watch was not aware of any credible police investigation
into any of those cases.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders have for many years been targets for threats, intimidation,
co-option attempts, censorship, and alleged defamation in state-owned or
ruling party-controlled media.
Officials have also used defamation laws to deter human rights reporting in the
country. In January 2012, Manuel Helder Vieira Dias “Kopelipa,” minister of state
and long-term head of the president’s Military Office (recently renamed Security
Office), and six other generals and senior officials, all shareholders of the private
security company Teleservice and the diamond company Sociedade
Mineira do Cuango, filed a defamation lawsuit in Portugal against anti-corruption
campaigner and human rights activist Rafael Marques.
The lawsuit was in response to a complaint filed by Marques in November 2011
at the Angolan attorney-general’s office in Luanda against 17 Angolan officials,
including nine generals of the Angolan Armed Forces, alleging they were responsible
for over 100 documented serious human rights abuses, including killings,
rape and torture, in the diamond-rich Lunda Norte province. A Luanda court only
heard four victims of abuses who testified on cases documented by Marques;
the court case against the officials remained pending at this writing.
Rafael Marques has been regularly threatened for documenting cases of highlevel
corruption in Angola involving the presidency and a broad range of senior
officials. His anti-corruption blog www.makaangola.org has suffered a series of
apparently targeted “denial of service” attacks in 2011, which effectively undermined
public access to the website, even if temporarily.
Mass Expulsions of Migrants
In a positive step, the government has undertaken efforts to build new transit
prisons with more humane conditions for migrants. However, Human Rights
Watch is not aware of any credible and thorough investigation and prosecution
of those security forces officials who were responsible for serious human rights
violations against Congolese migrants during expulsions from Angola.
Expulsions from the diamond-rich Lunda Norte province have been frequent,
but also from other areas bordering the Democratic Republic of the Congo, such
as the enclave of Cabinda. Corroborated abuses include targeting women and
girls for rape, sexual coercion, beatings, deprivation of food and water and—in
some cases—sexual abuse in the presence of children and other inmates.
Public Finances and Economic and Social Rights
Longstanding concerns about mismanagement of Angola’s oil revenues as a key
impediment to the realization of economic and social rights resurfaced in 2012.
Despite high oil revenues, Angola’s development indicators remain low, with
high poverty levels and limited access to social services. The International
Monetary Fund (IMF) revealed in December 2011 that Angolan government
spending, between 2007 and 2010, of US$32 billion in oil revenues bypassed
budget processes, audits, and other forms of public accountability. This
amount, equivalent to 25 percent of the country’s GDP, was spent largely by the
state oil company, Sonangol.
Key International Actors
Angola remains one of Africa’s largest oil producers and China’s second most
important source of oil and most important commercial partner in Africa. This oil
wealth, soaring economic growth, and Angola’s military power in Africa have
greatly limited leverage of other governments and regional and international
organizations pushing for good governance and human rights.
In March, the IMF issued the final payment under a 2009 emergency loan to
Angola. Civil society groups had urged the IMF to withhold the financing until
the government adequately explained the $32 billion in off-budget spending
from oil revenues during the loan period. They argued that making the final payment
may give the impression that the IMF was not concerned about the
Angolan government’s lack of accountability to its citizens.
