Angola
More than one year after the September 2008 parliamentary elections—the first
elections held in Angola since 1992—Angolans in 2009 were unable to vote, as
planned, in a presidential election. The government postponed the vote pending
the completion of a constitutional review that is ongoing at this writing. The
review has been strongly influenced by the current president, José Eduardo dos
Santos, who has been in power for 30 years. The Constitutional Commission dominated
by the ruling Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA) followed
the president’s suggestions to propose a new parliament-based model for
electing the president, rather than holding separate elections. It remains unpredictable
when the new constitution might be adopted and what its implications
for upcoming elections might be.
The 2008 legislative elections produced a landslide victory for the MPLA. No independent
investigation into the numerous shortcomings of those elections has
taken place.
Cabinda
Although Angola has been at peace since 2002, and a peace agreement was
signed in Cabinda in 2006, an intermittent, armed separatist conflict has persisted
in the enclave since 1975. The Angolan Armed Forces’ (FAA) presence there
continues to be stronger than elsewhere in the country, and the military has
stepped up operations to wipe out remaining guerrilla forces in light of the forthcoming
(January 2010) Africa Cup of Nations soccer tournament, some matches
being slated to take place in Cabinda city.
Human rights scrutiny remains restricted in Cabinda, particularly in the interior.
The government has not responded to calls for an independent investigation into
allegations of torture and other serious human rights violations committed by the
FAA, and perpetrators of torture are not prosecuted.
Since September 2007 the military has arbitrarily arrested more than 40 rebel
suspects. Most of them claim to have been subjected to torture and mistreatment
designed to extort confessions during lengthy incommunicado custody. They were eventually brought to a civilian prison and charged with “crimes against the security
of the state” and other related crimes, but in several cases were denied due
process rights.
In September 2008, in a trial that was patently unfair, a military court sentenced
Fernando Lelo, a civilian and former Voice of America correspondent, to 12 years
in jail, and five FAA soldiers accused along with him to 13 years’ imprisonment,
for alleged involvement in rebel armed attacks in 2007. In August 2009 the
Supreme Military Court reviewed Lelo’s conviction and acquitted him. But the
court also re-sentenced three of his co-accused to 24 years’ and the other two to
20 years’ imprisonment, despite lack of evidence and serious torture allegations.
In four trials between June and November 2009, the Cabinda civil court sentenced
nine men accused of national security offenses to up to 20 years in jail, despite
serious allegations of torture in initial military custody, while it acquitted 11 for
lack of evidence.
Media Freedom
The media environment continues to be restricted, despite the emergence of a
number of new media outlets since 2008. More than three years after a new press
law was enacted in May 2006, the legislation required to implement crucial parts
of the law, which would improve the legal protection of freedom of expression
and access to information, has still not passed. Independent private radio stations
cannot broadcast nationwide, while the government’s licensing practices
have favored new radio and television stations linked with the MPLA. The public
media remain strongly biased in favor of the ruling party.
Defamation remains a criminal offense in the new press law. Other vague offenses,
such as “abuse of press freedom,” are open to official manipulation. Since
2007 government officials have increasingly pressed charges against private
media editors and journalists for libel and related offenses. This trend continued
in 2009. In July a court sentenced Eugénio Mateus, a journalist with the private
weekly O País, to three months in prison for libel and “abuse of press freedom,”
suspended for two years, following a complaint by the Angolan Armed Forces
chief of staff. The lawsuit was based on a 2007 article published in the weekly A
Capital that criticized the FAA for allegedly renting out state property. Also in July the editor of A Capital, Tandala Francisco, was informed of a libel lawsuit for an
opinion article critical of President Dos Santos. In October, Welwitchia “Tchizé”
dos Santos, the president’s daughter and ,until recently, a member of parliament,
pressed charges against the secretary-general of the Angolan Journalist Union
(SJA), Luísa Rogério, as well as Vítor Silva, director of the private weekly Novo
Jornal, and Ana Margoso, a journalist of the same weekly, for libel. Luísa Rogério
had criticized “Tchizé”‘s appointment to the state television channel TPA’s management
commission as incompatible with her role as an MP, while Novo Jornal
had reported about the controversy. At this writing the proceedings are ongoing.
Such litigation, in an increasingly difficult economic environment for the private
media, perpetuates a widespread culture of self-censorship that restricts the public’s
access to independent information.
Housing Rights and Forced Evictions
Angola’s laws do not give adequate protection against forced eviction, nor do
they enshrine the right to adequate housing. In 2009 the government stepped up
forced evictions and house demolitions in areas that it claims to be reserved for
public construction in the capital, Luanda, and increasingly also in provincial
towns. In July, in the largest-scale demolition operation ever in Luanda, armed
police and military destroyed 3,000 houses in the Iraque and Bagdad neighborhoods,
leaving an estimated 15,000 residents destitute of their homes and
belongings. Immediately following the forced evictions, security forces prevented
residents from demonstrating in front of the president’s palace, and in August the
provincial government repeatedly delayed permission to hold a public protest
demonstration organized by local human rights organizations.
The new government in 2008 announced its intention to allocate more resources
for public housing over the next five years and to construct one million houses in
the country. However, many of the people forcibly evicted in recent years continue
to await compensation and alternative housing.Mass Expulsion of Foreign Migrants
In 2009 the Angolan authorities expelled tens of thousands of allegedly irregular
migrants and their families—most of them from the Democratic Republic of Congo
(DRC). Mass expulsion operations were carried out in the eastern diamond-rich
provinces in the first half of 2009 and in the northern provinces of Cabinda and
Zaire in September. The United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) reported that Angolan military and police committed
serious abuses, including rape and pillage, during these mass expulsions.
Refugees and asylum seekers in Nzage, Lunda Norte, told Human Rights Watch
that military temporarily arrested them in door-to-door operations, pillaged their
houses, and raped several women during a mass expulsion operation in May. In
Cabinda, both migrants and Cabindans told Human Rights Watch that border
police beat and injured people whom they assumed to be irregular migrants and
transported and held them in inhumane and degrading conditions during mass
expulsions in September and October.
Mass expulsions of foreigners, particularly from the diamond exploration areas,
have taken place repeatedly since 2003 amid allegations of serious rights abuses
by Angola’s military and police. In October 2009 the DRC authorities ordered the
unprecedented reciprocal expulsion of Angolan irregular migrants from Bas-
Congo, as a result of which tens of thousands of Angolans were forced to return to
Angola.
Human Rights Defenders
The environment for human rights defenders remains restricted. Threats by government
officials in 2007 to ban several national and international civil society
organizations have not materialized, and the government’s long-announced
review of the legislation concerning civil society organizations has remained
pending. However, some of the most outspoken human rights organizations have
continued to struggle with unresolved lawsuits against banning orders and
threats. An appeal against the 2006 Cabinda provincial court ruling banning the
civic association Mpalabanda is still pending in the Supreme Court. Legal proceedings
to ban the Association Justice Peace and Democracy (AJPD), going back to a lawsuit initiated in 2003, have not seen any development since the Supreme
Court took charge of the case in May 2009.
In August the coordinator of the housing rights organization SOS Habitat, Luiz
Araújo, claimed to have been subjected to intense surveillance and an assault
attempt against his office premises and his life.
Key International Actors
Angola is one of Africa’s biggest oil producers, served as chair of the Organization
of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) in 2009, and is China’s second most
important source of oil and most important commercial partner in Africa. This oil
wealth, and Angola’s regional military power, have greatly limited leverage of
partners and international organizations pushing for good governance and human
rights. Commercial partners remain reluctant to criticize the government, to protect
their economic interests.
However, falling oil and diamond prices and the global economic crisis have hit
Angola’s fast-growing economy. In 2009 the government invested more efforts to
seek support from international partners, including from the International
Monetary Fund, to cope with budget shortfalls.
On his first visit to Angola, in March 2009 at the invitation of President Dos
Santos, Pope Benedict XVI publicly raised important human rights issues, such as
the urgent need for good governance and better distribution of the country’s
wealth to benefit the poor majority. The Vatican’s diplomatic efforts were not successful,
however, in unblocking the Roman Catholic Church-owned Rádio
Ecclésia’s long-awaited signal extension beyond Luanda.