Angola
Jos Eduardo Dos Santos, Angolas president for the past 34 years, secured
another five-year term in the August 2012 elections. Although the polls consolidated
the control of the ruling Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola
(MPLA), the authorities intensified repressive measures to restrict freedom of
expression, association, and assembly in 2013.
The government has pursued numerous criminal defamation lawsuits against
outspoken journalists and activists, while continuing to use police abuse, arbitrary
arrests, and intimidation to prevent peaceful anti-government protests,
strikes, and other gatherings from taking place. The government also resumed
mass forced evictions of informal settlements in 2013 and launched a new initiative
to remove street traders in the capital, Luanda. Both measures affect
Angolas poorest communities and have been conducted with brutality.
Freedom of Expression
Freedom of expression is severely restricted in Angola due to limited independent
media, self-censorship, and government repression. Only 3 percent of the
Angolan population has access to the Internet and social media, which are the
main channels for commenting on government policies.
The authorities use criminal defamation laws to silence and intimidate journalists
and bloggers. On July 5, bloggers Jos Gama and Lucas Pedro were charged
with abuse of press freedom and defamation for articles published on the
news website www.club-k.net, which is hosted outside of Angola. Brought by
Angolas attorney general and the criminal investigation police director, the
lawsuits are based on articles published between January and May that
accused the attorney general of corruption and criminal investigation police
officers of torture.
Between March and July, Rafael Marques, an investigative journalist and human
rights defender who won the Transparency International Integrity Award in
2013, was charged with defamation in 11 criminal lawsuits. The plaintiffs are
high-ranking generals, their business associates, and three private companies
that operate in the diamond-rich Lunda Norte province. Marques accused the plaintiffs of involvement in torture, rape, and killings in a book he published in
Portugal in 2011. Angolas Attorney Generals office shelved a complaint filed by
Marques against the generals and business associates in 2012, and has failed
to investigate the allegations. Marques has regularly experienced threats,
harassment, and pervasive surveillance, including apparently targeted hacker
attacks on his computer and blog.
On June 11, Domingos da Cruz, journalist of the private weekly Folha 8, was
charged with instigation of collective disobedience according to a 1978 law
on crimes against the security of the state. The law was revoked and replaced
by a new law in 2010. The charges were based on an opinion piece that da Cruz
published in 2009. A court acquitted him on September 9, arguing the law had
been revoked.
Right To Peaceful Assembly
Despite constitutional protection for freedom of assembly, since 2011 the
authorities have responded to peaceful anti-government protests organized by
youth groups and others in Luanda and elsewhere with excessive force, arbitrary
arrests, unfair trials, harassment, and intimidation of participants, journalists,
and observers. The state-owned media, controlled by the ruling party,
present the protests as a threat to peace. Protest organizers and participants
were also targeted by surveillance and harassment and occasionally by violent
attacks and abduction by security agents in 2013.
On December 22 in 2012, and March 30, May 27, and September 19 in 2013,
police used excessive force to disperse peaceful youth protests in Luanda, arbitrarily
detaining protesters and in several cases threatening journalists. Most
protesters were released the same day without charges. However, 22-year-old
Emiliano Catumbela, who was arrested on May 27, was charged with bodily
harm, and later charged with attempted assassination of a police commander.
He was denied access to his lawyers for several days and said he was beaten
and tortured in custody. On June 25, he was released without charges.
On September 12, police arrested 17-year-old Manuel Chivonde Nito Alves, a
youth activist and protest organizer, when he collected t-shirts produced for a
protest planned for September 19. He was charged with outrage against the
president based on the t-shirt slogan which called President Dos Santos a disgusting dictator. Outrage against the president is considered a crime against
the security of the state under Angolan law since 2010. He was conditionally
released on November 8 to await trial, after being jailed arbitrarily for almost
two months.
Three journalistsRafael Marques, Alexandre Neto, and Coque Mukutawere
arrested on September 20 and severely beaten and threatened in police custody
after they interviewed several just-released protesters on the street.
During those protests, youth groups demanded an official explanation on the
whereabouts of Isaas Cassule and Antnio Alves Kamulingue. Unknown men
abducted Cassule and Kamulingue after they organized a protest of former
presidential guards on May 27, 2012. In March 2013, police arrested Alberto
Santos, who witnessed Cassules abduction. Santos claimed that police tried to
pressure him to incriminate opposition activists as responsible for the abductions.
He was released on October 1 without charges. On November 9, an
Angolan website published details of a leaked confidential report from the
Ministry of the Interior that revealed that Kamulingue and Cassule were abducted,
tortured, and killed by police and intelligence officials soon after their
abduction.
In April, the authorities banned a teachers union strike in Lubango, Huila
province. Union leaders faced anonymous threats and intimidation. On April
30, police detained two union leaders and charged them with disobedience and
defamation of the authorities. A court acquitted them for lack of evidence on
May 2.
Arbitrary Detentions in the Enclave of Cabinda
An intermittent separatist insurgency persists in the oil-rich enclave of Cabinda
despite a 2006 peace agreement. The government has used security as a pretext
to crack down on peaceful dissent. Security forces continue to arbitrarily
arrest supporters of the separatist guerilla movement Front for the Liberation of
the Enclave of Cabinda (FLEC) and use torture in military custody to force
detainees to confess or incriminate others. Such violations of due process
rights, as well as harassment of journalists who document such cases and
threats against defense lawyers, have undermined the credibility of trials for
alleged national security crimes in Cabinda.
Between August 10 and September 12 2013, military and intelligence officials
arrested, mistreated, in several cases tortured, and jailed at least 20 men in
Cabinda, including an adviser to the deputy governor of Cabinda. They were
charged with armed rebellion and remain in pretrial detention.
Nine men of Congolese origin and Angolan, Belgian and French nationalities,
alleged to be former members of the defunct Armed Forces of Zaire (FAZ) were
arrested on November 22, 2012, beaten and tortured by military and border
guards while in incommunicado detention. In May, they were charged with
armed rebellion against the government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, illegal entry and stay in Angola. As of November 2012, the men
remained in pretrial detention.
Since January 2013, Aro Tempo, a lawyer and local representative of the
Angolan Bar, has received repeated death threats from intelligence officials
warning him to stop defending the 20 men held in Cabinda and the 9 alleged
FAZ members.
Police Brutality during Removals of Street Traders
In October 2012, the governor of Luanda ordered urgent measures to reduce
street trade in the capital. Since then, the authorities have scaled up efforts to
remove street vendors from the streets of Luanda.
During these operations, police and government inspectors have routinely mistreated
street vendors, including pregnant women and women with children, by
seizing their goods, extorting bribes, threatened them with imprisonment, and
in some cases arresting them. The authorities have also intimidated, harassed,
and arbitrarily arrested journalists, activists, and witnesses who seek to document
the brutality of the operations.
Forced Evictions
The majority of Angolas urban population lives in informal settlements without
legal protection. Angolas laws neither adequately protect people from forced
eviction nor enshrine the right to adequate housing. In 2013, the government
continued to carry out mass forced evictions in areas that it claimed were reserved for public use. The operations occurred without adequate prior notice
and security forces used excessive force.
In the first days of February, security forces forcibly evicted an estimated 5,000
residents from an informal settlement in the peripheral Cacuaco municipality in
Luanda. Following the evictions, security forces arbitrarily arrested dozens of
residents, at least 40 of whom were charged with illegal land occupation and
disobedience, and were convicted and given prison sentences.
On October 7, International Habitat Day, the authorities prevented a protest
against forced evictions in Luanda organized by SOS Habitat, a nongovernmental
organization.
Key International Actors
Angola is the second largest economy in the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), and an increasingly influential power both in the sub-region
and the continent due to its economic and military clout. Angolas oil wealth
and soaring economic growth continue to attract business interests from all
over the world, and few of its partners prioritize the governance and human
rights concerns in their cooperation agenda.
Angolas periodic report to the UN Human Rights Committee, the treaty monitoring
body for the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, was considered
in 2013. The Committee urged the government to end impunity and
investigate killings, torture, ill-treatment, and enforced disappearances by the
security forces, among other recommendations.
In early April, the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, Navi Pillay, visited
Angola at the invitation of the government. During her visit, Pillay raised a wide
array of human rights concerns, including restrictions on freedom of expression
and of the media, the excessive use of force to repress protests, mistreatment
and sexual violence against irregular migrants, forced evictions, and violations
of economic and social rights. Pillays visit was a rare spotlight on Angolas
human rights record, which is mostly ignored by Angolas regional and international
partners in favor of strengthening trade links.