ALBANIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Following a series of political crises, by mid-year Albania entered a period of
what appeared to be more stable and inclusive governance.Nonetheless, impunity
for police abuse, failures of various government branches to uphold the rule of law,
trafficking in human beings, and widespread violations of children’s rights continued
to be major concerns. The government’s desire to cast Albania as part of the
European mainstream made it unfortunately more reluctant to acknowledge and
address the country’s human rights problems.
In early 2002, political life was dominated by a dramatic split within the governing
Socialist Party (SP), triggered by chairman Fatos Nano’s campaign against
what he described as the party’s “moral crisis” of corruption, nepotism, and criminal
connections. Nano’s attacks focused on then-Prime Minister Ilir Meta and his
top ministers,who reciprocated by making similar allegations against Nano and his
faction. The scathing cross-accusations led to Meta’s resignation in January 2002.
The tensions within the SP, and the return of the opposition Democratic Party
(DP) to Parliament despite its continuing refusal to recognize the outcome of the
2001 parliamentary election, shaped a situation that led to Prosecutor General
Arben Rakipi’s impeachment. Meta’s parliamentary faction accused Rakipi of
abusing his powers to support Nano’s campaign, and the opposition, which had
long been demanding Rakipi’s resignation, joined votes to initiate his impeachment.
Acting on Parliament’s proposal—adopted at the end of a swift, one-day
debate, without even giving Rakipi a chance to respond—the President of the
Republic dismissed Rakipi and quickly appointed a new prosecutor general.Rakipi
took the case to the Constitutional Court, claiming violations of his rights to be
informed of the charges and to defend himself. The court ruled that the impeachment
had indeed run afoul of constitutional due process and remanded the case to
Parliament “for reconsideration.”
The ruling was met with strong criticism, including from the president,
parliamentary speaker (who resigned in protest), and opposition leaders, some of
whom went as far as calling for the Constitutional Court’s dissolution. Parliament
took no action whatsoever to comply with the ruling, dealing a severe blow to the ALBANIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Following a series of political crises, by mid-year Albania entered a period of
what appeared to be more stable and inclusive governance.Nonetheless, impunity
for police abuse, failures of various government branches to uphold the rule of law,
trafficking in human beings, and widespread violations of children’s rights continued
to be major concerns. The government’s desire to cast Albania as part of the
European mainstream made it unfortunately more reluctant to acknowledge and
address the country’s human rights problems.
In early 2002, political life was dominated by a dramatic split within the governing
Socialist Party (SP), triggered by chairman Fatos Nano’s campaign against
what he described as the party’s “moral crisis” of corruption, nepotism, and criminal
connections. Nano’s attacks focused on then-Prime Minister Ilir Meta and his
top ministers,who reciprocated by making similar allegations against Nano and his
faction. The scathing cross-accusations led to Meta’s resignation in January 2002.
The tensions within the SP, and the return of the opposition Democratic Party
(DP) to Parliament despite its continuing refusal to recognize the outcome of the
2001 parliamentary election, shaped a situation that led to Prosecutor General
Arben Rakipi’s impeachment. Meta’s parliamentary faction accused Rakipi of
abusing his powers to support Nano’s campaign, and the opposition, which had
long been demanding Rakipi’s resignation, joined votes to initiate his impeachment.
Acting on Parliament’s proposal—adopted at the end of a swift, one-day
debate, without even giving Rakipi a chance to respond—the President of the
Republic dismissed Rakipi and quickly appointed a new prosecutor general.Rakipi
took the case to the Constitutional Court, claiming violations of his rights to be
informed of the charges and to defend himself. The court ruled that the impeachment
had indeed run afoul of constitutional due process and remanded the case to
Parliament “for reconsideration.”
The ruling was met with strong criticism, including from the president,
parliamentary speaker (who resigned in protest), and opposition leaders, some of
whom went as far as calling for the Constitutional Court’s dissolution. Parliament
took no action whatsoever to comply with the ruling, dealing a severe blow to the Impunity also seemed to be the rule in the case of the former Elbasan police
chief, Edmond Koseni—a police commander with one of the worst human rights
records in Albania.After years of victim complaints, Koseni was fired and indicted
for torture in late 2001. By April 2002, however, the office of the Tirana prosecutor
had closed the case without filing charges and without notifying the victim or his
defense lawyer at the Albanian Human Rights Group (AHRG). The case was reopened
only after Koseni himself publicized the dropping of the charges (reportedly
hoping to rejoin the police), and the AHRG called on the new prosecutor
general to intervene. The case was then assigned to another prosecutor, who as of
late October had yet to conclude the investigation. Such cases of prosecutorial failure
indicated that the prosecution service required systematic monitoring and support.
Violations committed by Albania’s police force also marred its efforts to support
the global war on terrorism. On September 12, 2001, the police and Intelligence
Service detained Ilir Hajrullai and his pregnant sister, Aishe, whose Kuwaiti husband
was under investigation for alleged links to al-Qaeda. The two were kept
incommunicado for twenty-one days, during which they were subjected to threats,
psychological pressures, and polygraph tests carried out by a foreign intelligence
officer. On February 6, Ilir Hajrullai was re-arrested. Only five days later was he
brought before a judge, who then ordered his indefinite detention, without giving
him the opportunity to be defended by a lawyer of his choice.
Albania continued to be a major point of transit and origin in the regional web
of trafficking in human beings.Most victims were women and girls trafficked for
forced prostitution and children trafficked into forced labor.The Albanian government
did begin to take some encouraging steps to address the problem. In December
2001, Parliament adopted an anti-trafficking strategy and set up a special
anti-trafficking police unit.The government also agreed to refer all illegal migrants
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, which did a
first screening for trafficking victims. The prosecutor general also issued instructions
that trafficking victims should no longer be charged with the crimes of prostitution
and illegal border crossing. These steps caused the U.S. Department of
State to move Albania, in its 2002 report on trafficking in human beings, up to the
class of countries not yet in compliance with international standards but making
significant efforts to meet the minimum standards for combating trafficking.
Progress notwithstanding, there remained many obstacles to the implementation
of the government’s anti-trafficking strategy. Particularly problematic was the
government’s reluctance to recognize that Albania continued to be a major country
of origin. This attitude was mirrored by the police and courts, which often viewed
trafficking as an issue of illegal migration rather than a serious human rights violation.
Prosecution of traffickers continued to be the weakest link in the system: only
a small fraction of those arrested by the police were successfully prosecuted and
tried. Even when traffickers were found guilty, they received prison sentences that
were generally much lower than the new statutory minimum of seven years. Police
corruption and the absence of a witness protection system also hindered investigations.
According to the Department of State report, “10 per cent of foreign victims
trafficked through Albania reported that police were directly involved.”
In 2002, new evidence emerged about the plight of thousands of trafficked
Albanian children subjected to forced labor, prostitution, use in criminal activities,
adoptions, and possibly organ donations. Despite a few arrests, traffickers continued
to prey upon vulnerable children and babies who were kidnapped or bought
from their indigent parents and smuggled to Italy, Greece, and elsewhere in Western
Europe.Child labor and school dropout rates remained very high, especially in
rural areas. In northern Albania, where a blood feud tradition was allowed to reemerge
in the 1990s, hundreds of children continued to live locked up in their
homes, fearing for their lives.
Albania’s Roma community continued to suffer from pervasive discrimination,
miserable living conditions, and inadequate access to basic social services,which in
turn reinforced their social exclusion.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Human rights groups were generally able to operate freely, even though the
authorities were at times hostile or non-cooperative. The Albanian Human Rights
Group was active in documenting and reporting serious violations, including
police violence, interference with media freedoms, and abuses in the government’s
anti-terrorist campaign. The Group’s Complaint Center represented victims in
legal actions, despite threats by perpetrators and stonewalling by judicial authorities.
The Albanian Helsinki Committee directed significant resources at providing
commentary on draft legislation, such as a police code of ethics and regulations on
detention facilities. The committee also set up a network of correspondents in
seven townships. The Albanian ombudsman made good progress toward the consolidation
of that new institution, engaging various branches of government in
human rights dialogue and focusing his activities on promoting freedom of information,
privacy rights, and effective judicial remedies. However, a disturbing
November 2001 decision of the Constitutional Court appeared to severely restrict
his ability to initiate judicial review of legislation.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
Since acceding to all major human rights treaties between 1992 and 1994,Albania
had not submitted a single report, initial or periodic, on its compliance with
treaty obligations. Fourteen reports were long overdue as of June 2002.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) called on
Albania to implement its recommendations for electoral reform and offered assistance
to the parliamentary committee established for this purpose. It also pushed the authorities to draft a comprehensive strategy for judicial reform and step up
prosecution of traffickers and corrupt officials.However,human rights monitoring
and reporting by the mission in Albania continued to suffer from political constraints,
including pressures by senior Albanian government officials to downsize
the mission and redefine its mandate.
Council of Europe
The impact of the Council of Europe on Albania’s human rights situation was
generally disappointing. A delegation of the Committee for the Prevention of Torture
(CPT) visited Albania in October 2001 to look into the treatment of detainees
and follow up on its earlier recommendations regarding the Vlora psychiatric hospital.
As of this writing, the government of Albania had not authorized the CPT to
publish its findings, which made Albania one of only three countries that had not
authorized publication of any CPT reports. A joint program of the Council of
Europe and European Commission continued to support Albanian legal system
reforms; activities under this heading included workshops on freedom of expression
and privacy rights for judges and prosecutors. The impact of such trainings
appeared to be limited, however. The European Court of Human Rights had yet to
hear its first Albanian case.
European Union
Political instability and concerns over the election of the new president delayed
until October the opening of E.U.-Albania negotiations for a Stabilization and
Association (SA) Agreement, the early precursor to the E.U.’s accession process. In
April, the European Commission issued the first annual SA report, which laid out
the challenges Albania faced to meet the SA requirements. The report’s analysis of
serious human rights problems, such as police abuse, media freedom violations,
and the judiciary’s failure to uphold fundamental rights, was disappointingly
superficial. Following its most recent committee meeting with Albania in September,
the European Parliament called on the commission to condition the conclusion
of a SA agreement on an improved human rights record in law enforcement
and a genuine commitment to free media. Italy,Greece, and Germany were slow to
deliver on their pledges to support the operations of a new anti-trafficking center
in Vlora.
United States
The U.S. Department of State reports on human rights practices (March 2002)
and trafficking in persons (June 2002) gave a largely accurate picture of the Albanian
human rights situation. The U.S. administration failed, however, to exert pressure
on the Albanian authorities to address key human rights concerns in areas
such as police violence and press freedoms. The U.S. reportedly pressured the
Albanian government to delay ratification of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court.