Anatomy of a Backlash: Sexuality and the
“Cultural” War on Human Rights
by Scott Long
What is at issue in cultural terms is a conflict of interest between the whole
body, which is the Zimbabwean community, and part of that body represented
by individuals or groups of individuals. The whole body is more important than
any single dispensable part. When your finger starts festering and becomes a
danger to the body, you cut it off—the homosexuals are the festering finger.
STATEMENT IN A PARLIAMENTARY DEBATE IN ZIMBABWE, 19951
A tale of one city: Cairo, in 1994, hosted the U.N. World Conference
on Population and Development. The meeting marked a major advance
in recognizing women’s sexual autonomy. Its final declaration linked
sexuality, health, and human rights, affirming that reproductive health
“implies that people are able to have a satisfying and safe sex life”—in
effect, that control over the enjoyment of one’s own sexuality was essential
to the well-being of both women and men.
Much the same affirmation was made the next year, at the U.N. World
Conference on Women in Beijing. The impact on local activists was
considerable. The Cairo conference, for instance, gave strength to campaigns
against female genital mutilation—in Egypt and elsewhere. But
other, more sinister notes were struck. The Kenyan press, for instance,
paid leering attention to lesbian activists marching at the Beijing meeting,
leading then President Moi to declare: “The government rejects
the immoral culture of homosexuality and lesbianism raised during
the… women’s conference.”2
Switch to Cairo seven years later. Police seized dozens of men in raids
on cruising areas and a discotheque where men who have sex with men
were believed to gather. The press accused them of staging a “homosexual
wedding” service. Prosecutors charged them with “debauchery,” the language for sex between men in Egyptian law, and alleged they
belonged to a blasphemous, “Satanist” cult assaulting culture and religion.
Their sensational trial inaugurated a massive, national crackdown
on homosexual conduct, in which hundreds of men have been seized
and tortured—as well as a moral panic about sexual “deviance” escaping
state control. Local human rights groups that tried to intervene have
been smeared as agents of perversion.3
A spectre is stalking the arenas where human rights activists work. Its
avatars range from politicians in Zimbabwe to policymakers in the
United States. It might be called an alliance of fundamentalisms, though
not all its agents embrace the term. The forces in question define themselves
most often by what they claim to defend—and that shifts from
time to time and territory to territory: “culture,” “tradition,” “values,”
or “religion.” What they share is a common target: sexual rights and
sexual freedoms. These are most often represented by women’s reproductive
rights, the assault on which continues. The most vividly drawn
and violently reviled enemy typically is homosexuality. “Gay and lesbian
rights,” the dignity of people with different desires, the basic principle
of non-discrimination based on sexual orientation: all these are painted
as incompatible with fundamental values, even with humanity itself.
The target is chosen with passion, but also precision and care.
Movements for the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender people,
along with movements that assert sexual rights more generally, are
arguably the most vulnerable edge of the human rights movement. In
country after country they are easy to defame and discredit. But the
attack on them also opens space for attacking human rights principles
themselves—as not universal but “foreign,” as not protectors of diversity
but threats to sovereignty, and as carriers of cultural perversion.
In many countries, forces opposed to universal rights standards have
found their strongest stance is to declare themselves defenders of
“authentic” (though often invented) cultural tradition.4 “Culture talk” increasingly opposes itself to “rights talk.” Rights are treated as
invaders. Sexuality has turned into a key battleground in the conflict.
The “cultural” argument against sexual rights sees itself as striking the
exposed flank of rights protections. The onslaught also has devastating
effects on public health—as essential measures to prevent HIV/AIDS
are scrapped in the name of “morals,” and as vulnerable people are driven
into the shadows.
Fundamentalism not only pits “culture” against rights, it paints a
somber picture of society in which sexuality—and, implicitly, a range of
other human experiences—demands continual and restrictive state
scrutiny and control. Against this bleak and onerous vision, rights
activists must reassert basic principles of personal freedom; but they
must also affirm that human beings require the autonomous enjoyment
of their sexualities to lead satisfying, fulfilled, fully human lives.
The standard articulated in the preceding essay in this volume—that
rights groups must oppose efforts to legislate morality where the only
“offense” is in the mind of the person who feels someone else believes
or behaves “immorally”—applies not only when the motive is religious
but more generally, whether campaigns to restrict rights are carried out
in the name of faith, tradition, culture, or collective values. At the same
time, rights activists must see defending sexual rights not as a distraction
from their traditional preoccupations, but as a necessary and logical
development. Human rights are the possessions of embodied human
beings, whose dignity is bound up with the capacity to inhabit and experience
their bodies as their own. Everyone deserves the free enjoyment
of their sexuality. No one who does not hurt other people should be a
prisoner of others’ consciences.
Movements and Moral Panics
The last fifteen years have seen great growth worldwide in the visibility
of people gathering, organizing, and campaigning around sexuality and around sexual rights, sexual orientation, and gender identity. There
are many causes. One lies simply in the spread of democratic governments
in the 1980s and 1990s. As dictatorial regimes receded—in Latin
America, in Eastern Europe, in Africa—and civil society asserted itself,
activists for sexual rights and sexual orientation also claimed freedom to
join that self-assertion. Models for organizing thus proliferated as well.
Emerging groups across Africa that identify as lesbian, gay, or transgender
may look to, and learn from, the work courageous people have performed
in achieving equal protection in South Africa (where many
activists in turn got their education in the anti-apartheid movement) or
answering a dictator’s vilification in Zimbabwe.
Meanwhile, movements around women’s health issues—whether
female-genital mutilation or access to reproductive health services—
increasingly approached their work through a rights-based framework.
Women’s sexuality, when viewed through the prism of human rights,
could be seen as an empowering capacity, not a source of vulnerability
(as movements opposing violence against women had long tended to
portray it)—as something to be prized and defended.5
HIV/AIDS put sexuality squarely in the center of health policy debates;
and HIV/AIDS activists also pushed public health discourse to open up
to rights-based approaches. This soldered links between “sexual minorities”
and the languages of rights. Indeed, the struggle against the epidemic
has given many groups previously marginalized to the point of
invisibility a new importance in human rights discussions, including
drug users, prisoners, sex workers, and migrant workers.
The emergence of new or once-hidden identities in political life and in
human rights discourse has prompted part of the backlash. “Lesbian,”
“gay,” “sexual orientation,” “gender identity”—these concepts have
been employed by activists in diverse places to explain who they are and
why their constituencies share common ground. At they same time such
concepts are decried as inauthentic imports or cultural impositions. Of course, as has been widely noted, “homosexuality,” in the sense of a
social self built around the gender of one’s object of desire, is a construct
that originated in modern industrialized societies.6 It is only one
way of attaching cultural meanings to the phenomena, universally
found, of homosexual desire and conduct. Yet the charge (heard sometimes
from intellectuals as well as from conservative politicians) that
those who translate these terms into settings other than their origin are
the agents of an alien lexicography, pursuing their self-definition in foreign
terms—this claim does not hold up. It neglects the creativity and
capacity for bricolage with which humans reinterpret and adapt ideas to
their own environments and needs: a constant change and interchange
which is one of the basic workings of culture.
And in fact ideas as much as identities are ultimately at stake in the
backlash. Advocacy around the rights of so-called “sexual minorities,”
however they define themselves, neither takes place in a vacuum nor is
reducible to a minority concern. This advocacy asserts a broader principle:
that people should control their own sexualities; that, in the context
of respect for others’ dignity and consent, everyone has the right (as the
World Health Organization puts it) to “pursue a satisfying, safe, and
pleasurable sex life”; and that this pursuit is not inimical to cultural and
social values, but supports people’s healthy integration into culture and
society.7 It is an assertion which lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
activists make together with activists for women’s rights, campaigners
against censorship, and other human rights defenders. The claim to sexual
freedom is the deepest threat. The extension of human rights
beyond consciences to bodies is the unbearable presumption.
Sexuality is something on which every society—probably every person—
imposes a portentous array of meanings. It may be the most highly
symbolized of human experiences. Fundamentalists fear sexuality
emerging from the cocoon of significance in which they feel traditions
once contained it. Yet this apprehension of escape itself becomes a metaphor for other, larger anxieties about cultural, social, or political
change. Sexuality stops being an experience and becomes an emblem.
“Gay and lesbian rights” and the promise of equality serve, to their fundamentalist
opponents, as symbol rather than tangible threat. Those
opponents rarely bother to examine the substance of what such equality
might entail. It is the monstrous apparition of men’s and (particularly)
women’s sexualities breaking the frame of traditional, authoritarian control
that terrifies them, and leads them to call on the law to repress the
genie back into the bottle. They are right that the liberatory impulse of
human rights will not be restrained from defending freedoms in people’s
intimate and physical, as well as political, lives. They are at their
most dangerous in acting on the insight. Using sexuality as metaphor
for broader processes of change, they extend their attack to the logic
and essence of human rights themselves.
One feature of fundamentalist discourses is the way their different terms
collapse into one another. “Culture” loses its variety and becomes indistinguishable
from “morality,” and “morality” from “religion,” which in
turn is defined by and often defines “tradition.” Collectively they can
colonize “nationhood” until it becomes not a political entity but a
rhetorical weapon. All these words will run through the examples of the
backlash. In all cases, however, fundamentalisms strip these terms of
ambiguity or negotiability. They become, in the fundamentalist vision,
not ideas to be debated or environments in which to live, but mandates
enforced by law.
Sometimes the backlash around sexuality has been overtly nationalistic.
When the film Fire, depicting a love affair between two women, was
released in India in 1998, it was met by riots and was hauled before the
national Censor Board. Both violence and silencing were instigated by
the right-wing government and its allies. One leader of the Hindu
nationalist Shiv Sena party said lesbianism “is not in our national culture,”
and wondered why the women had been given Hindu instead of Muslim names.8 Similar arguments have been used to support the arrest
and harassment of HIV/AIDS outreach workers.9 In defending India’s
law penalizing homosexual sex—a relic imported and imposed by
British colonialism—the government has claimed it was needed to preserve
true Indian mores and identity.
Sometimes the attacks show a mingling of religion, culture, and nationalism:
as when Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe, who has devoted a decade
to steady homophobic attacks, wondered how “immoral and repulsive
organizations, like those of homosexuals who offend both against the
law of nature and the law of morals of religious beliefs espoused by our
society, should have any advocates.”10 Usually, however, they are meant
to send two ominous messages: that freedom is a gift, not a given; and
that if one group’s freedoms can be stripped away, so can others’. Thus
Mugabe has said:
Freedom… is not a selfish, one-way street. The greater
the freedom one enjoys, the greater the responsibility
one owes the community which bestows that freedom.
… If we accept homosexuality as a right, as is being
argued by the association of sodomists and sexual perverts,
what moral fibre shall our society ever have to
deny organized drug addicts… the rights they might
claim and allege they possess under the rubric of individual
freedom and human rights, including the freedom
of the press?11
Mugabe meant it. His threats to lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
people were a prelude to crackdowns on farm workers, farmers, trade
unions, opposition parties. The press freedoms whose exclusivity he
claimed to prize went out the window early in the process.
Political leaders in many African countries have imitated Mugabe’s rhetoric.
Yet by contrast, in neighboring Namibia, where President Sam Nujoma indulged in similar attacks for years, human rights activists
quickly saw the assaults as aimed at all their work and at the core values
of human rights themselves. One said, “The government is making
attacks on homosexuality a central part of its outlook. But it will not
end with homosexuality—it is to create a culture of intolerance, a culture
that will grow. Either we change this culture and become more tolerant,
or it will get worse.”12
Disentangling intolerance from “culture” led to danger. Another activist
whose organization condemned Nujoma’s statements related how he
and his co-workers “have been attacked as traitors, as spies, and as being
un-African. And we have been attacked for promoting homosexuality.
… We are not promoting homosexuality, we are promoting human
rights.”13 It is to their credit that human rights organizations fought
back, and affirmed both that homosexuality belonged to, and that
human rights principles were integral to, Namibia’s diverse culture.
In Egypt, the crackdown on homosexual conduct was used to isolate
and defame the country’s embattled human rights organizations. Few
groups intervened: those who did faced condemnation. The message
was clear: that human rights had become the portal to perversion.
“They’re defending Egyptian perverts under the pretext of ‘human
rights!” one tabloid headline raged.14 A columnist asked of “sexual perverts,”
“What moral debasement has this group arrived at? What kind
of people are they, without religion, moral values, or honor… claiming
human rights? What human? What rights?”15
Similarly, in Jamaica in 2004, attacks on a Human Rights Watch report
linking endemic homophobic violence to the spread of HIV/AIDS
turned into attacks on human rights groups in general. A writer charged
that “homosexual surrogates attached” to Human Rights Watch have
“ripped” into Jamaica for what it imagines is wide scale abuse here
against male homosexuals. Homosexuals have always found that their
viral-like attachment to key groups in civil society and other bodies where social activism is a calling card has always assisted them as a
launching pad from which they can subtly foist their sexuality on a
nation of people totally turned off from and sickened by the abnormal
and filthy act of one man having sex with another man.”16
Others threatened mainstream Jamaican human rights activists. The
Jamaica Police Federation, representing most of the country’s police
officers, ominously lashed out at Human Rights Watch’s “local accomplices”
for “deliberately maligning the police and the state.” Declaring
that “The government and the police cannot be held responsible for
either the careless liaisons by homosexuals or the cultural responses of
the population towards gays,” it called on the Minister of Justice to
“slap on sedition charges where necessary to both foreign and local
agents of provocation.”17
Religious groups have played a significant role in the backlash—and a
significant role in opposing it. Within many religious traditions, powerful
voices have spoken up to defend sexual rights, along with human
rights principles generally. Still, evangelical Protestant churches in
Africa (many of them North American in origin) have often preached
homophobia. The Catholic Church in many places has lent official
weight to campaigns against equality for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender people, as well as against reproductive rights.18 Yet the role
of churches or mosques in whipping up fears around sexuality should
not be overstated. In most places the backlash’s leadership remains lay.
In many countries the roles of non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
that identify themselves as defending religious values, without being
tied to a particular institution or denomination, have been more powerful,
and their rhetoric more ferocious, than most religious figures.
This is nowhere more true than in the United States. Controversies
over lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people’s claim to equality
have burgeoned since 2003. That year, the Supreme Court struck down
the country’s remaining “sodomy laws.” Social conservatives saw this as a blow to their own authority, and as the loss of one of the basic ways in
which governments declared their “disapproval” of homosexuality—a
disapproval manifested in a jail cell. Later that year, courts in the state
of Massachusetts ordered that the full rights of marriage be extended to
same-sex partners. At least in one jurisdiction, it seemed, equality was at
hand.19
Individual states have wide latitude in the U.S. to set their own marriage
policies; however, the federal government has intervened in the
name of overarching principles—most notably when the Supreme
Court struck down laws against interracial marriages as fundamentally
discriminatory. Social conservatives therefore took a two-pronged strategy.
They have pressed, with great success, for states to amend their
own constitutions to ban equality in civil marriage. Eleven such initiatives
came on the ballot in 2004; eleven states passed them, often by
enormous margins. Some of these amendments ruled out legal recognition
of same-sex relationships in any form, such as civil unions. Their
sweeping wording could conceivably bar companies from granting
domestic-partner rights to same-sex employees, or actively prohibit a
lesbian from visiting her partner in the hospital. The zero-sum meanness
of such provisions reveals the underlying mindset, that certain relationships
can be “protected” only by taking a legal bulldozer to others.
The motive is not “defending marriage,” but fear: fear of difference, of
the other. The only union they defend is the shotgun coupling imposed
between government and religious compulsion.
The second strategy was to go national. President Bush has urged passage
of a amendment to the U.S. constitution which would bar equality
in civil marriage. It would be the first constitutional change in American
history not to affirm a basic right but to ban a specific group from
enjoying it. Legislative proposals to achieve the same effect nationwide
are multiplying as well.
In the United States as in other countries, panics over sexual nonconformity
have often been connected to political repression. Consider
how, in South Africa, the legal prohibition on interracial sex became a
foundation of the apartheid regime; consider too how, during the
McCarthyite period in the United States in the 1950s, the search for
invisible and insidious communists was paralleled by campaigns to root
down and crack down on homosexuals, in local communities and in
government itself. The strong desire of some social conservatives to
expand state control over personal life, while eviscerating the state’s secular
character, was suggested by the influential conservative leader Bob
Jones in greeting the 2004 election returns. Warning that “liberals…
despise your Christ,” he urged the victorious president to “exercise
forceful leadership… in passing legislation that is defined by biblical
norm regarding the family, sexuality, sanctity of life, religious freedom,
freedom of speech, and”—it is not clear how compatible this is with the
rest of the list—“limited government.”20
But the blend of social conservatism and sexual fear in U.S. policy is up
for export, where its effects are still more dangerous. Under the influence
of religious and conservative NGOs, the United States has—both
domestically and in its capacity as the world’s largest donor to
HIV/AIDS programs—heavily promoted HIV prevention programs
that define sexual abstinence and marital fidelity as the sole solutions.
The “United States Leadership against HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, and
Malaria Act”—a foreign aid program passed in 2003, and commonly
known as President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR)—
mandates that one-third of prevention spending go to “abstinence until
marriage” programs. In the United States, such federally-funded programs
have censored scientific information about the efficacy of condoms,
and called marriage the only reliable strategy for preventing sexual
transmission of HIV.21 In teaching that heterosexual marriage is the
sole safe environment for sex, these programs implicitly but intrinsically
condemn lesbians’ and gay men’s sex lives—since, in most countries, they cannot marry. The programs also cut off people at risk of HIV
from information that could save their lives.
The result, in countries that are candidates for PEPFAR funding, has
been a rash of statements endorsing abstinence and condemning condoms.
In May 2004, for instance, President Yoweri Museveni of
Uganda, who had long supported condoms as part of a prevention strategy,
changed his position and declared that they should only be provided
to sex workers.22 In March 2004, Zambia reportedly banned distributing
condoms in schools, claiming they spread promiscuity among
youth.23
One characteristic of many of these assaults on sexuality is that fundamentalist
forces interpret opposition—attempts to keep their proposals
from being enacted into policy—as an attempt to silence them altogether,
or to keep them from urging their principles upon free individuals.
Thus promoting an open public sphere where religious institutions and
others with different views can speak is treated virtually as an initiative
to suppress the church. One can—and human rights activists do—
oppose those who want gay sex criminalized, while respecting the opponents’
consciences and safeguarding their political freedoms. Yet in a
strange inversion, those who vociferously object to applying human
rights principles sometimes claim that any debate itself breaches their
basic rights.
They do this by claiming that individuals’ rights violate the “rights” of
the “community” to enforce morality—and silence. This appropriation
of rights language should not be curtailed—the words are available to
all—but it deserves to be questioned. When an Australian evangelical
group claims that anti-discrimination legislation would infringe “the
rights of heterosexuals,”24 it may seem marginal. The Catholic Bishops
Conference of the Philippines carried more authority, though, when
answering Human Rights Watch’s criticism of government policies—
heavily church-supported—that impeded condom use.25 A spokesman said, “If we speak the language of rights, let it be about authentic
human rights—rights which foster human dignity. … The right to religious
belief is a paramount human right. Will Human Rights Watch
deny that?”26
The right to religious belief does not mean that belief can tyrannize
over others’ bodies—or deny others what they need to save their health
and lives. The exercise of individual conscience is not infringed if governments
give men and women information and condoms that will help
them survive. Human rights groups should and typically do stand up
fiercely for religious freedom and the rights of believers. They should
also stand up against religious groups seeking to dilute or destroy rights
protections on the sole ground that they safeguard actions which faith
or teaching may condemn. This holds true whether the freedoms at
stake are those of religious dissenters, atheists, women, or men, or
whether they involve consensual sexual behavior. Human rights principles
should not be twisted into a tool to suppress expression, conscience,
or conduct, when the only harm is in the mind of someone who
takes moral umbrage at another’s behavior or belief.
Finally, the public health consequences of the policies in question
expose how untenable are fundamentalist forces’ claims to be defending
“rights” or to be standing up for “communities.” When HIV/AIDS outreach
workers are assaulted, in the name of national tradition; when
people are force-fed unscientific propaganda instead of life-saving facts,
in the name of safeguarding the family; when they are refused condoms,
in the name of moral values: it is communities who suffer, as HIV infection
spreads. More than ideology is at stake in the backlash over sexuality.
Societies are devastated. People die.
In the International Sphere
Far from conferences and Cairo, another important thing happened in
1994. The U.N. Human Rights Committee, in its landmark decision in Toonen v. Australia, held that so-called “sodomy laws”—laws criminalizing
consensual homosexual conduct—violated standards of privacy and
equality, and that “sexual orientation” was a status protected against discrimination
by the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(ICCPR).
This has been the single most important U.N. move to affirm equality
based on sexual orientation. It has supported the grassroots struggles of
countless activists. Yet since that year, the United Nations has increasingly
become a battlefield in wars over “culture” and sexuality.
U.N. conferences such as the Beijing World Conference on Women;
General Assembly Special Sessions such as the 2001 meeting on
HIV/AIDS or the 2002 gathering on children; and increasingly the
annual meetings of the U.N. Commission on Human Rights have been
sidetracked or taken over by fierce contests over questions of sexuality.
In the process, an odd alliance has emerged. It brings together the
countries of the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC); the
Holy See (which, though not recognized as a state, occupies observer
status at the United Nations); and a group of mostly U.S.-based NGOs,
some identifying as Catholic, some rooted in evangelical Protestantism
or Mormonism, all with domestic records of combating reproductive
rights and sexual rights. Under the Bush administration, the latter have
had sometimes tacit and sometimes overt backing from their government.
27
The alliance merits some comment. Its members work together closely,
visibly planning strategy in tandem at some sessions. Yet their opportunistic
transcendence of the conflicting confessional, political, and
social traditions they represent boldly defies any contention that “cultures”
are or should be self-contained, insulated, or incapable of negotiating
across differences. They model the diversity they deny. At various
venues the members of the alliance have all claimed to be defending the
“traditional family,” as if unaware of the different entities the term might describe in Arizona and Qatar. The irony of finding present and
former officials, including diplomats, from powerful OIC countries
serving on advisory boards to U.S. NGOs identified with the “Christian
right” is profound. To add to the irony, many of the U.S. NGOs now
devoting time and resources to U.N. advocacy oppose the U.N. and all
international human rights mechanisms. One highly prominent U.S.
advocate said in 2000, “Should the U.S. get out of the U.N.? That’s a
question I always steer clear of, principally because to participate in the
U.N. in the way that I do, you must at least have a veneer of supporting
the U.N.”28
The goals that unite them are simple to sum up: deleting sexuality.
They fight to roll back the affirmations of reproductive and sexual
rights in the Cairo and Beijing Platforms for Action; to restrict or eliminate
mentions of family planning, sexuality education, reproductive
rights, and related issues; and to keep language on sexuality, sexual
rights, or sexual orientation out of any U.N. documents, ever.
“Sexual orientation” has been a key issue for these opponents, both in
its own right and as a wedge to attract the votes of other countries from
the developing world. One writer comments that religious and socially
conservative groups in the U.S. are “turning to the developing world as
an innocent, unspoiled frontier, which might possibly be rescued from a
morally bankrupt West.”29 At the Beijing conference in 1995, a flyer
claiming to be from unnamed, conservative women from “Developed
Countries” offered to “apologize to people from the less developed
world … [for the West’s] direct attack on the values, cultures, traditions
and religious beliefs of the vast majority of the world’s peoples.”30 At
Beijing +5 (the General Assembly session five years after the World
Conference on Women) a similar anonymous flyer courted developing
states, blaming conference delays on perversions: “If the West would
stop pushing homosexual and abortion ‘rights’ on unwilling countries,
the document would be done. Don’t blame the developing countries with the courage to defend their values and their right to self-government!”
31
More is involved than flyers. The rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender people simply appear an easy sacrifice in the eyes of this
alliance. The 2001 U.N. Special Session on HIV/AIDS saw a furious
(and ultimately successful) campaign to rid the final document of specific
references to vulnerable groups, including men who have sex with
men, drug users, and sex workers. OIC states fought to prevent the
International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission from
addressing a panel on human rights—an issue which finally came to a
General Assembly vote (where the OIC narrowly lost).
Debates around sexual orientation reached new intensity in 2003 and
2004, at the annual meetings of the U.N. Commission on Human
Rights. In 2003, Brazil introduced a resolution on “Human Rights and
Sexual Orientation,” which expressed “deep concern” at “violations of
human rights all over the world against persons on the grounds of their
sexual orientation.” The resolution came with little warning; few NGOs
had a chance to mobilize fully to support it that year. It met with frenzied
opposition, though, from some Commission members and from
conservative NGOs, above all in the United States. Pakistan, in an aidememoire
on behalf of the OIC, stated:
The resolution has been built on an “assumption” “for
the purposes of the resolution” that the concept [of sexual
orientation] encompasses various manifestations of
sexual behaviour. The list could always be expanded to
include heinous activities like pedophilia and other
errant behaviour. … The draft resolution directly contradicts
the tenets of Islam and other religions. Its adoption
would be considered as a direct insult to the 1.2 billion
Muslims around the world.32
This language imitated that of Christian-based NGOs in the United
States, who had quickly circulated misinformation about the key term’s
meaning—suggesting that any of the sexual disorders listed in the
American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
(DSM) could qualify as a “sexual orientation.” Thus, they claimed, “22
different ‘sexual orientations’” could be protected by the resolution,
including bestiality or pedophilia. They warned the resolution would
offer “special human rights (rather than equal human rights),” calling it
“infamous,” “dangerous,” and, worst of all, likely to “pave the way for
the legalization of same-sex marriage across the world.”33
As the lobbyists well knew, “sexual orientation”—as understood in ordinary
speech as well as in repeated references in official U.N. documents—
describes whether a person’s sexual and emotional desires are
directed primarily to people of the same or opposite sex, or to both. It
has nothing to do with the conditions listed in the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual.34 Yet the distortion of language and medical fact, the
conflation of human rights principles with “protecting bestiality,” had
their effect. In a chaotic session, the resolution narrowly lost on a procedural
question—by two votes—but was postponed until the following
year. 2004 saw unprecedented global mobilization of lesbian, gay, bisexual,
and transgender activists, and a sweeping coalition of other human
rights groups, to support the measure. However, OIC countries applied
equally unprecedented pressure, threatening to quash possible trade
relations with Brazil. Sexuality at the United Nations had finally graduated
to the kind of issue that economic ties could hang on. Brazil postponed
the resolution again. Its future fate is unknown.
In a further sign of how the attacks on sexuality widen into attacks on
general rights standards, in 2004 Egypt also spearheaded a battle by the
OIC to remove “sexual orientation” from a crucial Commission resolution
on extrajudicial executions. Repeatedly in the past, the same opponents
had sought to undermine the work of the U.N. Special
Rapporteur on extrajudicial killings, whose reports drew attention to state-condoned or state-sponsored murders in many of their countries.
They had used her work on murders of “sexual minorities” to discredit
her work on honor killings of women, implying the second led to the
first. And they used both to try to dismantle her mandate. This year,
they made it clear they would be happy to kill the resolution—one basic
to the United Nations’ human rights mechanisms—if it condemned
killings of lesbians and gay men.
Although the move was defeated, the story here returns again to Cairo:
for it was evident that Egypt was driven in part by the desire to keep
unwanted U.N. attention away from its violent domestic crackdown on
gay men. The local backlash and the international one meet.
Cultures and Their Faces
On the night of September 29, 2004, FannyAnn Eddy, founder of the
Sierra Leone Lesbian and Gay Organization, was brutally murdered in
the group’s offices in Freetown. Although the motives for her killing
remain unclear, many suspect she was targeted for her visibility as a lesbian
and an activist. Human Rights Watch worked closely with her.
This essay is dedicated to her memory.
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people have learned one lesson
over the last twenty years: violence follows visibility. People can be
killed for their courage in standing up, in speaking out about themselves.
Yet FannyAnn’s life and death, on a continent where homosexuality
is again and again called “un-African,” call attention to another
truth. Cultures are made up of faces. They are not monoliths; they are
composed of diverse individuals, each contributing to and minutely
changing what the culture means and does.
When a culture is reinvented for ideological purposes as a faceless,
seamless whole—incapable of dissent from within, so that any dissenter
automatically becomes an outsider; incapable of changing, so that growth seems like destruction—it has ceased to be an environment in
which people can live and interpret their lives. It has become a rhetorical
weapon to be wielded against individuals, a tool of repression. And
any phenomenon that embraces innumerable Africans like FannyAnn
can be called good or bad, right or wrong; but it cannot be called “un-
African.”
The forces described here draw their strength from fear. They share an
anxiety: that norms governing personal life, which family or community
or religion used to inculcate, are losing strength. They share an ambition:
to enlist the state’s authority to enforce those norms. If there is a
useful definition of “fundamentalism,” perhaps it is this drive to seize
the state, turn its spotlight on private life, and make it the agent of a
newly-codified “tradition.” They fail to understand—or, perhaps, they
understand too well—that a norm changes when it becomes a law: that,
once backed by all the power of a modern state, it loses the flexibility
and negotiability that are the essence of a tradition. It can only punish
and repress, and it will find new victims.
The role of human rights principles, unquestionably, is to mark out
spaces of personal freedom, to affirm areas where individual privacy and
dignity and autonomy should prevail against state or community regulation.
But human rights principles also defend communities. They guard
them against measures which, by isolating or marginalizing people,
threaten the whole body politic with epidemic disease. They protect
minority and subcultural communities against change or uniformity
forced on them by the state. They ensure diversity both among communities
and cultures, and within them.
A dialogue between “rights talk” and “culture talk” is overdue—one
which explores not only the real meaning of culture, but the actual
workings of rights. Rights work does not promise utopia, only an endless
process of protecting basic human values against constantly renewing
threats. But it also does not promise the dissolution of cultures or the annihilation of traditions. It helps to ensure that they remain
responsive to the human beings they contain. To conserve is to care for,
not to preserve unchanged. The dialogue will happen only if true conservatives,
who respect the past because they grapple with its complexities,
dismiss the false ideologies of cultural uniformity that exploit sexuality
with no other real goal than to reject, exclude, and destroy.
Scott Long directs the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Rights
Program at Human Rights Watch. Jonathan Cohen, researcher with the
HIV/AIDS and Human Rights Program, assisted in conceptualizing and
researching this essay.
1 Quoted in Human Rights Watch and the International Gay and Lesbian Human
Rights Commission, More than a Name: State-Sponsored Homophobia and its
Consequences in Southern Africa, 2003, p. 16.
2 “Moi says no to ‘unAfrican sins,’” The Nation (Kenya), September 24, 1995.
3 See Human Rights Watch, In a Time of Torture: The Assault on Justice in Egypt’s
Crackdown on Homosexual Conduct, 2004.
4 See Mahmood Mamdani, ed., Beyond Rights Talk and Culture Talk: Comparative
esays on the Politics of Rights and Culture (Palgrave, 2000); see also, for a study of how
“traditions” are manufactured to suit political and social agendas, E. B. Hobsbawn
and Terence Ranger, eds., The Invention of Tradition (Cambridge, 1992).
5 See, for instance, Lynn P. Freedman, “Reflections on Emerging Frameworks of
Health and Human Rights”; Rebecca Cook, “Gender, Health, and Human Rights”;
and Alice M. Miller, AnnJanette Rosga, and Meg Satterthwaite, “Health, Human
Rights, and Lesbian Existence,” all anthologized in Jonathan M. Mann, Sofia
Gruskin, Michael A. Grodin, and George J. Annas, Health and Human Rights: A
Reader (New York: Routledge, 1999).
6 Or, more precisely: the option of organizing a lifelong social identity around the
experience of homosexual desire has historically been available only in certain cultural
and class settings, modern industrial capitalism—with its loosening of the economic
function of traditional family networks—being one. (The word “homosexual”
itself, a hybrid of Greek and Latin roots, was only coined in 1869.) In other settings
homosexual desire has been interpreted in other ways: as something to be
consummated only at certain stages in the life-course, for instance. See David
Halperin, One Hundred Years of Homosexuality and Other Essays on Greek Love
(Routledge, 1990) for a fuller discussion. A number of recent movements have
adopted, or adapted, more “traditional” identities as axes for organizing around sexual
difference. In south Asia, for instance, older cultural identities for people who
might, in a Western context, be called “transgender,” such as hijra or meti, as well
as identities such as koti referring to men who have sex with men, carry a resonance
not at all reducible to Western equivalents. Alternatively, in Zimbabwe, men within
the group Gays and Lesbians of Zimbabwe have carved out their own space and
sub-sub-culture, calling themselves chengetanai (a Shona word meaning “taking care
of each other”) or “liberated queens,” and identifying themselves much more by
their dissidence from gender norms than by their sexual behavior.
7 See World Health Organization, “Technical Consultation on Sexual Health:
Working Definitions,” at http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/
gender/sexual_health.html, retrieved November 22, 2004.
8 Bal Thackeray, quoted in “Protest in front of Dilip Kumar’s house justified, says
Thackeray,” Times of India, December 14, 1998; “Hindu leader says lesbian film
should be about Moslem family,” Agence France-Presse, December 14, 1998. For a
full account of the Fire controversy, see a report by the Campaign for Lesbian
Rights, India (CALERI), Emergency Jaari Hai/Lesbian Emergence (New Delhi, 1999).
9 See Human Rights Watch, Epidemic of Abuse: Police Harassment of HIV/AIDS
Outreach Workers in India, 2002.
10 Quoted in Human Rights Watch and the International Gay and Lesbian
Human Rights Commission, More than a Name: State-Sponsored Homophobia and its
Consequences in Southern Africa, 2003, pp. 13-14.
11 Ibid..
12 Ibid., p. 31, quoting Norman Tjombe, Legal Action Centre, Namibia.
13 Ibid., quoting Phil ya Nangoloh, National Society for Human Rights, Namibia.
14 “Special report: How could anyone believe them after this ridiculous statement?
They’re defending Egyptian perverts under the pretext of ‘human rights!’” Rose al-
Youssef, July 15, 2001.
15 Wagih Abu Zikri, columnist in al-Akhbar, February 17, 2002.
16 Mark Wignall, “What do these homosexual activists want?” Jamaica Observer,
November 21, 2004.
17 Sergeant David White, public relations officer, Jamaica Police Federation,
“Charge those groups for sedition,” Jamaica Observer, November 25, 2004.
18 In some countries the Orthodox Church has campaigned particularly militantly
against sexual rights. In Romania, the church engaged throughout the 1990s in a
long, ultimately unsuccessful struggle to prevent the repeal of that country’s brutal,
Ceausescu-era sodomy law. (See Human Rights Watch and the International Gay
and Lesbian Human Rights Commission, Public Scandals: Sexual Orientation and
Criminal Law in Romania, 1998.) Political calculation underlay the intensity of the
fight. The church was discredited among many Romanians by its tacit support of
Ceausescu, and was searching for an issue to regain clout and credibility; opposition
to reproductive rights—an immensely productive wedge issue for religious
conservatives in other countries—was closed to it, however, by the acute unpopularity
of Ceausescu’s pro-natalist, anti-abortion and anti-birth-control policies. The
campaign had international repercussions. In 1998, Orthodox churches threatened
to pull out of the World Council of Churches in outrage at the possibility of discussions
of sexual orientation at its Eighth General Assembly (held in Harare,
Zimbabwe).
19 See “Non-Discrimination in Civil Marriage: Perspectives from International
Human Rights Law and Practice,” a Human Rights Watch briefing paper, at
http://hrw.org/backgrounder/lgbt/civil-marriage.htm.
20 At http://www.bju.edu/letter, the website of Bob Jones University; retrieved
November 11, 2004.
21 See Human Rights Watch, Ignorance Only: HIV/AIDS, Human Rights and
Federally Funded Abstinence-Only Programs in the United States, September 2002. The
domestic mandate to promote “abstinence only” education had been a project of
conservative members of Congress since the 1980s. The 1996 “welfare reform” bill
in the U.S., for instance, required states accepting federal funds to teach “abstinence
from sexual activity outside marriage as the expected standard for all schoolage
children,” as well as that “sexual activity outside the context of marriage is likely
to have harmful psychological and physical effects.” The bill points to one of the
origins of the policy: in the endeavor to exert state control over the sexual lives of
the poor. Meanwhile, both domestically and internationally, the Bush administration
has used its commitment to “abstinence-only” education to funnel funds to
“faith-based” organizations that are among its political supporters. Groups that
criticize “abstinence-only” programs have been subjected to fiscal audits, apparently
in response to pressure from the White House and conservative politicians. See
Francoise Girard, Global Implications of U.S. Domestic and International Policies
on Sexuality, International Working Group on Sexuality and Social Policy Working
Papers No. 1, June 2004, at
http://www.healthsciences.columbia.edu/dept/sph/cgsh/IWGSSPWorkingPaper1E
nglish.pdf, retrieved November 21, 2004.
22 Rachael Rinaldo, “Condoms take a back seat to abstinence with U.S. AIDS
Money,” Inter Press Service, May 24, 2004. The article quotes an anonymous U.S.
official as stating that funds could be used by governments to buy condoms—but
that they should only be distributed to “high risk” groups.
23 Z. Geloo, “Anger at move to declare schools condom-free zones,” Inter Press
Service, March 16, 2004.
24 Website of John Mark Ministries, http://jmm.aaa.net.au/articles/10364.htm,
retrieved November 12, 2004.
25 See Human Rights Watch, Unprotected: Sex, Condoms, and the Human Right to
Health in the Philippines, vol. 16, no. 6, May 2004.
26 Patrick Goodenough, “Philippine pro-lifers stand by anti-condom policy,”
CNSNews, May 6, 2004, at
http://www.cnsnews.com/ForeignBureaus/Archive/200405/FOR20040506b.html,
retrieved November 12, 2004.
27 On reproductive-rights issues at the U.N. level, the Bush administration has
played an open and militant hand. When sexual orientation has arisen, it has been
quieter—with indications that it directs NGOs to do its work for it.
28 Austin Ruse of the Catholic Family and Human Rights Institute (C-FAM),
quoted in Jennifer Butler, “New Sheriff in Town’: The Christian Right nears major
victory at the United Nations,” Public Eye, vol. 16, no. 2 (Winter/Spring 2002).
29 Jennifer Butler, “For Faith and Family: Christian Right Advocacy at the United
Nations,” Public Eye, vol. 9, no. 2/3, p. 9.
30 Cited in Cynthia Rothschild and Scott Long, Written Out: How Sexuality Is Used
to Attack Women’s Organizing, a report by the International Gay and Lesbian
Human Rights Commission and the Center for Women’s Global Leadership, 2000,
pp. 63-64.
31 Flyer on file with Human Rights Watch.
32 Copy on file at Human Rights Watch.
33 See Lynn Allred, “Thwarting the Anti-Family Agenda: An Eyewitness Account
of the Commission on Human Rights,” Meridian Magazine, online at http://ldsmag.
com/familywatch/040505agenda.html, retrieved November 11, 2004. Material
about the “22 sexual orientations” was distributed at the 2003 and 2004
Commission sessions.
34 The DSM, of course, actually declares that homosexuality is not a disorder.