United Arab Emirates (UAE)
While the economy of the UAE continues its impressive growth, civil society continues
to stagnate and human rights progress has been slow. Authorities have
blocked the formation of independent human rights organizations and exerted
censorial pressure on a wide range of social activists, impeding the kind of vigorous
monitoring and reporting that can draw attention to and help curb human
rights abuses.
The UAE is a federation of seven emirates: Abu Dhabi, ‘Ajman, Al Fujayrah,
Sharjah, Dubai, Ra’s al- Khaymah, and Umm al-Qaywayn. The rulers of each emirate,
sitting as the Federal Supreme Council, elect the president and vice president
from among their number. The government announced in August 2006 that
it would hold its first-ever elections for 20 of the 40 members of the Federal
National Council, an advisory body to the president, in December 2006. The emir
of each emirate chooses the candidates who can stand for election and the president
of the UAE appoints the remaining council members.
The UAE has not signed most international human rights and labor rights treaties.
Migrant workers, comprising nearly 90 percent of the workforce in the private sector,
are particularly vulnerable to serious human rights violations.
Freedom of Association and Expression
The government approved the formation of the first human rights organization in
the country, the Emirates Human Rights Association, in February 2006, but disputes
among its board members kept the association from being fully functional
at year’s end.
The government actively discouraged the creation of other human rights organizations.
In July 2004 a group led by lawyer Muhammad al-Roken applied to the
Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare for permission to establish the Emirates
Human Rights Society. In April 2005 another group of 30 activists headed by
human rights campaigner Khalifa Bakhit al-Falasi applied to the ministry to set up
another human rights association. According to the Associations Law, the
Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare is to reply to such requests within a month of their filing, but as of November 2006 the ministry had not responded to either
application.
Since 2000, the government has barred 12 prominent UAE commentators and
academics from disseminating their views. In 2006 the government increased its
persecution and prosecution of human rights defenders. In June 2006 the Federal
High Court issued an arrest warrant for Muhammad al-Mansoori, president of the
independent Jurists Association, for allegedly “insulting the public prosecutor.”
Security agents detained Muhammad al-Roken, a former president of the Jurists
Association, for 24 hours in July and again in August for three days. On both occasions
officials questioned him about his human rights activities and his public
lectures. Security officials confiscated his passport and barred him from leaving
the country. The government has also not recognized City of Hope, the country’s
only shelter for abused women, children, and domestic workers. The organization’s
director, Sharla Musabih, currently faces potential criminal prosecution in
what she alleges to be a politically motivated case.
Migrant Labor
Nearly 80 percent of the UAE’s population are foreigners, and foreigners account
for 90 percent of the workforce in the private sector, including domestic workers.
As of May 2006, according to the Ministry of Labor, there were 2,738,000 migrant
workers in the country. The UAE’s economic growth has attracted large domestic
and foreign investments and the current construction boom is one of the largest
in the world. Exploitation of migrant construction workers by employers, especially
low-skilled workers in small firms, is particularly severe. Immigration sponsorship
laws that grant employers extraordinary power over the lives of migrant
workers are in part responsible for the continuing problem.
Abuses against migrant workers include nonpayment of wages, extended working
hours without overtime compensation, unsafe working environments resulting in
deaths and injuries, squalid living conditions in labor camps, and withholding of
passports and travel documents.
The government failed in 2006 to put in place a minimum wage as required by
the UAE Labor Law of 1980. 2006 saw an increasing number of public demonstrations by migrant workers protesting nonpayment of wages. Twenty-five hundred
construction workers rioted in Dubai on March 21, 2006, demanding better working
conditions and higher wages. In May 2006 thousands of construction workers
working for Besix, a Brussels-based company, went on strike to demand an
increase in their wage of US$4 a day and better working conditions. The government
deported 50 strikers.
In March the government announced that it would legalize trade unions by the
end of 2006, but as of November 2006 it had taken no steps to do so. Instead, in
September the government introduced a law banning any migrant worker who
participates in a strike from employment in the country for at least one year.
Following a surge in heat-related illnesses and injuries at construction sites in July
2005, the Labor Ministry directed construction companies to give their workers a
break from 12:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. during July and August. However, in July 2006,
after intense lobbying by construction companies, the government reduced the
afternoon break to the hours of 12:30 p.m. to 3 p.m. When asked about the reason
for this change, Minister of Labor Ali bin Abdullah al-Kaabi told reporters,
“The contractors should be asked about the reduction in the hours, as they are
the ones who have decided the timings.”
Women domestic workers are often confined to their places of work, and are at
particular risk of abuse, including unpaid wages, long working hours, and physical
or sexual abuse.
Trafficking
According to the US State Department, human trafficking to the UAE is an endemic
problem. Large numbers of young boys are annually trafficked to the UAE to be
trained as camel jockeys, and in 2005 the UAE government estimated the number
of children working as camel jockeys to be between 1,200 and 2,700; international
organizations have put the numbers at 5,000-6,000. Responding to international
criticism, UAE President Sheikh Khalifa bin Zayed al-Nahyan decreed in July
2005 that all camel jockeys must be age 18 or older. The law penalizes violators
with jail terms of up to three years and/or fines of at least Dh50,000 (US$13,600).
In 2006 the government cooperated with UNICEF to identify and return 1,071 children to their home countries. The government also provided funds for their resettlement.
Key International Actors
The UAE has emerged as a major business and trading hub in the Middle East,
attracting substantial foreign investments. The US, Japan, and the European
Union are among the UAE’s main trading partners. In April 2004 the UAE signed a
Trade and Investment Framework Agreement (TIFA) with the US, and the two countries
in November 2004 began negotiations toward a Free Trade Agreement. The
UAE is also negotiating free trade agreements with the European Union and
Australia.
In its 2006 annual report on human trafficking, the US State Department placed
the UAE on its Tier 2 Watch List for its “failure to show increased efforts to combat
trafficking over the past year, particularly in its efforts to address the large-scale
trafficking of foreign girls and women for commercial sexual exploitation.”
In October 2004 the UAE acceded to the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women. However, it is not a signatory to other
major international human rights instruments such as the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, the Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant
Workers and Members of Their Families, and the Convention against Torture.
