United Arab Emirates (UAE)
While the economy of the UAE continues to grow, human rights progress remains
scant. Authorities censor and harass human rights activists, impeding independent
reporting that could help curb abuses. Other forms of governmental accountability
are minimal. Only 6,600 UAE citizens, chosen by the rulers of the emirates
out of a population of roughly 900,000 citizens (and 4.7 million foreigners), can
vote or stand for the 20 elected seats in the 40-seat Federal National Council, an
advisory body to the president.
Freedom of Association and Expression
The only legally recognized human rights organization, the Emirates Human
Rights Association, took up the cause of cancer patients facing workplace discrimination,
but did little to address persistent human rights abuses by the government.
As of October 2008 the Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare had not
responded to applications from 2004 and 2005 to establish other human rights
organizations.
Human rights defenders and government critics face harassment, including criminal
charges. According to Muhammad al-Mansoori, former president of the Jurists
Association, charges against him from 2006 for allegedly “insulting the public
prosecutor” were dropped, but revived in October 2007. Al-Mansoori sought to
fight the charges in court but says the public prosecutor refuses to bring the case
to trial. Al-Mansoori claims that officials warned him to cease his human rights
advocacy, and have refused to renew his passport since March 2008.
In June 2005 authorities accused Hassan al-Diqqi, the founder of the unrecognized
Emirates People’s Rights Organization, of raping a housekeeper. The
charges aroused suspicion, coming two months after al-Diqqi established the
“PRO Emirates” website. Al-Diqqi went into hiding and was sentenced to death in
absentia in a 2005 trial in which forensic evidence did not support the charge,
according to a local rights activist and lawyer who saw the evidence. Sharjah
police arrested al-Diqqi in July 2008 on the old rape charge. On August 5 a court
ordered his release, and the next day an appeals court affirmed the release order,
but then without explanation the first instance court rescinded its initial release decision. Al-Diqqi says authorities are harassing him because of his human rights
activism.
Authorities arrested Salem Abdullah al-Dousari, a professor of religious education,
on May 6 without explanation. According to the Geneva-based human rights
organization Alkarama, he was detained in a psychiatric facility for three months
without charge before being released.
In May the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention concluded that
Sabihat Abdullah Sultan al-Alili was arbitrarily detained in February 2007 for exercising
his right to freedom of expression. In October 2007 the Federal Supreme
Court sentenced him to three years in prison for revealing state secrets. The
Working Group noted that, at his trial, al-Alili was not allowed to speak, his lawyer
was not allowed to plead, and a coerced confession was used against him.
According to lawyer and independent human rights activist Muhammad al-Roken,
the government returned his passport in May 2007 but in 2008 the Ministry of
Justice threatened to cancel his law license. Al-Roken received a three-month suspended
sentence after being charged with sex out of wedlock in a politically motivated
case in 2007.
Although Prime Minister Shaikh Muhammad decreed in 2007 that journalists
should not face prison “for reasons related to their work,” a 1980 law still in force
provides for the imprisonment of journalists and suspension of publication for
publishing “materials that cause confusion among the public.” The government
monitors press content, and journalists routinely exercise self-censorship. In July
2008, for example, Al-Khaleej newspaper refused to publish a column by `Abd al-
Khaliq Abdullah on the growing demographic imbalance between foreign workers
and Emiratis.
The government has targeted educators suspected of Islamist sympathies. In
June, 83 teachers staged a protest 11 months after being removed from their positions,
without explanation, because of what the government said were their
Islamist views. In July authorities without explanation banned law professors
Ahmed Salah al-Hamadi and Seif al-Shamsi from resuming their teaching positions
at the national university in al-Ain.
Prisons and Ill-Treatment
In a positive development, a former Dubai prison director and six jail wardens
were sentenced to six-month prison terms for beating prisoners during an inspection
for contraband in August 2007. Another 18 jail wardens involved in the abuse
were sentenced to three-months.
Migrant Workers’ Rights
Foreigners account for up to 85 percent of UAE residents and nearly 99 percent of
the private-sector workforce. Immigration sponsorship laws grant employers
extraordinary power over the lives of migrant workers. Laws in force, as well as a
draft revised labor law made public in 2007 but not yet implemented, fail to protect
workers’ rights to organize and to bargain collectively, provide punishments
for striking workers, and exclude from coverage domestic workers employed in
private households. Although the Labor Law of 1980 calls for a minimum wage, in
June 2008 the Ministry of Labor stated it had no plans to adopt such a measure.
Women domestic workers are at risk of unpaid wages, food deprivation, forced
confinement, and physical or sexual abuse. In October 2008 two Filipina domestic
workers tried to leave their employers’ household, complaining of physical
abuse and non-payment of wages. Their employers returned them to their recruitment
agency, Al Doukhi Labour Supply Company, which detained them in a small
kitchen “for days” before they escaped.
The standard contract for domestic workers introduced in April 2007 provides
some protections and calls for unspecified “adequate breaks,” but does not limit
working hours or provide for a rest day, overtime pay, or workers’ compensation.
The government announced plans in late 2007 to draft a law protecting domestic
workers, but this has yet to be finalized.
Exploitation of migrant construction workers is also severe. Abuses include nonpayment
of wages, extended working hours without overtime compensation,
unsafe working environments leading to deaths or illness, squalid living conditions
in labor camps, and withholding of passports and travel documents. 
In March, 1,500 workers with engineering contractor Drake and Scull went on a
violent strike at a labor camp in Sharjah, destroying company offices, cars, and
buses. Workers told local media they were protesting unpaid wages. In July police
in Ras al-Khaima arrested more than 3,000 workers employed by the Al Hamra
construction company after a riot reportedly sparked by anger at the poor quality
of company-supplied food. Authorities detained most of those involved for 13
days, and the Labor Ministry ordered some “instigators” expelled from the country.
Also in July, Sharjah police arrested 625 construction workers who blocked a
road after they were denied promised housing and forced to sleep on construction
sites. In October more than 3,000 workers of the ETA Contracting Company in
Abu Dhabi went on strike to protest delayed payments and demand wage increases
needed to meet food costs after the company banned workers from cooking
their own meals.
The Labor Ministry mandated an afternoon break for workers on outdoor construction
sites from 12:30 to 3 p.m. during July and August, when temperatures often
exceed 43 degrees Celsius. In July 2005 the ministry had directed companies to
give workers a four-hour break, but reduced it to two-and-a-half hours due to
company lobbying. Heat exhaustion cases have reportedly decreased overall,
although in August 2008 a hospital in Dubai reported receiving an increased
number of construction workers suffering heat exhaustion during the mandated
break period, suggesting some companies violated the law.
In August 2008 public health authorities in Dubai stated that 40 percent of that
emirate’s 1,093 labor camps violated minimum health and fire safety standards.
That same month, 11 construction workers died when the 30-room Dubai residence
where 500 workers were illegally housed caught fire; some had to jump out
of windows due to blocked exits. In June a chickenpox outbreak in a Sharjah labor
camp was linked to unhygienic conditions and workers’ inability to afford vaccines.
Workers died on the job due to apparently unsafe working conditions. In June
three Indian employees of Seidco General Contracting were killed when a basement
ceiling collapsed at a hotel construction site in Ajman; a police chief said
the scaffolding was unable to take the weight of the concrete. In September Abu Dhabi police blamed “lax safety procedures” for the deaths of two Pakistani workers
when a well they were digging collapsed.
The UAE has not ratified core International Labour Organization conventions protecting
freedom of association and the right to organize, which includes the right
to strike and the right to collective bargaining.
In May the UAE released its first annual report on trafficking, dedicated substantial
funds to counter-trafficking efforts, and publicly acknowledged that trafficking
takes place. In its 2008 annual report on human trafficking the United States
State Department listed the UAE as a Tier 2 country, taking it off its Watch List.
The UAE government has yet to take crucial measures to fight trafficking and
forced labor, however, such as major reform of inadequate labor and immigration
laws, stronger monitoring of recruitment agencies, screening for trafficking, and
prosecutions for trafficking into forced labor.
Key International Actors
The UAE cooperates with the United States on security matters. The US Navy routinely
uses the Dubai port of Jebel Ali. In December 2007 the Bush administration
notified the US Congress of the possible sale to the UAE of several air defense
missile systems as well as various munitions. On July 28, 2008, the US returned
to the UAE Abdullah al-Hamiri, a UAE national who had been detained at
Guantanamo Bay.
In a bid to increase the UAE’s food security, the Abu Dhabi Development Fund
announced plans to buy and develop farmland in several countries, including
tens of thousands of hectares in Sudan, and possible projects in Uzbekistan,
Vietnam, and Cambodia.
The UAE was reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism of the UN
Human Rights Council in December 2008.