Argentina
Violence in Argentina’s overcrowded prisons worsened in 2005. Guard brutality,
which has been especially well documented in Buenos Aires province,
is widespread and shows no signs of diminishing.
Prosecutors continue to investigate the systematic violations of human rights
committed under military rule (1976-1983). In June 2005, in an historic decision,
the Supreme Court declared the “Full Stop” and “Due Obedience” laws
to be unconstitutional, removing the remaining legal obstacles to these trials.
Prison Conditions
According to the Provincial Commission of Memory, a governmental body,
three prisoners were killed every week in Buenos Aires province through
March 2005, triple the level of violence in 2004. Prisoners in other provinces
also suffer from overcrowding, deplorable conditions, and inmate violence.
Eight people were killed, including five prisoners, two guards, and a police
officer, in a prison riot in February 2005 in a prison in Córdoba province.
Built to hold fewer than one thousand inmates, the prison was holding over
1,700 at the time. Two months later, thirteen inmates died in an inter-prisoner
clash in the Instituto Correccional Modelo in the city of Coronda, Santa Fe
province. According to official reports, eleven died of gunshot wounds, and
two were burned alive.
A third deadly riot claimed thirty-two lives in October after a fire broke out
in the Magdalena prison in Buenos Aires province. While the fire was started
by clashing prisoners, some reports allege that fire extinguishers in the prison
did not function and firefighters never entered the prison to battle the blaze.
The vast majority of inmates in Argentine prisons have not yet been tried. As
of February 2005, only 11 percent of inmates in the province of Buenos Aires
had been sentenced. Pretrial detention facilities are grossly inadequate.
According to the Center for Legal and Social Studies (CELS), a respected
human rights organization, 5,951 detainees in Buenos Aires province were being held in crowded police lockups in April 2005 for lack of regular prison
accommodation.
In May 2005, the Supreme Court of Justice declared that all prisons in the
country must abide by the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the
Treatment of Prisoners. The court was ruling on a collective habeas corpus
petition lodged by CELS in 2001 on behalf people held in prisons and police
lockups in Buenos Aires province. In August 2004 Human Rights Watch, the
International Commission of Jurists, and the World Organization against
Torture presented an amicus curiae brief in support of the petition. In
December 2004 the Supreme Court held a public hearing on the issue, the
first ever in a human rights case, in which CELS, Human Rights Watch, and
the provincial government of Buenos Aires participated. In addition to
declaring the U.N. rules to be national minimum standards, the court
required that police lockups be barred from detaining children under age
eighteen or sick people.
Torture
Torture and other forms of brutality are widespread in the prison system of
the province of Buenos Aires. In May 2005, prison guards in La Plata beat
inmate Cristián López Toledo and shocked him with electric current in
reprisal for denouncing earlier beatings to the Committee against Torture of
the Provincial Commission of Memory. A forensic doctor confirmed the use
of electricity from a skin sample. No effective measures have been taken to
implement the committee’s recommendations since the publication of its
October 2004 report on abuses in the prison system.
Accountability for Past Abuses
Argentina continues to make progress in prosecuting perpetrators of grave
human rights violations during the country’s so-called dirty war, in which at
least 14,000 people “disappeared.” In June 2005, the Supreme Court declared
the “Full Stop” and “Due Obedience” laws to be unconstitutional by a 7-1
majority, with one abstention. The two amnesty laws, passed in the late
1980s, granted immunity to perpetrators of torture, killings, and disappearances during military rule. Although Congress annulled the laws in 2003 and
cases had been reopened, progress had been slow as investigators waited for
the court to rule definitively on the constitutionality of the two laws.
Three hundred and thirty former military and police personnel are now facing
human rights-related charges and about 180 are detained in prisons or
military installations, or are under house arrest. Public attention has focused
on two “mega-cases” involving illegal arrest and torture by the First Army
Corps, and by the navy at the Navy Mechanics School (Escuela de Mecánica
de la Armada, ESMA), a torture center in the capital where an estimated
5,000 people are believed to have been held in secret detention before being
killed.
Forty-three alleged perpetrators have been detained in the First Army Corps
case, and an additional seven are fugitives from justice. Eighteen former
ESMA officers are currently under arrest. They include former naval Cap.
Alfredo Astíz, now in detention in a navy installation and awaiting trial for
the “disappearance” of two French nuns, Alice Domon and Léonie Duquet,
among other crimes. Duquet’s remains, which had been buried for twentyeight
years in an unmarked grave, were finally identified using DNA samples
in August 2005. In 1990, after a trial in absentia, a French court sentenced
Astíz to life imprisonment for this crime. Thirteen other former ESMA officers,
including Jorge Acosta, alias “The Tiger,” have been charged with stealing
property from detainees who “disappeared.”
The pace of prosecutions has been slow, mainly due to numerous appeals
presented by the defendants. Despite these delays, human rights groups
expect some of the cases to be tried in open court in 2006.
In March 2005, the Federal Appeals Court declared pardons issued by former
President Menem in 1989 and 1990 on behalf of six former army generals to
be unconstitutional. Three of the six who are still living—Carlos Suárez
Mason, Juan Bautista Sasaiñ, and Jorge Olivera Rovere—are accused of
human rights violations as former officers of the First Army Corps. The
appellate court reached the same conclusion in another case in July. It
declared unconstitutional the pardons of two vice-admirals, Antonio Vañek and Julio Torti, both charged with human rights violations at ESMA. All five
are expected to stand trial in the coming months.
Reproductive Rights
Women in Argentina continue to face arbitrary and discriminatory restrictions
on their reproductive decisions and access to contraceptives and abortion.
Access to one of the most effective forms of contraception—female sterilization—
continues to be subject to discriminatory limitations. Women are
often told that they need to obtain spousal authorization, that they must have
at least three children, and that they must be at least thirty-five years old to
be eligible.
Many women must choose between an unwanted or dangerous pregnancy or
an illegal and unsafe abortion. Approximately half a million illegal abortions
occur every year in Argentina, according to the health ministry, representing
40 percent of all pregnancies.
In 2005, in an important step toward guaranteeing women’s right to access to
health care services, the Argentine government published national guidelines
on humane post-abortion care.
Freedom of Expression
Draft legislation to extend rights of free expression and access to information
made no progress in 2005. A bill approved in the lower house in May 2003,
that would give Argentine citizens the right to information held by public
bodies, was weakened in the Senate and is now back in the lower house. An
earlier bill to make defamation of public officials punishable only by civil
damages, as opposed to criminal sanctions, has also not advanced. The need
for such legislation is still apparent. In June 2005 the government’s media
minister, Enrique Albistur, brought a criminal defamation suit against journalists
and directors of the magazine Noticias and the publishing house Perfíl
for a January article criticizing his policies on the distribution of government
advertising. The minister, who had asked for the maximum three-year sentence,
later withdrew the lawsuit.
Key International Actors
In December 2004, the U.N. Committee against Torture reported on
Argentina’s implementation of the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. Among the committee’s
concerns were the high number of reports of torture and ill-treatment,
the small number of convictions, the detention of children below the
age of criminal responsibility, and overcrowding and poor conditions in prisons.
In April 2005, a Spanish court sentenced Argentine ex-naval officer Adolfo
Scilingo to 640 years in prison for crimes against humanity. Scilingo went to
Spain in 1997 to voluntarily confess his role in throwing detainees into the
sea from airplanes, but subsequently retracted his admissions. Judge Baltasar
Garzón is also investigating the case of Ricardo Miguel Cavallo, another
ESMA agent, who was extradited from Mexico in 2003 on charges of genocide
and terrorism.
In July, in proceedings before the Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights, the Argentine government formally accepted partial responsibility for
failing to prevent the 1994 bombing of the Jewish Argentine Mutual
Association (AMIA), and for subsequently failing to properly investigate the
crime. Not a single person has been sentenced for the attack, while five have
been acquitted for lack of evidence.