Argentina
Argentina has taken important steps to bring to justice former military and police
personnel accused of having committed grave human rights violations during the
country’s “dirty war.” In 2006 two police officers were convicted for “disappearances,”
the first such convictions since the Supreme Court struck down the “Full
Stop” and “Due Obedience” laws in 2005.
Inmates are held in deplorable conditions in Argentina’s overcrowded prisons.
Inmate violence and brutality by guards are a continuing problem.
Confronting Past Abuses
Since President Néstor Kirchner took office in 2003, Argentina has taken historic
steps to prosecute military and police personnel responsible for “disappearances,”
killings, and torture during its last military dictatorship (1976-1983).
President Kirchner has forcefully encouraged these prosecutions, reinforcing what
began as a legal challenge to impunity in the courts. Several important cases
were reopened in 2003 after Congress annulled the 1986 “Full Stop” law, which
forced a halt to the prosecution of all such cases, and the 1987 “Due Obedience”
law, which granted automatic immunity in such cases to all members of the military
except those in positions of command. In June 2005, the Supreme Court
declared the laws unconstitutional, and in 2006 the first trials in nearly 20 years
were held for “disappearances” and torture.
In August 2006, a federal court in Buenos Aires sentenced former police official
Julio Héctor Simón to 25 years in prison for the illegal arrest and torture of José
Poblete Roa and Gertrudis Hlaczik de Poblete, a Chilean/Argentine couple who
“disappeared” after being detained in November 1978 and held at the
“Olympus,” a secret detention center run by the federal police. The following
month a court in La Plata sentenced another former police official, Miguel
Osvaldo Etchecolatz, to life imprisonment for illegal arrest, torture, and homicide
in connection with six “disappearances.” Etchecolatz had been convicted in 1986
on numerous counts of illegal arrest and sentenced to 23 years in prison, but he
was released the following year when his sentence was nullified by the “Due
Obedience” law.
Since 2005 several federal judges have struck down presidential pardons decreed
by President Menem in 1989 and 1990 in favor of former officials convicted or facing
trial for human rights violations. In September 2006, the Cassation Court
upheld a ruling that the pardon of General Santiago Omar Riveros, a former military
commander in Buenos Aires, was unconstitutional. The Supreme Court has
not yet ruled on the constitutionality of the pardons.
Witness Protection
The security of witnesses in human rights trials became a serious concern in
2006, with the mysterious disappearance in September 2006 of a torture victim
who had testified in the Etchecolatz case. Jorge Julio López, a 77-year-old construction
worker, vanished from his home in La Plata the day before he was due
to attend one of the final days of the trial. Another torture witness, Nilda Eloy, had
previously reported receiving death threats by telephone, accompanied by noises
that sounded like a torture session. Judges and prosecutors involved in human
rights cases also received threats, adding to fears that López may have been kidnapped
by individuals who had served in the police during the dictatorship and
aimed to sabotage the trials. The government mounted a major police operation
to find López, but by mid-October his whereabouts and the reason for his disappearance
were still unknown.
Prison Conditions
Overcrowding, abuses by prison guards, and inmate violence continue to be serious
problems in Argentine prisons. In 2006 there was a slight reduction in overcrowding
in Buenos Aires province. The number of detainees held in police lockups—
which for years have absorbed the overflow from the prison system—also
decreased.
Nevertheless, according to a report by the Justice Ministry of Buenos Aires
province, cited in the newspaper Clarín in August 2006, almost 4,000 prisoners
were still being held in police facilities as of then.
In a landmark ruling in May 2005, the Supreme Court declared that all prisons in
the country must abide by the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. One of the causes of overcrowding is the high percentage
of criminal suspects sent to prison to await trial (only two out of every 10 prisoners
in Buenos Aires prisons have been sentenced). Following the recommendations
of the court, in March 2006 the province of Buenos Aires reformed its criminal
procedure code, restricting the circumstances under which judges could order
suspects remanded to custody, and obliging judges to consider alternatives to
preventive detention.
Although there were fewer fatal incidents in 2006 than in 2005, prisoners continue
to die as a result of preventable inmate violence. In December 2005 a prison
inspector from the Public Defender’s office of San Martin, in Buenos Aires
province, denounced prison guards for selling home-made knives, known as
facas, to inmates in Campana prison. The following month, 35-year-old Alejandro
Leiva Duarte was stabbed to death with one of these weapons in Magdalena
prison.
Judicial Independence
After years in which the independence and quality of Argentina’s top judges were
constantly put in question, President Kirchner has taken important steps to
increase the transparency of appointments to the Supreme Court by requiring that
executive branch nominations are debated in public hearings, and that civil society
groups can have the opportunity to express their views.
At the same time, however, President Kirchner signed legislation in 2006 that
threatens the independence of the judiciary by restructuring the Council of the
Judiciary, the body responsible for selecting judges for appointment by the executive
branch. The new law increases the power of the governing party at the
expense of minority parties (which have been eliminated from the council) and of
judges, lawyers, and academics (whose numbers have been reduced), thereby
decisively altering the balance between political and professional opinion on the
council envisaged by the constitution. In October, lawyers across the nation elected
their two representatives to the new council, but thousands abstained. At this
writing, the Supreme Court was due to rule on a constitutional challenge to the
new law brought by the Buenos Aires Bar Association.
According to the Chief Justice, President Kirchner’s long delay in replacing two
justices on the Supreme Court made it difficult for the court to reach decisions. At
this writing, the court had only seven members, as opposed to the nine stipulated
by law, but all decisions still had to be based on a majority of five votes.
Several civil society groups also expressed concern that without the new appointments
this high voting requirement was holding up rulings on issues of public
concern.
Freedom of Expression
After being under debate for several years, bills to strengthen press freedom and
access to information have failed to clear Congress. A bill to make defamation of
public officials punishable only by civil damages and not criminal penalties,
which was presented in compliance with a friendly agreement brokered in 1999
by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, has not advanced.
Additionally, a bill giving Argentine citizens the right to information held by public
bodies made no progress for a second consecutive year. The lower house
approved the bill in May 2003, but the Senate voted for a much-weakened version
that had been approved by a committee chaired by the president’s wife,
Cristina Fernández de Kirchner. In November 2005 the bill was dropped altogether
from the parliamentary agenda.
Some provincial governments discriminate in the distribution of official advertising
by rewarding local media that provide favorable coverage and punishing
those with a critical editorial line. In 2003 the newspaper Rio Negro filed a writ
with the Supreme Court alleging that the provincial government of Neuquen had
drastically reduced its advertisements in reprisal for the newspaper’s coverage of
a bribery scandal that indirectly implicated the governor. In September 2006 the
attorney general issued an opinion on the appeal. Although he stated that the
Neuquen government had not violated the Constitution, he urged the legislature
to issue laws at the national and provincial levels to regulate the distribution of
official advertising, limiting the wide discretion currently enjoyed by government
authorities. At this writing, the Rio Negro case was still awaiting final decision by
the Supreme Court.
Access to Legal Abortion
Women in Argentina face arbitrary and discriminatory restrictions on their reproductive
decisions and access to contraceptives and abortion, while sexual violence
goes unpunished at times. Abortion is legal for mentally disabled rape victims,
but women face obstacles even when their rights are protected by law. In
one notorious case in 2006, a mentally disabled woman who had been raped and
impregnated by her uncle had to go to court and pass a series of legal hurdles
before she could obtain a legal abortion that the hospital doctors initially had
been willing to perform.
Human Rights Defenders
In a welcome new trend, Argentina’s Supreme Court has allowed civil society
organizations to present amicus curiae briefs on issues of public interest. The
case involving restructuring of the Council of the Judiciary and the Rio Negro case
are among those for which the court has authorized the presentation of amicus
curiae.
Key International Actors
The Inter-American Court of Human Rights continued to monitor the performance
of the government in implementing provisional measures ordered by the court to
protect the lives and physical security of prisoners held in the province of
Mendoza. In March 2006 the court renewed the measures, noting that the situation
in prisons in Mendoza had not tangibly improved.
In proceedings before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights in 2005,
the Argentine government formally accepted partial responsibility for failing to
prevent the 1994 bombing of the Jewish Argentine Mutual Association (AMIA),
and for subsequently failing to properly investigate the crime, in which 85 people
died. In October 2006 an Argentine special prosecutor accused Iran of planning
the attack, and Hezbollah of carrying it out. The following month, a federal judge
issued an international warrant for the arrest of former Iranian president Ali Akbar
Hashemi-Rafsanjani and eight other former Iranian officials.