Argentina
In 2013, President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner secured passage of legislation
that severely undermined judicial independence, although the Supreme
Court subsequently struck down some of its key aspects. A vibrant but increasingly
polarized debate exists in Argentina between the government and its critics.
However, the Fernández administration has sanctioned individuals for publishing
unofficial inflation statistics challenging official ones, and has failed to
adopt rules regarding the distribution of public advertising funds. There is no
national law regulating access to information.
Other ongoing human rights concerns include police abuse, poor prison conditions,
torture, and failure to protect indigenous rights.
Argentina continues to make significant progress on LGBT rights and in prosecuting
officials for abuses committed during the country’s “Dirty War” (1976-
1983), although trials have been subject to delays.
Judicial Independence
In April 2013, President Fernández put forward legislation to revise Argentina’s
justice system, which Congress swiftly approved. It included a bill to limit individuals’
ability to request injunctions against government acts, and another
that granted the ruling party an automatic majority in the Council of the
Judiciary, which selects judges and decides whether to open proceedings for
their removal, thereby granting the ruling party powers that undermined judicial
independence. In June, the Supreme Court struck down critical aspects of the
latter bill, including norms regarding the composition and selection of the
Council of the Judiciary.
Fernández accused those who defended the role of the judiciary as a check on
other branches of government of being a “check on the people.”
Freedom of Expression
In 2009, Congress approved a law to regulate the broadcast media, which
includes provisions to increase plurality in media. The federal authority in
charge of implementing the law has yet to ensure a diverse range of perspectives in state-run media programming. Argentina’s largest media conglomerate,
the Clarin Group, had challenged the constitutionality of articles of the law
requiring companies to sell off broadcast outlets that exceed the new limits of
outlets that can be owned by a media company, and obtained an injunction
that suspended their implementation during the trial. In October 2013, the
Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the law, lifted the injunction, and
ordered Clarin to comply with the law. The court also established clear parameters
regarding how the law should be implemented to ensure the right of free
expression is effectively protected.
Fernández accused the media in August 2013 of using “bullets of ink” to “overthrow
elected governments.” The president’s general secretary called a journalist
who aired several shows alleging government corruption of being a “media
hit man.”
High fines and criminal prosecutions undermine the right to freely publish information
of public interest. In 2011, the Ministry of Commerce imposed a fine of
500,000 pesos on 11 economists and consulting firms for publishing unofficial
inflation statistics challenging the accuracy of official ones. While the Supreme
Court overturned some of the fines in October 2013, others remained pending
at time of writing. Three of the fined economists were also being criminally
investigated for allegedly “defrauding commerce and industry.” In September, a
judge charged the minister of commerce with “abuse of authority” for having
imposed the fines.
The absence of transparent criteria for using government funds at the federal
level and in some provinces to purchase media advertisements creates a risk of
discrimination against media outlets that criticize government officials. In two
rulings in 2007 and 2011, the Supreme Court found that while media companies
have no right to receive public advertising, government officials may not apply
discriminatory criteria when deciding where to place advertisements.
Argentina does not have a national law ensuring public access to information
held by government bodies. An existing presidential decree on the matter only
applies to the federal executive branch, and some provincial governments have
adopted regulations for their jurisdictions.
Transnational Justice
At time of writing, no one had been convicted for the 1994 bombing of the
Argentine Israelite Mutual Association (AMIA) in Buenos Aires that killed 85
people and injured over 300. Judicial corruption and political obstruction hindered
criminal investigations and prosecutions from the investigation’s outset.
Iran, which is suspected of ordering the attack, has refused Argentina’s
requests for the extradition of former Iranian President Ali Akbar Hashemi-
Rafsanjani and seven Iranian officials suspected of participating in the crime.
In January 2013, Argentina and Iran signed a memorandum of understanding
(MoU) that creates an international commission of jurists with powers to review
evidence against Iranians accused by Argentine judicial authorities of being
responsible for the bombing, and to interrogate some of the suspects.
Legislators from Fernandez’s party ratified the agreement in February. In Iran, it
was ratified by the Council of Ministers, but it is unclear from the agreement’s
vague terms whether it can be implemented without Iranian parliamentary
approval, or if the Iranians’ statements will be admissible as evidence in
Argentine criminal proceedings. In September 2013, President Fernández de
Kirchner called on Iran to ratify the agreement during her speech before the
United Nations General Assembly. A legal challenge to the agreement filed in
April by Jewish community leaders before Argentine courts remained pending at
time of writing.
Confronting Past Abuses
Several cases of human rights violations committed during Argentina’s military
dictatorship (1976-1983) were reopened in 2003 after Congress annulled existing
amnesty laws. The Supreme Court subsequently ruled that the amnesty
laws were unconstitutional, and federal judges struck down pardons favoring
former officials convicted of, or facing trial for, human rights violations.
By September 2013, out of 2,316 persons investigated by the courts for crimes
against humanity, 416 had been convicted and 35 had been found not guilty,
according to the Center of Legal and Social Studies (CELS). There are 11 ongoing
oral trials involving multiple victims and suspects.
In December 2012, for example, a federal court convicted Jaime Smart, a minister
of Buenos Aires province during the dictatorship, for the torture and subsequent
death of one individual, and the illegal detention and abuse of 43 others.
The first civilian government official convicted for these crimes, Smart was
given life in prison. The tribunal also convicted 22 security officials for the same
abuses, and requested the investigation of a prosecutor, members of the judiciary,
and the Catholic Church for their alleged involvement.
Given the large number of victims, suspects, and cases, prosecutors and judges
face challenges bringing those responsible to justice while respecting the due
process rights of the accused. Other concerns include significant delays in trials;
that three convicted military officers who escaped in July 2013 remain at
large; and the unresolved fate of Jorge Julio López—a former torture victim who
disappeared in September 2006, a day before he was due to attend the trial of
one of his torturers.
In July 2013, President Fernández requested that Congress promote General
César Milani, the head of the armed forces, to lieutenant general. After widespread
criticism from human rights organizations and victims, who accused
Milani of having participated in abuses during the dictatorship, the president
asked Congress to postpone Milani’s promotion until the end of the year.
Police Abuse
In April 2013, at least 100 officers from the Metropolitan Police Force of the city
of Buenos Aires used excessive force to disperse doctors, nurses, union leaders,
and lawmakers who were protesting the city government’s plans to demolish
a building at a hospital, according to the city Ombudsman Office. The police
intervention resulted in injuries to dozens of civilians, including patients and
journalists, according to media accounts. Seventeen police officers were also
injured in the clash. At time of writing, the case was under investigation by a
criminal judge.
Prison Conditions
Overcrowding, ill-treatment by prison guards, inadequate physical conditions,
and inmate violence continue to be serious problems in prisons. According to the National Penitentiary Office (Procuración Penitenciaria de la Nación), an
official body created by Congress, there were 86 deaths, including 41 violent
ones, in federal prisons between January 2012 and mid-2013. The office also
documented 429 cases of torture or ill-treatment in federal prisons in 2012, and
426 in the first seven months of 2013.
Indigenous Rights
Indigenous peoples in Argentina face obstacles in accessing justice, land, education,
healthcare, and other basic services.
Existing laws require the government to perform a survey of land occupied by
indigenous communities by November 2017, before which authorities cannot
lawfully evict communities. In May 2013, the Supreme Court urged the government
of Formosa province and the federal government to carry out the required
survey for the Qom indigenous group. Before the survey was conducted, authorities
opened criminal investigations against Félix Díaz, a Qom leader, for having
“usurped” lands where community members live, and for participating in a
2010 protest in which a community member died and dozens more were injured
due to excessive use of force by provincial security forces, according to CELS.
Women’s Rights
Argentina adopted a new law in March 2013 extending key protections to
domestic workers, the majority of whom are women and girls, including limits
to work hours, a weekly rest period, overtime pay, sick leave, and maternity
protections.
Abortion is illegal in Argentina, with limited exceptions, and women and girls
face numerous obstacles to reproductive health products and services, such as
contraception, voluntary sterilization procedures, and abortion after rape (one
of the few circumstances when abortion is permitted). These barriers mean that
women and girls may face unwanted or unhealthy pregnancies.
In a landmark ruling in March 2012, the Supreme Court determined that prior
judicial authorization was unnecessary for abortion after rape and urged provincial
governments to ensure access to legal abortions. As of March 2013, only 5 out of Argentina’s 23 provinces had adopted protocols that met the court’s
requirements, according to the Association for Civil Rights (ADC).
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In 2010, Argentina became the first Latin American country to legalize same-sex
marriage. The Civil Marriage Law allows same-sex couples to enter into civil
marriages and provides for equal rights and the legal protections of marriage
afforded to opposite-sex couples including, among others, adoption rights and
pension benefits.
In 2012, the Gender Identity Law established the right of individuals over the
age of 18 to choose their gender identity, undergo gender reassignment, and
revise official documents without any prior judicial or medical approval. The
surgical and hormonal reassignment procedures are covered as part of public
and private health insurance.
Key International Actors
In April 2013, the UN rapporteur on the independence of lawyers and judges
stated that the changes to the justice system proposed by the Fernández
administration “seriously compromise[d] the principles of separation of powers
and independence of the judiciary, which are fundamental elements of any
democracy.” The Fernández government reacted by accusing the rapporteur of
“lack of impartiality, restraint, and balance.”
As a returning member of the Human Rights Council, Argentina voted in favour
of a number of key resolutions addressing the human rights violations in countries
such as Sri Lanka, Iran, and Syria. Argentina could do more to speak out
and hold governments accountable for enforced disappearances given their priority
focus on this issue at the UN.
In March 2013, the Organization of American States General Assembly adopted
a resolution ending a process, begun in 2010, to strengthen the Inter-American
human rights system. Several countries, however, used the process to attempt
to undermine the independence of the Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights and its special rapporteurship on freedom of expression. At the end of
the March meeting, Argentina proposed language to adopt the final resolution by consensus, effectively opening the door to reinitiating a debate in which
amendments to the system could undermine the commission’s independence.
In May 2013, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights ruled that Argentina had
violated the rights to liberty and freedom from cruel and inhuman treatment of
five children who were sentenced to life in prison. The court ordered Argentina
to modify laws to eliminate life imprisonment of children and to review cases in
which others were serving similar sentences.