Argentina
Serious problems continue to beset Argentina’s criminal justice system.
These include police abuses, prison overcrowding, torture of detainees,
and degrading conditions of detention in police lockups. Under strong
public pressure to deal more effectively with violent urban crime, the
government of President Néstor Kirchner passed laws in 2003 increasing
the use of pretrial detention and lengthening jail sentences for violent
offenders.
On a positive note, the Kirchner government continues to press for
accountability for human rights violations committed during Argentina’s
period of military rule (1976-1983). At this writing, roughly one hundred
former military and police officers had been detained, and several
key trials were underway.
Police Abuses
Police frequently fail to observe international norms concerning the use
of lethal force and, as a result, the death rate in confrontations with suspects
is high. Extrajudicial executions and torture by police are also serious
problems, although the true number of extrajudicial executions is
hard to gauge. According to official figures, twenty-five people, including
four minors, were killed in 2003 during armed clashes involving
federal police officers in the city of Buenos Aires. In 2004, victims
included fifteen-year-old Héctor David Herrera, who was killed on
April 16, reportedly shot at close range by members of the federal
police.
The March 2004 kidnapping and murder of twenty-three-year-old Axel
Blumberg led his father, Juan Carlos Blumberg, to initiate a high-profile
public campaign against impunity for violent crimes. In response to
demonstrations by thousands of people, the government rushed through
laws that lengthened sentences for armed robbery and for arms offenses.
The new laws increase the maximum length of cumulative sentences for
violent crimes to fifty years, drastically restricts the possibility of provisional
release for the accused, and bars convicts from early release. In
addition, a bill approved by the Buenos Aires city legislature in
September modified the city’s misdemeanor code by increasing penalties
for many misdemeanors to a maximum of sixty days of detention, a
period longer than that contemplated in the Criminal Code for some
crimes. The Center for Legal and Social Studies (Centro de Estudios
Legales y Sociales, CELS), a nongovernmental human rights group,
criticized the Buenos Aires law as “manifestly repressive” and in breach
of the Argentine Constitution and international human rights treaties.
Detention Conditions
The Argentine prison system is seriously overstretched, and torture and
mistreatment of detainees is widespread. In October 2004, the
Committee against Torture of the Provincial Commission of Memory
(of Buenos Aires province), after analyzing 3,500 criminal complaints
against officials of the Buenos Aires prison system, published dramatic
findings indicating that abuse is systemic.
Due to prison overcrowding, 5,441 people were being held awaiting
trial in police lockups in the province of Buenos Aires as of July 2004.
According to a report by CELS, there were up to ten detainees each
crammed into cells measuring 1.8 by 2.5 meters—with no beds, ventilation
or natural light—requiring detainees to take turns sleeping on the
floor. At this writing, a collective habeas corpus petition lodged by CELS
in 2001 on behalf of detainees held in police lockups was still pending
before the Supreme Court. In August 2004, Human Rights Watch, the
International Commission of Jurists, and the World Organization
against Torture co-presented an amicus curiae brief to the court in support
of the position taken by CELS.
The detention and mistreatment of juveniles in police stations in the
province of Buenos Aires continues to be a serious problem. In a report
published in December 2003, CELS revealed that many children are
held illegally with adults on police premises but do not appear in official
statistics. In October 2004, the press reported that three hundred juveniles
were being held illegally in police lockups in the province.
Reproductive Rights
Argentina has taken important steps toward guaranteeing women’s right
to reproductive health, most notably through the implementation of a
national program on “reproductive health and responsible procreation”
in 2002. However, women continue to face multiple obstacles in their
access to contraception and to information on reproductive health care.
Some of these obstacles constitute violations of international human
rights standards: denial of access to voluntary tubal ligation; pervasive
domestic violence without effective recourse; deliberate dissemination
of misinformation or withholding of information on contraceptive
methods in the public health care system; and severely limited access to
abortion, even where not punishable by law. These violations are exacerbated
for low income women by grossly inadequate services in some
areas and a seriously overburdened public health care system.
Accountability for Past Abuses
Following the congressional annulment in August 2003 of the “full
stop” and “due obedience” laws—which had obstructed prosecutions of
those responsible for human rights abuses committed during military
rule—human rights trials continue to advance. The Minister of
Defense, José Pampuro, stated in June 2004 that since the current president
entered office, ninety-seven former military officers had been
detained for past human rights abuses. Among the most high-profile
prosecutions are those involving fifteen former agents of the Navy
Mechanics School (ESMA), including Alfredo Astiz, and thirty former officers of the First Army Corps. In September 2004, Judge Jorge Urso
indicted nineteen former military officials, including ex-junta leader
Gen. Jorge Videla, for involvement in Operation Condor, a collaborative
venture of the military regimes of the Southern Cone countries in
the 1970s to arrest, torture, and “disappear” dissidents located in each
others’ territory.
In March 2004, a federal court in La Plata sentenced Miguel
Etchecolatz and Jorge Berges, a former police commissioner and doctor,
respectively, to seven years of imprisonment for concealing the identity
of the baby daughter of Aída Sanz, who was abducted by the security
forces in 1977 when nine months pregnant and “disappeared.” Berges
personally had handed the baby over to a civilian couple who raised her
under a false name. It was the first time that a court in La Plata has
convicted anyone of human rights violations, although up to two thousand
people are said to have “disappeared” there during military rule.
A final judicial decision on the constitutionality of the annulment of the
“full stop” and “due obedience” laws was still pending at this writing. In
October 2003, the Supreme Court referred the case to the Criminal
Cassation Panel. The same panel also was due to rule on whether the
reopening of the ESMA case violated Argentina’s prohibition on double
jeopardy.
In August 2004, the Supreme Court rejected an appeal by a former
Chilean agent who had argued that the life sentence he received for the
1974 assassination of Chilean army commander Gen. Carlos Prats
should be thrown out because the statute of limitations had elapsed. In a
landmark decision, the court ruled that, as a crime against humanity, the
murder was not subject to a statute of limitations.
In a symbolic event commemorating the twenty-eighth anniversary of
the March 24, 1976, military coup, President Kirchner ordered portraits
of two leaders of the military juntas that ruled the country until 1983 removed from the walls of the Military College. Kirchner also visited
the ESMA and signed an agreement with the city government to turn
the building into a “museum of memory.”
Freedom of Expression
Although Argentina has a free and vibrant press, progress on bills to
extend rights of free expression and access to information remain disappointingly
slow. Press freedom groups have lobbied Congress to adopt
legislation to make defamation of public officials punishable only by
civil damages, as opposed to criminal sanctions. A bill to this effect
introduced into the Senate in October 2002 is still bogged down in the
legislative process. Also held up in the Senate is a bill, already approved
in the lower house in May 2003, that would give Argentine citizens the
right to information held by public bodies.
Journalists in some Argentine provinces face threats and physical attacks
for their reporting. The perpetrators of such crimes are rarely prosecuted.
Key International Actors
Recently declassified U.S. government documents reveal the strong
support given by former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger to the
Argentine military junta in 1976, at a time when the junta was responsible
for massive human rights abuses. According to a record of a conversation
between Kissinger and Argentina’s then-Foreign Minister, Adm.
César Augusto Guzzetti, Kissinger told Guzzetti: “[I]f there are things
that have to be done, you should do them quickly. But you should get
back quickly to normal procedures.” The documents show how
Kissinger undermined efforts by the U.S. Congress and the U.S. ambassador
in Argentina to press the Argentine military to stop the abuses.
Trials continue in Spain of ESMA agents Adolfo Scilingo and Ricardo
Miguel Cavallo, the latter of whom was extradited from Mexico in June
2003. Courts in other countries, such as Germany, continue investigating
crimes committed during the “dirty war” against their nationals. In
November 2003, a Nuremberg court issued international warrants for
the arrest of former president Jorge Rafael Videla and two other former
military officials for the murder of two German students in 1976 and
1977. All three suspects were already under house arrest in Argentina
on other human rights charges.