Argentina
Argentina has taken important steps to bring to justice former military and police
personnel accused of having committed grave human rights violations during the
country’s “dirty war.” Since the Supreme Court struck down the “Full Stop” and
“Due Obedience” laws in 2005, several police and military officials have been
convicted.
Continuing human rights problems in Argentina include a juvenile justice system
that provides judges broad discretion to detain children, deplorable prison conditions,
and arbitrary restrictions on women’s reproductive rights.
Confronting Past Abuses
Since 2003 Argentina has made significant progress in prosecuting military and
police personnel responsible for “disappearances,” killings, and torture during its
last military dictatorship (1976-1983). The executive branch actively encouraged
these prosecutions, reinforcing what began as a legal challenge to impunity in the
courts. At this writing, there are more than 400 people facing charges for these
crimes, the vast majority of whom are in pretrial detention.
Several important cases were reopened in 2003 after Congress annulled the 1986
“Full Stop” law, which forced a halt to the prosecution of all such cases, and the
1987 “Due Obedience” law, which granted automatic immunity in such cases to
all members of the military, except those in positions of command. In June 2005
the Supreme Court declared the laws unconstitutional.
According to the Center for Legal and Social Studies, 28 people have been convicted
for abuses committed during the dictatorship. For example, in June 2008
two retired federal police officers were sentenced to life imprisonment without
parole for kidnapping and killing 30 detainees in the 1976 “Fatima massacre.” In
July 2008 a civilian intelligence agent and seven military officials, including
retired General Luciano Benjamin Menendez, were convicted for kidnapping, torturing,
and executing four members of the Workers’ Revolutionary Party in 1977:
Menendez and three others were sentenced to life imprisonment, while the rest
were sentenced to 18 or 22 years in prison. In September 2008 Menendez was also sentenced, together with Antonio Domingo Bussi, to life without parole for
kidnapping, torturing, and “disappearing” a legislator in 1976.
Since 2005 several federal judges have struck down pardons decreed by thenpresident
Carlos Menem in 1989 and 1990 of former officials convicted or facing
trial for human rights violations. In April 2008, for instance, a federal appeals
court upheld the unconstitutionality of pardons in favor of Jorge Rafael Videla, former
de facto president, Albano Eduardo Harguindeguy, former de facto interior
minister, and José Alfredo Martinez de Hoz, former de facto economy minister, in
a case regarding the “disappearance” of two businessmen.
The security of witnesses in human rights trials has become a serious concern
since the “disappearance” in September 2006 of a torture victim who had testified
in one of the cases that concluded that year. Jorge Julio López, age 77, who
vanished from his home in La Plata the day before he was due to attend one of
the final days of the trial, remains missing.
Criminal Justice System
Children in conflict with the law who are under age 16 are subject to a procedure
that provides judges broad discretion to authorize their detention. In cases in
which they are accused of having committed a crime, as well as when they are
subjected to a custodial or protective measure because of their “personal or
social situation,” judges routinely order children to be institutionalized. The
process through which “custodial sentences” are handed down lacks basic due
process safeguards. At this writing, a case challenging the constitutionality of the
juvenile justice system is pending before the Supreme Court.
In August 2008 Congress annulled the Code of Military Justice and created a new
disciplinary process for military officials. The Congress established that crimes
committed by military officials would be tried by federal civilian courts.
In detention facilities, overcrowding, abuses by guards, and inmate violence continue
to be serious problems. In a landmark ruling in May 2005, the Supreme
Court declared that all prisons in the country must abide by the United Nations
Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. Although there have
been slight improvements in the province of Buenos Aires, the situation remains critical. For instance, during 2006-07 there was a small reduction in the number
of detainees held in police lockups, which for years have absorbed the overflow
from the prison system. Yet, according to research by the Center for Legal and
Social Studies, the number of detainees held in police installations in July 2008
exceeded the number in 2007. The high proportion of criminal suspects sent to
prison to await trial, one of the causes of overcrowding, also increased in 2008,
reaching nearly 77 percent of the prison population.
Freedom of Expression and Information
Defamation of public officials remains punishable by criminal penalties. At this
writing, several bills to decriminalize defamation remain pending before
Congress.
In June 2008 the Supreme Court ruled that public officials should be held to a
high level of scrutiny, and overturned a civil judgment against a newspaper that
had criticized the Judiciary’s Forensic Medical Corps, an agency that carries out
medical forensic testing. The court held that an opinion regarding issues of general
interest, in particular related to the government, may not in and of itself lead to
civil or criminal responsibility. According to the court, public officials’ reputation
can only be adversely affected by knowingly disseminating false information.
Some provincial governments discriminate in the distribution of official advertising
by rewarding local media that provide favorable coverage and punishing
those with a critical editorial line. In September 2007 the Supreme Court ruled
against the provincial government of Neuquen, stating it had failed to justify why
it had abruptly limited official advertising in a local newspaper that had covered a
bribery scandal indirectly implicating the governor. According to the court,
although there is no right to receive official advertising, a government that grants
it may not apply discriminatory criteria in granting or withdrawing it. Several bills
to regulate the matter have been presented since then but remain pending. In
February 2008 the governor of Tierra del Fuego issued a decree establishing
objective criteria to grant official advertising.
An executive decree allows Argentine citizens to obtain information held by the
federal executive branch. However, bills giving Argentine citizens the right to information held by all federal offices have been pending before Congress for
years. (Some provinces have access to information laws that allow individuals to
obtain information from provincial governments.)
Reproductive Rights
Women and girls in Argentina face arbitrary and discriminatory restrictions on
their reproductive decisions and access to contraceptives, especially emergency
contraceptive pills. Therapeutic abortions and abortions for mentally disabled
rape victims are legal, but women continue to face obstacles even when their
right to an abortion is protected by law. For example, in October 2008 a judge
ordered doctors in Bahia Blanca to delay the abortion requested by the legal representative
of an 18-year-old mentally disabled woman who was raped by a family
member, allegedly after a couple expressed interest in adopting her child after
birth. The woman ended up having an abortion after a second judicial decision
reversed the judge’s initial one.
Key International Actors
In proceedings before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights in 2005,
the Argentine government formally accepted partial responsibility for failing to
prevent the 1994 bombing of the Jewish Argentine Mutual Association, and for
subsequently failing to properly investigate the crime, in which 85 people died. In
October 2006 an Argentine special prosecutor accused Iran of planning the
attack, and Hezbollah of carrying it out. The following month, a federal judge
issued an international warrant for the arrest of former Iranian president Ali Akbar
Hashemi-Rafsanjani and eight other Iranian former officials. In November 2007
the Interpol General Assembly voted to issue six arrest notices, and in September
2008 President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner reiterated before the UN General
Assembly the Argentine government’s request that Iran collaborate with the
Argentine justice system.
In May 2008 the Inter-American Court of Human Rights ordered the Argentine government
to modify its criminal defamation laws. The court ruled Argentina had
violated Eduardo Kimel’s right to free expression when a court sentenced him in
1995 to one year in prison (the sentence was suspended) and ordered him to pay 20,000 pesos (US$20,000 at that time) in damages for defamation. (Kimel had
criticized the work of a judge investigating a massacre committed during the last
military government.)
In September 2008 the Argentine government recognized that denying a woman’s
right to legal abortion violates women’s human rights after a notorious 2006
case—in which a mentally disabled woman who had been raped and impregnated
by her uncle had to request a private doctor to perform an abortion despite having
obtained a judicial authorization to carry it out—reached the United Nations
Human Rights Committee.
WORLD REPORT 2009
154