Armenia
The ruling Republican Party of Armenia (RPA) won almost 33 percent of the vote in
the May 2007 parliamentary elections and controls nearly half of the seats in the
National Assembly. Two other parties loyal to President Robert Kocharian won
enough seats to guarantee a pro-presidential majority. Although the elections
showed improvements over previous years, observers have documented irregularities
and the opposition contested results in some locations. Harassment of
opposition supporters and limits on media freedom marred the run-up to the
February 2008 presidential election. Torture and ill-treatment remain a problem.
Limits on media freedom and freedom of religion persist.
Elections
International observers have determined that the May 12 parliamentary elections
largely met international standards, although they have noted pre-election irregularities,
including pressure on employees to vote for the RPA, distribution of
goods and services in exchange for votes, and abuse of administrative resources.
Opposition parties held rallies without police harassment and had access to public
television, although pro-government parties received disproportionate coverage.
On election day there were reports of fraud and double voting as well as
problems in transparency, counting, tabulation, and publication of results.
On April 27 President Kocharian publicly accused Orinats Yerkir Party leader Artur
Bagdasarian of treason based on secret recordings of a February meeting
between Bagdasarian and a British diplomat, during which reportedly
Bagdasarian claimed that government officials were taking steps to rig the parliamentary
elections and asked whether the European Union could respond. No
charges have been brought against Bagdasarian.
On October 23 police in the capital Yerevan detained seven opposition activists
who were informing passers-by about an October 26 rally for former Armenian
president and prospective 2008 presidential candidate Levon Ter-Petrosian. The
group was released, but five were later charged with assaulting police.
Narek Galstian, an activist with the youth group of the opposition Social
Democratic Hnchakyan Party, was beaten on November 15 by a group of unknown
assailants. Two days prior, police briefly detained Galstian and another opposition
youth activist as they posted leaflets critical of Prime Minister (and prospective
2008 presidential candidate) Serzh Sargsian and warned them to stop antigovernment
propaganda.
In mid-October, leading Armenian media figures expressed concern that the countrys
television outlets were curtailing political news, including coverage of news
conferences by opposition politicians, and accused the authorities of restricting
press freedom ahead of the presidential election. On November 12, the state tax
service accused the Giumri-based independent Gala television channel of tax
evasion. The stations leadership believes the tax inspection and other pressures
from the authorities come in response to its broadcast of a September speech by
Ter-Petrosian in which he called the government corrupt and mafiosi.
On November 22 the Yerevan Press Club and the TEAM Research Center presented
the initial results of a project analyzing eight broadcasters evening news
coverage of prospective presidential candidates and political party leaders ahead
of the 2008 presidential elections. The research revealed that Prime Minister
Sargsian has received disproportionately more positive coverage compared to
opposition candidates.
Arrest with Possible Political Motivation
On May 7 police arrested former minister of foreign affairs Alexander
Arzoumanian, now the head of the Civil Disobedience Movement, on charges of
money laundering. Authorities claim that Arzoumanian, obtained funds for political
activities from a fugitive Armenian-Russian businessman. Arzoumanian maintains
that the money was given to him legally by friends and not for political purposes.
Arzoumanian was released on September 6 pending investigation.
Torture and Ill-Treatment
The death in custody of Levan Gulyan highlights concerns about continuing torture
and ill-treatment of suspects and witnesses. On May 9, 2007, Gulyan, a restaurant owner, witnessed a fight between several individuals, which resulted
in one person being shot dead. Gulyan was called to the local police station
repeatedly for several days for questioning. On May 12, after questioning Gulyan
at the Ministry of Internal Affairs, officials informed Gulyans family that he had
died after supposedly jumping from a second-storey window. At the request of
the family, Armenian authorities allowed international forensic experts to conduct
an autopsy. Although the experts could not determine the circumstances in which
Gulyan fell, they concluded that the severe injuries causing his death were consistent
with a fall from a second-storey window and that a few of the smaller
bruises and abrasions could have been caused by another force, e.g. a punch or a
blow, prior to the fall.
On August 25 Lori province prosecutor Albert Ghazarian was killed by an unknown
assailant. According to local human rights groups and media reports, during the
investigation into his death authorities subjected some witnesses to beatings
and other ill-treatment in order to extract testimony. Officials deny the claims.
On December 22, 2006, the Court of Cassation overturned the murder conviction
of three conscript soldiers, Razmik Sargsian, Musa Serobian, and Arayik Zalian,
releasing them and returning the case to prosecutors for additional investigation.
Sargsian testified that military investigators had beaten him and threatened him
with rape, coercing him into signing a confession in which he named as accomplices
Serobian and Zalian, who also claim to have been ill-treated by investigators.
Human rights groups reported that ill-treatment of military conscripts remains
widespread as a result of impunity for perpetrators. In an exceptional case, military
authorities arrested and charged with murder an officer who had in April
2007 shot and killed Gegham Sergoian reportedly because he believed Sergoian
and another conscript were laughing at him.
Media Freedom and Freedom of Speech
In mid-July 2007 Armenian Public Radio ceased broadcasts of Radio Free
Europe/Radio Liberty (RFE/RL), a United States government-funded program widely
listened to in Armenia, notwithstanding that on July 3 parliament had narrowly voted against amendments to media laws that effectively would have banned
RFE/RL and other foreign broadcasters from being rebroadcast through Armenian
public television and radio. RFE/RL is currently being rebroadcast through private
networks.
Journalists continue to face threats, harassment, and criminal charges. On
September 15 unknown assailants beat Hovannes Galajian, editor of the opposition
newspaper Iskakan Iravunk and a frequent government critic, outside his
office moments after a man claiming to be from another Armenian newspaper
telephoned Galajian requesting a meeting. Vandals burned the car of Suren
Baghdasarian, the founder of Football Plus newspaper, on January 30 (his car had
been similarly vandalized a year earlier), and on February 8 vandals set fire to the
car of Ara Saghatelian, chair of the editorial board of Im Iravunk newspaper and
Panorama.am news portal, both of which often criticize government institutions
and prominent business people.
On June 6 a Yerevan court handed freelance journalist Gagik Shamshian a twoand-
a-half-year suspended sentence, two years probation, and a fine, for fraud,
embezzlement, and waste. In July 2006 Shamshian had published an article
about a bank robbery for which relatives of the Nubarashen district administration
head faced charges. Shamshian reported being harassed and assaulted in
retaliation for the article, and pressed charges against his attackers, but then
prosecutors instead charged him initially with insult, cheating, and extortion.
On January 12, 2007, an appeals court lessened the sentence of Arman
Babajanian, editor of the opposition newspaper Zhamanak Yerevan, who had
been convicted of forging documents in order to evade compulsory military service.
The court cut six months from the original four-year sentence, which had been
considered unnecessarily harsh.
Freedom of Religion
At least 80 Jehovahs Witnesses are in prison for refusing to perform military or
civilian service. In accordance with its Council of Europe obligations, in 2004
Armenia established alternative service, but the allegedly civilian service
remains under military control and regulations.
Human Rights Defenders
Armenias Ombudsman Armen Harutyunyan received 1,353 complaints in the first
six months of 2007, mainly against city administrations and police. His 2006
report described human rights protection in Armenia as unsatisfactory. He
noted the excessive use of pretrial detention, violence against journalists, and
limits on freedom of speech, and the need for a more independent judiciary.
Key International Actors
Following the annual Partnership and Cooperation Council meeting between the
European Union and Armenia in October 2007, the two parties underlined the
importance of the respect of the rule of law, democratic principles, protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms as essential elements in the bilateral
dialogue. The conclusions further stressed the importance the EU attached to
the governments ensuring that the 2008 presidential election is held in full compliance
with international standards.
The United States presidential budget request for 2008 proposes reducing funding
for civil society programs in Armenia, including human rights programs, by 66
percent, from US$8.3 million to US$2.9 million.
The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe adopted a resolution on
Armenia in January acknowledging that Armenias revised constitution is consistent
with European standards but encouraging Armenia to fully implement electoral,
media, and justice system reforms. It expressed disappointment over
Armenias failure to introduce a genuine civilian alternative to military service.