Armenia
The Armenian government has done little to address serious human rights violations.
Threats to media freedom in Armenia continued in 2006, as more journalists
faced harassment and attacks, and broadcast media lack pluralism and
remain largely pro-government. Torture and ill-treatment remain serious problems
in places of detention and the military. Human rights defenders did not report
harassment in 2006, but the ombudsperson was dismissed in January apparently
for criticizing the government, a move that raises questions about the government’s
commitment to the independence of that institution.
In November 2005 a national referendum vote approved constitutional amendments
that aimed to introduce stronger checks and balances among government
branches. Council of Europe legal experts approved the draft amendments, but
Armenia’s political opposition contested the legitimacy of the Armenian authorities
and called for boycotting the referendum. Council of Europe observers
expressed concern about the integrity of the vote.
Media Freedom
The president appoints all members of bodies that regulate and manage broadcast
media, including the Public Television and Radio Company (PTRC). The PTRC
is responsible for policies and programming on the public service television station
H1. Media experts state that because of government control H1 does not have
sufficient independence to provide objective and diverse news coverage.
The independent television station A1+, which lost its broadcasting license in
2002, has since lost 12 tenders for television and radio frequencies, including a
March 2006 bid for an FM radio frequency. On June 19,2006, A1+, which produced
a weekly newspaper Ayb-Feh and maintains a website, had to vacate the
premises it had leased from the National Academy of Sciences for more than 10
years, after losing a court case in 2005 against notice of eviction. The government
provided an alternative location that at the time of the move lacked electricity
and telephone connections, forcing A1+ to suspend all work for several weeks.
Among incidents of harassment against journalists, on February 23 in the town of
Vanadzor, a local minibus company owner threatened Narine Avetisian, executive
director of the Lori television station, over her reports criticizing increases in
minibus tariffs; he later apologized for the incident. On May 16 unknown people
broke the windows of Avetisian’s parked car following a program about violations
during the eviction of residents from a Vanadzor neighborhood; a criminal investigation
on the case was closed when the authorities determined they could not
identify the perpetrators. On July 12 freelance journalist Gagik Shamshian reported
being harassed by relatives and associates of Mher Hovhannisian, head of
Yerevan’s Nubarashen district administration, because of an article he published
in the July 11 edition of the newspaper Chorrord Ishkhanutiun about a bank robbery
for which two of Hovhannisian’s relatives face charges. The attackers threatened
and beat the journalist and took his tape recorder, mobile telephone, and
wallet. The next day the electricity and telephone at Shamshian’s apartment were
cut off. Shamshian pressed criminal charges against his attackers. On August 3,
in response to several appeals from local residents, the police instituted criminal
proceedings against Shamshian allegedly for insult, cheating, and extortion. On
September 6 unknown assailants attacked Hovhannes Galajian, editor-in-chief of
the Iravunk newspaper, which has ties to a small opposition party. Galajian
believes that the attack was in retaliation for his articles criticizing the government.
On September 8 a court sentenced Arman Babajanian, editor of the opposition
newspaper Zhamanak Yerevan, to four years in prison for failing to serve the compulsory
two years of military service. Although Babajanian admitted to forging
documents in 2002 in order to evade military service, the harsh sentence is suspected
to be retribution for the journalist’s persistent criticism of government
policies (draft evaders are usually sentenced to between two and three years in
prison).
Torture and Ill-Treatment
On May 31, 2006, Armenia ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention
against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
(OPCAT). In April the government established a group to monitor certain detention
facilities (temporary holding cells and pre-trial detention cells), although its independence is questionable as the majority of members are police appointees.
NGOs report that torture and ill-treatment in police custody, prisons, psychiatric
institutions, and the military remain widespread.
On May 30 the Court of Appeal sentenced three army soldiers to life imprisonment
on charges that they killed two fellow conscripts in December 2003. One of
those charged, Razmik Sargsian, testified that military investigators beat him and
threatened him with rape, thereby coercing him into signing a confession in
which he named Musa Serobian and Arayik Zalian as accomplices. Serobian and
Zalian also claim to have been abused by investigators, but neither confessed to
the murders. In September the men appealed to the Court of Cassation.
In February 2006 a young army conscript reported that he had been repeatedly
raped and beaten by superiors and other conscripts for nine months at a Yerevan
military post. After making these accusations public, the victim stated that he
was again beaten by his superiors in retaliation.
Four inmates of Nubarashen prison went on hunger strike to protest alleged
assault by prison guards and their detention in inhuman conditions following an
escape attempt. Human rights groups state that most prisons are overcrowded
and prisoners are often denied basic rights.
Freedom of Religion
Despite military service reforms adopted in 2004 mandating that conscientious
objectors be provided with alternative service opportunities, the civilian service is
run by the army and imposes military regulations on participants. According to
the Helsinki Citizens’ Assembly Vanadzor office, many conscientious objectors
prefer to go straight to jail rather than perform alternative service. As of November
2006, 43 Jehovah’s Witnesses are serving prison terms for evading service, and
five are awaiting trial.
Property Rights
Over the past two years, the government forced hundreds of central Yerevan residents
to vacate their homes to allow for construction of a business district. Many felt that government compensation was well below the market value of their properties.
In April the Constitutional Court ruled that the government’s assertion of
eminent domain was unconstitutional. On August 11, 2006, President Robert
Kocharian announced that the government will refund the income tax deducted
from the compensation paid to those evicted, but also suggested that no additional
compensation would be paid, despite the Constitutional Court decision.
On February 15 authorities released Vahe Grigorian, a lawyer for many of the
evictees, who had been held in pre-trial detention for over four months on
charges of fraud and forgery. Grigorian denies the accusations and believes the
charges were in retaliation for his advocacy in the eviction case. The charges
against him have not been dropped.
Human Rights Defenders
Armenia’s first ombudsperson, Larisa Alaverdian, was relieved of her duties by
President Kocharian in January 2006. Alaverdian’s relationship with Kocharian
became strained after her office published reports critical of the government’s
human rights record. The government refused to allow Alaverdian to present her
2005 report to parliament, although the law requires that the ombudsperson do
so. The new ombudsperson, Armen Harutiunian, previously a legal adviser to
Kocharian, read Alaverdian’s report in parliament on April 13.
Key International Actors
In a December 2005 report, an ad hoc committee formed by the Monitoring
Committee of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe to observe
Armenia’s November 27, 2005 referendum on constitutional reforms found that
the authorities had engaged in fraud during the referendum and called into question
Armenia’s commitment to Council of Europe principles. In January 2006 the
Monitoring Committee issued a declaration reiterating the ad hoc committee’s
findings and noting that implementation of the new provisions would indicate the
government’s commitment to respecting European standards.
On July 26, 2006, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
(OSCE) representative on freedom of the media released a report on Armenia noting the limited pluralism in broadcasting and recommending amendment of the
Law on Television and Radio to clarify licensing competition procedures. The
report also recommended that defamation be decriminalized completely, that the
criminal offense of “insulting a representative of the authorities” be repealed,
and that guidelines be introduced to limit the amount of damages in civil defamation
cases. On September 12 the OSCE’s Yerevan office expressed concern over
recent incidents of violence and intimidation against local journalists.
In August the European Union and Armenia successfully completed negotiations
on the European Neighborhood Policy Action Plan, which will serve as the main
instrument for bilateral relations for the next five years. The plan sets out clear
steps that the Armenian government should achieve in numerous fields including
rule of law, democracy, economic and business development, trade, energy, and
resolution of internal conflicts.
The United States is the largest bilateral donor to Armenia. In March the US
awarded Armenia US$235 million under the Millennium Challenge Account. The
funds will finance the development of rural infrastructure and irrigation projects
and will be disbursed in several installments, with each tranche conditional on
the government’s performance in key areas of economic reform and democratization.
In September a US delegation visited Armenia to discuss increased military
cooperation.
In its country strategy for Armenia approved in February 2006, the European Bank
for Reconstruction and Development maintained its engagement with Armenia,
but noted that the political will to implement commitments to democracy, pluralism,
and market economics remains uncertain.