Armenia
The Armenian authorities have yet to ensure meaningful investigations into excessive
use of police force during March 2008 clashes with opposition supporters
protesting alleged fraud in the previous month’s presidential election, and
address related allegations of abuse in police custody. A number of opposition
supporters reportedly remain imprisoned in connection with the March 2008
events. During May 2009 municipal elections in the capital, Yerevan, international
observers reported intimidation and attacks on domestic observers and journalists.
Broadcasting law amendments bring greater transparency to the licensing
process, but an independent television station that has been off air for over
seven years remains without a new license despite a European Court of Human
Rights ruling in its favor. Authorities have failed to conclusively investigate physical
attacks on journalists.
Lack of Accountability for Excessive Use of Force
The authorities have yet to ensure a meaningful investigation into and full
accountability for excessive use of force by security forces during clashes with
protestors on March 1-2, 2008, following the disputed February presidential election.
The clashes resulted in at least 10 deaths, including two security officials
and eight protestors. Soon after the March events the police dismissed several
top officials, although none was charged in relation to the violence. Officials
claimed to have opened 200 internal inquiries into police conduct, but only four
police officers have been charged in two separate cases for excessive use of
force. The trials continue at this writing.
In September 2009 a parliamentary commission investigating the March 2008
events and dominated by the ruling Republican Party concluded that despite isolated
incidents of excessive force, law enforcement actions had been “largely
legitimate and proportionate.” A separate fact-finding working group, with opposition
participation, had been dismissed by President Serj Sargsyan in June.
More than 50 civilians were prosecuted in relation to the March violence, with
some sentenced to lengthy prison terms. Although a June 19, 2009 presidential
pardon released many, local human rights groups maintain that 17 opposition
supporters remain imprisoned on politically motivated charges.
Torture and Ill-Treatment
Over 100 opposition supporters were detained following the March 2008 events,
and many alleged physical abuse during apprehension, transfer to police station,
and in detention. The Armenian Helsinki Association reported at least four cases
of torture of opposition supporters in custody in 2009 related to investigation
into the March 1 events.
Helsinki Citizens’ Assembly (HCA)’s Vanadzor office reported five cases of torture
and ill-treatment in police custody in 2009. Despite HCA’s appeal to the relevant
prosecutorial and judicial authorities, there have been no efforts to ensure
accountability for these abuses.
Despite a June 2008 court order to reopen the investigation into the May 2007
death in custody of Levon Gulyan, prosecutors closed the case again in April
2009. Gulyan was found dead after police arrested and interrogated him. The
authorities allege that while being held for questioning, Gulyan jumped from a
second-story window of a police station while trying to escape, a claim denied by
Gulyan’s relatives who believe he was tortured.
Municipal Elections
Although election observers from the Council of Europe’s Congress of Local and
Regional Authorities (CLRAE) stated that the May 31, 2009 Yerevan City Council
elections were broadly in compliance with European standards, they also documented
cases of intimidation of party proxies and domestic observers by unidentified
persons. Unidentified assailants attacked opposition newspaper journalists
Gohar Veziryan (IV Estate), Tatev Mesropyan (Hayq), and Marine Kharatyan
(Zhamanak), and prevented them from accessing polling stations. The journalists
complained to police, and the investigation is still ongoing.
Media Freedom
On May 6, 2009, two unknown assailants attacked Nver Mnatsakanyan, anchor
for the private television station Shant, near his home after work. A week earlier,
Argishti Kvirikyan, editor for the Armenia Today online news agency, was attacked
in similar circumstances and hospitalized with severe injuries. On November 17,
2008, an unknown assailant attacked Edik Baghdasaryan, the editor of the online
news magazine Hetq and chairman of the Investigative Journalists’ Association.
He was hospitalized with a concussion. No conclusive investigations followed any
of these incidents. In April 2009 the Organization for Security and Co-operation in
Europe (OSCE) representative on freedom of the media, Miklos Haraszti, urged
the authorities to swiftly investigate the attacks.
Despite the June 2008 decision of the European Court of Human Rights finding
Armenia in violation of article 10 (freedom of expression) of the European
Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) in relation to A1+, an independent television
station, A1+ has not been able to resume broadcasting due to a suspension in all
new licensing until digitalization of frequencies, due in 2010.
Parliament amended broadcasting laws in April 2009. The OSCE positively
assessed some of the amendments, including those that ensure greater transparency
regarding approval for broadcast licenses. However, it also criticized the
amendments for failing to ensure political and ideological pluralism of the licensing
body, the Council for Public Television and Radio, whose members are
appointed by the president.
In August the authorities released Arman Babajanyan, editor of the independent
newspaper Zhamanak Yerevan, from prison for health reasons. Babajanyan was
convicted in 2006 of forging documents in order to evade compulsory military
service and served most of a three-and-a-half-year sentence.
Freedom of Assembly
The authorities continue to restrict freedom of assembly by frequently denying
requests to hold rallies, usually on technical grounds. Out of 84 opposition
requests for demonstrations and rallies, only 28 were granted. Opposition parties
and some NGOs allege particular difficulties in securing meeting venues for
indoor events.
In July three youth opposition activists, Tigran Arakelyan, Sahak Muradyan, and
Herbert Gevorgyan, were hospitalized after plainclothes security officials attacked
them in downtown Yerevan. The activists were publicizing a rally for the opposition
Armenian National Congress. Arakelyan was later charged with hooliganism
and grave abuse against law enforcement personnel, and remanded to two
months pretrial custody, but was released in October pending trial. In September
Gevorgyan was convicted of causing minor bodily injury and sentenced to one
year in prison and fined, but amnestied. Muradyan is under investigation for
hooliganism.
Human Rights Defenders
While monitoring the May Yerevan City Council elections, Arshaluys Hakobyan of
the Armenian Helsinki Association was expelled from a polling station. A few days
after filing a complaint about this incident with the authorities, police appeared
at his home to summon him for questioning. After an argument over his signature
on the summons, police arrested Hakobyan for allegedly resisting authority.
Hakobyan alleges he was then beaten and ill-treated in custody. Although he filed
a complaint and testified to his ill-treatment during his September trial on the
charge of resisting authority, the police have failed to comprehensively investigate
the claim. Hakobyan remains in custody.
Mariam Sukhudyan, whose activism primarily relates to environmental concerns,
in November 2008 publicized on a national television program the case of two
girls who alleged sexual harassment at their Yerevan school. Police charged
Sukhudyan with falsely reporting a crime. Human rights activists believe the
charges are designed to intimidate Sukhidyan in retaliation for her environmental
work.
The investigation into the May 2008 attack on Armenian Helsinki Association
Chairman Mikael Danielyan was halted allegedly for lack of criminal intent.
Danielyan was wounded when an assailant shot him from a pneumatic gun, following
an argument. Danielyan’s appeal against the decision to close the investigation
is pending at this writing.
Key International Actors
In May 2009 Armenia and the European Union signed a Joint Declaration on
Eastern Partnership. Armenia is already part of the European Neighbourhood
Policy (ENP), which pledges significant financial and other assistance. The April
ENP Action Plan progress report commended Armenia for certain progress, but
expressed concerns about repercussions of the February 2008 presidential election.
In June the Millennium Challenge Corporation (a United States government program
for reducing rural poverty) decided to take US$64 million out of an original
US$235.6 million budget for road reconstruction, citing the Armenian government’s
failure to meet the program’s “eligibility criteria” on civil rights. The fund
was originally suspended following the March 2008 events.
The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) has adopted four resolutions
on Armenia since the March 2008 events, setting concrete benchmarks
for addressing human rights concerns. In its June 2009 session PACE welcomed
incremental progress in meeting the benchmarks, but decided to remain seized
of developments.
The Council of Europe also issued a report in September 2009 on the situation of
minority languages in Armenia, in which it called upon the authorities to “develop
a structured policy to make available sufficient teacher training and updated
teaching materials in Assyrian, Yezidi and Kurdish at all education levels.”
In December 2008 the European Court of Human Rights found Armenia in violation
of article 3 (the prohibition against inhuman or degrading treatment), article
6 (the right to a fair trial), and article 2 of protocol 7 (the right to appeal) of the
ECHR in relation to three participants of opposition protests following the
February-March 2003 presidential election. The men were detained in cramped
and unsanitary detention cells without bedding and with restricted access to toilet
facilities. During their trial, the judge heard their cases only very briefly.
In its January 2009 concluding observations, the United Nations Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women urged the government, among
other things, to enact a gender equality bill, which would establish a national
machinery for the advancement of women.