Armenia
Armenian authorities have yet to ensure meaningful investigations into excessive
police force during March 2008 clashes in Yerevan, the capital, when opposition
supporters protested alleged fraud in the previous month’s presidential election.
Twelve opposition supporters remain imprisoned following the events.
Torture and ill-treatment in police custody remains a serious problem.
Amendments to the Law on Television and Radio threaten to limit media pluralism.
Authorities continue to restrict freedom of assembly.
Armenia’s international partners did not fully use their leverage to influence the
human rights situation. The European Union and Armenia launched negotiations
on an association agreement to strengthen ties.
Lack of Accountability for Excessive Use of Force
Authorities have yet to ensure a meaningful investigation into, and full accountability
for, excessive use of force by security forces during clashes with protestors
in March 2008. Ten people were killed, including two security officials and eight
protestors. Only four police officers have been convicted of excessive use of force,
in December 2009. They were sentenced to three years, but were amnestied
immediately, and are only barred from working in law enforcement.
More than 50 civilians were prosecuted in relation to the March 2008 violence,
with some sentenced to lengthy prison terms. Although a June 2009 presidential
pardon released many of them, local human rights groups maintain that 11 opposition
supporters remain imprisoned on politically motivated charges.
On January 19, a court sentenced Nikol Pashinyan, opposition leader and editorin-
chief of the Haykakan Zhamanak newspaper, to seven years imprisonment for
allegedly organizing “mass disorders” during the March 2008 events. An appeals
court upheld the decision but halved his sentence. In November 2010 Pashinyan
claimed two masked men attacked and beat him in Kosh prison; the government
denied the allegation.
In April 2010, relatives of nine victims killed in the March 2008 violence, the eight
protestors and one of the soldiers, appealed unsuccessfully to court for a thorough
investigation into the deaths.
In a March 2010 report analyzing the post-March 2008 trials, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) called on authorities to, among other
things, comprehensively investigate allegations of ill-treatment and ban in court
evidence obtained through ill-treatment.
Torture and Ill-Treatment
Local human rights groups report continued ill-treatment in police custody. For
example, on April 13, 2010, police detained 24-year-old Vahan Khalafyan and four
others in Charentsavan, north of Yerevan, on suspicion of robbery. Khalafyan died
of knife wounds some hours later. Police say he stabbed himself with a knife
obtained in the station, and deny allegations of ill-treatment.
On April 23, investigators charged the head of Charentsavan’s Criminal
Intelligence Department and three others with abuse of authority. The trial is
ongoing at this writing. Khalafyan’s relatives and human rights groups want additional
murder and torture charges. An internal police investigation led to the dismissal
of Charentsavan’s police chief and three officers. The Helsinki Citizens’
Assembly (HCA) Vanadzor Office reported that police ill-treated two other men
detained with Khalafyan. Police failed to conclusively investigate these incidents.
On August 27 a court ordered the investigation into the death in custody of Levon
Gulyan be reopened. In May 2007, Gulyan was found dead following a police
interrogation. Authorities say he jumped from the second-story of a police station
trying to escape. Gulyan’s relatives deny this, insisting he was tortured.
During a September 2010 visit the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention interviewed numerous detainees and prisoners who alleged beatings,
other ill-treatment in police custody, and refusal by prosecutors and judges to
admit evidence of the ill-treatment into court.
In September a YouTube video showed Army Major Sasun Galstyan beating and
humiliating two conscripts. An investigation into abuse of power is ongoing.
In June the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) found Armenia had twice violated
the prohibition against inhuman or degrading treatment in the case of
Ashot Harutyunyan. Convicted of fraud and tax evasion in 2004, Harutyunyan
died of a heart attack in prison in January 2009. The court determined authorities
had denied him necessary medical care for his multiple chronic health problems,
including heart disease, an ulcer, and diabetes. The court also found the government’s
public restraint of Harutyunyan in a metal cage during his appeal hearings
amounted to degrading treatment.
On July 26, 14 human rights groups issued a statement citing a 20 percent rise in
the national prison population, which is leading to overcrowding, health problems,
and conflicts among detainees.
Media Freedom
In early 2010, as part of the transition to mandatory digital broadcasting, parliament
convened a working group to revise the Law on Television and Radio that
included NGOs and opposition parliamentarians. Parliament adopted the legislation
in a June 10 emergency session before thorough discussion of the draft.
The amendments reduced the number of available television stations, and stipulate
that existing broadcasters or those with at least three years experience
receive preference in future licensing competitions, creating a barrier for new
broadcasters.
In March the Gyumri-based television station GALA reported advertisers withdrew
business under pressure from local officials. 26 companies pulled their ads in
one month alone. Since 2007, GALA has been subject to apparently politically
motivated court cases and harassment by state agencies, seemingly in retaliation
for the station’s regular coverage of opposition party activities.
The independent television station A1+ remained off the air for an eighth year,
despite a June 2008 ECTHR judgment that Armenia had violated freedom of
expression due to repeatedly arbitrarily denying the station a broadcast license.
Freedom of Assembly
Authorities continue to restrict freedom of assembly by frequently denying
requests to hold demonstrations. Opposition parties and some NGOs allege particular
difficulties securing indoor events venues.
On May 31, riot police forcibly prevented opposition demonstrators from entering
Yerevan’s Liberty Square. They detained 15 demonstrators following clashes with
riot police, holding them for several hours and denying them access to lawyers.
During the operation police detained Ani Gevorgian, a correspondent for the
opposition Haykakan Zhamanak newspaper, and two opposition activists,
Gevorgyan’s brother, Sargis, and Davit Kiramijyan. Amid local media outrage,
police did not press charges against Ani Gevorgyan. Authorities charged
Kiramijyan with hooliganism and Sargis Gevorgyan with using force against a
police officer. Their joint trial is ongoing.
On November 9, police briefly detained four youth opposition activists protesting
outside a Yerevan hotel at the start of an EU-organized human rights seminar. The
activists claimed police punched and kicked them in the police station.
Human Rights Defenders
Police closed the investigation into the May 2008 attack on Armenian Helsinki
Association Chairman Mikael Danielyan, who was wounded when an assailant
shot him with a pneumatic gun after an argument. The investigation was allegedly
closed due to lack of criminal intent. A court rejected Danielyan’s appeal against
the decision.
Mariam Sukhudyan, primarily an environmental activist, publicized on national
television in November 2008 the case of two girls who alleged sexual harassment
at a Yerevan school. Police charged Sukhudyan with falsely reporting a crime. On
March 10, 2010, the United States Embassy awarded Sukhudyan its first ever
Woman of Courage Award. A day later, the criminal case against her was dropped.
Key International Actors
Armenia’s international partners did not make full use of their leverage to press
Armenia to fulfill its human rights commitments.
The EU’s annual assessment of Armenia—published in May to report on its
progress in meeting benchmarks in the European Neighbourhood Policy Action
Plan— commended Armenia for certain progress, but urged the government to try
harder to ensure that there is a comprehensive investigation into the March 2008
events. On July 19 the EU launched negotiations on an Association Agreement
with Armenia to strengthen political and economic ties.
The May 2010 Universal Periodic Review of Armenia at the UN Human Rights
Council raised concerns about investigations and prosecutions related to the
March 2008 violence; torture and ill-treatment by police; judicial independence;
and freedom of assembly and expression. Armenia said it would “examine all recommendations
and implement them.”
Following his May visit to Armenia, Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe (PACE) President Mevlüt Çavusoglu called on the authorities to adopt a
new electoral code; reform police; and ensure judicial independence, freedom of
assembly, and media independence and pluralism. In June the PACE rapporteurs
on Armenia welcomed the government’s “roadmap” of reforms following the
March 2008 election violence, but expressed concerns about the new electoral
code and amendments to the broadcasting laws. The rapporteurs acknowledged
progress on police and judicial reforms.
In March the Council of Europe’s Committee for the Prevention of Torture published
a report on its ad hoc visit to Armenia in March 2008, finding that practically
all people detained on March 1, 2008, alleged physical ill-treatment during
arrest, and some alleged ill-treatment during police questioning.
During a July 4-5 visit to Yerevan, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton met
President Serzh Sargsyan, and separately with civil society leaders. Secretary
Clinton discussed the US government’s concerns that recent changes to the Law
on Television and Radio could hinder freedom of expression.
On August 20 Russian President Dmitry Medvedev and President Sargsyan agreed
to extend Moscow’s lease of a military base in Armenia until 2044, and Russia
committed to updating Armenia’s military hardware.
In April 2010 Armenia suspended the ratification process for two protocols it
signed with Turkey in 2009 to establish bilateral relations. The unresolved conflict
between Armenia and Azerbaijan in Nagorno-Karabakh continues to impede normalization
of Armenian-Turkish relations. The EU commended Armenia’s commitment
to pursuing normalization of relations, but expressed concern about loss of
momentum.