ARMENIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The trauma of the October 27, 1999, murders in the Parliament continued to
dominate politics and public debate in Armenia. The government did little to
improve on human rights practices, as torture, abuse in the army, and persecution
of religious minorities continued, and growing poverty, combined with corruption,
also led to rights abuses.The Council of Europe admitted Armenia in January.
The trial of Nairi Hunanian and other members of the group alleged to have
killed the prime minister, speaker of Parliament, and six other deputies during the
1999 shootings began in February. After the opposition voiced suspicions that
groups close to the president masterminded the assassinations, Parliament formed
a commission to examine the criminal investigation. In July, at the commission’s
request, forensic experts examined the corpse of suspect Norair Yeghiazarian, who
died in pretrial detention in September 2000.They concluded that an electric shock
followed by a heart attack killed him. Cellmates claimed that he had an accident
with an electric heating device.
Other suspects in the case claimed they were ill-treated or tortured during interrogation.
In September journalist and former detainee Nairi Badalian alleged that
military prosecutors kept him standing for twelve days and poured hot and cold
water over him, to induce him to implicate a presidential adviser in the organization
of the shootings.
The flawed criminal procedure code and the willingness of judges to admit
coerced evidence abetted the routine police practice of extracting confessions
through beatings and other forms of torture. In October 2001, Parliament legislated
a minor improvement to the code, reducing from four to three days the time
police could detain a person without charge.
An egregious case in September demonstrated the impunity security officials
apparently enjoyed in cases of physical abuse.The beaten corpse of Pogos Pogosian
was found in the restroom of a Yerevan jazz club, after a visit by President Robert
Kocharian accompanied by singer Charles Aznavour. Pogosian was reported to
have greeted Aznavour and then made an impertinent remark to President Kocharian,
resulting in an assault by the president’s bodyguards, who took him away. The
bodyguards were suspended, but as of this writing no criminal charges were filed.
Armenian courts continued to deliver death sentences, although the government
pledged to adopt a new criminal code abolishing the death penalty within a
year of Council of Europe accession. A moratorium on executions remained in
place. However, reflecting widespread public calls for the execution of the perpetrators
of the October 1999 Parliament killings, Parliament failed to adopt the new
draft criminal code, which also would decriminalize consensual homosexual relationships
between adults.
Widespread torture, beatings, and noncombat fatalities of soldiers in the army continued. In January, Defense Minister Serge Sarkisian claimed that the number
of soldier deaths had declined compared to previous years,with seventy-two fatalities
in 2000, eight of which were attributed to border skirmishes with Azerbaijan.
Military investigators attributed many soldier deaths to suicide, allegedly doing so
to cover up fatalities under a range of circumstances. Physical abuse of new conscripts
by officers and older conscripts continued to be systematic. Superiors
extorted money or personal belongings from conscripts, abusing those who
refused to comply.
In July, the Presidential Commission on Human Rights issued the first challenge
by an official body to the widespread practice of torture in the detention facilities
under the military procuracy’s direction and to the latter’s role in fostering
impunity for grave human rights abuses in the army. It called also for the suspension
of chief military prosecutor Gagik Jahangirian. The commission raised cases
in which military police and prosecutors allegedly tortured Mikael Arutiunian by
crushing his fingers with pliers and beat another detainee repeatedly on an open
foot wound.However, it notably failed to address the wider problem of brutality in
army units.
In early September, a special investigating commission established by Prosecutor
General Aram Tamazian confirmed several allegations of abuse by the military
procuracy, including the case of Suren Grigorian, who was permanently crippled
when a group of officers allegedly beat him shortly after he was conscripted at the
end of 2000. Military prosecutors had declined to pursue the case and pressured
medical staff to misreport his injuries.However, by choosing to reject most allegations
the special commission signaled that the military procuracy need not answer
for systematic abuse.
In June, Armenia partially implemented a Council of Europe requirement to
pardon all sentenced conscientious objectors, by pardoning and releasing thirtyseven
Jehovah’s Witnesses. However, the authorities flouted the requirement by
continuing to arrest, detain, and imprison conscientious objectors. Armenia did
not adopt a law on alternative service.
The governmental Council for Religious Affairs continued to deny official registration
to the Jehovah’s Witnesses and other non-Orthodox Christian faiths. The
authorities continued to prosecute a Jehovah’s Witnesses organizer, Levon Markarian,
for holding “illegal” religious meetings. They charged him under article 244(1)
of the criminal code: “infringement of individual and civil rights and freedoms.”
Because families with children were present at these meetings, the procuracy
charged him with enticing children into meetings of an unregistered religion, for
which the penalty was a prison sentence of up to five years. A court acquitted him
in September, but the prosecutor appealed the decision.Article 244 of the criminal
code was a remnant from Khrushchev’s antireligious campaign of the early 1960s.
Although Armenia reported its seventh successive year of economic growth, the
majority of the population remained in poverty.Disparities of wealth increased, as
in previous years, with a small elite exercising much control over resources and
political power. The government announced an anticorruption drive, yet corruption
investigations remained highly selective and often appeared to be politically
motivated. A high-profile case was brought against Ashot Bleian, an opponent of the government and a former presidential candidate, who had mounted a legal
challenge on President Kocharian’s eligibility to stand for the presidency. In
December 2000, a court sentenced Bleian to seven years of imprisonment for
embezzlement and abuse of office, although witnesses withdrew incriminating
statements in court, claiming that prosecutors obtained them by intimidation or
blackmail. Two of Bleian’s colleagues were also imprisoned. His sentence was
reduced to five years on appeal in May; he was released in July.
In several cases, newspapers and journalists publishing articles critical of the
authorities received telephoned threats. Police and tax inspectors investigated the
holding company of the newspaper Fourth Estate after it fiercely criticized the official
investigation into the 1999 parliament killings. The authorities did not appear
vigorously to investigate an arson attack on the workshop of freelance journalist
Vahan Gukasian, another critic of the official investigation into the 1999 parliament
killings. The authorities reacted identically to two antigovernment demonstrations—
on October 30, 2000, and September 7, 2001—as police arrested and
sentenced the respective organizers to administrative detention, and confiscated
journalists’ cameras or videotapes. Authorities cut the power to an independent
television station’s transmitter to prevent the broadcast of news footage of the
arrest of October 2000 demonstration organizer Arkady Vartanian.
In a December 2000 report on the state’s failure to respond to domestic violence,
Minnesota Advocates for Human Rights noted that there was a high degree of social
acceptance of domestic violence and that the government did not keep statistics on
it. The research, conducted in Yerevan and Gyumri, indicated that the authorities
did not view domestic violence as a significant problem and that police often
attempted to dissuade women from pressing charges against violent partners. The
report cited a Ministry of Internal Affairs official who claimed: “If women are
assaulted in their homes, it is not considered a crime. According to Armenian tradition,
a man has a right to beat his wife in his home.”
Prisons were overcrowded, poorly supplied, and neglected. In June, Parliament
approved a general prison amnesty, releasing or reducing the sentences of onethird
of the country’s estimated 6,000 convicts and detained suspects. The authorities
planned to implement the transfer of prisons from the jurisdiction of the
Ministry of Internal Affairs to the Ministry of Justice by the end of 2001, as mandated
by the Council of Europe, in order to reform and demilitarize the system.
However, the transfer of pretrial facilities run by the Ministry of Internal Affairs
and the Ministry of National Security, mandated to take place within eighteen
months of Council of Europe accession, appeared to be stalled.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
There were no reported cases of harassment of human rights defenders in 2001.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In November 2000, the Committee against Torture reviewed Armenia’s second
periodic report. It criticized the report for concentrating overly on projected
reforms, such as the draft criminal code, rather than the existing situation, and for
failing to respond to the committee’s 1996 recommendations. It recommended legislative
and practical reforms to address violations of the rights of detainees, particularly
regarding access to lawyers, family, and doctors; poor prison conditions;
hazing in the army; lack of effective compensation for people tortured by state officials;
and the draft criminal code’s inadequate definition of torture.
Council of Europe
The Council of Europe did not sufficiently monitor Armenia’s observance of the
obligations it assumed upon membership, and failed to condemn the ongoing
imprisonment of conscientious objectors in violation of Armenia’s pledges. The
three-year deadline it set for the adoption of a law on alternative service was too lax.
A group of experts appointed by the secretary-general visited Armenia in May to
investigate cases of alleged political prisoners, concluding that there were none.
In July the Venice Commission of the Council of Europe published its report on
the revised draft Armenian constitution,which the government intended to put to
a referendum. The commission gave a generally positive assessment of the constitution’s
treatment of human rights, and proposed further revisions, such as incorporating
the abolition of the death penalty.
United States
The State Department’s Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2000,
published in February, provided a full and telling portrayal of the human rights situation
in Armenia.
International Financial Institutions
The World Bank and the Armenian government co-hosted an international
donors’ meeting in July, and the bank published its Country Assistance Strategy
(CAS). The report emphasized a need for generating conditions for poverty reduction
through job creation. The paper cited corruption and outward migration as
hampering the business and investment environment. It called for expanded
budget allocations to education, health, and to targeted social assistance for vulnerable
sectors of the population. In August, President Kocharian publicly took
issue with the CAS, disputing its assessment that growth had done nothing to
reduce poverty levels. The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank oversaw
the government’s development of an Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy, for
which they earmarked loan credits. In May the World Bank granted U.S. $300,000 for an anticorruption program, to be managed by the Yerevan office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe.