Armenia
Although the international community has looked favorably upon
Armenia for its economic reforms in 2004, the government has failed to
improve its human rights record. The legacy of the 2003 presidential
elections, which were marred by widespread fraud, dominates political
life. An opposition boycott of Parliament, in response to the ruling
coalition’s refusal to debate a “referendum of confidence” in President
Robert Kocharian, exemplified an increased polarization between the
government and opposition.
The opposition led a broader campaign calling on President Kocharian
to step down, triggering a countrywide government crackdown. The
campaign peaked in a massive, peaceful protest on April 12, 2004, which
the authorities dispersed using excessive force. Repeating a cycle of
repressive tactics from the 2003 election, the authorities arrested opposition
leaders and supporters, violently dispersed demonstrators, raided
political party headquarters, attacked journalists, and restricted travel to
prevent people from participating in demonstrations.
In response to international pressure, the government has released some
opposition leaders detained during the crackdown, and has participated
in discussions about cooperation with the opposition. The government
has made limited attempts at reforms in other areas. It set up a council
to fight corruption, a widespread, endemic problem in Armenia. Critics,
including Transparency International, dismissed the measure as ineffectual,
citing the council’s lack of independence from the executive. The
judiciary remains under the influence of the executive and torture and
ill-treatment continue in places of detention.
Freedom of Assembly
The authorities restrict the right to freedom of assembly, effectively
banning most opposition rallies. In May 2004, President Kocharian signed a new law on public gatherings that Parliament had adopted
despite criticism from the Council of Europe and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) that the law did not comply
with European human rights standards. Among other things, the
law prohibits public gatherings in numerous specific locations and bans
mass public events “for the purposes of election or referendum campaigning”
if they interfere with traffic regulations. After the law came
into force, the authorities denied the opposition permission to hold a
rally in at least one case, and permanently banned public gatherings
outside the presidential residence, the site of the April 12 protest.
Repeating a pattern established during the 2003 presidential election,
the authorities restricted travel on major roads to Yerevan when opposition
rallies were held in the capital from March to May 2004. Police set
up roadblocks, stopped cars, questioned passengers, and denied permission
to travel further to those they believed were opposition supporters.
State Violence
Torture and ill-treatment in police custody remain widespread in
Armenia. In 2004, Human Rights Watch documented cases of torture
of opposition supporters in police custody. Police beat and threatened
to rape the detainees, later releasing them either without charge, or
with petty charges punishable with fines or short periods of imprisonment
under the Administrative Code. No officials were held to account
for these incidents.
A dramatic low point in 2004 was the authorities’ use of excessive force
to break up the April 12 demonstration. Police and security forces violently
dispersed a peaceful crowd of about three thousand protesters
who were calling for President Kocharian’s resignation. Security forces
sprayed the crowd with water cannons and then beat protesters with
batons, shocked them with electric prods, and threw stun grenades into their midst. High-level government officials later claimed the violence
was not excessive, though no investigation was carried out.
Security forces and unknown assailants have carried out a series of brutal
attacks on journalists who were reporting on opposition rallies.
Attackers confiscated and smashed journalists’ equipment, significantly
preventing television coverage of these events and their violent dispersal.
Although there was evidence of the identity of attackers, the authorities
charged only two men, who received a fine of less than U.S. $200,
in stark contrast to the custodial penalties imposed on opposition
activists for lesser offences.
An environment of impunity for attacks against government critics continues.
The authorities failed to bring to justice the perpetrators of at
least four attacks on opposition leaders and a human rights activist in
March and April 2004. On March 30, four unknown men assaulted
Mikael Danielian, a human rights defender, punching and kicking him.
Danielian spent four days in a hospital after the attack, which he
believed was aimed at stopping him from monitoring the growing street
protests by the political opposition. The General Prosecutor’s investigation
produced no results and was closed on June 1.
Arrests and Raids
As the opposition began a series of protests in late March 2004, the
government resorted to its long-established tactic of detaining potential
protesters under the Administrative Code for short periods of time for
what is termed “administrative detention.” From March to June, police
detained several hundred people, for such offences as petty hooliganism
and failing to carry out a police directive. The trials breached basic
standards, including the defendant’s right to a lawyer and to present evidence
in his or her defense. Judges imposed penalties ranging from a
fine to fifteen days in prison. 
On March 30, the authorities stepped up the pressure on the political
opposition, opening a criminal case against a coalition of opposition
parties and its supporters. Prosecutors charged a handful of opposition
party leaders with publicly calling for the seizure of power and publicly
insulting representatives of government, keeping them in custody for up
to several months. By September, the prosecutor general had dropped
the charges and released all the accused men. In another example of
political intimidation, on the night of April 12-13 security forces
stormed the Yerevan opposition headquarters of the Republic Party, the
Nationial Unity Party, and the People’s Party, arrested those present,
and closed two of the headquarters for several days.
Media
Although Armenia has a significant independent and opposition print
media, the government continued to restrict full media freedom in the
country. On April 5, 2004, the Russian television channel NTV had its
broadcasting suspended throughout the country, after broadcasting
footage of opposition protests. The official reason given for the suspension
was “technical problems.” By the end of September, NTV had not
resumed broadcasting and the government had given its broadcasting
frequency to another Russian channel that does not do news programming.
In October, Kentron, a private Armenian television station, cancelled
a Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty (RFE/RL) news and
analysis program three days after it began broadcasts. RFE/RL believed
that a high-level government official had forced the cancellation. Local
NGOs continue a campaign for broadcasting rights for A1+ television,
which had been a highly popular and independent channel. The national
broadcasting commission remains steadfast, however, refusing to
grant licenses to A1+ and Noyan Tapan television channels, which were
shut down in 2002 and 2001 respectively.
Freedom of Religion
There was some improvement for religious freedom in 2004 with the
registration in October of the Jehovah’s Witnesses, after a string of
rejected applications. However, despite the authorities’ promises to
release all Jehovah’s Witnesses imprisoned for refusing to perform military
service, the courts continue to impose fresh prison terms. In
September, according to the Armenian Helsinki Association, eight
Jehovah’s Witnesses were serving prison terms for their refusal to perform
military service, and a further eight, five of whom were in custody,
were awaiting trial for the same offences.
Key International Actors
The U.S. appears to be gaining influence in Armenia, which traditionally
has looked to Russia for military and economic ties. The U.S.
increased military aid and cooperation and, after initially refusing to
involve itself, in 2004 Armenia agreed to send a small contingent of
non-combatant military personnel to Iraq. The U.S. also designated
Armenia as one of sixteen countries to be eligible for a multi-million
dollar aid program called the Millennium Challenge Account. The U.S.
stated that the flow of money was dependent on improvements in
Armenia’s human rights record.
The Council of Europe effectively engaged Armenia to roll back some
of the government’s more authoritarian practices in 2004. The council
continued its scrutiny of Armenia’s post-accession obligations, noting
progress in complying with some commitments, such as abolition of the
death penalty, while expressing disappointment in other areas, such as
the conduct of the 2003 elections. In April, the council’s Parliamentary
Assembly passed a resolution under an urgent procedure, expressing
concern about the government crackdown against opposition supporters
that month. Armenia responded by releasing the opposition supporters who were in custody on criminal charges and dropping the charges
against many of them.
In September 2004, the European Union and Armenia met under the
framework of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement.
Unfortunately, the E.U. failed to use this forum publicly to encourage
human rights improvements, issuing a press release that did not raise
human rights concerns. In a step that could increase the ability of the
E.U. to influence Armenia on human rights, it included Armenia in its
European Neighborhood Policy, giving privileged ties with the bloc.
Officials warned that economic benefits would not flow until at least
2007, when Armenia will have to have negotiated action plans on economic
and political reforms.