Armenia
Although the international community continued in 2005 to look favorably
on Armenia for its economic performance, the government has failed to
improve its human rights record. The crackdown on opposition parties and
supporters in 2004 led to fewer public demonstrations in 2005, and, consequently,
less overt government pressure on the opposition. However, the
authorities continued to use their powers to limit political activity.
In July 2005, after years of failing to meet Council of Europe obligations to
amend the constitution to introduce a system of stronger checks and balances
among the different branches of government, Armenian authorities secured
the approval of Council of Europe legal experts on a raft of constitutional
amendments. The opposition (and media freedom activists) were critical, saying
that too much power would remain with the executive, and some opposition
parties decided to campaign against the amendments, which were to go
to a referendum in November. The government made little progress on
measures against corruption, a widespread problem in the country, and
forced land aquisition by government-backed urban developers resulted in
allegations of abuses against homeowners.
Law enforcement authorities restrict freedom of assembly and use torture
and other violent and intimidating practices when carrying out their work.
The authorities have a history of putting pressure on human rights defenders
who are critical of the government. In 2005, such pressure extended to the
ombudsperson’s office.
Freedom of Assembly
The authorities restrict the right to freedom of assembly, particularly in the
case of opposition rallies and demonstrations. May 2005 amendments to the
2004 law on public gatherings resulted in few improvements. On repeated
occassions in 2005, nongovernmental organizations and political parties
attempted to hold public gatherings at which police or unidentified people
interfered, grabbing banners and placards, or triggering disturbances. One
such incident occurred on April 20, when the head of the New Times political party, Aram Karapetian, held a public meeting with residents in the town
of Sevan. Unidentified people began fighting with rally participants, and one
shot and injured in the leg a university student who was participating in the
rally. A police investigation concluded that the rally participants had themselves
incited the disturbances, and no one was charged in relation to the
shooting. In another incident in May, police reportedly threatened to detain
people who wanted to attend a rally of the opposition People’s Party of
Armenia in a village near Yerevan.
State Violence and Intimidation
Torture and ill-treatment in police custody remain widespread in Armenia.
Torture usually occurs in pre-trial detention with the aim of coercing a confession
or evidence against third parties. Abuse and mistreatment within the
army is also widespread, with dozens of suspicious deaths occuring every
year.
In May 2005, police allegedly beat supporters of an independent candidate,
Artur Shaboyan, in local elections in the town of Hrazdan. According to
media reports, police used batons and electric-shock equipment to attack
Shaboyan supporters outside several polling stations.
In June, law enforcement authorities arrested Yektan Turkyilmaz, a Turkish
scholar who had been carrying out historical research using Armenian
archives, for failing to obtain official permission to take old books out of the
country. After his arrest, security officers questioned him and his associates
about his research and political views. They denied him access to a lawyer for
two days and then provided him with a state-appointed lawyer, not of his
choice. In August, after significant international pressure, he was released on
a two-year suspended prison sentence.
Media
Although Armenia has significant independent and opposition print media,
the government continued to restrict full media freedom in the country.
Television channels A1+, Noyan Tapan, and Russian NTV, which had aired independent news coverage about Armenia, remained unable to broadcast
because the government had taken away their broadcasting frequencies. The
proposed constitutional amendments would increase the independence of the
National Commission on Television and Radio, the body that issues and
revokes broadcasting licenses, by giving parliament the power to appoint half
of the members and the president the power to appoint the other half (currently,
the president appoints all the members of the commission).
Nevertheless, media associations, nongovernmental organizations, and the
ombudsperson have criticized the Council of Europe for endorsing the proposed
constitutional amendments, which they argue fails to guarantee the
independence of the electronic media. They further criticize the authorities’
failure to institute changes to increase the independenceof the commission
overseeing state-run Armenian Public Television and Radio, set up in 2005 to
provide independent public television, one of Armenia’s obligations to the
Council of Europe.
Freedom of Religion
Despite amendments to the law on alternative service introduced in
November 2004, Jehovah’s Witnesses continue to be persecuted for their
refusal to perform military service. According to the Armenian Helsinki
Association, in September 2005 sixteen Jehovah’s Witnesses were serving
prison terms, and nineteen were awaiting trial, for refusing to perform military
service.
On June 9, 2005, according to Forum 18 News Service, a court in
Stepanakert, in the unrecognized republic of Nagorno-Karabakh, sentenced
Armen Grigorian, an Armenian conscientious objector, to two years in prison
for refusing to perform military service. A year earlier, the Armenian military
had forcibly taken Grigorian, an eighteen-year-old from a Jehovah’s Witness
family, from Yerevan to a military unit in Nagorno-Karabakh. His request for
alternative civilian service was rejected. When he refused to sing the national
anthem and swear the military oath, army officials beat him and later forced
him to stand in his underwear in front of about 1,800 soldiers and explain
why he refused to perform military service.
Human Rights Defenders
In May 2005, the government successfully applied to the Constitutional
Court to curtail the powers of the ombudsperson to access court documents,
arguing that the powers breached the principle of the independence of the
courts. The decision came after the ombudsperson released her first annual
report, which criticized the government for its human rights record. Later in
May, security services reportedly confiscated a computer from the office of
the ombudsperson that had confidential information about people who had
made complaints to the office; ostensibly the computer was seized as evidence
against an employee of the office previously arrested and accused of
taking a bribe. Larisa Alaverdian, the ombudsperson, claimed that the security
services did not have a warrant to take the computer, and that they used
information it contained to harass a law firm that had helped two individuals
to file complaints to her office.
Key International Actors
Although the Council of Europe continued to engage Armenia to make
progress in complying with its membership obligations, local groups criticized
the organization for weak monitoring of those obligations and for
approving the government-proposed amendments to the constitution. Many
of Armenia’s obligations to the Council of Europe remain unfulfilled, including
resolving the problem of the use of administrative arrests for political
purposes, providing plurality in the electronic media, and resolving the issue
of alternative service.
In April 2005, the European Union decided to proceed with the European
Neighbourhood Policy joint preparations for action plans with the countries
of the South Caucasus, including Armenia. This is the first time that the
E.U. has offered closer economic, political, and cultural relations in exchange
for progress on concrete human rights benchmarks, and therefore marks a
significant opportunity for the E.U. to encourage human rights improvements
in Armenia. The potential of this opportunity to trigger meaningful
reforms will depend, however, on how specific the human rights benchmarks are in the final action plan document, which was being negotiated between
the Armenian government and the E.U. throughout the latter half of 2005.
The United States and Russia continued to compete for influence in
Armenia. The United States protested over the lack of transparency in the
sale of Armenia’s electricity grid to a Russian company, which increased
Russia’s hold over Armenia’s energy sector. Russia’s withdrawal from its bases
in Georgia resulted in Russia relocating part of its military hardware to
Armenia. Increasing ties with the United States led to Armenia sending
forty-six troops to join coalition forces in Iraq in January 2005. In March,
Armenia and the United States signed an action plan regarding Armenia’s
participation in the Millennium Challenge Account, a multi-million-dollar
U.S. aid program. The action plan focuses on development of fiscal policy,
banking, corruption, and agriculture.