ARMS
The arrival of the Bush administration in the White House in January ushered
in an approach to U.S. foreign policy that could only be described as a
reflexive unilateralism. It seemed there was not a single multilateral treaty that the
new government was willing to join or retain. Treaty negotiations soon ran up
against freshly drawn “red lines,” that is, baseline positions that, it was made clear,
were essentially nonnegotiable. As a result, these negotiations were either scuttled
or resulted in watered-down documents that reflected a common denominator
heavily colored by what the United States presented as its vital national interests.
This was true especially for negotiations involving issues of international arms
control. In 2001, these included talks on the 1972 bilateral Anti-Ballistic Missile
Systems (ABM) treaty, the 1972 Biological Weapons Convention (BWC), and small
arms and light weapons (at a U.N. conference in July).The review of the 1980 Conventional
Weapons Convention (CCW) was scheduled for December; negotiations
at preparatory committee meetings (“prepcoms”) took place in April and September.
In mid-September, States Parties to the 1997 Mine Ban Treaty met to review
that treaty, as they had every year since 1997; as a non-signatory, the U.S. was not
involved in this review.
After the September 11 attacks on New York and Washington,D.C., the U.S. government
no longer could hew to a strict unilateralist line. It suddenly was faced with
the need to build a broad international coalition to respond to the attacks. However,
in the middle of November it remained unclear whether this would bring a
renewed U.S. commitment to multilateral treaties.Moreover, one victim of the new
U.S. preoccupation with its self-proclaimed fight against terrorism was the effort to
curb the proliferation of small arms and small weapons.While this remained an
issue of pressing concern for those who suffered directly from the impact of the
spread of small arms, especially those living in zones of armed conflict in Africa and
elsewhere, the fear was that supplier countries would turn their attention away
from the urgent need to impose stricter export controls.
Consistent with its emphasis on small arms and light weapons, in 2001,Human
Rights Watch was engaged primarily in the U.N. conference on small arms, and in
the review of the Mine Ban Treaty.
ANTIPERSONNEL LANDMINES
Important strides were made in 2001 in the effort to eradicate antipersonnel
landmines, despite the reality that antipersonnel mines continued to be laid and to
take far too many victims. It was evident that the 1997 Mine Ban Treaty, and the ban movement more generally, were making a significant difference. A growing number
of governments joined the Mine Ban Treaty and there was a decreased use of
antipersonnel mines, a dramatic drop in production, an almost complete halt to
trade, and progress in the rapid destruction of stockpiled mines. There were also
fewer mine victims in key affected countries and more land was demined.
Between November 2000 and November 12, 2001, the number of States Parties
to the 1997 Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,Production, and
Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and On Their Destruction (Mine Ban Treaty)
grew to 122. Among the new adherents were Romania and Chile, both major producers
and exporters in the past, and Eritrea,which was using antipersonnel mines
in combat as recently as June 2000. An additional twenty countries had signed but
not yet ratified the Mine Ban Treaty. The foreign ministers of Greece, Turkey, and
Yugoslavia pledged to ratify or accede to the treaty shortly.
Fifty-two countries had not yet joined the treaty.This included most of the Middle
East, most of the former Soviet republics, and many Asian nations.Major producers
such as the United States, Russia, China, India, and Pakistan were not part
of the treaty. Yet virtually all of the nonsignatories had endorsed the notion of a
comprehensive ban on antipersonnel mines at some point in time, and many had
already at least partially embraced the Mine Ban Treaty. United Nations General
Assembly Resolution 55/33v calling for universalization of the Mine Ban Treaty was
adopted in November 2000 by a vote of 143 in favor,none opposed, and twenty-two
abstentions.Nineteen nonsignatories voted for the resolution.
The Mine Ban Treaty intersessional work program,with week-long meetings in
Geneva in December 2000 and May 2001, successfully fulfilled its intended purpose
in helping to maintain a focus on the landmines crisis, in becoming a meeting place
for all key mine action players, and in stimulating momentum to fully implement
the Mine Ban Treaty. The four intersessional Standing Committees on Victim
Assistance,Mine Clearance, Stockpile Destruction, and General Status and Operation
of the Convention helped to provide a global picture of priorities, as well as to
consolidate and concentrate global mine action efforts. Compliance with all key
articles of the convention became an overall focus of the second intersessional year.
A Universalization Contact Group was formed, coordinated by Canada, with participation
by a number of States Parties, the International Campaign to Ban Landmines
(ICBL) and International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). In addition
to many bilateral efforts to promote adherence to the Mine Ban Treaty, there were
important regional conferences aimed at universalization, notably in Bamako,Mali
in February.
The Third Meeting of States Parties to the Mine Ban Treaty was held in Managua,
Nicaragua in September. States Parties, in close cooperation with the ICBL,
developed an action plan for the year and issued a strong final declaration.
Just prior to the Managua meeting, the ICBL released the 1,175-page Landmine
Monitor Report 2001, its third annual report looking at the landmine situation in
every country of the world. The report, the product of a network of 122
researchers from ninety-five countries, cited many positive developments, including
more than 185 million square meters of land cleared of mines in 2000; a revised
estimate of new mine casualties of 15,000–20,000 per year, compared to previous estimates of 26,000 per year; destruction of another five million stockpiled
antipersonnel mines, bringing the total to 27 million in recent years; no known
significant exports of antipersonnel mines; and a reduction in the number of producers
from fifty-five to fourteen (with Turkey and Yugoslavia being removed
from the list in the past year).However, the Landmine Monitor also identified use
of antipersonnel mines in twenty-three conflicts by fifteen governments and more
than thirty rebel groups in this reporting period (May 2000 to mid-2001). It
reported a “strong possibility” of use by Mine Ban Treaty state party Uganda in
June 2000 in the Democratic Republic of Congo, and called on states parties to
seek clarification urgently.
The Second Annual Conference of States Parties to Amended Protocol II (Landmines)
of the Convention on Conventional Weapons (CCW) was held in Geneva
in December 2000, and there were preparatory meetings in December 2000, April
2001, and September 2001 for the Second CCW Review Conference, to be held in
December 2001. Proposals presented and discussed at these meetings included:
extension of the treaty’s scope, compliance issues, antivehicle mines,wound ballistics,
and the explosive remnants of war.
In the United States there were indications in late 2000 that the Clinton administration
would announce several significant steps toward a ban on antipersonnel
mines prior to departing office, but this did not materialize. Decisions were left to
the incoming administration on controversial issues such as procurement of
RADAM (a new “mixed” system combining existing antitank and antipersonnel
mines) and a “man-in-the-loop”munition developed as an alternative to antipersonnel
mines but which contains a feature to revert the munition to mine status.
The Bush administration had not made a formal policy statement on antipersonnel
mines by mid-November, and key developments were on hold pending completion
of a comprehensive review of landmine policy and actions that began in
June.The U.S. continued to be the leader in contributions to global mine clearance,
devoting nearly U.S. $100 million in both FY 2000 and FY 2001.
SMALL ARMS AND LIGHT WEAPONS
The United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, mandated in December 1999 by the General Assembly,
was held in July 2001 in New York. Flawed both in concept and in execution, it was
considered a near-total failure by the human rights and humanitarian communities.
While participating states did manage to produce a conference document (the
program of action) despite a long list of contentious issues, the document was
weak. The program of action ascribed primary responsibility for dealing with the
black-market trade in small arms to states, yet did not allude to, much less prescribe,
any measures to curb the flow of weapons to abusive actors through the irresponsible
arms trade practices of governments themselves. The document did not
codify any standards for the arms trade based on international humanitarian law or
human rights, and made only a few vague references to the humanitarian urgency
of the unchecked proliferation of small arms. It did not establish a transparent universal system for marking and tracing weapons, or record-keeping and reporting
mechanisms (such as an international public register of small arms transfers).
Finally, the program of action was not legally binding, nor did it mandate the negotiation
of other legally binding documents, such as a treaty on measures to regulate
the activities of independent brokers.
Confusion over the conference mandate hampered progress from the beginning,
and the scope of the conference was still being debated by the third and final
prepcom in March. The conference title referred specifically to the “illicit” trade in
small arms, but by adding the phrase “in all its aspects,” the door was left open for
states to tackle a critical facet of the problem: the legal, government-sponsored
trade. However, while many states were adamant that battling the illicit trade in
small arms was the responsibility of governments (as opposed to nongovernmental
organizations, which were marginalized throughout the process), the same
states insisted that the conference should not address government responsibility for
creating the problem. Ignoring the fact that virtually every illicitly traded weapon
was first traded legally, and that weapons were routinely traded “legally” to abusive
forces, the conference rejected demands from civil society and some government
delegations to develop stronger export controls and international standards governing
the arms trade practices of states.
From the beginning, it was expected that major arms exporters, including most
of the Permament Five members of the U.N. Security Council, would try to water
down any program of action. The surprise was the emergence of the United States,
rather than Russia or China, in this respect. The U.S. had itself boasted relatively
decent arms trade control mechanisms, including curbs on exports to human
rights abusers and measures to ensure transparency.Yet with the change in administration
following immediately after the second prepcom in January, the U.S. delegation
began taking a blatantly obstructionist approach. An uncompromising
U.S. position was articulated in an opening statement to the conference which
shocked most observers and reflected the Bush administration’s disdain for multilateral
arms control and multilateralism in general.The statement set down several
positions which were said to be nonnegotiable, rejecting a mandatory Review Conference,
the participation of nongovernmental organizations, and all “measures
that would constrain legal trade and legal manufacturing of small arms.” It was
clear throughout the conference that the domestic gun lobby wielded heavy influence
in the U.S. delegation, imposing on the conference a belief that talk of international
arms trade control would lead to the demise of the putative constitutional
right of U.S. citizens to own guns. Other states antagonistic to the conference’s
objectives were all too willing to let the U.S. dismantle the conference.
Other factors also hampered progress at the conference. Lack of interest in the
process in general, and in the humanitarian dimension in particular, was evident in
the make-up of most delegations.Many states refused to send senior Foreign Ministry
representatives to the conference, and most delegations were staffed primarily
by arms control experts (where staffed with any expertise at all) who were unfamiliar
with human rights and international humanitarian law. Further distracting
states from turning their focus to the humanitarian and human rights implications
of small arms, where it belonged, were debates over peripheral issues, such as nonstate actors, self-determination, and self-defense, as well as myriad disputes over
definitions.
Civil society was effectively excluded from participating in the conference. Limitations
on NGO access were not officially agreed until the beginning of the conference
itself, where it was decided that NGOs would be allowed to watch plenary
proceedings from the gallery but could be sent out at any point if delegates opted
for a closed session. (NGOs were also allowed one three-hour session to address
delegates at each prepcom and during the conference.) States also debated whether
or not to include language calling for civil society participation in the program of
action. The U.S. in its opening statement opposed this, claiming that such participation
was not “consistent with democratic principles,” and other delegations
insisted that implementation of the program of action was the exclusive realm of
states. The document did, however, contain language on civil society cooperation
in some areas.
In addition, negotiating the program of action was a consensus-driven process
that allowed rejectionist states such as the U.S. to hijack the outcome by simply
refusing to compromise on key issues, resulting in a document based on the lowest
common denominator that was predictably weak, even on those issues that were
not cut from the final draft. One positive outcome was the commitment to a review
conference after five years, making this the only red-line position on which the U.S.
delegation was eventually willing to back down.The conference also served to raise
the profile of small arms proliferation internationally, and allowed civil society
organizations to rally around a specific event and develop momentum and focus
for future work.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Landmine Monitor Report 2001: Toward a Mine-Free World, 9/01
Crisis of Impunity: The Role of Pakistan, Russia, and Iran in Fueling the Civil War
in Afghanistan, 07/01