Australia
Australia has a strong record protecting civil and political rights, but has damaged
its record and its potential to be a regional human rights leader by persistently
undercutting refugee protections. In 2013, successive Australian governments
continued to engage in scare-mongering politics at the expense of the
rights of asylum seekers and refugees. The Labor government reintroduced offshore
processing, and the Liberal Party-led coalition government elected in
September continued and expanded these punitive resettlement policies,
repeatedly trumpeting their refusal to consider resettling in Australia even a
single additional asylum-seeker arriving by sea.
Australia also has been increasingly unwilling to publicly raise human rights
abuses in countries with which it has strong trade or security ties, fearing that
doing so would harm its relations with Asian governments. Such reluctance to
speak out validates the stance of those who mistakenly view raising human
rights as an act of diplomatic aggression rather than a normal part of principled
diplomacy, making it all the more difficult to use foreign relations as a means of
improving human rights protections globally.
Asylum Seekers and Refugees
Successive governments have prioritized domestic politics over Australia’s
international legal obligations to protect the rights of asylum seekers and
refugees, many of who have escaped from appalling situations in places like
Afghanistan and Sri Lanka. Too often, the government has attempted to demonize
those trying to reach Australia by boat and has insisted that officials refer
to all asylum seekers who do so as illegal maritime arrivals.
In October 2012, the Labor government introduced “enhanced screening” for Sri
Lankan asylum seekers arriving by boat, whereby immigration officials conduct
cursory interviews with asylum seekers, who often have no access to legal representation
or right to appeal. An unfavorable finding means the asylum seeker
is immediately deported back to his or her country of origin. This policy poses a
serious risk of refoulement, returning genuine refugees to face persecution and
threats to their life and liberty. At this writing, the government had returned at
least 1,191 Sri Lankans under this procedure.
In July 2013, the United Nations Human Rights Committee found that Australia
had breached the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and committed
143 human rights violations by indefinitely detaining 46 refugees on the
basis of Australian Security Intelligence Organisation “adverse security assessments.”
The committee directed Australia to provide the refugees with an effective
remedy, including release from detention, rehabilitation, and compensation.
So far, the government has yet to act on the committee’s recommendations.
Australia has continued the practice of mandatory detention for those arriving
in Australia without a visa. As of September 30, 2013, 6,403 people were in
secure immigration detention facilities (onshore and offshore), including 1,078
children; 106 people had been in detention for more than two years.
Another deterrent measure is the offshore processing of asylum seekers on
Manus Island, Papua New Guinea, and Nauru. Offshore processing was first
implemented in 2001 and subsequently abandoned in 2008, only to be reintroduced
by the Labor government in August 2012. In July and August 2013, the
Australian government concluded agreements with Papua New Guinea and
Nauru through which all asylum seekers who arrive in Australia by boat after
July 19, 2013, are to be transferred to offshore processing centers. The United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has repeatedly expressed
concern regarding the mandatory and indefinite detention of asylum seekers in
offshore centers, where conditions are harsh and unsatisfactory and individuals
get little help making their claims.
The new agreements mean that those found to be refugees, despite the limitations
of the offshore processing system, will never be eligible for resettlement
in Australia and instead will be permanently resettled in Papua New Guinea,
Nauru, or another country.
Upon taking office in September, Prime Minister Tony Abbott declared his intention
to expand the offshore processing and regional resettlement arrangements
and implement the government’s new “Operation Sovereign Borders” policy.
The policy empowers military commanders to turn around boats at sea “where
safe to do so.” The new government stopped referring asylum seekers to
refugee casework organizations. Abbott also announced the reintroduction of
temporary protection visas for the approximately 30,000 asylum seekers in Australia awaiting assessment of their refugee claims, though in December this
was blocked in the Senate.
Indigenous Rights
While some health and socioeconomic indicators are improving for indigenous
Australians, they still on average live 10-12 years less than non-indigenous
Australians, have an infant mortality rate almost two times higher, and continue
to die at alarmingly high rates from treatable and preventable conditions such
as diabetes and respiratory illness. Although they live in one of the world’s
wealthiest countries, many indigenous Australians do not have access to adequate
health care, housing, food, or water.
In March 2013, Parliament passed legislation recognizing indigenous
Australians as the first inhabitants of Australia, an important step toward constitutional
recognition and toward addressing Australia’s history of exclusion.
As part of his election campaign, Prime Minister Abbott promised to propose a
referendum on recognition within 12 months of taking office and to establish an
indigenous advisory council. In September, he established the council to focus
on “practical changes to improve the lives of Aboriginal people.” It is not clear
what role this council will play relative to the national representative indigenous
body, the Congress of Australia’s First Peoples.
Disability Rights
In July 2013, the government introduced the National Disability Insurance
Scheme, allowing people with disabilities to receive support based on their
needs and be actively involved in choosing the types of support they need.
Disability rights have also been a focal point in Australia’s international aid
programs.
In 2013, the Australian Law Commission launched an inquiry into barriers to
equal recognition before the law and legal capacity for individuals with disabilities.
Current laws promote guardianship, which strips people with disabilities
of their ability to make decisions about their lives instead of recognizing their
legal capacity on an equal basis as others, as required by the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD).
Alarmingly, Australian law allows women and girls with disabilities to be involuntarily
sterilized if the family court or a guardianship tribunal determines that
the procedure is in their best interests. A Senate committee review in 2013
merely recommended that the practice of involuntary sterilization be “regulated”
rather than banned. In September 2013, the UN Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities (CRPD Committee) urged the Australian government to
take immediate steps to prohibit involuntary sterilization and provide assistance
enabling people with disabilities to make decisions about their own lives
(supported decision-making).
Shackles and restraints are often still used on people with mental disabilities
in Australia, sometimes because of lack of beds in psychiatric wards in public
hospitals. According to local disability advocates, women with mental disabilities
experience a high rate of physical and sexual abuse, including in psychiatric
facilities. The CRPD Committee recommended that the government develop
more inclusive gender-based violence prevention programs and ensure
access for women with disabilities to an effective, integrated redress mechanism.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Cohabiting same sex couples are accorded de facto status and civil unions are
recognized in some states. Marriage, however, remains restricted to heterosexual
relationships under the federal Marriage Act.
The Australian Capital Territory became the first state or territory in Australia to
recognize same-sex marriage with the passage of the Marriage Equality Act in
October 2013. The Federal Government later signaled its intention to challenge
the new law in the High Court.
Long overdue amendments to the Sex Discrimination Act in August 2013 made
discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, gender identity, intersex status,
and relationship status unlawful in Australia. However, exemptions for religious
organizations mean that, for instance, religious schools can continue to
refuse to admit or expel LGBTI students.
Freedom of Media
In September 2013, the High Court rejected an appeal by three award-winning
journalists working for the Age newspaper who refused to comply with an order
to disclose their confidential sources in a defamation case for articles written in
2009. The journalists face charges of contempt of court, which could lead to
fines and imprisonment if they refuse to reveal their sources.
Since the publication of these articles, shield laws protecting journalistic
sources have been introduced in six of the nine legal jurisdictions in Australia.
In these jurisdictions, there is now a presumption that journalists do not have
to reveal their sources. The presumption can be overridden where the benefit of
disclosure would outweigh the harm. Whether these new shield laws will offer
adequate protection remains to be seen. No such protections exist in
Queensland, South Australia, and the Northern Territory.
Australia’s Foreign Policy
Australia held a two-year rotating seat on the UN Security Council starting in
2013. It used its presidency of the Security Council in September to push for a
resolution restricting the trade in and distribution of small arms and light
weapons and a presidential statement on humanitarian access in Syria. The
government continued its leadership role in international disarmament by presiding
over the successful final Arms Trade Treaty negotiations in New York.
Despite calls for a boycott over lack of war crimes accountability in Sri Lanka,
Australia sent a high-level delegation to the Commonwealth Heads of
Government Meeting (CHOGM) in Colombo in November 2013. Prime Minister
Abbott and Foreign Minister Julie Bishop repeatedly sidestepped or downplayed
the importance of accountability and respect for human rights. Most egregiously,
Abbott, addressing allegations of torture by Sri Lankan security forces,
defended the Sri Lankan government, saying “We accept that sometimes, in difficult
circumstances, difficult things happen.”
This rationalization of torture, which was endemic during the war years and
continues to be a serious problem in Sri Lanka today, seems to have been motivated
in part by the goal of enlisting Sri Lanka’s support in preventing asylum
seekers from leaving Sri Lanka for Australia, and, on the same visit, Abbott announced a gift of two patrol boats to the Sri Lankan navy to combat people
smuggling. The Australian government was seemingly oblivious to the role Sri
Lankan government abuses play in prompting outflows of ethnic Tamil asylum
seekers.
Abbott continued his predecessors’ foreign policy focus on the Asia-Pacific
region, declaring he would be an “Asia-first” prime minister. He also continued
the practice of turning a blind eye to human rights abuses in neighboring countries.
Abbott made Indonesia his first foreign visit as head of state in
September in order to seek cooperation on combatting “people smuggling,”
with no mention of the rights of those seeking asylum. Australian aid remained
focused on Asia and the Pacific, with Indonesia and Papua New Guinea the top
two aid recipients. In September, the government said it would slash
Australia’s aid budget by US$4.2 billion over the next three years, reducing foreign
aid spending from 0.37 percent to 0.32 percent of gross national income.