Azerbaijan
Azerbaijan’s government has a long-standing record of pressuring opposition
political parties and civil society groups and arbitrarily limiting critical
expression. In the run-up to the November 2005 parliamentary elections the
repressive environment intensified, despite considerable efforts by the international
community to encourage Azerbaijan’s compliance with international
human rights standards. Election day itself fell far short of these standards.
In the elections the government used a variety of tactics that impaired the
integrity of the process and ensured that pro-government candidates won the
majority of seats. Government policies appear to support an environment in
which state officials are free to use violence to achieve their ends without fear
of being held accountable. Although the government has released political
prisoners, the system of repression against perceived government critics
ensures that new politically motivated cases will continue to be generated.
Independent and opposition press face major barriers to their work.
Elections and Associated Rights
Azerbaijan has a history of seriously flawed elections. In 2005, repression and
harassment of opposition party members, an overwhelmingly pro-government
bias in the electronic media, and government control of election commissions
ensured that the parliamentary elections would not be free and fair.
The government’s registration of candidates without party-based bias was an
improvement on previous elections but was later overshadowed by other serious
violations. Measures taken to improve the election process, such as allowing
inking of voters’ fingers with invisible ink to prevent multiple voting and
lifting the ban on monitoring by foreign-funded nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs), proved ineffective because they were introduced late in the
election campaign.
During the election campaign period, the government continued to restrict
freedom of assembly, despite lifting the absolute ban on opposition gatherings
that had existed until June 2005. The authorities refused to allow rallies
to be held in city centers, and police carried out mass arrests and beat protesters who attempted to gather for unauthorized meetings or rallies.
Officials exerted pressure on government workers, particularly teachers, to
attend the ruling Yeni Azerbaijan Party candidates’ meetings with voters. At
the same time, police detained campaign workers for opposition and independent
candidates and warned them to stop their political work. The timing
and circumstances surrounding two separate alleged coup d’etats by opposition
groups raised serious concerns that the government was using these
cases to increase repression against the oppostion and to influence the elections.
Based on these two sets of allegations, the government arrested three
youth movement members and about a dozen high-level government officials
and opposition supporters, and accused them of preparing a coup d’etat.
Election day was marred by numerous irregularities throughout the country.
Local and international observers documented serious violations, including
ballot box stuffing, repeat voting, and tampering with results of protocols. At
the time of writing, the authorities had responded to international calls to
rectify falsifications on election day by cancelling the results in several election
districts, firing several local officials, and detaining four others.
State Violence
Torture, police abuse, and excessive use of force by security forces are widespread
in Azerbaijan. In pre-trial detention severe beating is a common form
of torture, although electric shock, threats of rape, and threats against family
members are also used, usually to coerce a confession or other information
from a detainee. Torture and ill-treatment is less common in post-conviction
prison facilities, although a series of incidents were alleged in the context of a
February 2005 special operation by Ministry of Interior troops to combat
illegal activity in the prisons. Former inmates of prisons number 12 and 13
told Human Rights Watch that security forces beat hundreds of prisoners,
forcing some to run through a gauntlet of troops who beat them with batons.
The government has not taken any significant measures to combat the environment
of impunity for government officials who commit torture or other
forms of ill-treatment. On the contrary, Vilyat Eviazov, the head of the Organized Crime Unit, a body known for its use of torture, was promoted to
deputy minister of interior in April 2005.
Political Prisoners
The existence of political prisoners is a long-standing problem that
Azerbaijan committed to resolving when it joined the Council of Europe in
2001. In the eighteen months prior to June 2005 Azerbaijan made progress
on this issue, releasing more than one hundred political prisoners. However,
according to the Council of Europe, political prisoners remain in custody and
Azerbaijan is yet to find a permanent solution to this problem, such increasing
the independence of the judicuary. In 2005 opposition supporters continued
to be imprisoned and charged in what appear to be politically motivated
cases.
Media Freedom
Authorities use a variety of informal measures to prevent or limit news critical
of the government from reaching the public. The government pressures
opposition and independent media outlets by limiting their access to printing
houses and distribution networks, initiating defamation cases resulting in the
imposition of crippling fines, restricting access to official information, and
harassing journalists. Major television outlets, from which the vast majority
of the population gets its news, are either state-owned or affiliated, and the
government controls the issuing of radio and television broadcast licenses
through a board that consists entirely of presidential appointees. A public television
station, set up by the government because of its obligations to the
Council of Europe, started broadcasting in August 2005.
Media monitoring carried out by independent monitors during the pre-election
campaign showed that the content of all the national television stations’
news broadcasts was overwhelmingly pro-governmental.
In one of the worst incidents of violence against journalists in Azerbaijan in
many years, on March 4, 2005, an unknown attacker shot dead Elmar
Husseinov, founder and editor of the independent weekly magazine Monitor.
The magazine regularly published harsh criticism of the government, including
allegations of corruption among high-level officials and their families.
Monitor stopped publication after Husseinov’s death.
Human Rights Defenders
The authorities continue to deny registration to many human rights NGOs,
usually on minor technical grounds. Human rights defenders are at times
subjected to physical and verbal attacks and other forms of pressure and
harassment. For example, in March and April 2005, pro-government television
channels made harsh and provocative statements against human rights
defenders. According to Leila Yunus, the Director of the Institute for Peace
and Democracy, in late March a presenter on Lider TV stated, “The whole
activity of Leyla Yunus is directed against the statehood of Azerbaijan. And
yet she applies to the law-enforcement bodies for protection. Should such
people be protected?” On April 2 the authorities refused to allow Ilgar
Ibrahimoglu, religious freedom activist, to leave the country to present a
statement at the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in Geneva.
Key International Actors
By the end of 2005 construction of the new major oil pipelines routed across
Azerbaijan, Georgia, and Turkey had been completed, and a gas pipeline was
due for completion in mid-2006. The huge foreign investment in these projects
has focused international attention on issues of security and stability in
the region, sometimes at the expense of human rights.
United States policy toward Azerbaijan has focused on military cooperation
and oil interests. Since 2001, U.S. military aid and cooperation has increased
significantly, and Azerbaijan has cooperated in U.S. military operations, sending
approximately 150 troops to Iraq. Although the U.S. government criticized
the parliamentary elections and put pressure on Azerbaijan to investigate
and rectify incidents of falsification on election day itself, its response to
pre-election violations was inconsistent and sometimes weak.
In April 2005, the European Union decided to proceed with preparing the
European Neighbourhood Policy action plans with the countries of the south
Caucasus, including Azerbaijan. This is the first time that the E.U. has
offered closer economic, political, and cultural relations in exchange for
progress on concrete human rights benchmarks, and therefore marks a significant
opportunity for the E.U. to encourage human rights improvements in
Azerbaijan. However, the potential of this opportunity to trigger meaningful
reforms will depend on the specificity of the human rights benchmarks in the
final action plan document, which was being negotiated between the
Azerbaijani government and the E.U. throughout the latter half of 2005.
The Council of Europe has played a constructive role in addressing human
rights problems in Azerbaijan, pressing for the release of political prisoners,
greater pluralism, and a devolution of political power away from the presidency.
In 2005, it concentrated on promoting free and fair parliamentary
elections, and resolving the issue of political prisoners.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) is one of
the largest multilateral investors in Azerbaijan, having committed more than
?459 million in projects, approximately half of which goes to the private sector.
Although acknowledging many serious shortcomings in Azerbaijan’s
human rights record and transition to democracy, the EBRD’s strategy for
Azerbaijan, approved in May 2005, confirmed the government’s commitment
to the principles of article 1 of the bank’s founding document, which includes
multiparty democracy, pluralism, and market economics. Despite its conclusion
that Azerbaijan’s progress in implementing these principles was “slow
and uneven,” and that “many challenges remain,” the Bank did not make use
of its political mandate to link further engagement to concrete human rights
improvements.
The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) was
deeply involved in election monitoring for the parliamentary elections, providing
665 election observers from forty-two countries. During the election
campaign period and immediately following the elections, the OSCE published
three interim reports and a preliminary report that described numerous violations of OSCE commitments and Council of Europe standards for
democratic elections.