Azerbaijan
The Azerbaijani government has a long-standing record of pressuring
civil society groups and arbitrarily limiting critical expression and political
activism. It has done so with a new intensity following the October
2003 presidential elections, which international and domestic observers
said were marred by widespread fraud.
Trials of opposition supporters, accused of the 2003 post-election violence,
did not comply with fair trail standards and showed once again
how the authorities use the criminal justice system to discourage government
critics. An environment of impunity for government officials
implicated in acts of torture, excessive use of force, and election fraud,
shows that the government did not seriously attempt the reconciliation
that the international community was urging after the political and
human rights crisis surrounding the presidential elections. Freedom of
assembly for groups seen to be associated with the political opposition
remains severely curtailed and independent and opposition press face
major barriers to their work.
Post-Election Trials
Over one hundred opposition party members and supporters were tried
on charges relating to the post-election violence. Only four were
released on bail, the rest remained in pre-trial detention for up to six
months. Azerbaijani courts convicted all of the defendants, sentencing
forty-six people to custodial sentences ranging from two to six years.
The remainder were released on three- to five-year suspended prison
sentences. On October 22, the Court of Grave Crimes sentenced seven
opposition leaders to between two and a half and five years in prison for
their role in the post-election violence. According to local observers,
prosecution witnesses retracted their testimony in court, claiming that
Ministry of Interior officials had tortured and coerced them into signing
statements incriminating the defendants. Independent observers raised serious allegations of procedural abuses, including defendants’ restricted
access to lawyers, and the admission of evidence in court that was based
on confessions extracted under torture. Judges’ failure to address these
deficiencies called into question, as in the past, the independence of the
judiciary.
State Violence
Torture, police abuse, and excessive use of force by security forces are
widespread in Azerbaijan. Peaceful protests are frequently met with the
use of force and arbitrary arrest. Severe beatings at police stations are
routine and torture methods in pre-trial detention include electric
shock and threats of rape. In 2004, the government failed to address
these problems, perpetuating an environment of almost total impunity
for security force abuses surrounding the October 2003 presidential
elections. Although international interlocutors repeatedly called on
Azerbaijan to investigate allegations of torture by the Organized Crime
Unit of the Ministry of Interior, and security forces’ use of excessive
violence during the protests following the elections, at the time of writing
the authorities had not prosecuted any cases.
Political Prisoners
Azerbaijan is making some progress toward releasing or retrying political
prisoners, a long-standing problem. By July 2004, following several
amnesties in late 2003 and early 2004, the government had released
thirty-two political prisoners and agreed to retry eleven, from a Council
of Europe list of forty-five. However, the Council of Europe and local
groups maintained that additional political prisoners remain in custody,
and that the recent imprisonment of opposition supporters, accused of
the post-election violence, added to their ranks. The chance of a fair
trial for political prisoners facing retrial remains slim because of the lack
of an independent judiciary. The Council of Europe previously condemned retrials of political prisoners as a “sham” controlled by the
presidential authorities rather than the judiciary.
Civil Society Organizations
The government attempts to tightly control civil society and pressures
and harasses groups that are critical of government policies. In a dramatic
example of this tendency, the authorities tried Ilgar Ibrahimoglu,
the head of the Center for the Protection of Conscience and Religious
Freedom, and a government critic, for alleged participation in the postelection
violence. In April 2004, a Baku court found him guilty and
handed him a five-year suspended prison sentence, despite serious allegations
that the charges were falsified. While Ibrahimoglu was in custody,
a court ordered the eviction of the Juma Mosque community,
which Ibrahimoglu headed, from the mosque it had used since 1992. In
June, police forcefully evicted worshippers from the mosque, detaining
several of them. On July 30, police prevented the community from
meeting at a private house, raiding the premises and temporarily detaining
all twenty-six members present.
Media Freedom
Authorities use a variety of informal measures to prevent or limit news
critical of the government from reaching the public. Major television
outlets are either state-owned or affiliated and the government fully
controls the issuing of radio and television broadcast licenses through a
licensing board that consists entirely of presidential appointees. The
opposition and independent media are under constant pressure, through
limited access to printing presses and distribution networks, imposition
of crippling fines from government-initiated defamation cases, and
harassment of journalists. In 2004, Hurriet, an opposition newspaper
affiliated with the Azerbaijan Democratic Party, had to suspend publishing
due to financial burdens and government harassment leading to difficulties
distributing and selling the newspaper outside of Baku. In addition, journalists and editors face the threat of physical assault by
unknown attackers bent on intimidation. For example, on July 17, four
masked men kidnapped the editor-in-chief of the independent Baki
Khaber (“Baku News”) newspaper and demanded that he cease his journalism
work, beating him for two hours before releasing him. Also at
the end of July, an unknown assailant attacked a journalist for the
Monitor, an independent weekly magazine. At the time of writing no
one had been prosecuted for either attack.
Key International Actors
Construction on two new major oil and gas pipelines routed across
Azerbaijan, Georgia, and Turkey is currently underway. The huge foreign
investment in these projects has focussed international attention on
issues of security and stability in the region, sometimes at the expense of
human rights.
United States policy toward Azerbaijan has focused on military cooperation
and oil interests. Since 2001, U.S. military aid and cooperation has
increased significantly in Azerbaijan. Correspondingly, Azerbaijan has
cooperated in U.S. military operations, with approximately 150 troops
in Iraq and thirty in Afghanistan. The U.S. role in Azerbaijan has been
marred by inconsistent and sometimes weak responses to rights abuses,
particularly in response to the 2003 presidential elections.
In September 2004, the European Union (E.U.) and Azerbaijan met
under the framework of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement.
Unfortunately, the E.U. failed to use this forum publicly to encourage
human rights improvements, issuing a press release that did not raise
human rights concerns. In a step that could increase the ability of the
E.U. to influence Azerbaijan on human rights, the E.U. included
Azerbaijan in its European Neighborhood Policy, which brings with it
economic benefits. Officials signaled that these benefits would not flow until at least 2007, when Azerbaijan will have begun to implement
action plans on economic and political reforms.
The Council of Europe has played a constructive role in attempting to
address human rights problems in Azerbaijan, pressing for the release of
political prisoners, greater pluralism, and a devolution of political power
away from the presidency. In January 2004, the Parliamentary Assembly
of the Council of Europe (PACE) expressed concern about events surrounding
the 2003 presidential elections and called on the government
to rectify the abuses. In October, the PACE reviewed Azerbaijan’s compliance
with the January resolution, and stated that although some
progress had been made, it was inadequate.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) is
one of the largest multilateral investors in Azerbaijan, having committed
more than U.S. $473 million in projects. Although article 1 of the
bank’s founding document commits the EBRD to promoting democracy,
human rights, and the rule of law, the Bank did not raise human
rights concerns during the human rights crisis surrounding the 2003
presidential elections. Its board approved financing of U.S. $125 million
for the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan oil pipeline in November 2003 and provided
the government with $41 million for road reconstruction projects in
July 2004 with no conditions addressing democracy, human rights, or
rule of law concerns.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe’s Minsk
Group, co-chaired by the U.S., France, and Russia, led talks on the conflict
over Nagorno-Karabakh between Armenia and Azerbaijan; however,
no breakthrough appears imminent.