Azerbaijan
With its October 2008 presidential election Azerbaijan largely wasted an opportunity
to demonstrate improvements in human rights. Opposition parties boycotted
the election, and freedom of assembly and media remained restricted. President
Ilham Aliyev was re-elected with 82.6 percent of the vote.
The release of five journalists in December 2007 was a welcome step, but at least
five other journalists remain in prison on questionable charges relating to their
work. Torture and ill-treatment in police custody, political prisoners, and harassment
and intimidation of human rights defenders remain serious problems.
On November 2, 2008, at talks convened by Russian President Dmitry Medvedev,
President Aliyev and his Armenian counterpart signed an agreement to intensify
efforts for a political settlement over Nagorno-Karabakh. Some commentators
hailed it as the most significant step toward a breakthrough over the separatist
enclave and contiguous Armenian-occupied territories since the 1994 ceasefire.
Elections
Azerbaijan has a history of seriously flawed elections. All major opposition parties
boycotted the October 15 presidential election, charging that the government
failed to implement the recommendations of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and Council of Europe from past elections.
International observers from the OSCE, Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly
(PACE), and the European Parliament cited some progress in 2008’s election, but
noted as shortcomings the lack of competition and little media discourse, and
that it “thus did not reflect all principles of a meaningful and pluralistic democratic
election.”
In the pre-election period, domestic election observers noted improvements in
voter list verification, but documented local officials interfering in signature collection
during the nominating process. Experts also noted that June election code
amendments did not address Council of Europe or local NGO recommendations.
The authorities prevented the opposition from organizing demonstrations prior to
the election. On July 11, police prevented the Musavat party from holding a rally
near the Baku municipal building to protest violations of freedom of assembly;
eight people were detained briefly. Police prevented another Musavat demonstration
on June 17, briefly detaining 16 party members and two journalists.
In September the government banned foreign television and radio companies
from using satellite equipment for live broadcasting during the presidential election,
apparently intending to prevent or delay broadcast of election information.
Media Freedom
Journalists, particularly those critical of the government, continue to face politically-
motivated charges. In December 2007 five journalists serving sentences for
criminal libel or other charges were released under a presidential pardon, but five
remained in prison—two of them already convicted and the other three pending
trials completed in 2008. On November 14, 2008, a court sentenced the editor-inchief
of the Ideal newspaper, Ali Hasanov, to six months’ imprisonment on criminal
libel charges.
Eynulla Fatullayev, the outspoken founder and editor-in-chief of two newspapers—
Realny Azerbaijan and Gundelik Azerbaijan—was convicted in October 2007
on charges of fomenting terrorism and libel and sentenced to eight-and-a-half
years in prison. He continues to serve his sentence, which was upheld on appeal
by the Supreme Court on June 3, 2008. Fatullayev has filed an application with
the European Court of Human Rights. Mirza Sakit, a reporter and satirist for the
opposition daily Azadlyg, is serving a three-year prison sentence for alleged narcotics
possession.
Ganimed Zahid, Azadlyg editor-in-chief, was sentenced to four years’ imprisonment
in March 2008 on questionable hooliganism charges. Mushfig Husseinov, a
Bizim Yol newspaper journalist, was sentenced to six years in January and banned
from journalism for two years on questionable extortion charges; in April the
appeals court reduced Husseinov’s sentence to five years and left the ban
unchanged. Novruzali Mammadov, editor of the Talishi Sado newspaper and head
of the Talysh Cultural Center and of the Science Academy’s Linguistics Department, was sentenced to 10 years’ imprisonment on June 24 for high treason.
After more than 16 months in pretrial detention, he was convicted for “distribution
of Talysh nationalist ideas and attempts to destroy the foundations of the
Azerbaijani state,” and for spreading “a negative image of Azerbaijan” internationally
by writing about abuses against minorities.
On October 7 Azadlyg andYeni Musavat were allowed to resume publishing temporarily,
after having been closed following court decisions in libel cases.
The government failed to meaningfully investigate violence against journalists. In
February two security officers beat Azadlyg correspondent Agil Khalil. One month
later, four unknown assailants stabbed Khalil in the chest. On July 15 a Baku court
sentenced Sergei Strekalin, whom they claim was Khalil’s former lover, for the
stabbing, to which Strekalin allegedly confessed; the conviction apparently
“demonstrated” that the attack on Khalil was not political. In September 2007
Hakimeldostu Mehdiyev, a reporter for Yeni Musavat, was detained, threatened,
and beaten severely in police custody. He was sentenced to 15 days’ imprisonment
for a misdemeanor.
Four years after the murder of Elmar Huseynov, the editor-in-chief of the independent
journal Monitor, the case remains unresolved.
In November the government announced the discontinuation in 2009 of local
transmission of three international radio services—BBC, Radio Free Europe/Radio
Liberty, and Voice of America, making them accessible only through satellite
receiver or the internet.
Torture and Ill-Treatment
Torture and ill-treatment in custody continues to be a widespread problem. Three
teenage boys convicted in June 2007 of murdering another boy have stated
repeatedly, including at trial, that they confessed after beatings and other illtreatment
by police and investigators. The government failed to conduct a meaningful
investigation into these allegations. In October, imprisoned journalist
Ganimed Zahid was beaten in custody. Azerbaijan has not allowed publication of
the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture’s reports on its last three
visits. In November 2007 Faina Kungurova, a member of the Democratic Party of Azerbaijan, died of starvation following a hunger strike, after six weeks in detention
on drug-related charges believed to be politically motivated. From 2002-
2004 she had also served a prison sentence on politically-motivated charges.
In October videos of Azeri army officers beating conscripts, apparently as part of a
hazing ritual, became widely available. Two officers were subsequently arrested
for their role in the beatings.
Political Prisoners
Government officials, businessmen, and opposition politicians arrested prior to
the November 2005 parliamentary elections on allegations of attempting to overthrow
the government remain in custody, including brothers Farhad and Rafig
Aliyev, respectively former economics minister and former president of the
Azpetrol oil company, and former health minister Ali Insanov. Parts of their trials
were completely closed and lawyers cited procedural violations, raising concerns
about the trials’ fairness.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders continue to face pressure and harassment. On June 14,
police detained Emin Huseynov, chairman of the Institute for Reporter Freedom
and Safety (IRFS), an outspoken media monitoring organization. Police beat and
threatened Huseynov in custody, and he was hospitalized for 24 days. Huseynov
filed a complaint, but the court refused to open an investigation, and an appellate
court upheld that refusal on September 2. IRFS staff had been the target of
attacks and government surveillance in 2007.
On May 14, a Baku court found the Election Monitoring Center (EMC), an independent
domestic observer organization, in violation of registration laws and
ordered its liquidation. EMC staff and others believe the decision was politically
motivated. After being denied registration six times, the EMC had received registration
in February, but in April the Ministry of Justice suspended it, claiming the
EMC had provided inaccurate information, and petitioned for its liquidation. In
June the EMC lost an appeal against the May court decision.
Key International Actors
A number of international and regional institutions and bilateral partners criticized
Azerbaijan’s human rights record, especially regarding media freedoms. In
a strongly-worded June resolution, the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly
expressed concern about the deteriorating human rights situation and outlined
urgent reforms needed prior to the presidential election. The PACE also called for
decriminalization of defamation; an immediate moratorium on criminal libel
charges; the release of journalists and political prisoners; and implementation of
the European Court of Human Rights judgments. In a February report on his April
2007 visit to Azerbaijan, the United Nations special rapporteur on freedom of
opinion and expression, Ambeyi Ligabo, encouraged the government to consider
repealing criminal defamation laws and to institute a moratorium on criminal libel
prosecutions. He also noted the problem of impunity for crimes targeting media
professionals. Others making strong statements on the media situation in 2008
included Council of Europe Secretary-General Terry Davis; the PACE rapporteur on
Azerbaijan, Andreas Herkel; OSCE Representative on the Freedom of the Media
Miklos Haraszti; and United States Assistant Secretary for Democracy, Human
Rights, and Labor David J. Kramer.
On January 8, 2008, the European Union welcomed the presidential pardon of the
imprisoned journalists, and called for the release of the remaining journalists and
for a moratorium on defamation proceedings. The EU’s European Neighbourhood
Policy Action Plan progress report released in April also noted that “the rapid
solution” of the cases of the remaining journalists in jail, and a revision of the
current norms on libel and defamation “would contribute to improving the attainment
of the relevant Action Plan objectives.” It highlighted the problem of torture,
noting that “effective investigation of allegations of torture remained minimal.” It
also called for the government to ensure judicial independence.
Azerbaijan is due to be reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism
of the UN Human Rights Council in February 2009.