Azerbaijan
Azerbaijan’s human rights record remained poor in 2010. The government continued
to use criminal defamation and other charges to intimidate and punish journalists
expressing dissenting opinions; an outspoken journalist remained in
prison on spurious criminal charges, apparently in retaliation for his work. The
parliamentary elections of November 7 failed to meet international standards.
Other serious problems persisted, including restrictions on freedoms of religion,
assembly, and association, and torture and ill-treatment in custody.
The European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) found Azerbaijan had violated freedom
of expression by imprisoning journalist Eynulla Fatullayev and called for his
immediate release.
Media Freedom
Government officials initiated 26 criminal defamation cases against journalists
and other critics in the first half of 2010; courts delivered 14 sanctions. In addition
officials filed 36 civil defamation claims, 30 of which were successful. For
example, in February 2010 a Baku court convicted Ayyub Karimov, editor in chief
of the Femida 007 newspaper, of slander and ordered him to pay a fine, in
response to a Ministry of Internal Affairs complaint regarding Karimov’s articles
criticizing the ministry. Also in February Ministry of Education officials filed a criminal
complaint against Alovsat Osmanli, a mathematician, for articles in the
Azadlig newspaper criticizing the ministry for mistakes in mathematics textbooks.
In July a court sentenced Eynulla Fatullayev, chief editor of two newspapers and
an outspoken government critic, to an additional two-and-a-half years in prison
on spurious drug charges brought by prison authorities. Fatullayev was sentenced
to eight-and-a-half years in prison in 2007 on charges of fomenting terrorism and
other criminal charges, which were widely believed to be politically motivated. In
April the ECtHR found that Azerbaijan “grossly” and “disproportionately” restricted
freedom of expression by imprisoning Fatullayev and ordered his immediate
release. In October the decision became final after the court’s Grand Chamber
refused to admit the government’s appeal. Fatullayev remains imprisoned at this
writing.
Political activists and bloggers Emin Milli and Adnan Hajizade who were victims
of an apparently staged attack in July 2009 and subsequently convicted of hooliganism
were released in November 2010 after serving over half of their sentences.
Several journalists suffered physical attacks by police and others; the government
failed to meaningfully investigate these incidents. In February a police officer
attacked Leyla Ilgar, a correspondent for the Yeni Musavat newspaper, as she
reported at a local market. Police interrogated her and deleted the photographs
from her camera. In May police detained Seymur Haziev, a reporter for the Azadlig
newspaper, at an opposition rally in Baku. Haziyev was questioned without his
lawyer, charged with resisting arrest, and sentenced to seven days imprisonment.
Haziyev reported that two officers kicked and hit him periodically during the interrogation.
In July unidentified men attacked Elmin Badalov, a reporter for Yeni Musavat, and
Anar Garayli, the deputy editor of Milli Yol, while they took photographs for an
investigative story about luxury villas near Baku believed to be built by the transportation
minister. In August an unidentified assailant stabbed Rasul Shukursoy,
a sports writer for Komanda newspaper, in the arm. Shukursoy links the incident
to his article criticizing a famous football player.
Police interfered with journalists’ efforts to document public protests. In June as
police broke up a Baku demonstration by opposition party Musavat, they also
shoved journalists and prevented them from filming. In July presidential administration
guards detained and erased the recordings of four journalists filming a
protest by Sabirabad region residents complaining about the government’s
response to severe flooding in southern Azerbaijan.
In May Baku airport security forced Norwegian journalist Erling Borgen to place
his camera and recorded DVD footage in his checked bags. Upon arrival in Oslo
Borgen discovered that all footage from his visit to Azerbaijan for a documentary
on Eynulla Fatullayev had disappeared.
In February the parliament approved amendments to several laws that ban media
representatives from videotaping, photographing, or audio recording without a
subject’s prior knowledge or consent, except in “operative-investigative cases”
carried out by law enforcement. In June the government placed restrictions on
street newspaper vending in central Baku, allegedly for aesthetic reasons, limiting
many newspapers’ distributions and revenues.
Elections to Milli Mejlis (Parliament)
The ruling Yeni Azerbaijan Party won an overwhelming majority in the November 7
parliamentary elections; only one clear opposition candidate gained a seat in the
country’s 125-member parliament. Restrictions on political parties and free
expression of political views, due to restrictions on the freedoms of assembly and
association, marred the pre-election campaign. International observers criticized
the elections for failing to meet international standards.
In September the ECtHR found Azerbaijan violated the right of opposition candidate
Flora Karimova to free elections when it invalidated 2005 parliamentary election
results in the district she had won.
Freedom of Assembly and Association
The government restricted freedom of assembly. Officials did not authorize any
demonstrations in central Baku and police quickly dispersed unauthorized
protests. On April 26 the Baku police rounded up about 80 people traveling to a
rally on free expression and assembly, releasing some immediately on the outskirts
of Baku and detaining others for five hours. Police charged 10 with resisting
the police and violating public order. Four days later police briefly detained
dozens of political activists outside the State Oil Academy, where they had been
commemorating the 2009 deadly shooting there.
The government interfered with the work of NGOs. The Ministry of Justice refused
to register the Television and Alternative Media Development Center three times.
In August police briefly detained several employees of the Kur Civil Society organization
as they monitored flood damage in southern Azerbaijan.
In December 2009, several unknown people beat Ilgar Nasibov and Vafadar
Eyvazov of the Democracy and NGO Development Resource Center in the
Nakhichivan Autonomous Republic, a landlocked region in southwestern Azerbaijan. The activists believe the attack came in retaliation for their planned
anti-corruption seminar.
In September 2010 Elman Abassov and Hekimeldostu Mehdiyev, Nakhichivanbased
employees of the Institute for Reporters’ Freedom and Safety, a media
monitoring organization, reported that security officials regularly interrogate people
with whom the activists meet, pressuring them to cease further contact for
“their own safety.”
Freedom of Religion
All religious communities were forced to re-register with the State Committee for
Work with Religious Organizations by January 1, 2010, or face potential liquidation.
The 450 communities that successfully re-registered included 433 mosques
and two Protestant churches. The state denied registration to Baku’s Baptist
Church, its Catholic Parish, and its Seventh-day Adventists, Jehovah’s Witnesses,
and others. Authorities threatened to close several mosques, including the
Fatima Zahra Mosque in Baku and a Sunni mosque in the town of Mushfigabad,
after refusing to register them.
In March police detained and prosecuted two Jehovah’s Witnesses for “distributing
religious literature without state permission,” fining each US$250. In
September an appeals court upheld the decision to sentence Farid Mammedov, a
Jehovah’s Witness, to nine months in prison for refusing compulsory military service
on religious grounds. In October two Muslim men from the northern
Azerbaijan region of Zakatala reported being detained by local police, who
harassed them for their long beards and forcibly shaved them off. In October
police raided a Baptist harvest festival in the northern Azerbaijani town of Qusar,
arresting four participants and sentencing them to five days’ imprisonment.
Torture and Ill-Treatment
Widespread torture and ill-treatment in custody continue with impunity. In 2010
the Azerbaijan Committee against Torture, an independent prison monitoring
group, received over 150 complaints alleging torture and ill-treatment in custody Police disciplined several officers, but failed to criminally prosecute any. At least
one prisoner reportedly died in custody in 2010 after alleged ill-treatment.
Political Prisoners
The government continued to hold political prisoners. At this writing, NGO
activists counted between 23 and 45 political prisoners, including former government
officials, businessmen, and opposition politicians arrested prior to the
November 2005 parliamentary elections on allegations of attempting to overthrow
the government.
Key International Actors
International and regional institutions and bilateral partners voiced concerns
about and criticism of Azerbaijan’s human rights record, especially regarding
media freedoms. In June 2010 Thomas Hammarberg, the Council of Europe commissioner
for Human Rights, published a report on his May visit to Azerbaijan,
urging the government to remedy a range of abuses, including police misconduct
and violations of freedom of expression and association and fair trial norms.
In a June resolution the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe called
on the government to release imprisoned journalists, decriminalize libel, and
refrain from new criminal defamation charges against journalists.
During his United Nations General Assembly speech in September, United States
President Barack Obama expressed hope that Azerbaijan would implement democratic
reforms and increase human rights protections, including the release of the
imprisoned bloggers Milli and Hajizade. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton visited
Baku in July and raised a number of concerns with the government, including the
imprisonment of the bloggers.
The European Union’s April 2010 European Neighbourhood Policy Action Plan
progress report commended Azerbaijan for improvements in economic and social
governance, but expressed concern about the penitentiary system; torture in custody;
and freedoms of expression, assembly and religion. In July 2010 Azerbaijan and the EU began negotiations for an Association Agreement to further strengthen
economic relations.
Following its December 2009 review of Azerbaijan’s torture record, the UN
Committee against Torture urged the government to, among other things, ensure
that all allegations of torture are subjected to prompt, impartial, and effective
investigation.