Azerbaijan
Dozens of government officials, opposition politicians, and others arrested in
November 2005 on charges of attempting to organize a coup remain in custody
awaiting trial, and a few were sentenced. Torture in police custody, conditions of
detention, and politically motivated arrests remain unresolved problems. Media
freedom deteriorated, with violence against and arrests of journalists, as well as
numerous defamation cases orchestrated by government officials. Many international
actors publicly criticized the Azerbaijani government for its poor human
rights record.
Politically-Motivated Arrests
In advance of the November 2005 parliamentary elections, authorities arrested
dozens of high-profile government officials, businessmen, and opposition politicians
on allegations of attempting to overthrow the government. Almost all
remain in pre-trial custody more than a year after their arrests. Many complain of
severe health problems caused or exacerbated by their conditions of detention.
Deputy Chairman of the opposition Azerbaijan Democratic Party Natiq Efendiev
was sentenced in September 2006 to five years’ imprisonment for illegal possession
of firearms, after charges of plotting a coup were dropped. Former Economic
Development Minister Farhad Aliev appealed to the European Court of Human
Rights concerning his arrest, prolonged detention, and other alleged violations.
Among others arrested were three members of the youth group New Thinking,
including its head, Ruslan Bashirli, and his two deputies, Ramin Tagiev and Said
Nuri, on charges of accepting funds from the Armenian secret services to carry out
a coup. Their trial began on March 31, 2006, and for several weeks was closed
allegedly due to concerns about national security and the safety of witnesses. The
trial was later made public, but there is evidence that it did not meet fair trial
standards. At trial Bashirli stated that he had been beaten and offered money in
an attempt to persuade him to confess. On July 12 all three were convicted of
attempting violent overthrow of the government. Bashirli and Tagiev received
prison sentences of seven and four years respectively, and Nuri received a fiveyear conditional sentence owing to his severe health problems. On September 28
the Court of Appeal reduced Tagiev’s prison term by one year.
On December 20, 2005, police in Bilasuvar district arrested opposition activist
and election commission member Gadir Musaev on drug charges. During the
2005 election Musaev refused to sign election result protocols that he said were
falsified. He received a seven-year prison sentence.
Torture and Inhuman Treatment
Torture remains a widespread and largely unacknowledged problem in Azerbaijan.
In May 2006 the trial began of three boys from a village near Baku who were subjected
to severe beatings and other forms of torture by police and investigators in
March 2005. The main evidence against the boys were the coerced confessions
and incriminating statements against one another for participation in a murder,
which they all maintained none of them committed. The government refused to
conduct a meaningful investigation into these and other allegations of abuse.
At least two people died in pre-trial custody in 2006: Namik Mamedov, on April 3,
and Rasim Alishev, on July 25. It is not known whether authorities carried out
effective investigations into their deaths.
Nongovernmental organizations continued to receive reports of torture, particularly
in police lockups. Sentenced prisoners complained of ill-treatment in the form
of beatings, inadequate food, insufficient medical care, and lack of information
and purposeful activities. Dozens of prisoners serving life sentences in Gobustan
prison went on hunger strikes to protest their particularly harsh conditions, and
three suicides were reported in that facility.
Media Freedom
Journalists, particularly those associated with opposition publications, face violence
and criminal charges. In March 2006 Fikret Huseinli, a reporter for the
opposition daily Azadlyg, was severely beaten and slashed by unknown
assailants. In May unidentified attackers beat Bahaddin Haziev, the editor-inchief
of the opposition newspaper Bizim Yol and deputy chairman of the opposition party People’s Front of Azerbaijan, and demanded that he stop criticizing the
government. In July police and other government officials harassed and threatened
Ayna-Zerkalo and Institute for War and Peace Reporting correspondent Idrak
Abbasov and confiscated his notebook and tape recorder while he was preparing
a report on the destruction of houses in the Binagedi district of Baku.
On June 23, officials detained Mirza Sakit Zakhidov, a prominent reporter and
satirist for Azadlyg, on spurious drug charges, apparently to silence him for newspaper
columns and poems he wrote criticizing President Ilham Aliev and government
corruption; he was sentenced in October to three years’ imprisonment. At
least six journalists and editors and a number of newspapers faced criminal and
civil libel suits brought by government officials. At least three editors received
prison sentences for charges including criminal libel and “insulting the honor and
dignity” of a state official. On October 1 a court ordered the closure of three major
media outlets after their editor, Einulla Fatullaev, was convicted on libel charges
deriving from articles he published alleging financial links between Interior
Minister Ramil Usubov and Haji Mammadov, a former top Interior Ministry official
on trial for leading a criminal gang. Two editors imprisoned for libel were included
in a presidential pardon issued in late October.
Haji Mammadov confessed on July 25 to having killed Elmar Huseinov, the editor
of Monitor magazine who was murdered in 2005, though he was not a suspect.
Mammadov claims that he committed the murder at the behest of Farhad Aliev,
who in turn maintains that the claim is part of the politically motivated case
against him.
Although Azerbaijan opened a public television station in August 2005 as recommended
by the Council of Europe, media experts state that it is virtually indistinguishable
from pro-government rivals and risks being shut down if too openly critical
of the government. In June 2006 the government targeted the ANS television
station, known to be comparatively more independent, by arresting some of its
employees and initiating a tax investigation apparently in order to keep the station’s
managers from acting too independently.
In November, as this report went to press, a court has ordered the eviction of the
Azerbaijan Popular Front Party and two newspapers affiliated with it, Azadlyg and Bizim Yol, from a building they shared; also evicted from the building was the
independent Turan News Agency. In addition, the National Television and Radio
Council ruled not to extend the license of ANS, Azerbaijan’s only remaining independent
television station.
Human Rights Defenders
A campaign to discredit long-time human rights activists Rena and Murad
Sadaddinov began following their trip to the United States in June 2006, during
which they spoke about human rights concerns in Azerbaijan. Two individuals
known for their close ties to the government publicly accused the Sadaddinovs of
taking bribes to include certain names into lists of political prisoners, and falsely
claimed that Council of Europe experts confirmed the accusation. The
Sadaddinovs note that they have not prepared lists of political prisoners for more
than three years and maintain they have never accepted bribes.
Key International Actors
On May 9, 2006, Azerbaijan was elected to the United Nations Human Rights
Council, which replaced the Human Rights Commission, and pledged to cooperate
closely with special procedures mechanisms, promote transparency and the
participation of NGOs and civil society in UN meetings, and support universal
periodic review of human rights records of both council members and non-members.
In January 2006 the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) challenged
the credentials of the Azerbaijani delegation in response to violations in
the November 2005 parliamentary elections. The PACE ultimately confirmed the
credentials, but set out a list of urgently needed reforms. In a March 2006 report
on human rights of members of the armed forces, the PACE found hazing and
material conditions for conscripts in Azerbaijan to be serious problems and found
violations of the right to conscientious objection.
In April President Aliev traveled to the United States for a meeting with President
George W. Bush, which focused on energy security and the fight against terrorism.
On July 14, the US Embassy in Baku stated publicly that the right to equal defense before the law and the presumption of innocence were violated during the trial of
the New Thinking leaders. The embassy also expressed concern over violence and
pressure against journalists.
The European Union completed the European Neighborhood Policy Action Plan
with Azerbaijan, which will serve as the primary framework guiding EU-Azerbaijan
relations for the next five years. The plan sets out steps that the Azerbaijani government
should achieve in fields including the rule of law, democracy, economic
and business development, energy, and resolution of internal conflicts. On
September 28, European Commission and Council of Europe officials called on
the government to undertake reforms in the prison system.
The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) observed the
May 13 repeat elections in 10 constituencies in which results of the November
2005 parliamentary elections had been annulled on account of fraud. The OSCE
found progress in some areas, including a more inclusive representation of candidates,
unimpeded campaigning, and increased domestic observation, yet also
observed interference by local authorities. In July 2006 the OSCE office in Baku
stated that the trial of the New Thinking leaders fell short of international standards
in upholding the rule of law. The OSCE representative on freedom of the
media raised concerns over the use of defamation suits to silence journalists.