Azerbaijan
The Azerbaijani government’s poor record on freedom of expression, assembly,
and association dramatically deteriorated during the year. The authorities
arrested dozens of political activists on bogus charges, imprisoned critical journalists,
broke up several peaceful public demonstrations, and adopted legislation
that further restricted fundamental freedoms. This crackdown was the
backdrop for the October 2013 presidential election, in which incumbent
President Ilham Aliyev was re-elected for a third term with 84.5 percent of the
vote.
The government continued its urban renewal campaign in the capital Baku,
forcibly evicting hundreds of families without adequate compensation. Torture
and ill-treatment persists with impunity.
Azerbaijan’s international partners failed to fully realize the potential of their
relationships with the government to press for rights improvements.
Elections
International observers from the Organization for Security and Co-operation in
Europe (OSCE) criticized the presidential election for failing to meet international
standards. It assessed counting in 58 percent of polling stations observed as
bad or very bad. It also said arrests and intimidation of opposition political
activists, a restrictive media environment, and violations of the freedoms of
assembly and association marred the pre-election campaign. International
observers from the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly and the European
Parliament were less critical.
Politically Motivated Prosecutions
In 2013, the authorities used a range of spurious charges—including narcotics
and weapons possession, hooliganism, incitement, and even treason—to
imprison political activists critical of the government. These activists included
several high-ranking opposition political party members such as Ilgar
Mammadov, chair of the opposition group REAL, arrested on February 4 and
charged with inciting violence; Tofig Yagublu, Musavat party deputy chair, also arrested in February on similar charges; Yadigar Sadigov, an advisor to
Musavat, arrested in June on hooliganism charges for allegedly beating up a
Nagorno-Karabakh war veteran; and Ilkin Rustemzade, a Free Youth activist,
arrested in May on hooliganism charges for alleged involvement in filming a
comedy video but later charged with inciting violence.
Seven members of the youth opposition movement NIDA were arrested in
March and April on drugs and other charges related to an alleged plan to instigate
violence at a peaceful protest. At time of writing their trials were ongoing.
In November, courts sentenced Rashad Ramazanov, a well-known blogger and
government critic, and Taleh Bagirov, a religious scholar and activist who
sharply criticized the government, to seven and nine years, respectively, on
bogus drug possession charges.
Dashgin Malikov, a Popular Front Party activist, was arrested in March shortly
after he criticized the government on social media and sentenced in July to twoand-
a-half years’ imprisonment on drug charges.
In two separate incidents in March and May, security personnel detained, blindfolded,
handcuffed, and mistreated Ibrahim Ibrahimli, a leader of an opposition
alliance, and Rahim Gaziyev, a former defense minister who had publicly criticized
President Aliyev. Both were released after several hours.
Freedom of Media
In May 2013, the parliament amended a law expanding the definition of slander
and insult to specifically include content published on the Internet.
At least five journalists were arrested or convicted in 2013 on spurious charges
in apparent retaliation for critical and investigative journalism. In March, Avaz
Zeynalli, editor-in-chief of the opposition newspaper Khural, was sentenced to
nine years’ imprisonment upon conviction for dubious extortion and tax evasion
charges. In April, Araz Guliyev, editor-in-chief of the news site
Xeber44.com, was convicted on charges of possessing illegal weapons and
organizing public order disturbances and sentenced to eight years’ imprisonment.
In November, Sardar Alibeyli, editor of the pro-opposition newspaper Nota Bene
and the PS Nota news portal, was convicted on spurious hooliganism charges
and sentenced to four years in prison.
In September, a court sentenced Hilal Mamadov, editor-in-chief of the Tolishi
Sado newspaper, arrested in 2012, to five years’ imprisonment for illegal drugs
possession, treason, and other charges. Also in September, police arrested
Parviz Hashimli, editor of the news website Moderator and a reporter for the
opposition daily Bizim Yol. At time of writing, he was awaiting trial on charges
of smuggling and illegal weapons possession.
In March, the executive director and editor-in-chief of Khayal TV, a local station,
was convicted on several charges, including participating in social unrest, and
sentenced to three years’ probation and released.
A smear campaign begun in 2012 against Khadija Ismayilova, a Radio Liberty
journalist, continued throughout 2013 in apparent retaliation for her investigations
into the business holdings of the president’s family and close associates.
Pro-government newspapers and sites published articles and videos personally
attacking the journalist and her family. Yafez Hasanov, another Radio Liberty
journalist, was the target of blackmail and threats by security services after he
refused to stop investigating a 2012 suspicious death in custody.
In February, a government smear campaign targeted Akram Aylisli, a well-known
writer, after he published a novel containing critical analysis of Azerbaijan’s
modern history and treatment of Armenians. President Aliyev stripped Aylisli of
his government stipend and honorary title of “Peoples’ Writer”; his wife and
son were also fired from their jobs.
In November, major opposition daily Azadlig temporarily ceased publishing due
to financial constraints after mounting defamation claims brought by officials,
frozen bank accounts, and government-imposed restrictions on distribution.
Freedom of Assembly
The authorities broke up several peaceful protests, at times violently, and
arrested protesters. In November 2012 and May 2013, parliament amended
laws increasing by more than hundredfold the fines for involvement in unauthorized protests and increasing from 15 to 60 days the maximum jail sentence for
minor public order offenses often used to incarcerate protesters.
On January 26, police rounded up more than 60 people at an unsanctioned,
peaceful rally in central Baku, using excessive force during the arrests. Courts
sentenced 5 people to up to 15 days of administrative detention and fined 20
people up to 2,500 manat (US$3,200) for resisting police and participating in
an unsanctioned protest.
On March 10, police used water cannons and teargas to disperse another
peaceful gathering in central Baku. Police arrested dozens and courts convicted
over twenty on misdemeanor charges, sentencing five to up to seven days’
detention and fining others up to 600 manat (US$760).
Freedom of Association
In February 2013, parliament adopted legislative amendments making it impossible
for unregistered groups to legally receive grants and donations, a measure
that will jeopardize groups that the government refuses to register, often
because they engage in work that is controversial or critical of the authorities.
Other amendments increased by five-fold fines for nongovernmental organizations
that receive funding from a donor without first concluding a grant agreement
and registering it with the Ministry of Justice.
The government continues to refuse to register the Human Rights Club, an
advocacy group that first filed its registration papers in 2011.
Torture and Ill-Treatment
Torture and ill-treatment continue with impunity. In the first nine months of
2013, the Azerbaijan Committee Against Torture, an independent prison monitoring
group, received 96 complaints alleging ill-treatment in custody.
The authorities did not effectively investigate credible allegations of beatings,
threats, and other abuses in custody made by several arrested political
activists. In March 2013, NIDA activist Mahammad Azizov told his lawyer that
after he retracted a confession made under duress, Ministry of National
Security officials punched him and beat him with clubs. As a result he could not
walk for four days and lost hearing in his left ear.
In May, Rashad Ramazanov told his lawyer that he was beaten in a police car
on the day of his arrest and during the first three days of questioning.
Forced Evictions and Illegal Demolitions
In 2013, the authorities continued urban renewal in Baku, involving expropriation
of many properties—primarily apartments and homes in middle class
neighborhoods. Some homeowners continued to face forced eviction in the
lead-up to May 2013 opening of central Baku’s Winter Garden, a complex with
parks and shops. Hundreds more have been forcibly evicted in previous years
to make way for parks, roads, a shopping center, and luxury residential buildings.
Most evictees have not received fair compensation based on market values
of their properties.
Human Rights Defenders
In February 2013, a court convicted Bakhtiyar Mammadov, a human rights
lawyer, on apparently politically motivated charges of large-scale extortion and
sentenced him to eight years in prison. Mammadov represented several residents
who were forcibly evicted from their homes in Baku in 2012.
In May, police briefly detained, slapped, and threatened human rights lawyer
Aslan Ismayilov after he publicly claimed that Rashad Ramazanov had been
beaten in custody. In September a court stripped Ismayilov of his bar membership.
Key International Actors
The European Union, United States, and other international and regional actors
and institutions expressed concern about the deterioration in Azerbaijan’s
human rights record but did not impose any consequences for it.
In its January 2013 resolution, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe (PACE) expressed concern about “the alleged use of fabricated charges
against activists and journalists” and called on Azerbaijan to, among other
things, release prisoners “whose detention gives rise to justified doubts and
legitimate concerns.” The PACE voted down a parallel resolution dedicated
exclusively to the issue of political prisoners in Azerbaijan.
In his July 2013 report, Nils Muižnieks, the Council of Europe’s commissioner for
human rights, expressed serious concern about “the apparent intensification of
… unjustified or selective criminal prosecution of journalists and others who
express critical opinions.” Other criticism included restrictions on freedom of
expression, assembly, association, and property rights.
In February 2013, EU High Representative Catherine Ashton and Commissioner
Štefan Füle jointly urged the authorities to “ensure speedy, fair, transparent,
and independent investigation of the charges” against Ilgar Mammadov and
Tofig Yagublu. In June, they expressed disappointment regarding legislation
expanding the definition of criminal libel.
In its March European Neighborhood Policy progress report, the EU noted that
Azerbaijan “addressed only a few of the key recommendations” contained in
last year’s report and highlighted serious, ongoing human rights violations
related to freedom of expression, association, and assembly.
In April, Azerbaijan underwent the second cycle of the Universal Periodic
Review at the United Nations Human Rights Council. The government
announced an open invitation to UN human rights experts and accepted all critical
recommendations regarding, inter alia, freedom of expression, assembly,
and association but continued to deny allegations of rights violations.
OSCE Special Representative on Freedom of the Media Dunja Mijatovic criticized
the Azerbaijani authorities’ failure to respect freedom of expression,
including the expansion of criminal libel laws and Avaz Zeynalli’s nine-year
prison sentence. In July, Azerbaijan successfully pushed to downgrade the
OSCE’s presence in Baku from a full-fledged mission to a project coordinator. At
time of writing, the OSCE’s new mandate was not made public.
In its annual human rights report published in April, the US Department of State
flagged a concern about restrictions on freedom of expression and assembly
and politically motivated imprisonment. The US embassy issued several statements
of concern on related issues during 2013.