Azerbaijan
The government continues to use defamation and other criminal charges to intimidate
independent and opposition journalists, some of whom have also been
assaulted by unknown men. Media freedoms rapidly deteriorated in 2007, with at
least ten journalists imprisoned. High-profile government officials, businessmen,
and opposition politicians remain in custody, and politically-motivated arrests
and trials, torture in police custody, and conditions of detention remain unresolved
problems. Less than a year ahead of major presidential elections in
Azerbaijan, the ground is set for an unfair presidential campaign.
Media Freedom
Independent and opposition media is subject to state intimidation. In April 2007
Eynulla Fatullayev, the outspoken founder and the editor-in-chief of two newspapers
Realny Azerbaijan and Gundelik Azerbaijanwas sentenced to two-and-ahalf
years in prison on charges of libel and insult for an internet posting blaming
Azerbaijanis for a 1992 massacre in Nagorno-Karabakh. Fatullayev denied writing
the posting. In July Azerbaijans Ministry of National Security pressed additional
charges against him for terrorism and inciting religious and ethnic hatred for articles
printed in Realny Azerbaijan. Further tax evasion charges were filed against
him in September. Both newspapers, which had the largest circulations among
print outlets in the country, were effectively shut down in May after Emergency
Ministry and National Security Ministry personnel evicted staff from the papers
premises, confiscated computer hard drives, and sealed the office shut.
In January, Faramaz Allahverdiev, correspondent for the Nota Bene newspaper,
was sentenced to two years of imprisonment for libel and insult charges brought
by the minister of interior and another official. In May, Samir Sadetoglu and Rafik
Tagi, editor and correspondent for the weekly Senet were sentenced to five and
three years of imprisonment, respectively, for inciting religious hatred because of
an article in Senet unfavorably comparing Christianity to Islam. In the same
month, Rovshan Kebirli and Yashar Agazadeh, editor and correspondent for the
newspaper Mukhalifet, were sentenced to two-and-a-half years on libel and
defamation charges brought by a member of parliament for an article exposing government corruption. In July, Mushfig Husseinov, who wrote a series of articles
on government corruption for the newspaper Bizim Yol, was arrested on spurious
charges, which NGOs believe were the result of entrapment. In November, Nazim
Guliev, editor of Ideal newspaper, was sentenced to two-and-a-half years for
defamation charges filed by a ministry of interior official. In the same month, a
judge ordered Ganimet Zahid, editor-in-chief of opposition Azadlig daily, to be
held for two months to await trial on spurious hooliganism charges. Mirza Sakit
Zakhidov, a reporter and satirist for the daily Azadlyg, remains in prison after his
2006 conviction on spurious drug charges.
The government failed conclusively to investigate numerous reports of violence
and threats of violence against opposition and independent journalists. In
December 2006, Nijat Husseinov, an Azadlyg journalist, was attacked by four
unknown assailants and required three weeks of hospitalization to recover from
his injuries. The attack was precipitated by anonymous, threatening phone calls
referring to his journalism. In April 2007 unknown assailants attacked Realny
Azerbaijans Uzeyir Jafarov, who sustained serious injuries. At least two other
journalists, Hakimeldostu Mehdiev and Suhayla Gamberova, were hospitalized
with injuries they sustained following assaults in 2007 related to their work.
The president appoints all nine members of Azerbaijans National Television and
Radio Broadcast Council, which grants broadcasting licenses. The independent
television station ANS faced problems renewing its broadcast license f0r three
years after it expired in 2003, and was taken off the air for a short time in
November 2006. In April 2007 its license was extended for six years, but as a
result of the licensing ordeal, ANSs content now appears to be prone to self-censorship.
Torture and Inhuman Treatment
Torture remains a widespread and largely unacknowledged problem in Azerbaijan.
Emblematic of this is the June 2007 murder conviction of three boys, who were
between the ages of 15 and 17 when they were arrested, based on confessions
and incriminating statements that they stated repeatedly, including at trial, had
been coerced under severe beatings and other forms of torture. The government has failed to conduct meaningful investigations into these and other allegations
of abuse.
The Azerbaijani government says that it has invested in training for law enforcement
officials, but this effort is not matched with rigorous prosecutions of abusive
officers. Of 11 cases the government has investigated, 10 dealt with suspicious
deaths in custody. Six cases were dismissed for lack of evidence, two are
still pending, and three officers were convicted for such minor offenses as negligence
and abuse of office, receiving prison sentences from one to three years.
Politically-Motivated Arrests and Convictions
In 2004 and 2005 Azerbaijan released more than 100 political prisoners, but the
government has made no more progress in this area. The government officials,
businessmen, and opposition politicians arrested in advance of the November
2005 parliamentary elections on allegations of attempting to overthrow the government
remain in custody; some have been convicted, and many remain in
detention pending trial. In almost all cases the government replaced accusations
of coup plotting with charges of economic crimes or abuse of office. For example,
in October 2007, former Economic Development Minister Farhad Aliyev was sentenced
to 10 years of imprisonment for corruption, tax evasion, and other economic
crimes. Similarly, in April, former Minister of Health, Ali Insanov, was convicted
of abuse of office and other economic charges. Parts of Insanovs and
Aliyevs trials were completely closed, and lawyers complain of numerous procedural
violations. The March 2007 presidential pardon provided for the release of
only one person out of what human rights activists estimate to be dozens of prisoners
sentenced on politically motivated charges.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders are the targets of public smear campaigns on television
and in print media, physical and verbal attacks, and other forms of pressure and
harassment. For example, in July 2007 the pro-government Modern Musavat party
held a protest outside of the Institute for Peace and Democracy (IPD), a human
rights NGO, throwing eggs and tomatoes and shouting offensive remarks. The
organizations head, Leyla Yunus, believes that the protest was prompted by the IPDs May appeal to the Council of Europe calling for sanctions against Azerbaijan
because of its deteriorating human rights record. Throughout 2007, staff of the
Institute for Reporter Freedom and Safety (IRFS), an outspoken media monitoring
organization, were subjected to police beatings, arbitrary detention, and surveillance
by the security services. In July, an elderly man was brutally beaten just outside
the IRFSs office. The IRFS believes the attackers assumed the victim was an
employee of the organization. The police failed to respond promptly or open an
investigation citing the victims unwillingness to file a complaint. On August 29,
the IRFS director and a staff member were detained while reporting on a protest,
they were released after several hours of police questioning about IRFSs work.
Key International Actors
Key actors made public statements of concern about Azerbaijans human rights
record. These concerns appear to have little impact on these actors relationships
with Azerbaijan, likely due to the countrys geostrategic importance and hydrocarbon
resources. As part of the European Neighborhood Policy (ENP) Action Plan
signed by the EU and Azerbaijan in 2006, the two parties adopted a European
Neighborhood Policy Instrument (ENPI) for financial assistance totaling 92 million
for 2007-2013. Funding priorities include strengthening democratic structures,
good governance, and poverty reduction efforts.
The annual EU-Azerbaijan Partnership and Cooperation Council meeting in
October underscored the importance of the protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms as essential elements in the bilateral dialogue.
A March statement by the German Presidency of the EU on media freedom in
Azerbaijan expressed concern that criminal defamation suits initiated by public
officials are being used in order to limit media freedom, and called the authorities
to create an environment where the media can work freely, effectively and
without fear.
A strongly critical resolution adopted in April by the Council of Europe
Parliamentary Assembly highlighted many shortcomings in Azerbaijans record of
honoring its membership obligations.
In its second report on Azerbaijan, the Council of Europes Commission against
Racism and Intolerance (ECRI) noted some positive steps, such as improved
access to public school for children of non-citizens, but noted that there are still
cases of racist and inflammatory speech or promotion of religious intolerance by
some media, members of general public and politicians.
In January, the European Court of Human Rights issued its Chamber judgment in
the case of Mammadov (Sardar Jalaloglu) v. Azerbaijan, unanimously finding violations
of Article 3 (prohibition of torture) and of Article 13 (right to effective remedy)
of the European Convention on Human Rights. Police had arrested Jalaloglu,
secretary general of the Democratic Party of Azerbaijan, following the October
2003 presidential elections for organizing public disorder and use of violence
against a state official.
In March 2007, the United States and Azerbaijan signed an agreement aimed at
improving security and cooperation in the Caspian Sea region energy sector. In
August, the US and Azerbaijan conducted the third round of their bilateral dialogue
on democracy and human rights, initiated by the US in December 2006.
Key issues were discussed, and some US concerns about Azerbaijans human
rights record were made public.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Representative
on Media Freedom, Miklos Haraszti, harshly criticized the Azerbaijani authorities
in his report to the Permanent Council on June 21, 2007, expressing particular
concerns about the continuous harassment of independent media and journalists,
and urging the government to decriminalize defamation. The OSCE in Baku
issued numerous statements echoing the problems of media freedoms.