Azerbaijan
Azerbaijan’s human rights record further deteriorated. A February 2009 referendum
on constitutional amendments abolished presidential term limits, which
many local and international observers believed will make it possible for
President Ilham Aliyev to remain in office indefinitely. The government continued
to use defamation and other criminal charges to intimidate and punish journalists
and bloggers expressing dissenting opinions; at least nine are serving prison sentences
at this writing.
New amendments to the religion law restrict freedom of conscience. Other serious
problems persist, including torture and ill-treatment in police custody, political
prisoners, and harassment of human rights defenders.
Media Freedom and Civil Society Activism
Since November 2008 at least nine independent or pro-opposition journalists
and editors were convicted on criminal libel or defamation charges. They were: Ali
Hasanov, the editor of Ideal newspaper, who was sentenced in November 2008 to
six months in prison, and pardoned in April 2009 after serving all but one month
of his sentence; Asif Merzili, chief editor of the newspaper Tezadlar, and Zumrud
Mammadova, a journalist there, who in April were sentenced to one year in prison
and six months of corrective labor respectively (a higher court annulled the convictions
two days later); Nazim Guliyev, the founder of Ideal, convicted in May and
sentenced to six months in prison; Sardar Alibeili and Faramaz Allahverdiev, editor-
in-chief and a correspondent of Nota newspaper, who in October received
four- and three-month prison terms respectively, and staffer Ramiz Tagiyev, who
received a six-month suspended sentence; and Zahir Azamat, chief editor of
sports website, Fanat.az, and a staff member, Natig Mukhtarli, who were sentenced
in October to six months and one year of corrective labor respectively.
In July youth activists and bloggers Emin Milli and Adnan Hajizade were physically
attacked, apparently unprovoked, in a Baku restaurant. They were detained, interrogated,
and put in custody when they went to the police to complain about the
attack; their attackers were released. Milli and Hajizade were convicted in November of hooliganism and deliberately causing bodily harm and sentenced to
two-and-a-half and two years in custody, respectively.
Other imprisoned journalists include Eynulla Fatullayev, an outspoken government
critic and editor-in-chief of two newspapers, who was convicted of fomenting
terrorism and other criminal charges in 2007 and sentenced to eight-and-ahalf
years for his writings; Ganimed Zahidov, editor-in-chief of the opposition
daily Azadlig, who was convicted in March 2008 on questionable hooliganism
charges and sentenced to four years in prison; and Mushfig Huseynov, opposition
daily Bizim Yol correspondent, who is serving a five-year term handed down in
January 2008 (to be followed by a two-year publishing ban), on questionable
extortion charges.
The government failed to meaningfully investigate several incidents of violence
and threats against journalists. In February 2009, Idrak Abbasov, of the media
monitoring organization Institute for Reporter Freedom and Safety (IRFS), visited
Nakhichevan autonomous region, where he was called to the local ministry of
security and allegedly blindfolded and beaten. IRFS Nakhichevan regional correspondent
Elman Abbasov received telephone death threats throughout the year,
and no official investigation followed his numerous complaints. In October the
Baku Appeals Court upheld a district court decision not to investigate the illegal
detention and ill-treatment by police of IRFS chairman Emin Huseynov, who had
been detained in June 2008, beaten in custody, and hospitalized for more than
20 days for his injuries. In April ANS TV employees Nijat Suleymanov, Elmin
Muradov, and Azer Balayev were allegedly beaten up by about 30 policemen as
they were trying to document the destruction of a mosque in Baku. Police temporarily
confiscated the filming equipment, which they also broke; they did not
return the confiscated videotape. In May Elchin Hassanov, a correspondent for
two newspapers, sustained multiple bodily injuries from an alleged assaulted by
police at the Sabail district police department as he inquired about a group of
detained youths.
In December 2008 the National Television and Radio Council banned the transmission
of foreign radio stations via FM frequencies, making them accessible only
through satellite receiver or the internet. The February 2009 constitutional
amendments ban the audio recording, filming, or photographing of a person without his or her consent, seriously hampering investigative journalism in
Azerbaijan. March amendments to the mass media law allow the government to
request a court to suspend a media outlet for up to two months for several reasons,
including failure to send free obligatory copies to “relevant government
bodies.”
The minister of interior filed a libel suit in December 2008 against human rights
activist Leyla Yunus based on statements she made in a media interview that simply
repeated courtroom testimony by a defendant during an open trial. The lawsuit
accused her of “insulting” the ministry and causing “moral damage” to the
reputation of the police. The case was dropped in February 2009.
In June the government introduced, but then withdrew, a draft law on NGOs that
would have imposed extensive restrictions on the founding and operation of civil
society groups.
Freedom of Religion
In May a new religion law and amendments to both the criminal and administrative
codes came into force, requiring all registered religious organizations to
reregister by January 2010—the third time since the country’s independence. The
amendments ban a religious organization from conducting religious activity
beyond the legal address where it is registered, and also restricts producing,
importing, circulating, or selling religious literature without specific permission
from the State Committee for Work with Religious Organizations.
In June another set of restrictive amendments were adopted by parliament,
requiring all religious rituals of the Islamic faith to be led only by citizens of
Azerbaijan who were educated in the country.
Torture and Ill-Treatment
Torture and ill-treatment in custody continue to be a widespread problem and
occur with impunity. The Azerbaijan Committee against Torture, an independent
group that monitors penitentiary institutions, received over 90 complaints alleging
torture and ill-treatment in custody. In each case where law enforcement agencies responded to the complaint, they denied that torture or ill-treatment
had taken place. At least three prisoners are reported to have died in custody in
2009 after allegedly being ill-treated.
In August Novruzali Mammadov, editor-in-chief of Talyshi Sado newspaper, died
in custody apparently after the government failed to provide him with adequate
treatment for health problems. In February he was kept in solitary confinement for
15 days and deprived of bedding and warm clothes, which is believed to have
aggravated his illness. At this writing a court is hearing a wrongful death complaint
filed by Mammadov’s family.
In April the European Court of Human Rights found Azerbaijan in violation of article
3 (the prohibition against inhuman or degrading treatment) of the European
Convention on Human Rights in relation to Mahira Muradova, a participant in
opposition protests following the October 2003 presidential election. Muradova
alleged that she had been subjected to an act of police brutality and that the
authorities failed to carry out an adequate investigation into the incident.
Political Prisoners
The government continues to hold a number of political prisoners, prompting the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe in March 2009 to appoint a rapporteur
on the issue of political prisoners in Azerbaijan. Government officials,
businessmen, and opposition politicians arrested prior to the November 2005
parliamentary elections on allegations of attempting to overthrow the government
remain in custody. Parts of their trials were completely closed and lawyers said
there were procedural violations, raising concerns about the trials’ fairness. Three
political prisoners arrested in connection with the 2003 presidential election,
Elchin Amiraslanov, Safa Poladov, and Arif Kazimov, also remain incarcerated.
Key International Actors
A large number of international and regional institutions and bilateral partners
criticized Azerbaijan’s human rights record, especially regarding media freedoms
and the imprisonment of the bloggers Milli and Hajizade. In February 2009 the
Council of Europe secretary general expressed concern about the number of imprisoned journalists in Azerbaijan and urged the authorities to examine each
case. These concerns were echoed by the Organization for Security and Co-operation
in Europe (OSCE) representative on freedom of the media, Miklos Haraszti, in
his April and July reports to the OSCE Permanent Council.
In March 2009 the Council of Europe’s Venice Commission, the advisory body on
constitutional matters, criticized the constitutional amendments, stating that they
distort the balance of power and contradict European practice.
Azerbaijani civil society, together with international human rights groups, successfully
campaigned against Azerbaijan’s reelection to the United Nations
Human Rights Council in May. A number of UN treaty bodies reviewed
Azerbaijan’s treaty compliance, including the Human Rights Committee, the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, and the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women. The resulting concluding observations
of these bodies urged Azerbaijan to take immediate steps to bring the country’s
human rights record into full compliance with the relevant conventions.
In May Azerbaijan and the European Union signed a Joint Declaration on Eastern
Partnership. Azerbaijan is already part of the European Neighbourhood Policy
(ENP). The April ENP Action Plan progress report was critical of the government for
making no or limited progress in implementing the Action Plan, particularly in the
areas of political dialogue and reform, including protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms.