Burundi
Efforts to resolve conflict between the government and the last active rebel group,
the Party for the Liberation of the Hutu People-National Liberation Forces
(Palipehutu-FNL), made halting progress. Preliminary talks in early 2008 on
renewed negotiations soon deadlocked. In April, FNL forces attacked the capital,
Bujumbura. Tanzania, longtime host of the Palipehutu-FNL leadership, expelled
them in May. Combined with combat losses, this brought the group back to the
table, signing a new ceasefire on May 25. However, as of November, Palipehutu-
FNL refused to enter the political process unless it could retain its name, although
the constitution prohibits ethnically based political parties.
Rebels, security forces, and armed civilians linked to the ruling party carried out
extrajudicial executions of opponents. Meanwhile, President Pierre Nkurunziza’s
National Council for the Defense of Democracy—Forces for the Defense of
Democracy (CNDD-FDD) intimidated rival parties and civil society.
Progress in Peace Negotiations and Demobilization
Progress toward resuming peace talks deadlocked in April over Palipehutu-FNL
demands for “provisional immunity” from prosecution, leading to combat that
displaced thousands of civilians. Once talks resumed in May, FNL combatants
refused to enter assembly sites, recruited new members, and continued pillaging
civilians. Police killed an FNL member in August, raising fear of renewed violence.
Talks continued under strong international pressure.
In addition to the matter of Palipehutu-FNL’s name, the fate of a group claiming to
be former FNL combatants was a sticking point. The Palipehutu-FNL charged the
group was created by the government as an alternative negotiating partner, and
the World Bank refused to fund its demobilization.
Some 230 children from this group were demobilized in May, but UN observers
reported difficulties in reintegration. Human rights groups estimate that hundreds
of children remain in the ranks of Palipehutu-FNL.
Political Violence
In early 2008 killings on both sides of the political divide raised concerns about
violence as politicians began preparing for the 2010 elections. At least five persons
linked to the FNL and three persons linked to the Front for Burundian
Democracy (Frodebu), a political party, were murdered. Witnesses accused police,
National Intelligence Service (SNR) agents, local officials, and members of the
CNDD-FDD youth league. In March grenades were thrown at the homes of five
politicians opposed to the CNDD-FDD, recalling similar attacks in mid-2007.
Five CNDD-FDD officials and a police informant linked to the CNDD-FDD were
killed in early 2008, and attempts were made on the lives of two intelligence
agents and two other CNDD-FDD officials. In at least three cases, witnesses attributed
attacks to Palipehutu-FNL, while two other victims had been repeatedly
threatened by FNL members.
Police arrested three suspects for the grenade attacks, but a magistrate released
them due to lack of evidence. As of November, there had been no trials for any of
these attacks.
Following the resumption of combat in April, police, soldiers, and intelligence
agents arrested hundreds of suspected Palipehutu-FNL members, detaining many
for weeks without charge, beating some. Police and intelligence agents frequently
used former FDD combatants to harass, assault, and illegally arrest Palipehutu-
FNL members and others.
Repression of Political Opposition
In April former CNDD-FDD president Hussein Radjabu was sentenced to 13 years
in prison after being convicted with five others of threatening state security.
Radjabu was arrested in April 2007 after he lost his post in political in-fighting.
He had been detained for months in conditions that violated Burundian law. The
convictions are under appeal.
Twenty-one CNDD-FDD deputies including 19 loyal to Radjabu left the party in
2007. Another was expelled in early 2008, leading to deadlock in the National
Assembly. In June the CNDD-FDD president of the assembly asked the Constitutional Court to declare the seats empty. He did not seek a ruling on the
situation of deputies who had left the opposition Frodebu party. In a much-criticized,
hastily issued decision, the court held that the seats of the CNDD-FDD
defectors were occupied unconstitutionally, allowing the party to fill them with
loyalists. The decision did not enable Frodebu also to replace defectors. Three
defecting CNDD-FDD deputies were subsequently arrested; as of November two
remained in pre-trial detention on charges of threatening state security.
In late 2007, at least 71 members of opposition parties and movements, mostly
from the Union for Peace and Democracy (UPD-Zigamibanga) and the Movement
for Security and Democracy (MSD), were arrested. MSD chairperson Alexis
Sinduhije was arrested in November on charges of “insulting the president”,
based on documents seized in an illegal search at his headquarters.
Addressing Impunity
On October 23, a military tribunal convicted 15 soldiers for the killing of 31 civilians
in Muyinga in 2006; a year after the Nkurunziza government took power.
Although this was an important blow against impunity, no civilian officials implicated
in the case, including local administrators and intelligence agents, were
prosecuted. The primary Muyinga suspect, Colonel Vital Bangirinama, sentenced
to death in absentia, had fled Burundi in January after learning he was to be
arrested. A new criminal code before the National Assembly would eliminate the
death penalty.
Impunity continued for crimes from the war years and other more recent human
rights violations. Progress was slow in the trials of intelligence officers responsible
for killing four civilians in Kinama in 2006 and of police officers accused of
beating at least 20 civilians in Muramvya in 2007. Officers accused of abuses
failed to appear in court in September because the court failed to send them subpoenas,
and unknown individuals attempted to bribe and intimidate witnesses
not to testify.
Transitional Justice
A committee including representatives of government, the United Nations, and
civil society was formed in November 2007 to guide popular consultations on the
establishment of a truth and reconciliation commission and a special tribunal.
Although the UN Peacebuilding Fund, established by the UN Peacebuilding
Commission, contributed US$1 million, the committee did not organize consultations,
now scheduled for 2009. President Nkurunziza wrested control of the
process from the first vice president, contravening an agreement with the UN, and
was rebuked by the UN secretary-general. The government continued to urge
amnesty for war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide, despite UN
opposition.
Human Rights Defenders and Journalists
After three journalists held for allegedly threatening state security were freed in
2007, several months of relative press freedom followed. In August 2008, however,
judicial authorities interrogated representatives from the Burundian human
rights organization Ligue Iteka and a Burundian consultant for International Crisis
Group about sources of information critical of the government they had allegedly
passed to journalists. Gabriel Rufyiri, head of L’Observatoire de Lutte contre la
Corruption et les Malversations Economiques (OLUCOME), detained for four
months in 2006 for criticizing official corruption, was interrogated twice in 2008,
once after criticizing the state budget.
In August, Jean Claude Kavumbagu, editor of the web-based Net Press, was
imprisoned on defamation charges after publishing a report that the president
had spent US$100,000 on a trip to China. Union activist Juvenal Rududura was
imprisoned for “false declarations” after he accused the minister of justice of corruption.
In September the director of Radio Publique Africaine (RPA) was interrogated
after the station criticized officials. Pressured by the National
Communications Council to apologize, the station expressed regret for some
“journalistic errors,” but otherwise stood by its reporting.
Violence against Women
In January the UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women
expressed concern over domestic and sexual violence in Burundi. The government
took some measures to combat violence against women. A proposed new
criminal code, currently before the National Assembly, explicitly defines the
crimes of rape and sexual violence, and provides stiffer penalties.
Key International Actors
The UN Human Rights Council renewed the mandate for the independent expert
on the situation of human rights in Burundi after the Burundian government,
encouraged by local human rights groups and EU diplomats dropped its opposition.
The government agreed to extend the mandate until a proposed national
human rights commission begins operating.
Human rights officers of the United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB),
successor to the ONUB peacekeeping mission, monitored and denounced human
rights abuses, although other sections of BINUB hesitated to criticize governmental
actions.
The UN Peacebuilding Fund began disbursing US$35 million pledged to Burundi,
including US$500,000 for the intelligence agency known for many abuses.
International donors supported police training and renovation of courts and prisons,
projects important to assuring human rights. The EU defended press freedom,
and the EU, UK, and US issued statements condemning the arrest of
Sinduhije. But they were silent on the expulsion of the 22 deputies, and failed to
send a proposed joint letter to the government expressing concerns about
impunity.
A new political directorate including South Africa and the EU facilitated peace
talks between the government and Palipehutu-FNL. An African Union force of
South African troops provided security to Palipehutu-FNL leaders upon their
return to Burundi, but planned to pull out after a December 31 deadline for a
peace agreement.
Burundi is due to be reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism of
the UN Human Rights Council in December 2008.