Burundi
The Burundian government committed to strengthening human rights protections
and made progress in certain areas, such as initiatives to address genderbased
violence. A five-day national debate on the justice sector produced a set
of recommendations on judicial reforms. However, the justice system remained
weak and under-resourced and suffered from political interference and allegations
of corruption.
Impunity for human rights abuses, particularly by state agents and youth of the
ruling party, was a dominant concern. Most cases of extrajudicial killings and
other acts of political violence between 2010 and 2012 remained unresolved.
Prosecutions were initiated against a small number of alleged perpetrators, but
proceedings were slow or seriously flawed, and several police officers accused
of involvement in killings and ill-treatment were released.
Most leading opposition figures who had fled the country after boycotting the
2010 elections returned to Burundi, encouraged by the government, in advance
of the 2015 general elections. However, opposition party members continued to
face obstruction and harassment.
Journalists and civil society activists also encountered intimidation by the government,
which accused them of siding with the opposition. In June, President
Pierre Nkurunziza promulgated a new press law severely curtailing media freedoms.
Impunity for Political Killings and Other Abuses
Few of the perpetrators of the scores of political killings in 2010-2012 were
brought to justice, due to a lack of political will and weak judicial system. In
many cases, victims families were too afraid to seek redress.
In a small number of cases, judicial authorities arrested, charged, and prosecuted
police officers, following investigations by a commission of inquiry into
extrajudicial killings and torture set up in 2012 by the prosecutor general. The
High Court in Gitega tried Michel Nurweze, known as Rwembe (razor blade in
Kirundi), a deputy police commissioner in Gitega province, for his alleged
involvement in the November 2011 murder of Landre Bukuru, a member of the Movement for Solidarity and Democracy (MSD) opposition party. Nurweze was
also tried for attempted murder and torture in two other cases. His trial could
have set an important precedent in ending impunity, but at least two prosecution
witnesses would not testify in court because of the absence of adequate
protection.
On August 12, the court acquitted Nurweze of the murder and torture charges,
changed the offense of attempted murder to grievous bodily harm, and sentenced
him to three months imprisonment. He was released, as he had already
served a year in prison. The prosecution appealed. Appeal hearings opened in
October but were postponed to January 2014.
Appeal hearings in the trial of those accused of involvement in an attack in
Gatumba in September 2011, which killed 39 people, concluded in November.
Proceedings were complicated by the escape from detention of one of the principal
defendants, Innocent Ngendakuriyo. The trial in 2012 had been seriously
flawed, with several defendants convicted despite claiming they had been tortured.
Political Parties
Most opposition party leaders who had fled the country after boycotting the
2010 elections returned to Burundi, including Alexis Sinduhije, president of the
MSD, and Agathon Rwasa, former rebel leader and head of the National
Liberation Forces (FNL). Following their return, members of opposition parties,
including the FNL and the MSD, were harassed and intimidated, despite government
promises that political parties could operate freely. Government officials
and police disrupted or obstructed party meetings and arrested a number of
FNL and MSD members.
Members of the imbonerakurethe youth league of the ruling National Council
for the Defense of Democracy-Forces for the Defense of Democracy (CNDDFDD)
committed acts of violence, including killings, beatings, rape, threats,
and extortion against their perceived opponents and other Burundians. Despite
a public outcry and promises by government and party officials to punish such
actions, abuses continued throughout the year. Some opposition party members
threatened to retaliate in kind through their own youth groups. A clash between imbonerakure and MSD youth in Gihanga, Bubanza province, on
October 6 caused injuries on both sides.
Killings, Ill-Treatment, and Arbitrary Arrests of Religious
Worshippers
Police opened fire on a large crowd of religious worshippers near Businde,
Kayanza province, on March 12, killing nine people. The police then lined up
the worshippers and beat them. The victims included men, women, and children.
The worshippers, part of an informal spiritual movement that makes a
monthly pilgrimage to Businde, consider themselves Roman Catholics, but have
been rejected by the Catholic Church hierarchy in Burundi and have repeatedly
clashed with local clergy, police, and governmental officials since 2012. The
police, instructed by the government to prevent the worshippers from gathering
at Businde, beat them severely on several previous occasions in late 2012 and
January 2013. Some victims sustained broken bones and other serious injuries.
Hundreds of these worshippers were arbitrarily arrested in late 2012 and 2013.
Most were accused of rebellion for disregarding the government decision to
prohibit prayers at Businde. Many were released without charge but some were
rearrested. In some cases, a condition for their release was that they would
agree not to return to Businde, in violation of their right to religious freedom.
More than 200 people arrested in March and April were tried summarily on the
day of their arrest, without a defense lawyer, and received sentences of up to
five years imprisonment. On appeal, their sentences were reduced to a fine
and all but two of them were released. Thirty-three others arrested in late 2012
remained in pretrial detention.
The prosecutor of the appeal court at Ngozi ordered the arrest on March 16 of
Bosco Havyarimana, the police commander accused of ordering the shootings
and supervising the beatings, and two other police officers, Syldie
Nsengiyumva and Innocent Nizigiyimana. On May 29, all three were provisionally
released, pending further investigations. At time of writing, they had not been
brought
to trial.
Harassment of Civil Society Activists and Journalists
Burundi has a vibrant independent civil society and media, but government officials
have attempted to silence their criticisms and accused them of siding with
the political opposition. Government and judicial officials harassed, intimidated,
and questioned several journalists about their reporting and threatened
them with legal action.
On April 27, a policeman threatened Patrick Niyonkuru, a journalist with Radio
Publique Africaine (RPA), as he attempted to investigate alleged extortion of
bicycle-taxi drivers by the police. The policeman then shot Niyonkuru, injuring
him in the arm. The policeman was arrested, tried summarily, and sentenced to
15 years in prison on the day of the attack.
On April 25, armed men broke into the house of Willy Abagenzinikindi of Radio
Television Renaissance, forced him to the ground, hit him with a machete, and
demanded that he hand over audio cassettes he had recorded as part of his
investigations.
Hassan Ruvakuki, journalist with Radio France Internationale and Bonesha FM,
who had been sentenced to life imprisonment in 2012 for alleged participation
in terrorist acts after interviewing a rebel group, was released in March after
spending 15 months in prison. His sentence had been reduced to three years on
appeal. Following much international attention on the case, he was released
early on medical grounds, then granted conditional release in October. On
February 19, police fired teargas to disperse journalists marching in support of
Ruvakuki in the capital Bujumbura.
The National Communication Council suspended the online readers forum of
Burundis main independent newspaper Iwacu for 30 days on May 31, claiming
that unspecified readers comments had violated legal provisions on endangering
national unity, public order and security, incitement to ethnic hatred,
justification of crimes, and insults to the head of state.
In June, the government adopted a new restrictive press law, despite strong
national and international expressions of concern. The law undermines the protection
of sources and limits the subjects on which journalists can report,
potentially criminalizing reporting and analysis on subjects such as inflation, public order and security, and political killings. While eliminating prison sentences
provided under the old law, it imposes new, heavy fines.
A draft law on public demonstrations and meetings, adopted by parliament but
not yet promulgated, and another on nongovernmental organizations, awaiting
parliamentary debate, also raised concerns about possible restrictions of freedom
of association and assembly. Amendments by the National Assembly to
the law on public demonstrations and meetings took into account many recommendations
by Burundian civil society organizations, but the draft retained the
right of an administrative official appointed to attend public meetings to suspend
or dissolve them to maintain public order.
Transitional Justice
At time of writing, parliament had not yet adopted a draft law establishing a
Truth and Reconciliation Commission to cover crimes committed since 1962,
despite assurances by President Nkurunziza that the commission would be
established by the end of 2012. The draft law does not provide for the establishment
of a special tribunal to prosecute those accused of the most serious
offenses.
Returnees
Around 35,000 Burundian refugees, many of whom had been living in Tanzania
for several decades, returned to Burundi between October and December 2012
following an ultimatum by the Tanzanian government. Overall the returns took
place peacefully, but there were tensions around property and land ownership,
and controversy over some decisions of the National Commission for Land and
Other Property, responsible for resolving such disputes.
Key International Actors
Burundis Universal Periodic Review, which took place in January 2013, contained
important recommendations on the protection of civil and political as
well as social, economic, and cultural rights. While welcoming progress in some
areas, many governments raised concerns in the Human Rights Council about
extrajudicial killings, impunity for human rights abuses, and restrictions on press freedom, among other issues. The Burundian government rejected all the
recommendations to fight impunity for extrajudicial killings, as well as those on
the prevention of discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender
identity and the decriminalization of consensual same-sex conduct.
The United Nations Office in Burundi, BNUB, encouraged dialogue between
political parties and organized a meeting between political actors in March.
Participants agreed to create an environment conducive to free, fair, transparent,
and peaceful elections in 2015, the right of all parties to carry out their
activities unhindered, and a commitment not to use violence.