Burundi
Most of Burundi enjoyed relative peace for the first time in a decade
during 2004, but the province of Rural Bujumbura just outside the
national capital remains a battleground between the rebel National
Liberation Forces (FNL) on one side and the combined Burundian
Armed Forces and the Forces for the Defense of Democracy (FDD) on
the other. The FDD is a former rebel movement that joined the government
at the end of 2003. The FNL, drawn largely from the majority
Hutu population, remains outside the peace process that has brought
together other Hutu-dominated groups, including the FDD, with parties
of the Tutsi minority who have dominated political and military life
for generations. All forces in the country-wide civil war and those
involved in the more recent limited combat outside the capital committed
grave violations of international humanitarian and human rights law,
killing and raping civilians and pillaging their property.
The Arusha Accords of 2000, the first of several power-sharing arrangements
between belligerents, provided for a three year period of transition
to be ended with national elections by November 1, 2004. By July
2004, the major parties had failed to agree even on a constitution under
which such elections could be held. With strong backing from regional
heads of state, Hutu-dominated parties pushed through a constitution
in September that was rejected by the leading Tutsi-dominated parties
on the grounds that it failed to provide adequate safeguards for their
rights and security. But just before the new constitution was to take
effect, most of the Tutsi-led parties changed their position and agreed
to work within the new constitution, at least until a national referendum
could be held, now scheduled for the end of 2004, with elections to take
place in early 2005.
In June 2004, a South African-led peace-keeping force, operating under
the auspices of the African Union, was replaced by a United Nations
peacekeeping force known as the United Nations Operation in Burundi (ONUB). Reaching its full complement only towards the end of the
year, ONUB deployed increasing numbers of troops and observers to
Rural Bujumbura but without markedly reducing the number of abuses
against civilians.
Civilians Targeted by Combatants
Government soldiers in collaboration with the FDD fought to extirpate
the FNL from the hills surrounding Bujumbura, areas that had formed
the FNL base for years. In some cases they engaged FNL combatants
but often they also attacked civilian populations thought to support the
FNL by paying them party dues or by giving them food and shelter.
They also attacked civilians in reprisal for FNL ambushes against government
soldiers or FDD combatants. They deliberately killed civilians,
raped women and girls, burned houses, and stole property. FNL forces
assassinated those known or thought to be working with the government
and stole or extorted property from civilians. Combat and abuse
by combatants frequently caused civilians to flee and tens of thousands
spent more than six months of the year living in camps, temporary
lodgings, or in the bush. By late 2004, government and FDD forces
were regularly looting civilians immediately after they had received
humanitarian assistance like food, blankets, or other household items.
The practice had become so widespread that humanitarian agencies
were obliged to suspend deliveries of aid in order to avoid further
attacks on people who were living in abject misery. The FDD, in the
past occasionally allied with the FNL, saw the other movement as a
potential rival for votes if a functional electoral system is established and
apparently were the force most responsible for abuses against civilians
thought to support the FNL
On August 13, 2004, FNL rebels, apparently together with combatants
from other groups, massacred more than 150 Congolese refugees at
Gatumba camp, near the Congolese border. More than one hundred
Burundian army soldiers and dozens of Burundian national police in nearby barracks failed to respond to repeated calls for help from the
civilians, most of them women and children, who were killed by intense
gunfire or were burned to death in their tents. As of early November,
Burundian military authorities had taken no public action against the
officers responsible for this failure to protect civilians under their
charge.
Justice
Despite frequent calls for justice, both national and international actors
appear driven more by expediency than real concern for accountability.
The late 2003 agreement between the government and the FDD, generally
supported by the international community, granted “provisional
immunity” to all combatants and leaders of both forces, meaning that
justice for their crimes would be at least postponed and probably never
delivered. Prosecutors in the military justice system now claim that they
cannot prosecute accused soldiers because of this “provisional immunity.”
Hundreds of FDD combatants detained in Burundian jails, including
some accused of crimes resulting in deaths, were released in mid-2004
under this provision. In July 2004 prisoners at most Burundian jails
went on strike for several weeks, demanding that they too be released
either under the terms of this agreement or under another broader
arrangement that provided for the release of “political prisoners.”
Authorities restored order in the prisons and promised to set up a committee
to examine prisoners’ demands, thus postponing a decision on
the complicated question.
Under the Arusha Accords, the parties asked the United Nations to
provide an international commission to investigate serious crimes committed
in Burundi since 1962. The Security Council did not act on this
request until April 2004 and then sent a team only to assess the feasibility
of such a commission. The conclusions of the assessment team had not been published by late November, at which time the council seemed
more inclined to dispense with further commissions and move directly
to supporting prosecution. During these years of delay, Burundian
authorities insisted that they wanted an international mechanism to
deliver justice but showed no real commitment to delivering justice for
these crimes in the national court system.
In 2004, authorities began slowly to implement reforms to the judicial
system adopted in 2003 but they have not yet indicted any suspects
under a law passed that year against genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity.
After a spokesman acknowledged FNL responsibility for the Gatumba
massacre, the government issued arrest warrants for two FNL leaders
but neither has been caught. Faced with the difficulty of prosecuting a
complicated as well as a horrendous crime, some Burundians raised the
issue of joining the International Criminal Court, a process that had
been begun but then stalled in August 2003. Under both domestic and
international pressure, the government completed the ratification procedure
for membership in the ICC, raising the hope that some such
crimes could eventually be punished.
Land and the Return of Refugees
Nearly eighty thousand largely Hutu refugees returned to Burundi from
Tanzania by August 2004, but the flow slowed and even temporarily
reversed with uncertainty about instability that might result from the
failure to hold elections. Hundreds of Tutsi residents also fled from
Burundi to Rwanda in September and October, also fearing violence.
The government faces the problem of finding ways to reconcile the
property rights of returnees with the rights of those who currently
occupy the land. In similar circumstances ten years ago, the return of an earlier generation of refugees and ensuing contests over the control of
land sparked the tensions that led to the beginning of the civil war.
Key International Actors
International actors are committed to avoiding a genocide like that
which occurred in Rwanda, the neighbor and demographic twin of
Burundi, but have been reluctant to commit the necessary resources to
promote real peace: the U.N. agreed to a peace-keeping force only in
2004 and still has not agreed to establish a commission to help deliver
justice for past serious violations of international law.
South Africa bore most of the cost of the initial African Union peacekeeping
force and has also invested substantial political resources in trying
to facilitate agreements in Burundi. Its leadership has sometimes
meshed poorly with that of other heads of state in the region, but all
came together to provide forceful backing for the most recent advance
towards a constitution.
Various international actors, particularly the U.N., tried to move the
FNL towards negotiations in June and July, but after the Gatumba massacre,
they suspended all such efforts. Towards the end of the year, the
U.N. and others discretely signaled a willingness to resume talks with
the FNL, leaving unclear how they could do so without sacrificing justice
for the Gatumba massacre.
The U.N. Human Rights Commission did not renew the mandate of a
special rapporteur for Burundi, but human rights personnel attached to
the U.N. peacekeeping force became increasingly effective in monitoring
abuses.
In late November 2004, Burundi joined international efforts to protect
children and ratified two optional protocols to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child (formally adopted May 25, 2000), that on the involvement of children in armed conflict and that on the sale of children,
child prostitution and child pornography.