Burundi
Human rights in Burundi in 2012 present both progress and serious concerns.
For example, the number of political killings decreased in 2012 after a sharp
escalation in 2011, but political space remains restricted. The Burundian government
failed to address widespread impunity, especially for members of the
security forces and the youth league of the ruling National Council for the
Defense of Democracy-Forces for the Defense of Democracy (CNDD-FDD). The
report of a commission of inquiry, set up by the prosecutor general to investigate
cases of extrajudicial executions and torture, acknowledged that killings
had occurred, but concluded that they did not constitute extrajudicial executions.
There were very few arrests or prosecutions for politically motivated killings,
and in the incident that claimed the largest number of victims in 2011—the
attack at Gatumba resulting in 39 deaths—the trial of the alleged perpetrators
was seriously flawed. Several leading opposition figures remained outside the
country, and the CNDD-FDD continued to dominate the political scene.
Civil society organizations and media continued to investigate and publicly
denounce human rights abuses; however, freedom of expression was constantly
under threat. State pressure on journalists and civil society activists continued,
as the government counted them among the political opposition. Draft legislation
placing new restrictions on media freedoms was tabled before parliament
in October.
The National Independent Human Rights Commission continued to work in an
independent manner, expanding its representation in several provinces and
investigating reports of human rights abuses.
Political Killings
Political killings diminished significantly in 2012, but there were sporadic
attacks by armed groups as well as killings of members or former members of
the opposition National Liberation Forces (FNL). Despite repeated promises to
deliver justice for these crimes, the government failed to take effective action to do so. In the vast majority of politically motivated killings, thorough investigations
were not carried out, and there were no arrests or prosecutions. Impunity
was particularly pronounced in cases where the perpetrators were suspected to
be state agents or members of the Imbonerakure, the youth league of the CNDDFDD.
The Gatumba attack, which claimed 39 lives in September 2011, was one of the
rare cases that resulted in prosecution. However, the trial of 21 people accused
of involvement in the attack, which concluded in December 2011, was seriously
flawed. Despite the complexity of the case, the trial only lasted a few days and
was marked by irregularities, with several aspects of proceedings casting doubt
on the fairness of the trial and the reliability of the judges’ ruling. In January, 16
of the 21 defendants were found guilty; seven were sentenced to life imprisonment.
At this writing, their appeal was pending. The report of a commission of
inquiry investigating the Gatumba attack, which was completed in October
2011, has still not been published.
In June, the prosecutor general set up a commission of inquiry into cases of torture
and extrajudicial killings, including cases reported by Human Rights Watch,
Amnesty International, and the Burundian human rights organization,
Association for the Protection of Human Rights and Detained Persons
(APRODH).
In August, the commission published its report, recognizing that killings had
occurred, but concluded that they did not constitute extrajudicial executions.
The report stated that casefiles had been opened on a number of these incidents
and that investigations were underway. It attempted to discredit the findings
of Human Rights Watch, APRODH, and the human rights section of the
United Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB). BNUB issued a press release challenging
the commission’s conclusions, and reiterated the state’s responsibility for
human rights abuses by its agents.
The commission’s work resulted in the arrest of about eight people, including
policemen, alleged to have been involved in cases of killings or torture. At this
writing, they were in preventive detention.
However, in the majority of other cases documented by Human Rights Watch,
even when prosecutors had opened a file, judicial authorities made little effort
to conduct in-depth investigations and rarely questioned witnesses or victims’
relatives. Many family members of victims were often too afraid to demand justice.
Several faced threats for speaking out about the deaths of their relatives.
Transitional Justice
In December 2011, the government published a draft law establishing a Truth
and Reconciliation Commission to cover crimes committed since 1962. While
long overdue and broadly welcomed by Burundian civil society, the law did not
provide for the establishment of a special tribunal to prosecute individuals
accused of committing the most serious offenses, including war crimes, crimes
against humanity, and genocide. The Truth and Reconciliation Commission is yet
to be established, despite promises by President Pierre Nkurunziza that it would
be set up by the end of 2012.
Pressure on Civil Society Activists and Journalists
State authorities repeatedly threatened human rights activists, journalists, and
other members of civil society. In February, Pierre Claver Mbonimpa, president
of APRODH, received a letter from the minister of interior accusing his organization
of launching a “campaign of disinformation” against the state after
APRODH alleged that state security forces were arming youth. The minister
threatened “severe sanctions” if Mbonimpa did not produce evidence of the
state arming youths within 10 days.
On February 7, Faustin Ndikumana, president of the nongovernmental organization,
Words and Action for Awakening Consciences and Changing Mentalities
(PARCEM), was arrested after denouncing alleged corruption in the ministry of
justice in relation to procedures for recruiting magistrates. He was detained for
two weeks, released on bail, tried by the Anti-Corruption Court, and sentenced
in July to five years’ imprisonment for making false statements. The court also
fined him and PARCEM for defaming the minister of justice. Ndikumana remains
free pending his appeal.
Minister of Interior Edouard Nduwimana ordered Human Rights Watch to cancel
a May 2 press conference and report launch in Bujumbura, and to stop distributing
copies of its report on political killings in Burundi. The government
spokesperson issued a public statement on May 7 describing the Human Rights
Watch report as a “declaration of war” against the people of Burundi.
After long delays, the trial of those accused of involvement in the murder of
anti-corruption campaigner Ernest Manirumva in 2009 concluded in May 2012.
Fourteen people were sentenced to prison terms ranging from 10 years to life
imprisonment. The Burundian government had established three successive
commissions of inquiry to investigate Manirumva’s death and had accepted
assistance from the FBI. However, the prosecution disregarded leads and recommendations
from the third commission and from the FBI, which might have
uncovered the possible involvement of Burundian officials in Manirumva’s
death. Appeal hearings began in November.
State agents, including high-ranking members of the intelligence services,
repeatedly threatened journalists, accusing them of siding with the opposition,
and warning them to stop criticizing the government.
The National Assembly was considering a new draft law on the press at this writing.
If adopted without being amended, this law would drastically curtail free
speech. The draft law contains several provisions that would restrict the ability
of journalists to operate independently. Journalists would not be able to protect
their sources in cases deemed to threaten state security or public order or cases
involving defense secrets, among others. The draft law requires journalists to
only broadcast or publish “balanced information from sources that have been
rigorously verified.” One improvement compared to the existing law is that
offenses would no longer be punishable by imprisonment; however, new heavy
fines would restrict the ability of media organizations to operate.
In June, Hassan Ruvakuki, of Radio France Internationale and Bonesha FM, was
sentenced to life imprisonment for alleged participation in terrorist acts after
interviewing a new rebel group in the eastern province of Cankuzo in late 2011.
Twenty-two co-accused persons were also found guilty. Ruvakuki maintained
that he was interviewing the group in his capacity as a journalist and that he was not a member of the group or spreading its propaganda. His lawyers walked
out of the trial, citing procedural irregularities and bias on the part of the
judges. Appeal hearings concluded in November.
Prisoner Releases
The Ministry of Justice launched an initiative to address overcrowding and irregular
detentions in Burundi’s prisons by reviewing prisoner case files and provisionally
releasing certain prisoners, including those who had served at least a
quarter of their sentence. In addition, a presidential decree in June announced
that several categories of prisoners, including those sentenced to five years’
imprisonment or less (except those convicted of rape, armed robbery, illegal
possession of weapons, and endangering state security), pregnant women, prisoners
suffering from incurable diseases, prisoners over the age of 60, and those
under the age of 18 would benefit from presidential grace; other prisoners’ sentences
would be halved. Several thousand prisoners could be released thanks
to these two initiatives, which began to be implemented during the year.
Key International Actors
Foreign diplomats in Bujumbura continued to follow high-profile trials, including
those of Ndikumana and Ruvakuki, the individuals accused of killing Ernest
Manirumva, and the Gatumba trial. The European Union issued two statements,
one in February expressing concern about flawed procedures in the Gatumba
trial and delay in delivering justice for the killing of Manirumva, and another in
August regretting the verdict in the trial of Ndikumana, and expressing concern
about difficulties facing Burundian civil society activists.
The Dutch government suspended part of its training program for the Burundian
police following the report of the prosecutor general’s commission of inquiry
into extrajudicial executions and the lack of progress in bringing perpetrators to
justice.