Burundi
Burundi held local and national elections between May and September 2010.
Following communal elections on May 24, the electoral commission announced
an overwhelming majority for the ruling party, the National Council for the
Defense of Democracy–Forces for the Defense of Democracy (CNDD-FDD).
Opposition parties cried fraud and boycotted subsequent elections. Government
officials banned opposition meetings and tortured political opponents. Both
CNDD-FDD and opposition supporters carried out acts of political violence.
International observers, relieved that Burundi had not descended into mass violence,
described the elections as “calm.”
The government facilitated the illegal takeover of the main opposition party, the
National Liberation Forces (FNL), by a dissident wing friendly to the ruling party.
Some FNL and other opposition members retreated to the bush and took up
arms. Police apprehended and killed several FNL members who were attempting
to join the armed groups.
The government cracked down on journalists, civil society organizations, and
international organizations that denounced abuses.
Elections and the Breakdown of Democratic Progress
CNDD-FDD’s election campaign relied on bribery and use of state resources,
along with intimidation. Police shut down the meetings of some opposition parties
and arrested some activists.
The May communal election results gave 64 percent of the vote to CNDD-FDD.
Opposition parties claimed that there had been massive fraud and formed a
coalition, ADC-Ikibiri, which called for a boycott of subsequent elections. They did
not present concrete evidence of massive fraud, but the failure of the National
Independent Electoral Commission (CENI) to publicize written vote tallies from
each voting station—in violation of the electoral law—raised doubts about the
integrity of the process.
All six opposition candidates dropped out of the presidential elections in June,
leaving incumbent President Pierre Nkurunziza as the sole candidate. One opposition
party, UPRONA, participated in legislative elections in July. Still, CNDD-FDD
won over 80 percent of parliament seats.
Political Violence and Return to Armed Conflict
Before and throughout the elections most major parties used intimidation tactics,
including violence. These parties included the FNL and, to a lesser degree, the
Front for Democracy in Burundi (FRODEBU), the Movement for Solidarity and
Democracy (MSD), the Union for Peace and Development (UPD), and the Union for
National Progress (UPRONA), but the majority of incidents were attributed to
CNDD-FDD. Partisan youth groups, including the CNDD-FDD’s Imbonerakure,
played a significant role in the violence. The Imbonerakure were also involved in
carrying out illegal arrests before, during, and after the elections.
In the two weeks before communal elections at least five politically-motivated
killings took place. During the presidential and legislative elections at least 128
grenade attacks – many of them targeting political activists on all sides – took
place throughout Burundi, killing 11 and injuring at least 69. At least 33 CNDDFDD
meeting places were set on fire during this period.
Throughout July and August FNL members fled their homes to avoid arrest, many
returning to the forests where they had fought during Burundi’s 16-year civil war.
FNL leader Agathon Rwasa went into hiding, as did ADC-Ikibiri spokesperson
Leonard Nyangoma. A new armed movement was formed. In September seven
workers employed by a prominent CNDD-FDD member were killed; evidence suggested
that the perpetrators were FNL members in the Rukoko forest. At least 18
bodies, many mutilated, washed up in the Rusizi River; some were recognized as
FNL members. The United Nations mission in Burundi (BINUB) and a Burundian
human rights group presented the authorities with evidence that police carried
out some of the killings.
Repression of the Political Opposition and
Resurgence of Torture
Over 250 opposition members were arrested in June and July. Charges included
“inciting the population not to vote,” which is not a crime in Burundi. Others were
suspected of serious crimes, including throwing grenades.
At least 12 opposition activists were tortured or ill-treated in June and July by the
National Intelligence Service (SNR). Dozens were ill-treated by the police. SNR
agents cut off part of the ear of one UPD member and forced him to eat it. Other
activists were kicked in the genitals or imprisoned in toilets.
Three opposition leaders were illegally prevented from leaving the country in
June. On June 8 Interior Minister Edouard Nduwimana banned all opposition
activities. He rescinded the ban in late July, but police still shut down some opposition
activities, including a September 17 ADC-Ikibiri press conference.
On August 4 Interior Minister Nduwimana recognized the results of an “extraordinary
congress,” organized by former FNL members with support of the ruling
party, in which FNL president Rwasa was voted out and replaced by more compliant
leaders. After years of effort by government officials and the international
community to bring Rwasa and the FNL into the political process, the congress
violated FNL internal rules and left Rwasa and his supporters with no political
voice.
On September 27 MSD spokesperson François Nyamoya was arrested on defamation
charges after stating in a radio interview that President Nkurunziza should
dismiss SNR chief Adolphe Nshimirimana and Deputy Police Director Gervais
Ndirakobuca due to abuses committed by both services. He was released on bail
on October 14. In addition to his political activity, Nyamoya is a prominent lawyer
who has defended government critics in court. His client Jackson Ndikuriyo, a former
police officer who had filed a complaint for unlawful dismissal, was killed on
August 26 in what Burundian rights organizations denounced as an extrajudicial
execution by police. Ndikuriyo had been fired for denouncing police corruption
and had told Nyamoya before his death that he was being threatened by Deputy
Police Director Ndirakobuca.
Human Rights Defenders and Journalists
The year 2010 represented a low point for the rights of human rights defenders
and journalists, with repression reaching a level not seen since 2006.
On May 18 Foreign Minister Augustin Nsanze revoked the work permit of Human
Rights Watch’s Burundi researcher, claiming that the organization’s May report on
political violence in Burundi was “biased” and that the researcher demonstrated
“attitudes that are harmful to government institutions.” The government did not
contest any specific information in the report and as of November Nsanze had not
responded to a series of requests from Human Rights Watch for dialogue.
Four journalists were arrested in 2010. Jean Claude Kavumbagu, editor of the
online service Net Press, was detained in July on treason charges—by law only
applicable “in times of war”—after questioning the army’s ability to respond to an
attack by al-Shabaab. Prosecutors insinuated that threats from al-Shabaab
against Burundi constituted “war.” As of October Kavumbagu had been held illegally
in pretrial detention for three months. Thierry Ndayishimiye, editor of the
newspaper Arc-en-Ciel, was detained in August for denouncing corruption at the
state energy company. He was released on bail. Two journalists from the private
newspaper Iwacu were detained for two days in November, with no explanation
and no charges.
On July 29 Gabriel Rufyiri, president of the anti-corruption organization OLUCOME,
was questioned by a magistrate subsequent to a defamation complaint.
Bujumbura prosecutor Renovat Tabu ordered Rufyiri’s arrest. The magistrate
refused, for lack of evidence, and was transferred the next day to a post in a jurisdiction
in rural Burundi.
Eric Manirakiza and Bob Rugurika, the director and editor-in-chief of the private
radio station RPA, received death threats. Pacifique Nininahazwe, delegate general
of the Forum for the Strengthening of Civil Society (FORSC), was subjected to
surveillance by vehicles associated with the SNR.
Hearings were held in the trial of suspects in the April 2009 murder of Ernest
Manirumva, OLUCOME vice president. Civil society groups expressed concern that
prosecutors have neglected to arrest or question several high-ranking police and SNR officials who have been cited by witnesses. They have also presented evidence
suggesting that some witnesses have disappeared or have been killed.
Prosecutors lost the witnesses’ confidence by sharing information on witnesses
with the SNR.
Transitional Justice and Criminal Justice
A committee representing the government, the UN, and civil society completed a
series of “national consultations” on establishing a Truth and Reconciliation
Commission and a Special Tribunal to address past war crimes. The committee
presented President Nkurunziza with a report in April, but it still is not public at
this writing, preventing progress on establishing the proposed mechanisms.
The Burundian justice system was plagued by backlogs in 2010. Sixty-five percent
of prisoners were in pretrial detention. A September court decision upholding the
pretrial detention of journalist Kavumbagu held that pretrial detention is always
the best means to maintain a suspect “at the disposition of the justice system,”
in violation of international human rights principles.
Key International Actors
International diplomats in Bujumbura closely followed proceedings in cases
affecting human rights defenders and journalists, many personally attended hearings.
Belgium’s foreign minister condemned the arrests of Kavumbagu and
Nyamoya and called for investigations into the allegations of torture of political
opponents. The United States, which offered technical assistance from its FBI in
investigations into Manirumva’s death, pressed the government to pursue highranking
officials suspected of involvement in the killing.
Many foreign governments failed to denounce restrictions on the rights of the
political opposition during the election period. They downplayed the lack of an
equal playing field and exerted heavy pressure on the opposition to end its boycott,
which resulted in alienating opposition parties.
The UN mission in Burundi systematically documented cases of torture, arbitrary
arrests, and extrajudicial executions, and pressed the government to end these
practices.
The UN-appointed Independent Expert on the Situation of Human Rights in
Burundi has not been able to present any report on the situation in Burundi since
September 2008, in a deviation from standard practice at the UN Human Rights
Council. Burundi lobbied the Council to postpone the presentation of the independent
expert’s report during the council’s September 2010 session.
Rwandan pressure on Burundi resulted in the illegal repatriation of 103 Rwandan
asylum seekers in November 2009. Tanzania took the positive step of naturalizing
162,000 Burundian refugees who had been in Tanzania since 1972.