Burundi
The political situation in Burundi is marked by efforts of the ruling National
Council for the Defense of Democracy–Forces for the Defense of Democracy
(CNDD-FDD) to monopolize power and by continuing impunity for severe human
rights abuses. Despite its resounding electoral victory in 2005, the CNDD-FDD
struggled with internal divisions and challenges from opposition parties that paralyzed
legislative action for most of 2007. In August unidentified assailants threw
grenades into the homes of five opposition political leaders, further embittering
the political atmosphere.
The war between the government and the last active rebel group, the National
Liberation Forces (FNL), had been halted by a September 2006 ceasefire, but on
July 21, 2007, talks on implementation broke down and rebel leaders returned to
the bush. Though there was international pressure to return to the talks, the FNL
leadership refused to negotiate unless the South African mediator was replaced.
In August fighting broke out near the capital Bujumbura between two FNL factions—
one for and one against immediate implementation of the terms of the
ceasefire—leaving 21 combatants and one civilian dead and causing hundreds to
flee. Claiming responsibility for initiating the attack, the FNL leadership under
Agathon Rwasa declared that the self-professed “dissident” faction favoring
peace was a government creation. In September-October the FNL carried out several
more attacks on this “dissident” group at sites protected by the Burundian
military and in Bujumbura, killing a total of 12 “dissidents”; at least four
Burundian soldiers have also been killed by the FNL since the ceasefire’s breakdown.
Mediators in Burundi’s peace process are attempting to verify the status of
those claiming to be dissident combatants.
Judicial Action against the Opposition
On January 15 the Supreme Court acquitted former President Domitien Ndayizeye,
former Vice President Alphonse-Marie Kadege, and three others of plotting a coup
in 2006, but convicted Alain Mugabarabona and Tharcisse Ndayishimiye. In
September 2006 three of those eventually acquitted filed complaints of torture
against intelligence agents, although no one was arrested for the alleged crime.
In convicting Mugabarabona and Ndayishimiye, the court discounted claims that
they had been forced to make the confessions that constituted the primary evidence
against them. Three journalists who had been arrested in late 2006 for
their coverage of the alleged coup were acquitted in early January 2007 in a separate
trial, but the government filed an appeal which is pending at this writing.
Hussein Radjabu, president of the CNDD-FDD and once a dominant force in the
government, was ousted by his party in February and was arrested in April, along
with several supporters, on charges of endangering state security. Two of those
detained were beaten and then released, and a third, Evariste Kagabo, was tortured.
He and Radjabu remain detained and have not yet been tried. Jean-Bosco
Ngendaganya, chief of staff at the National Intelligence Service (SNR) when
Kagabo was tortured, was removed from his post and charges of assault were prepared
against him, but he has not been arrested.
Human Rights Violations by Security Agents, Police,
and Soldiers
Accusations of grave violations by security agents and soldiers declined in 2007,
but impunity for cases of torture, unlawful killings, and war crimes continued to
be the norm. There was no progress toward accountability in the case of the 31
people “disappeared” and presumed dead in July 2006 in Muyinga province,
although three different judicial commissions investigated the crimes. An intelligence
service agent arrested in September 2006 was released without trial in
May 2007, and two soldiers arrested at the same time have not been tried. Highranking
civilian and military authorities admitted that an arrest warrant was
issued against the former commander of the Fourth Military Region, Col. Vital
Bangirinama, but was never executed. Colonel Bangirinama was removed from
his post in Muyinga, but remains on active duty.
In October a special police brigade known as the Mobile Rapid Intervention
Group (GMIR) was detached from Bujumbura to combat criminality and arms possession
in Muramvya province. In collaboration with local police, the brigade
established two clandestine jails where at least 20 individuals were illegally
detained, tortured, and questioned about their alleged affiliation with the FNL.
Several victims pressed charges, but officials have yet to seriously investigate
abuses or discipline offending officers, who remain in service.
In one positive development, judicial authorities arrested Lieut. Col. Léopold
Ntibaruhisha for ordering the beating and kidnapping of a local resident near
Buyengero military camp, Bururi province, in May 2007. Ntibaruhisha is awaiting
trial at this writing.
Transitional Justice
Since 2006 the government has provisionally released thousands of prisoners
accused of crimes connected to the assassination of President Melchior Ndadaye
in 1993 and the subsequent 10-year civil war. Some had been detained for years
without trial. In principle they will appear before a yet to be established truth
commission. In June 2005 the United Nations Security Council directed the government
to hold public consultations on transitional justice mechanisms to
address crimes committed during the civil war. After long delays, consultations
are tentatively scheduled to begin in early 2008. Under the supervision of the
government, UN, and civil society representatives, some 6,000 Burundians will
be asked their views on reconciliation and accountability, and the proposed truth
commission and an associated special tribunal for serious violations of international
law will be explained.
Despite this apparent progress, the government has yet to recognize the need for
an independent prosecutor for the tribunal and the CNDD-FDD insisted that only
cases in which reconciliation had failed would be brought to the tribunal. This
position conflicts with international law principles, which hold that all serious
crimes under international law must be prosecuted.
Juvenile Justice
Hundreds of children are imprisoned in Burundi, and three-quarters of them have
never been tried or sentenced for their alleged crimes. Following increased public
attention, the government released some categories of child detainees, but some
472 remained incarcerated as of late 2007. A penal reform bill that would raise
the age of criminal responsibility from 13 to 15 and provide alternatives to incarceration for juvenile offenders remains blocked in parliament since being introduced
in the spring.
Burundians Expelled from Tanzania
During the 1990s hundreds of thousands of Burundians fled the civil war into
Tanzania. Many settled in local communities rather than enter refugee camps and
failed to register with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR). In 2006 Tanzania began deporting these persons, arguing they had
never been recognized refugees. Tanzania also expelled some Burundians who
had become naturalized Tanzanian citizens. Tanzanian soldiers, police, and militia
beat many expelled people, separated family members, and looted or
destroyed property. Following international protests, most blatant abuses
decreased, but in July 2007 the Tanzanian authorities once again announced that
all of the 150,000 Burundians who had taken refuge in Tanzania after 1993 and
were housed in UNHCR camps must return to Burundi by the end of 2007.
However, expulsions proceeded slowly, and at this writing the vast majority of
those refugees remain in Tanzania.
More than 36,000 Burundian refugees returned voluntarily in 2007, fewer than in
previous years. Refugee agencies attributed the decline to drought in eastern
Burundi, as well of lack of access to land and fear of renewed conflict.
Human Rights Defenders
Burundian human rights defenders are widely respected both nationally and
internationally. In May 2007 Pierre-Claver Mbonimpa, president of the Burundian
Association for the Promotion of Human Rights and Detained Persons (APRODH),
was summoned for interrogation by the prosecutor’s office after denouncing the
delays in prosecuting the case of the 31 people “disappeared” in Muyinga, but he
was not detained. Mbonimpa was later awarded the prestigious Martin Ennals
Prize for human rights defenders.
Key International Actors
The UN withdrew peacekeepers at the end of 2006, and opened the UN
Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB) to assist in post-conflict development. The
newly created UN Peacebuilding Commission, meant to monitor progress in countries
recently emerged from war, chose Burundi as one of two beneficiary nations.
The fund will administer a US$35 million grant, part of which is supposed to
strengthen human rights. Commission members, however, saw no need to speak
publicly about human rights concerns.
Regional governments tried to broker implementation of the ceasefire signed
between the FNL and the government, with South Africa as the formal mediator.
The African Union supported troops to provide protection to returning FNL leaders
as well as combatants. In August the AU declared its concern about the deteriorating
state of the negotiations and deadlock in the legislature.
In 2007 the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights documented
abuses and brought human rights defenders and government agents together to
discuss various cases. OHCHR also initiated regular briefings of representatives of
donor nations on human rights concerns. In September the UN Human Rights
Council extended the mandate of the independent expert on Burundi for one year.
Since 2004 the expert has provided support to the government in its efforts to
improve the human rights situation by monitoring, reporting, and making recommendations.
Donors made few public statements on human rights issues, but did privately
press Burundian authorities to speed the trial of the journalists arrested in connection
with the 2006 “coup plot” and to prosecute those accused of the
Muyinga killings. When the abuses of children in prisons were publicized, the
United Kingdom and Sweden agreed to fund legal assistance to accused juvenile
offenders.