B<=FI< K?< AI89 SGI@E>, K?< UEJ<<E T?8N
By Eric Goldstein
Like everyone else, we didn’t see it coming.
Even though we human rights workers spent much time scrutinizing the
Middle East and North Africa from the bottom up, talking to the disenfranchised,
the oppressed, and the stubbornly defiant, the timing and extent of
the popular revolts that shook the region in 2011 surprised us as much as
they did policy-makers, scholars, diplomats, and journalists.
Why didn’t we see the upheavals coming? One reason was because we overestimated
the robustness of some of the authoritarian regimes, and underestimated
demands for a better life, measured partly in human rights terms.
Yes, we heard a lot about the hogra, an Algerian term used throughout North
Africa to denote the contempt of rulers toward their people. But we failed to
see how quickly it could ignite into a region-wide revolt that is, in large part, a
struggle for dignity.
It’s a concept that is, of course, central to the human rights enterprise. The
Universal Declaration of Human Rights leads with the assertion that “recognition
of the inherent dignity....” of human beings is the “foundation of freedom,
justice and peace in the world.” The Koran says that God has “dignified
humankind,” while contemporary philosophers have reflected on the link
between dignity and human rights. Martha Nussbaum, for example, writes
that all persons “are of equal dignity and worth.” The primary source of these
values, she says, is a power of moral choice within them that gives them a
fair claim to certain types of treatment from society and politics. “This treatment
must … respect and promote the liberty of choice, and … respect and
promote the equal worth of persons as choosers,” she states.
The notion of dignity is so central to human rights that it had—for me at
least—become an abstraction until the Arab Spring protests forced me to
reflect on its meaning. Long before Tunisian peddler Mohamed Bouazizi set
himself ablaze on December 17, 2010, to protest a humiliating run-in that day with local police—igniting unrest that ousted President Zine el-Abidine Ben
Ali one month later and spread as far as Syria, Bahrain, and Yemen—there
were countless, equally poignant protests against indignity that passed unnoticed.
But they added to the pent-up frustrations that gave resonance to
Bouazizi’s desperate act.
In 2004, for example, Slaheddine Aloui, a Tunisian agricultural engineer
recently freed from 14 years in jail for political activity, sat down in a local
market holding a sign that offered, with Swiftian irony, to sell his daughters.
The Ben Ali government had prevented him from supporting his family by
pressuring employers not to hire ex-political prisoners and had imposed a 16-
year sentence of post-prison “administrative control” that subjected him to
onerous and time-consuming sign-in requirements.
This quest for dignity, including the right to self-governance, was evident
throughout Tunisia on election day, October 23, 2011, as more than 80 percent
of registered voters joined long lines to vote in the country’s first free
election, in this case for a constituent assembly that will write a constitution.
“It’s the first time I’ve waited on line for three hours for anything and am smiling,”
one voter told me.
And it was the demand for dignity that propelled a depoliticized Egyptian
middle class into action, as Ramez Mohamed, a 26-year-old computer science
graduate who works in telecommunications told The New York Times in
February 2011:
… the [government’s] websites’ blockade and communications
blackout on January 28 was one of the main reasons I, and many
others, were pushed to the streets…. Imagine sitting at your home,
having no single connection with the outer world. I took the decision,
“This is nonsense, we are not sheep in their herd.” I went
down and joined the protests.
For many Libyans, dignity came via a rebellion that showed the world, “We
are not Gaddafi”—the leader with whom the country had been synonymous
for four decades—but rather a people able to shape its own destiny.
with local police—igniting unrest that ousted President Zine el-Abidine Ben
Ali one month later and spread as far as Syria, Bahrain, and Yemen—there
were countless, equally poignant protests against indignity that passed unnoticed.
But they added to the pent-up frustrations that gave resonance to
Bouazizi’s desperate act.
In 2004, for example, Slaheddine Aloui, a Tunisian agricultural engineer
recently freed from 14 years in jail for political activity, sat down in a local
market holding a sign that offered, with Swiftian irony, to sell his daughters.
The Ben Ali government had prevented him from supporting his family by
pressuring employers not to hire ex-political prisoners and had imposed a 16-
year sentence of post-prison “administrative control” that subjected him to
onerous and time-consuming sign-in requirements.
This quest for dignity, including the right to self-governance, was evident
throughout Tunisia on election day, October 23, 2011, as more than 80 percent
of registered voters joined long lines to vote in the country’s first free
election, in this case for a constituent assembly that will write a constitution.
“It’s the first time I’ve waited on line for three hours for anything and am smiling,”
one voter told me.
And it was the demand for dignity that propelled a depoliticized Egyptian
middle class into action, as Ramez Mohamed, a 26-year-old computer science
graduate who works in telecommunications told The New York Times in
February 2011:
… the [government’s] websites’ blockade and communications
blackout on January 28 was one of the main reasons I, and many
others, were pushed to the streets…. Imagine sitting at your home,
having no single connection with the outer world. I took the decision,
“This is nonsense, we are not sheep in their herd.” I went
down and joined the protests.
For many Libyans, dignity came via a rebellion that showed the world, “We
are not Gaddafi”—the leader with whom the country had been synonymous
for four decades—but rather a people able to shape its own destiny.
prevented their supporters from gaining steam, the combination of grassroots
protest in the disenfranchised inland and the solidarity movement in the
north now seems a dress rehearsal for the regime-changing uprising of
December 2010 and January 2011.
Following the unification of North and South Yemen in 1990, civil society
blossomed and was largely able to resist efforts since 2007 by President Ali
Abdullah Saleh, who has ruled since 1978, to clamp down on independent
media and associations. In early 2011, civil society leaders had become a key
force in the protests calling for the president’s exit. (The anti-Saleh movement
gained force also from Huthi rebels in the north and separatists in the south,
which both allege discrimination by the central government, and from a renegade
military brigade and tribal militias).
Even in Syria and Libya—where the governments were among the region’s
most brutal—human rights contestation picked up during the past decade. In
the former, the “Damascus Spring” reform movement and the Committees for
the Revival of Civil Society that launched shortly after Bashar al-Assad succeeded
his father as president in 2000, as well as the Damascus Declaration
of 2005, displayed a new assertiveness by small groups of Syrians demanding
basic rights, although many wound up serving long prison terms. And in
Libya, families of victims of the 1996 mass killings in Abu Salim prison
became the first group in the country to demonstrate regularly in public after
a North Benghazi court in 2008 ordered the government to reveal the fate of
Abu Salim prisoners who had “disappeared.”
In addition to such frontal defiance, subtler strands of opposition were also
forming.
In Tunisia, sympathizers with the cause of human rights who had demobilized
in the early and mid-1990s under pressure from Ben Ali’s government
re-emerged in the 2000s. In 2001, for example, we found a journalism professor
attending events organized by the Tunisian Human Rights League and
briefing foreign visitors on the lack of media freedom; just five years earlier,
he had declined to meet with Human Rights Watch because he feared questioning and surveillance by the secret police. Families of political prisoners,
who had just a few years earlier shunned contact with international human
rights groups fearing reprisals against themselves or their loved ones, now
sought out such organizations and strove to publicize the plight of imprisoned
relatives.
What had changed?
For the professor it was a newfound sense that civil society had been paralyzed
too long and it was time to take a stand. For the families of political
prisoners,it was the realization that by remaining silent they had gained nothing
and that with their relatives still in prison, there was nothing left to lose.
As a result, around the core of diehard activists there formed an outer circle
of people willing to take a stand, if somewhat more discreetly, on some
human rights issues.
These shifts were reinforced by the spread of new communication technologies
that connected activists, in real time and at minimal expense, with
domestic and international audiences. Able to exchange information and
opinions securely and anonymously, their link to larger networks encouraged
activists to persevere despite repression. It also encouraged them to formulate
their demands for change in terms of human rights, a universal and
nonpartisan framework that their audience could endorse whatever their
political orientation.
At the same time, governments started to recognize that they could not ignore
their human rights image. Leaders who had once tried to discredit human
rights as a Western concept alien to local culture began in the 1990s to create
and promote their own human rights commissions.
By 2000 such commissions operated in nearly every country in the region. In
practice, most of them put a positive spin on the government’s record while
trying to divert attention from violations. The point here is not the objectivity
of such commissions; rather, the fact that they reflect governments’ recognition
of human rights as a critical factor by which they were being judged, both
domestically and internationally.
Another indicator of human rights awareness in these countries was the
remarkably high number of victims or witnesses who agreed to provide evidence
to human rights investigators. When seeking people’s accounts about,
say, torture and unjust imprisonment, our researchers explain that we are
preparing a public report to expose abuses and pressure the government to
clean up its act. Given how little we can promise victims and witnesses, it is
surprising and moving how consistently they agreed to tell their stories.
Narrating their experiences gave them a sense of dignity or of honoring victims,
reframing what might otherwise be a random, local act of cruelty and
injustice as a human rights event that fit an international framework built on
treaties their government had committed to respect. Testifying about an
unlawful killing also connected families to one other, establishing patterns of
abuse that undermined governments’ efforts to minimize violations by misrepresenting
them as isolated events.
The year’s events remind us that asserting one’s rights against repressive
governments does not mean embracing all rights for all people. Human rights
demands may have energized the protests that shook the Middle East and
North Africa in 2011. But protecting rights, especially for vulnerable sectors of
the population, remains an uphill battle in the countries where authoritarian
rulers have toppled, not just in those where they still rule.
In the months since Ben Ali and Mubarak fell from power, for example,
women demonstrating in Tunisia and Egypt to demand gender equality have
been slapped, groped, or threatened by counter-demonstrators. Protesters in
Tunis ransacked a cinema in June and burned a television executive’s home
in October to protest programming they deemed insulting to Islam. In Libya
rebels have mistreated thousands of sub-Saharan African migrant workers on
the pretext that they were mercenaries for Muammar Gaddafi. And in Egypt
deadly sectarian violence has cast a pall over the Muslim-Christian unity seen
during the anti-Mubarak protests.
This newly volatile region is likely to bring more surprises in 2012. Just as rising
expectations for a dignified life shook several governments of the region
in 2011, they may yet motivate revolts against successor governments, in Tunisia or elsewhere, should those governments fall short in this regard. We
didn’t see the Arab Spring coming because we missed signs of the thaw. But
we would do well to keep in mind what Arab peoples showed us about the
power of the aspiration for dignity, a power that they are unlikely to surrender
anytime soon.
Eric Goldstein is deputy director of the Middle East and North Africa Division at
Human Rights Watch.