Bangladesh
The elected government of Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina Wazed made strong
commitments to address serious human rights problems in 2010, but those promises
were not realized, as extrajudicial executions and torture continued, as well
as impunity for members of the security forces. The government mounted sustained
attacks on the right to freedom of expression of the media and political
opposition. Labor union activists protesting for higher wages were systematically
targeted and, in some cases, arrested and jailed on trumped-up charges.
Abuses by the Rapid Action Battalion and Other Forces
Soon after elections in December 2008, officials in the Awami League-led government
promised to institute a zero-tolerance policy and bring the perpetrators of
extrajudicial killings to justice. Yet little change has taken place, and in 2010 the
home minister and other officials denied any wrongdoing by law enforcement
agencies, including the Rapid Action Battalion (RAB), the elite anti-crime, anti-terror
force whose officers regularly kill with impunity. The RAB acknowledges that
its officers have killed at least 622 people since the force was established in
2004. But in press statements, the RAB has claimed that the victims were shot
and killed in “crossfire” after their accomplices opened fire on the force. The
home minister has also supported the claim that RAB officers who have killed
were acting in self-defense. In a worrying development, the police appear to have
increasingly adopted the RAB’s extrajudicial methods, and several hundred
killings have been attributed to the police force in recent years.
Investigations by human rights organizations regularly find that victims were executed
while in RAB custody. The bodies of the dead often bear marks of torture,
and many survivors of RAB custody have repeatedly alleged ill-treatment and torture.
The chairperson of the National Human Rights Commission recommended in
December 2009 that all allegations of RAB killings be investigated by an independent
commission of inquiry. At this writing the government has taken no
action on this, and not a single member of the RAB has been criminally prosecuted
for involvement in torture or killings.
In one abortive attempt at justice, the High Court issued a suo moto ruling calling
on the government to explain why action should not be taken against the RAB
officers responsible for the “crossfire” killing of Lutfar and Khairul Khalashi in
November 2009. However, before a ruling could be issued, the relevant judicial
bench was reorganized and the case has not since been heard by the court.
Attacks against Civil Society and Media
In July 2010, officials forced the closure of the daily Amar Desh, an oppositionlinked
newspaper that had reported critically on the government. The editor,
Mahmudur Rahman, was arrested under the Anti-Terrorism Act, and he later
claimed in court that police officers beat him and that RAB officers blindfolded
him, handcuffed him to window bars in a cell, and deprived him of food and
water. At this writing the newspaper’s closure is under court appeal.
In another assault on free expression, the police in Dhaka, the capital, temporarily
shuttered the Drik Picture Library on March 22, shortly before the opening of an
exhibit titled “Crossfire” by Shahidul Alam. Police claimed the show, which featured
photographs and installations relating to alleged extrajudicial killings by
the RAB, would “create anarchy.” After a public outcry and a legal challenge by
the gallery, the exhibit was finally able to open on March 31.
Harassment and Intimidation of Apparel Industry Workers
In 2010 the government continued to severely restrict the work of trade unionists
pressing for an increase in the minimum wage. On June 3 the government’s NGO
Affairs Bureau suddenly revoked the operating license of the Bangladesh Centre
for Workers Solidarity (BCWS), a group with ties to international trade union and
labor rights groups and representatives of foreign clothing brands sourcing from
Bangladeshi factories.
In July the government raised the monthly minimum wage for garment workers
from 1,662 to 3,000 taka (US$24 to $43). Workers contended that the increase
was inadequate to meet the rising urban cost of living. On July 30 and 31, as they
have often done in the past, angry garment workers took to Bangladesh’s streets.
They blocked roads and damaged factories and other property. Government security
forces responded with force, injuring scores of protesters.
On July 30 the government accused Kalpona Akhter, Babul Akhter, and Aminul
Islam, the directors of the BCWS, of inciting workers to protest, which the directors
denied. Babul Akhter later alleged that on the night of August 28, he was
beaten in custody. Kalpona and Babul Akhter were released on bail in September
and are awaiting trial at this writing. Islam, who had managed to escape police
custody after being detained and allegedly physically abused by the police in
June, remains in hiding.
Impunity
In 2010, members of the security forces regularly escaped accountability for
killings, acts of torture, and illegal detentions. Several legal provisions effectively
shield members of the security forces and other public officials from prosecution
by requiring government approval for criminal actions to be initiated.
Military and police regularly employ torture and cruel, inhuman, or degrading
punishment against detainees, despite constitutional guarantees against torture
and Bangladesh’s ratification of the United Nations Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. The government
failed to investigate the causes of numerous deaths in custody, and there
was little action to hold accountable those responsible for the deaths of alleged
mutineers from the Bangladesh Rifles border force.
In 2009 the parliament passed amendments to the International Crimes
(Tribunals) Act of 1973 in order to bring to trial those responsible for human rights
crimes in the war of 1971, but the law still falls short of international standards.
Five members of Jamaat-e-Islami, a religious right-wing political group alleged to
have collaborated with Pakistani forces, were in 2010 charged with war crimes,
including genocide, and at this writing are awaiting trial before a special war
crimes tribunal established in March to investigate crimes committed during
Bangladesh’s battle for independence four decades ago.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
Discrimination against women remains common in both the public and private
spheres, despite the presence of women in several key government positions.
Bangladesh maintains a reservation against article 2 of the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, which requires it to
effectively adopt laws and policies to provide equal rights for women and men.
Domestic violence is a daily reality for many women, and there was no progress
made in adopting laws on domestic violence and sexual harassment during 2010.
The Acid Survivors Foundation reported 86 acid attacks, primarily against women,
between January and September. The courts convicted only 15 perpetrators of
acid attacks in 2009.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Section 377 of Bangladesh’s criminal code punishes consensual homosexual conduct
with penalties up to life imprisonment.
Border Killings
According to Odhikar, a Bangladesh human rights monitoring group, at least 930
Bangladeshi nationals were killed by India’s Border Security Force between the
year 2000 and September of 2010. A number of Indian nationals have also been
killed by Indian forces deployed at the border.
Acute poverty and unemployment prompts millions of Bangladeshi nationals to
cross the border into India in search of jobs and commerce. While some of those
killed are engaged in smuggling goods and contraband, Indian border forces systematically
use lethal force without justification.Bangladeshi authorities have
repeatedly complained about killings of Bangladeshis, as have human rights
groups in both countries. Bangladeshi Home Minister Sahara Khatun in May 2010
said that she would again ask officials in New Delhi, India’s capital, to stop these
incidents. Indian authorities declared that their forces have been instructed to
exercise restraint, but there was little sign of progress in ending violations during
2010.
Discrimination in Corruption Cases
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina and her Awami League party reiterated the government’s
strong commitment to address the problem of corruption in 2010. Yet the
government recommended that the courts and the Anti-Corruption Commission
withdraw hundreds of corruption cases initiated against Awami League supporters
on the grounds that they were “politically motivated” cases filed under previous
governments. The government has not recommended similar cases against
the political opposition for withdrawal, raising significant concerns about discriminatory
treatment and politically motivated prosecutions.
Refugees
Bangladeshi authorities did little to prevent a wave of intensifying violence and
discrimination against Rohingya refugees from Burma, and refugees were driven
out of communities and into makeshift camps. Newly arriving Rohingya were systematically
denied the right to seek asylum in 2010.
Key International Actors
Foreign governments–including the US and members of the European
Union–raised concerns about extrajudicial executions, stressed the importance of
addressing impunity, and called for respect for human rights, but also continued
to view the RAB as an important anti-terrorism force. The US has provided training
on investigation methods and human rights to the RAB, but has failed to vigorously
enforce the Leahy Law and deny US assistance and training to all RAB units
credibly implicated in human rights abuses where justice has not been done.
After the arrests of key labor leaders in the garment industry, the US Congress
sent a letter in August to US garment importers urging them to put economic
pressure on Bangladesh to secure the release of the prisoners. The US Congress
also called for action to withhold Generalized System of Preferences trade benefits
for Bangladesh on labor rights grounds.