Bangladesh
A military-backed caretaker government was installed in January 2007 and ruled
Bangladesh under a state of emergency for the rest of the year.
The caretaker government announced police and judicial reforms and promised to
set up a National Human Rights Commission. It was initially welcomed by most
Bangladeshis, civil society activists, and the international community in the hope
that it would stamp out corruption, build the rule of law, and restore democracy.
However, as the year progressed there was increasing concern in Bangladesh and
internationally about the lack of progress on election preparations, the increasingly
visible role of the army as the main power in the country, and the large numbers
of arbitrary arrests, cases of torture, and custodial killings by security forces
acting with impunity under emergency rules.
As part of its minus two policy of removing the leaders of the two main parties
from the political process, the government arrested former prime ministers
Khaleda Zia, leader of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party, and Sheikh Hasina,
leader of the Awami League, as well as other senior politicians and government
officials, and charged them with corruption. In the name of sorting out political
gridlock and preparing credible national elections, the government banned all
political and trade union activities and imposed new limits on press freedoms.
Political Developments
In December 2006, widespread protests over alleged fraudulent election preparations
led to deepening political instability. Several people were killed and hundreds
were injured in the violence. On January 11, 2007, after the United Nations
and European Union announced that plans for elections were so compromised
that they would not send observers, then-President Iajuddin Ahmed announced
that elections would be postponed and declared a state of emergency. He also
resigned as chief advisor, and on January 12, a new army-backed caretaker government
headed by Fakhruddin Ahmed was brought in.
(Under Bangladeshs constitution, a caretaker government is appointed for a period
of three months immediately prior to elections to ensure they are carried out
in a neutral and impartial manner. Since October 2006, President Iajuddin Ahmed
had served as chief advisorin effect, prime ministerof such a caretaker government.
On January 11, the old caretaker government was dissolved and a new
one established the following day, with Fakhruddin Ahmed as chief advisor.)
Although Fakruddin Ahmed promised reforms and a quick return to democracy,
elections were soon put off until December 2008. Immediately upon being
installed, the caretaker government issued the Emergency Power Rules, still in
effect at this writing, which dramatically dilute constitutional protections for basic
rights.
Anti-Corruption
Pervasive corruption has caused widespread disillusionment with the political
parties running the country. Bangladesh has for many years ranked at or near the
bottom of Transparency Internationals index of corruption. On April 18, 2007, the
caretaker government announced the Anti-Corruption Commission (Amendment)
Ordinance aimed at rooting out high level corruption and stopping the influence
of organized crime over politics. It acceded to the UN Convention against
Corruption, replaced senior bureaucrats with persons perceived to be more honest,
and forced some officials in key statutory and constitutional positionssuch
as the attorney general and heads of the Anti-Corruption Commission and
Election Commissionto resign and be replaced by officials considered to have
greater integrity. These moves proved highly popular.
The Anti-Corruption Ordinance, however, also empowers Anti-Corruption
Commission officials, with retroactive effect, to arrest suspects without warrants,
confiscate property without court orders, and detain suspects for thirty days without
a warrant. Many suspects have been held for 30 days while evidence of their
alleged offenses is collected. The special tribunals set up for these cases often
fail to meet international fair trial standards because of limits on access to counsel,
flawed evidentiary requirements, and lack of judicial independence.
State of Emergency and Suspension of Rights
Tens of thousands of people were reportedly arrested in the weeks following the
declaration of a state of emergency in January 2007. The government has not published
accurate statistics on detainees, access to official places of detention has
been restricted, and the security forces have used unofficial sites, such as the
headquarters of the Directorate General of Forces Intelligence (DGFI, or military
intelligence) in Dhaka, making it impossible to know exactly how many people
were arrested or how many are still being held.
Most arrests under the state of emergency have taken place without warrants.
Security forces have told detainees that they do not need such authorization
under emergency rules. Evidence used to make arrests often has not been transparent
or available to detainees or their lawyers. Credible reports suggest that
many arrests have been based on coerced statements from others or have been
the product of score-settling. Many offenses have been deemed non-bailable
under emergency rules, resulting in indefinite detention even for minor charges.
Bail orders or habeas corpus decisions in favor of detainees often have been
ignored or overturned by politicized appellate decisions. On August 30, the
United Nations Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers
expressed concern at alleged irregularities in the trial of Sigma Huda, the United
Nations Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, who was convicted by the
Special Anti-Corruption Court of Bangladesh and sentenced to three years imprisonment
on extortion charges, citing reports that the right to legal representation
and the independence of the court were severely affected during her trial.
Torture
Torture in custody, a longstanding problem in Bangladesh, continues to be routine.
The use of unofficial places of detention for interrogation by the DGFI and
others has exacerbated this problem, as such sites are beyond the scrutiny of the
courts, lawyers, family members, and the media.
Professor Anwar Hossan, a Dhaka university professor, was taken into custody for
his alleged involvement in inciting August campus protests against the army. He
was taken to an unofficial detention center run by DGFI, where he remained for two days without being brought before a judge. When he was later produced in
court, he said that he had not been allowed to sleep, was questioned constantly,
and was slapped.
Similarly, Tasneem Khalil, a Daily Star reporter, CNN representative, and Human
Rights Watch consultant, was taken to an unofficial place of detention by DGFI on
May 11, where he was interrogated, tortured, and coerced into making a false confession.
After international pressure, he was released but later had to seek asylum
in Sweden.
Extrajudicial Killings
The paramilitary Rapid Action Battalion (RAB) and the police continue to engage
in extrajudicial killings of suspected criminals and others. The security forces
euphemistically call these crossfire killings, falsely suggesting they are carried
out in self defense. Such killings continued under the caretaker government.
Odhikar, a Dhaka-based human rights monitoring organization, said that 126 people
were killed by security forces during the first 210 days of emergency. Of them,
82 were allegedly killed in crossfire, while at least 23 others were allegedly tortured
to death. The most brutal was the March torture and killing of Choles Ritchil,
a well known rights activist. Although eyewitnesses identified some of the perpetrators,
the government failed to bring them to justice.
Freedom of Expression, Assembly, and Association
Section 5 of the Emergency Power Rules bans the use of the internet or other electronic
or print media to publish provocative editorials, feature articles, news
items, talk shows, or cartoons. Violations lead to confiscation of equipment and
jail terms ranging from two to five years.
In 2007, many journalists and NGO workers continued to receive anonymous
phone calls from persons claiming to be members of DGFI, the army, or RAB,
warning them against defaming the army or government. Others were summoned
to military intelligence headquarters and delivered warnings. Some, such as
Tasneem Khalil, were tortured, sending a chilling message to all journalists.
Security forces use mass arrests as a means to suppress demonstrations. Curfew
was imposed after protests erupted in August when a squabble between soldiers
and Dhaka university students spread into demonstrations against the emergency
restrictions and de facto army rule. Many began to question whether the military
would be willing to give up power.
Soon after the August demonstrations, two television channelsEkushey
Television (ETV) and the CSB news networkreceived a written notice from the
Press Information Department warning them not to broadcast provocative
news. Several journalists were arrested and some were beaten up while they were
covering the protests.
Human Rights Defenders
The activities of nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) were also restricted by
the army. In July 2007, a notice was issued by the NGO Affairs Bureau asking all
voluntary organizations to spend at least half of their foreign grants on visible
development works such as roads and canals. Human rights defenders, including
the head of Odhikar, were threatened for highlighting abuses by troops.
Key International Actors
While governments such as the US, UK, and India expressed concern about the
slow pace of election preparations, few expressed concern over the countrys
poor human rights situation. Most cheered reforms while turning a blind eye to
the human rights violations that accompanied mass arrests and continuing
reports of torture and illegal killings. Although the army already had effectively
taken power in January when it installed the second caretaker government, no
international actors publicly called on the army to return full powers to a civilian
government.
The Bangladeshi army continues to receive assistance and training from several
foreign governments including the US and UK, which are concerned about Islamic
militancy in Bangladesh. The army remains a large contributor to UN peacekeeping
operations and is thus susceptible to pressure from the UN and others to restore civilian rule and enforce basic rights. At this writing, international actors
had not used this leverage.