Bangladesh
Bangladesh tumbled backwards on human rights in 2013. The government led
by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, which has long claimed to be liberal and
democratic, engaged in a harsh crackdown on members of civil society and the
media. In August, it jailed prominent human rights defender Adilur Rahman
Khan on politically motivated charges. “Atheist” bloggers were arrested, as was
a newspaper editor. The government increasingly accused those who criticized
its actions or policies, ranging from the World Bank to Grameen Bank founder
and Nobel laureate Muhammad Yunus, of being involved in plots against it.
On many occasions the government employed violent and illegal measures
against protesters, including against followers of the Hefazat-e-Islami movement
and those demonstrating against deeply flawed war crimes trials which
ended in death sentences against many accused.
Dire conditions for workers in the garment and other industries remained largely
unreformed in spite of promises of improvements following the tragic collapse
of the Rana Plaza garment factory in April and the deaths of over 1,100
workers. The government finally dropped frivolous charges against several
labor rights leaders. The courts also ordered all charges to be dropped against
Limon Hossain, a young man wrongfully shot and maimed by security forces in
a botched operation in 2011.
Elections scheduled for January 2014 led to increased tensions. Although the
Awami League campaigned for a caretaker system while in opposition to guard
against fraud and manipulation, once in power it abolished the system, leading
to opposition party threats to boycott the elections and increasing the chances
of violent confrontations between security forces and protesters.
Crackdown on Civil Society, Media, and Opposition
In February, Bangladesh was gripped by large-scale protests, political unrest,
and violence after the International Crimes Tribunal (ICT) sentenced a leader of
the Jamaat-e-Islaami party, Abdul Qader Mollah, to life in prison instead of
death. Hundreds of thousands of people throughout Bangladesh took to the
streets in peaceful protests to demand that Mollah be hanged. The situation took a more violent turn after the ICT, on February 28, sentenced another
Jamaat leader, Delwar Hossain Sayedee, to death for war crimes. Following this
verdict, Jamaat supporters took to the streets. Jamaat supporters were responsible
for a number of deaths, but the security forces killed many more with
often indiscriminate attacks on protesters and bystanders.
At the same time, the government began a crackdown on critics. Several bloggers
who criticized the government for appearing to appease Islamic extremism
were arrested.
In April, the law minister announced that the government would increase its
control over social media, blogs, and online news websites. On February 16, the
Bangladesh Telecommunication Regulatory Commission shut down the Sonar
Bangla blog, known to be operated by Jamaat activists, for spreading “hate
speech and causing communal tension.” In a further attack on free speech, on
April 11 the police arrested Mahmdur Rahman, the editor of an opposition news
outlet, Amar Desh. Rahman was subsequently charged with sedition and unlawful
publication of a hacked conversation between the ICT judges and an external
consultant initially published by the Economist magazine. On April 14,
police raided the offices of another opposition newspaper, Daily Sangram, and
its editor was subsequently charged for printing Amar Desh.
In August, Adilur Rahman Khan of Odhikar, a leading human rights group, was
arrested under the Information and Communication Technology Act for allegedly
false reporting about killings by government security forces when they dispersed
the May 5-6 demonstration by Hefazat, a fundamentalist group demanding
greater adherence to Islamic principles. Police raided Odhikar’s offices on
the night of August 11, seizing computers which may contain sensitive information
on victims and witnesses. Khan was denied bail several times and kept in
prison for two months before being granted bail in October on appeal.
In October, parliament passed a bill amending the Information and
Communication Technology Act to increase the length of sentences, according
the police greater powers to arrest, and making certain offenses non-bailable.
War Crimes Trial
At time of writing, the ICT, set up to prosecute war crimes during the country’s
independence war in 1971, had handed down eight convictions, five of which
resulted in death sentences. While human rights organizations have long called
for fair trials of those responsible, the trials fell short of international human
rights standards. In December 2012, the Economist published damning evidence
of collusion between judges, prosecutors, and the government showing
that judges were instructing the prosecution on the conduct of the trials, the
questioning of witnesses, and written submissions. The revelations led to the
resignation of the ICT’s chief judge, but defense motions for retrials were rejected.
Although the ICT had the authority to order measures for victim and witness
protection, it summarily dismissed credible claims of witness insecurity. In the
Delwar Hossain Sayedee case, judges dismissed credible evidence that an
important defense witness was abducted from the courthouse gates and did
not order an independent investigation into the allegation. Contradictory statements
by key prosecution witnesses were not taken into account in several
cases, and judges severely limited the number of defense witnesses. The
Appellate Division of the Supreme Court reversed the life sentence given to
Abdur Qader Mollah and imposed the death penalty after the government
pushed through retrospective amendments to the ICT Act, in clear violation of
Bangladesh’s obligations under article 15 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights (ICCPR). The amendment allowed the prosecution to appeal
against the life sentence handed down by the trial judges, which the ICT Act
had not previously allowed.
Human Rights Watch and the Economist, journalists and television show guests
were issued orders by the ICT to show cause for contempt for critical remarks
and reporting on the tribunal.
Unlawful Violence Against Protesters
Bangladeshi security forces frequently used excessive force in responding to
street protests, killing at least 150 protesters and injuring at least 2,000
between February and October 2013. While large numbers of protesters were arrested, Bangladeshi authorities made no meaningful efforts to hold members
of the security forces accountable. At least 90 protesters were killed by security
force gunfire during the clashes among the Shahbagh movement, Jamaat-e-
Islaami supporters, and security forces in March and April.
In response to the May 5-6 Hefazat protests, the police, the paramilitary Rapid
Action Battalion (RAB), and the Border Guards Bangladesh (BGB) fired indiscriminately
into crowds and brutally and unlawfully beat protesters, leading to
approximately 50 deaths. At least a dozen members of the security forces and
police officers were also killed, as well as three members of the ruling Awami
League party.
Labor Rights and Conditions of Workers
Bangladesh has long had notoriously poor workplace safety, with inadequate
inspections and regulations. This issue was spotlighted in April, when the Rana
Plaza building, which housed five garment factories, collapsed. The building
had been evacuated the day before due to cracks in the structure, but the workers
had then been ordered back to work. More than 1,100 workers died.
Under domestic and international pressure, on July 15, 2013, the Bangladeshi
parliament enacted changes to the Labour Act. The amendments, which did
away with the requirement that unions provide the names of leaders to employers
at the time of registration and allow workers to seek external expert assistance
in bargaining, failed to lift a number of other restrictions on freedom of
association. The law also provided exemptions to export processing zones
where most garments are made. Even after Rana Plaza, Bangladeshi law
remains out of compliance with core International Labour Organization standards,
including Convention No. 87 on freedom of association and Convention
No. 98 on the right to organize and bargain collectively.
The government also undertook to have more regular inspections of factories in
2013, but inspections which were due to start in September remained stalled by
administrative delays.
In a welcome move, the authorities dropped charges against the leaders of the
Bangladesh Centre for Worker Solidarity, who had been hampered and
harassed in their work for years by frivolous criminal charges.
Tannery workers in the Hazaribagh neighborhood of Dhaka, one of the world’s
most polluted urban sites, continue to face highly toxic working conditions.
Some 150 leather tanneries operate in the area, producing leather primarily for
export and discharging 21 thousand cubic meters of untreated effluent into the
nearby Buriganga River each day. The government’s planned relocation of the
tanneries to a dedicated industrial zone, delayed numerous times since 2005,
was again put off in mid-2013.
The Department of the Environment fined two tanneries for their failure to treat
waste in 2013, the first time environmental laws have been enforced against
Hazaribagh tanneries. Enforcement of environmental and labor laws is otherwise
lacking, with negative consequences for the health and well-being of tannery
workers and local residents.
Women’s Rights
Leading human rights groups in the country had discussions with doctors to
revise medico-legal protocols for the treatment and examination of rape victims
to exclude degrading practices like the two-finger test to draw conclusions
about a woman’s “habituation to sex.” Such groups are challenging the practice
as a violation of the fundamental rights to life and health with dignity in the
High Court Division of the Bangladesh Supreme Court.
Key International Actors
India, Bangladesh’s most influential international interlocutor, remained largely
silent on the human rights situation. Bangladesh and India continued to hold
talks on issues linked to their shared border including illegal trade and the use
of excessive force by Indian border guards leading to deaths and injuries to
Bangladeshi and Indian nationals.
Bangladesh’s donors were more vocal, pressing the government to end its
crackdown on critics. Donors were swift in denouncing the arrest of Adilur
Rahman Khan, with members of the international community observing court
proceedings. However, donors were largely silent on the lack of fair trials at the
ICT.
Following the Rana Plaza collapse, over 70 European companies signed an
international accord designed to better protect Bangladeshi workers by requiring
regular inspections of factories and making the results public. However,
American buyers refused to join this accord and signed a separate agreement
which has been criticized for not allowing workers to freely form unions.
The government publicly agreed to allow international monitors to observe the
January 2014 elections. The international community, in particular the US, have
been vocal in calling for the various parties to come to an agreement well
beforehand in order to avoid contentious and potentially violent protests and a
non-credible election result.