Bangladesh
Bangladesh’s overall human rights situation worsened in 2012, as the government
narrowed political and civil society space, continued to shield abusive
security forces from accountability, and flatly ignored calls by Human Rights
Watch to reform laws and procedures in flawed war crimes and mutiny trials.
Civil society and human rights defenders reported increased governmental pressure
and monitoring.
The security forces’ practice of disguising extrajudicial killings as “crossfire”
killings or legitimate confrontations between alleged criminals and security
forces continued, as did disappearances of opposition members and political
activists. A prominent labor activist was kidnapped and killed, and other labor
activists threatened.
After June 2012 sectarian violence in Arakan state in neighboring Burma, the
government responded to an influx of Rohingya refugees by pushing back boatloads
of refugees and insisting that it had no obligation to provide them sanctuary.
The government curtailed the activities of nongovernmental organizations
operating in pre-existing Rohingya refugee camps in Cox’s Bazaar in Chittagong.
Flawed trials against those accused of war crimes in the 1971 war for independence
continued, as did mass and unfair trials of the Bangladesh Rifles (now
Bangladesh Border Guards) accused of mutineering in 2009.
The government continued to demand that Indian border guards stop killing
Bangladeshi nationals who cross into India for smuggling or other crimes.
Extrajudicial Killings, Torture, and Impunity
Although there was a decline in overall numbers of civilians killed by security
forces in 2012, the Rapid Action Battalion (RAB)—a force comprised of military
and police—continued to carry out extrajudicial killings. The ruling political
party, the Awami League, pledged to bring the RAB under control when it
assumed office, but abuses persisted.
The government continued to persecute 17-year-old boy, Limon Hossain, whom
RAB officials shot and maimed in March 2011. Although the government initially
said that Hossain was injured in a botched RAB operation, it quickly retracted
the statement and filed criminal charges against him. In August 2012, an
alleged RAB informant attacked and beat Hossain in a street in his hometown.
Instead of protecting Hossain, the government filed further charges against him,
and accused him and his relatives of murdering a bystander.
The authorities failed to investigate and prosecute the RAB or other security
forces responsible for extrajudicial killings or torture. While the RAB set up an
internal investigative unit with technical assistance from the United States, no
RAB member has ever faced criminal prosecution for a human rights violation.
In April, Elias Ali, secretary of the Sylhet Division of the opposition Bangladesh
Nationalist Party (BNP), disappeared without trace. Prime Minister Sheikh
Hasina called on the police to investigate Ali’s disappearance, but undermined
the effort by claiming that Ali and his driver were “hiding” at his party’s orders
to allow the opposition to blame the government. Human rights groups reported
more than 20 disappearances in 2012.
Labor Rights
Aminul Islam, a prominent labor rights activist, was found tortured and killed in
April 2012. In response to an intense outcry, the Home Ministry set up a highlevel
commission to investigate his killing, but there had been no progress in
the investigation at this writing. While there was no suggestion of political
responsibility, Prime Minister Hasina made public statements downplaying the
significance of the killing.
Workers in Bangladesh faced poor working conditions, low wages, and excessive
hours. Government repression and collusion with factory owners prevented
them from organizing effectively.
The government continued legal action against the Bangladesh Center for
Worker Solidarity (BCWS), an NGO that works closely with trade unions. Over a
dozen labor rights leaders, including BCWS leaders, faced criminal charges on a
variety of spurious grounds, including under the Explosive Substances Ordinance Act, which carries the death penalty as a sentence. Labor rights
groups faced registration problems that affected their funding and operations.
Hazaribagh Tanneries
The Hazaribagh neighborhood of Dhaka, the capital, is considered to be one of
the world’s most polluted urban sites; some 150 leather tanneries discharge 21
thousand cubic meters of untreated effluent into the nearby Buriganga River
each day. Local residents complain of fevers, skin diseases, and respiratory and
stomach illnesses due to contamination, while tannery workers suffer from skin
and respiratory diseases due to exposure to tanning chemicals, and limb amputations
caused by accidents in dangerous tannery machinery. In some tanneries,
children as young as 11 work directly with chemicals, operate heavy tannery
machinery, or slice hides with razor blades.
In 2001, Bangladesh’s High Court ordered the government to ensure that the
tanneries installed adequate waste treatment facilities. The government ignored
that ruling. Officials from the Department of Environment and the Department of
Labour confirmed that the government does not enforce labor and environmental
laws in Hazaribagh, which exports most of its leather to China, South Korea,
Japan, Italy, Germany, Spain, and the United States.
Restrictions on Civil Society and Political Opposition
The government was increasingly hostile in 2012 to civil society groups.
Following the July 2012 publication of a Human Rights Watch report on the 2009
Bangladesh Rifles mutiny, Bangladeshi officials threatened action against
domestic rights groups who had helped conduct the research.
Of particular concern is a draft law aimed at regulating foreign donations to
Bangladeshi NGOs. Many NGOs, such as BCWS or Odhikar, had already been
facing years of delays in getting critical foreign funds released for their projects.
The bill appeared aimed at severing funds for organizations engaged in publicly
criticizing the government. In August 2012, the government announced plans to
establish a new commission charged solely with regulating NGO activities, in addition to the NGO Affairs Bureau that already exists in the prime minister’s
office.
Refugees and Asylum Seekers
The government’s response to the influx of Rohingya refugees fleeing sectarian
violence in Arakan state, Burma, exposed its failure to respect the United
Nations Refugee Convention. Bangladesh pushed Rohingyas back at the border,
regardless of the risk they faced when they return to Burma, and blocked critical
humanitarian assistance.
The government suspended any third-country resettlement of the Rohingya
refugees, arguing it would encourage other Rohingya in Burma to seek refuge in
Bangladesh. Government officials labeled Rohingya “intruders” and “criminals,”
and blamed them for destroying Buddhist temples in mass riots in
October, without offering evidence to prove they were responsible.
International Crimes Tribunal and Bangladesh Rifles Mutiny
Trials against those accused of war crimes during the 1971 war of independence
continued, despite calls by the US war crimes ambassador, Stephen Rapp, and
several international groups to amend the International Crimes Tribunal Act (ICT
Act) to ensure it complied with international fair trial standards.
The trial chamber allowed several prosecution witnesses statements as evidence,
without any live testimony being heard. While the prosecution claimed
the witnesses were unavailable, the defense produced safe house logbooks
that showed they were available at the time when they were meant to appear in
court. However, the tribunal rejected the defense’s claims. In the first trial
against the accused Delwar Hossain Sayedee, defense lawyers claimed that
they could not produce their witnesses due to intimidation and threats against
them by the prosecution. The prosecution denied the claims.
Mass military trials against the 6,000 soldiers of the Bangladesh Rifles (since
renamed Bangladesh Border Guards) continued, with nearly every accused soldier
being found guilty. A mass trial in a civilian court of over 800 soldiers continued in 2012. In addition to the allegations of torture, most of the accused did
not have proper access to lawyers and were often unaware of the charges
against them. The government rejected Human Rights Watch’s concerns—published
in a July 2012 report—concerning these mass trials, which involved as
many as 800 accused being tried at one time, in one courtroom. Instead, the
government mounted a public relations campaign that denounced Human
Rights Watch and local groups that had helped to research the report.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
While Bangladesh has a strong set of laws and judicial guidelines to tackle violence
against women, implementation remains poor. Violence against women
including rape, dowry-related assaults, and other forms of domestic violence,
acid attacks, and illegal punishments in the name of fatwas or religious decrees
and sexual harassment continue.
Bangladesh reported the highest prevalence of child marriages in the world.
Archaic and discriminatory family laws for Muslims, Hindus, and Christians, continued
to impoverish many women when they separate from, or divorce spouses,
and trap them in abusive marriages for fear of destitution. The Law
Commission of Bangladesh researched and recommended reforms to these laws
in 2012.
International Community
The international community continued to press the government to respect civil
and political rights in the face of increased restrictions on political opposition
groups and civil society. The donor community was particularly vocal in calling
for swift and meaningful investigations into the murder of Aminul Islam and the
disappearance of Elias Ali, as well as calling on the government to give
Rohingya refugees sanctuary. The government often responded by suggesting
that critics were part of a conspiracy against it.
Under persistent pressure from Bangladesh, Indian authorities committed to
end all unlawful killings at their shared border.
In June, the World Bank announced that it was withdrawing its US$1.2 billion
credit assistance for building the Padma Multipurpose Bridge across the Padma
River due to evidence of serious corruption by senior government officials. In
September, the government agreed to put in place conditions that the World
Bank had demanded when the deal was suspended, including placing all public
officials suspected of involvement in the corruption scheme on leave from government
employment, appointing a special inquiry and prosecution team, and
granting an external international expert body access to investigate the corruption
charges and advise the bank. When the government announced in
September 2012 that the Padma Bridge deal was back on track, the World Bank
issued a public rejoinder stating that the project would resume only once all its
conditions had been fully and unconditionally fulfilled.