B8E>C8;<J?
The Awami League government failed to use its significant parliamentary mandate
in 2011 to push through policies to ensure strong protections of human
rights. Instead of prosecuting members of the Rapid Action Battalion (RAB),
who engage in extrajudicial killings, the home minister chose to deny that such
violations occur, even in cases where internal ministry investigations found evidence
of wrongdoing. The practice of disguising extrajudicial killings as “crossfire”
killings seeped from the RAB into other law enforcement institutions, particularly
the police. New allegations of torture, arbitrary arrest, and enforced
disappearances by police continue to emerge.
The government in 2011 tightened controls over civil society organizations by
prosecuting labor union leaders and delaying foreign grants to NGOs. At this
writing a bill proposing restrictions on media, which would prohibit the broadcast
of certain religious and political speech, was under consideration.
Violence against women including rape, dowry-related assaults, acid attacks,
and sexual harassment continue.
Torture, Extrajudicial Killings, and Other Abuses
Despite strong evidence that security forces were continuing to arbitrarily arrest
people, often torturing and then killing them in custody, the home minister
refused to acknowledge the need for accountability. Prime Minister Sheikh
Hasina said her government had zero tolerance for extrajudicial killings, but
failed to properly investigate allegations and prosecute the perpetrators.
On May 21, 2011, William Gomes, a representative of the Asian Human Rights
Commission, was allegedly picked up by plainclothes RAB personnel and taken
to a place his abductors described as “headquarters,” where he was stripped
naked, had his hands and legs cuffed, was forced into stress position, and was
verbally abused and threatened with physical torture. He was interrogated
about his work documenting human rights violations.
In at least two cases, the Home Ministry ignored its own findings that RAB was
responsible for wrongful killings. According to Odhikar, a Dhaka-based human
rights organization, at least 1,600 people have been victims of extrajudicial
killings since 2004. Before the Awami League came to power, its leaders had
accused RAB of widespread extrajudicial killings; they now claim that all deaths
occur during armed exchanges with criminals.
The military and police continue to employ torture and cruel, inhuman, or
degrading punishment against suspects, violating both domestic and international
law. Many deaths in custody are never investigated. According to
Odhikar, at least 12 people died in custody due to police torture in 2011.
Trials for Bangladesh Rifles Abuses
Military tribunal hearings against members of the Bangladesh Rifles (BDR)
accused of participating in a February 2009 mutiny continued through 2011.
Military courts convicted nearly 1,000 soldiers in mass trials that did not meet
fair trial standards, among other things because the prosecution failed to produce
individualized evidence against each detainee. In a single trial that concluded
on June 27, 657 of 666 defendants were found guilty and sentenced to
prison terms ranging from four months to seven years.
Several thousand other soldiers remain in custody awaiting trial in military
courts, while another 847 have been charged under the Bangladesh Criminal
Code. Some of those charged under the criminal code face the death penalty
and many do not have lawyers.
The government did not investigate allegations of torture and possibly as many
as 70 custodial deaths during investigations after the mutiny. Many suspects
were denied access to legal counsel, particularly in the few months directly
after the mutiny.
Civil Society
The government increased surveillance of Odhikar and in particular, Adilur
Rahman Khan, Odhikar’s secretary advocate; threatening and harassing staff;
and delaying approvals of projects.
After Nobel Peace Laureate Mohmmad Yunus, founder of the Grameen Bank,
was removed from his position at the bank because he had exceeded the
mandatory retirement age, there were mysterious attacks on his supporters. In
May Sagirur Rashid Chowdhury, an accounts officer at the bank, was picked up
outside the office by plainclothes men. When he was released his body bore
signs of severe beatings. He said his abductors had asked him to issue a public
statement withdrawing support for Yunus. In September six women directors
and one former director of the board of directors of the Grameen Bank, all beneficiaries
of the microcredit system, suffered intimidation by police who came
and searched their rooms.
The government continued legal action aimed at intimidating the Bangladesh
Center for Worker Solidarity (BCWS), a trade union group. After revoking BCWS’s
registration one agency demanded that two union leaders, Kalpona Akhter and
Babul Akhter, both facing criminal charges, resign as a precondition to renewed
registration of the organization. BCWS has denied all allegations against it.
International Crimes Tribunal
To address fair trial concerns, the government in June 2011 amended the
International Crimes (Tribunals) Act of 1973 to include some basic due process
concerns, such as the right to the presumption of innocence and a fair and public
hearing. But the law, established to prosecute those responsible for atrocities
in the war of 1971, still fell short of international standards. The definitions
of war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide did not conform to international
standards and the government failed to amend the law to ensure due
process. Defense lawyers, witnesses, and investigators said they had been
threatened.
The tribunal in 2011 began proceedings in its first case, that of Jamaat-e-Islami
leader Delawar Hossein Sayedee, accused of involvement in war crimes in the
1971 war.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
Violence against women and girls and their discriminatory treatment under personal
status laws persists. New cases were reported in 2011 of beatings, isolation,
and other public humiliation of girls, all imposed following religious leaders’
issuance of fatwas on issues such as talking to a man, pre-marital relations,
having a child outside wedlock, and adultery. Women’s groups are particularly
concerned that such abuses continue even though the High Court division
of the Bangladesh Supreme Court ordered government authorities to take
preventive measures and prosecute perpetrators.
The Bangladesh parliament in 2011 enacted a law against domestic violence
and rules are currently being framed for its implementation. The government
also introduced a national policy to advance women’s rights.
Recruiters in the Middle East are increasingly turning to Bangladesh to hire
women domestic workers as other labor-sending countries tighten their regulations
or impose bans in response to widespread exploitation. The Bangladeshi
government has failed to introduce minimum protection measures for these
workers during training or recruitment or to ensure that embassies abroad are
adequately equipped with labor attaches and shelters to respond to cases of
abuse.
Protection of Indigenous People
Bangladeshi authorities did little to prevent intensifying violence and discrimination
against indigenous groups residing in the Chittagong Hill Tracts. There
were repeated clashes between ethnic and religious minority groups and “settlers”
who belong to the majority Bengali community. These clashes were in
part a result of government failure to implement its agreement with the indigenous
communities to protect their rights.
Key International Actors
The United States and United Kingdom expressed concern in 2011 about continuing
impunity for human rights violations by the RAB. Both countries have provided
assistance and training for RAB, though the UK ended such programs in
2011. The US recommended creation of an independent unit to investigate allegations
of torture, disappearances, and extrajudicial killings by the RAB.
Bangladesh and India signed trade and security agreements in 2011. Despite
Indian government commitments to order its border forces to act with restraint
against Bangladeshi nationals who cross into Indian territory, it failed to properly
investigate and prosecute those responsible for abuses, including killings.