Bahrain
Bahrain’s human rights practices improved significantly following reforms
decreed by the king, Shaikh Hamad bin `Isa Al Khalifa, in 2001-02, but the government
did not institutionalize in law protection of basic rights such as freedom
of assembly, association, and expression. Some new laws ratified in 2006—on
counterterrorism and public gatherings, for instance—contain provisions that
undermine those rights.
Among the earlier reforms was the establishment of a 40-member elected
National Assembly. The government scheduled elections for November 25, 2006.
Some opposition political societies that boycotted the first elections, in 2002,
planned to participate in the 2006 contest, but others continued to protest what
they regarded as the absence of real legislative authority for the elected representatives.
Freedom of Expression
Following the 2001-02 reforms Bahrainis have enjoyed a greater measure of freedom
of expression, although the Press Law (47/2002) contains measures that
unduly restrict press freedoms, such as prohibitions on insulting the king and on
reports that “threaten national unity.” The authorities invoked the law in 2006 to
ban coverage of controversial matters. The country now has two independent
daily newspapers, but other dailies as well as Bahrain’s radio and TV stations are
state-run. Journalists exercise a considerable degree of self-censorship, particularly
on issues such as corruption implicating the ruling family. The country’s sole
residential internet service provider, Batelco, is also government-owned; the
independent Bahrain Center for Human Rights said in October that the authorities
were blocking 17 websites, including its own.
In September 2006 Shaikh Hamad promulgated an amendment to the Penal Code
(Act 65/2006) that provides criminal penalties for publishing the names or pictures
of accused persons prior to a court verdict without permission of the public
prosecutor. Human rights advocates protested that the law is intended to prevent
public campaigns on behalf of persons wrongly charged with criminal offenses.
In remarks on September 2, Prime Minister Shaikh Khalifa bin Salman Al Khalifa
warned that “democracy, openness and freedom of opinion should not be used
as a pretext to violate the law, sow sectarian sedition, or falsify truths in international
arenas, claiming internal liberties are curbed.” Platforms for expressing
opinions are open “to accommodate all stances and trends as long as they serve
the national interests rather than personal designs,” he said. He also warned
against what one Bahraini newspaper termed “misusing the parliament to raise
controversial issues.”
Freedom of Assembly
Law 32 of 2006 requires the organizers of any public meeting or demonstration to
notify the head of Public Security at least three days in advance. The law authorizes
the head of Public Security to determine whether a meeting warrants police
presence on the basis of “its subject… or any other circumstance.” The law stipulates
that every public meeting must be organized by a committee of at least
three members who are responsible for “forbidding any speech or discussion
infringing on public order or morals”; it leaves “public order or morals” undefined,
however.
Bahraini authorities, citing Law 32/2006, have banned meetings on the grounds
that the organizers failed to get authorization and on several occasions forcibly
prevented or dispersed meetings. On September 15 police prevented the
Movement of Liberties and Democracy (Haq) from holding a public seminar on
the group’s petition calling for a new constitution, on the basis that the group
had not sought permission from the Ministry of the Interior. On September 22
when the group tried a second time to hold the meeting, police used rubber bullets
and teargas to disperse the gathering, reportedly wounding several people.
Counterterrorism Measures
On August 12, 2006, Shaikh Hamad signed into law the “Protecting Society from
Terrorist Acts” bill. The UN special rapporteur on human rights and counterterrorism
had publicly urged the king to seek amendments to the bill passed by the
legislature, expressing concern that it contained an excessively broad definition
of terrorism and terrorist acts. Article 1 prohibits any act that would “damage national unity” or “obstruct public authorities from performing their duties.”
Article 6 prescribes the death penalty for acts that “disrupt the provisions of the
Constitution or laws, or prevent state enterprises or public authorities from exercising
their duties.” The law also allows for extended periods of detention without
charge or judicial review, heightening the risk of arbitrary detention and torture or
inhumane treatment during detention.
Women’s Rights
Women are eligible to vote and stand for office in national and municipal
elections.
Bahrain has no written personal status laws. Instead, separate Sharia-based family
courts exist for Sunni and Shia Muslims. These courts hear marriage, divorce,
custody, and inheritance cases, with judges exercising authority to render judgments
according to their own reading of Islamic jurisprudence. Judges presiding
over these courts are generally conservative religious scholars with limited formal
legal training. Many are unapologetically adverse to women’s equality and persistently
favor men in their rulings. The Women’s Petition Committee continued to
campaign for codifying Bahrain’s family laws and reforming family courts. In
November 2005 the official Supreme Council for Women launched a campaign to
raise public awareness of the need for a codified personal status law. In March
2006 the government introduced draft legislation containing separate sections
for Shia and Sunni Muslims. Women’s rights organizations continued to call for a
unified personal status law.
Human Rights Defenders
The independent Bahrain Center for Human Rights (BCHR), which the authorities
ordered dissolved in September 2004 after one of its leaders publicly criticized
the prime minister, remained closed. The center’s activists continued to monitor
human rights practices, issue reports and statements, and provide legal counsel,
but do not have access to the group’s former office or to its funds, which the government
confiscated.
The Bahrain Human Rights Society (BHRS), set up by the government in 2002,
inspected Jaw prison, a major detention facility, in December 2005, and in May
2006 issued a report critical of conditions there. The BHRS has also been active
in promoting women’s rights, and in particular a unified personal status code.
Decree 56/2002 confers immunity from investigation or prosecution on present
and former government officials alleged to be responsible for torture and other
serious human rights abuses committed prior to 2001. In April 2006 the BCHR
and other groups, including the Committee of Families of Martyrs and Victims of
Torture, sponsored a seminar on the need for accountability for serious human
rights violations such as torture. Government-controlled media harshly criticized
the meeting and its organizers, but the authorities took no steps to interfere with
the event.
On June 26, the International Day in Support of Victims of Torture, the authorities
objected to the planned route for a march sponsored by the Committee of
Families of Martyrs and Victims of Torture and prevented the march from taking
place. The Ministry of Social Affairs denied local Amnesty International members
permission to stage a mock soccer match on June 26 between Guantanamo
“detainees” and “guards” intended to highlight inhumane treatment at the US
detention facility because the organization was not officially registered with the
ministry.
Key International Actors
The United States remains a major ally of Bahrain. In 2001 President George Bush
designated Bahrain a Major Non-NATO Ally. Bahrain hosts the headquarters of the
US Navy’s Fifth Fleet as well as “important air assets.” The State Department’s
Fiscal Year 2007 budget justification submitted to Congress identified access to
Bahrain-based military facilities and airspace as “critical” to US military operations
in Iraq, Afghanistan, and the Horn of Africa as well as “any contingency
operations and/or force projections in the Gulf and Southwest Asian areas.” The
US provided almost US$21 million in military and counterterrorism assistance to
Bahrain in fiscal year 2005 and an estimated $19.3 million in 2006. The Bush
administration has requested $17.3 million for fiscal year 2007. The US and
Bahrain entered into a Free Trade Agreement in September 2004. US officials did not publicly raise specific human rights concerns during the year outside of the
State Department’s annual country report.
In May 2006 Bahrain was among the states elected to the first UN Human Rights
Council, the body established to replace the Commission on Human Rights.
Bahrain is not a state party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights or the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, but
is a state party to the Convention against Torture, the Convention against All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, and the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. Following Bahrain’s initial report to the Committee against Torture in May
2005, the committee commended Bahrain for a number of positive developments,
particularly in bringing an end to systematic torture, but also expressed a
number of concerns, including “the blanket amnesty extended to all alleged perpetrators
of torture or other crimes by Decree No. 56 of 2002 and the lack of
redress available to victims of torture.” The committee also expressed concern
with provisions of the then-draft counterterrorism law that would “reduce safeguards
against torture.”