B8?I8@E
In mid-February Bahraini authorities used lethal force to suppress peaceful
anti-government and pro-democracy protests, killing seven and wounding many
more.
The crackdown resumed in mid-March, after troops from Saudi Arabia entered
Bahrain and Bahraini military and security forces launched a systematic campaign
of retribution, arresting thousands of demonstrators or individuals who
supported the protests. Authorities fired hundreds of public sector employees
suspected of supporting the protests, as did large private firms in which the
state had a substantial stake.
Security forces’ use of birdshot pellets, rubber bullets, and tear gas as well as
live ammunition caused most of the deaths and injuries of protesters and
bystanders. Attacks against protesters continued after authorities formally lifted
the “state of national safety” on June 1. At this writing more than 40 persons
had been killed in connection with suppression of protests, including four who
died in custody in April from torture or medical neglect, and several members of
security forces.
Right to Assembly
During the early morning hours of February 17, security forces attacked peaceful
demonstrators at the Pearl Roundabout in Manama, the capital. Many were
sleeping. The assault left four protesters dead and hundreds injured. On
February 18, security forces and the Bahrain Defense Force (BDF) fired live
ammunition and rubber bullets at peaceful protesters marching towards the
Pearl Roundabout—then occupied by BDF tanks, armored vehicles and police
units—mortally wounding Abd al-Ridha Bu Hameed.
On February 19, authorities ordered security and military forces to withdraw and
protesters reoccupied the Pearl Roundabout. For four weeks protesters gathered
at the roundabout and other areas to voice opposition to the government
and ruling Al Khalifa family. Crown Prince Salma bin Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa
appeared on national television and guaranteed that protesters would be free to demonstrate at the Pearl Roundabout without facing arrest or attack by government
forces.
On March 16—a day after King Hamad declared a “state of national safety,”
akin to a state of emergency—security and military forces forcibly cleared the
Pearl Roundabout, the center of anti-government protests. The same day, forces
dispersed protesters in villages outside Manama and surrounded the
Salmaniya Medical Complex, the country’s largest public hospital, preventing
patients and medical staff from entering or leaving the hospital. At least six
people were killed during clashes on March 16, including two police officers.
After lifting the state of emergency on June 1, authorities permitted Al Wefaq,
the largest opposition political society, to hold several rallies, which remained
peaceful, but clashes with security forces regularly broke out when protesters
held demonstrations in Shia villages. At least eleven protesters and
bystanders, including two children under age 18, had been killed as a result of
protest-related injuries between June 1 and this writing.
Arbitrary Arrests and Detentions
Since mid-March security forces have arrested over 1,600 people who participated
in, or were suspected of supporting, the anti-government demonstrations.
Some of those arrested and detained were children. In many cases armed
masked men, some in uniforms and others in civilian clothes, pulled people out
of their homes in pre-dawn raids and transferred them to unknown locations.
Others were arrested at work or pulled out of cars at checkpoints. Authorities
held most detainees in incommunicado detention for weeks, in some cases
months. Detainees had little or no contact with lawyers or family except when
they were presented before a special military court.
Those held incommunicado included doctors, teachers, students, athletes, a
prominent defense lawyer, and leaders of legally recognized opposition political
societies. Ibrahim Sharif, a Sunni who heads the secularist National
Democratic Action Society, was one of the first arrested, in a pre-dawn raid on
March 17. Matar Ibrahim Matar and Jawad Fairouz—who represented Al Wefaq,
the largest opposition bloc in parliament before its members resigned in protest in February—were seized on May 2. Authorities released Matar and
Fairouz in August but they still face charges related to their political activities.
Dozens remained in pre-trial detention as of October, in addition to the more
than 250 who were convicted and sentenced by special military courts. The government
provided little information about the number of people arrested and
typically gave reasons for arrest only when detainees were charged before special
military courts.
Torture, Ill-Treatment, and Abuse
In April four people died in custody, apparently as a result of torture and medical
neglect. The body of one—Ali Isa Ibrahim Saqer, arrested in connection with
the deaths of two police officers—bore unmistakable signs of torture on his
body. On April 28 Bahrain TV broadcast Saqer’s purported confession in connection
with the trial of his co-defendants, although authorities notified Saqer’s
family of his death on April 9.
Abdulhadi al-Khawaja, a leading human rights and political activist, appeared
before a special military court on May 8 with facial fractures and head injuries,
apparently the result of severe beatings he sustained when authorities
detained him on April 9. Several other co-defendants showed signs of possible
abuse or ill-treatment. Since mid-February dozens of released detainees,
including doctors, nurses, and paramedics arrested in March and April, have
alleged they were abused or tortured during detention, often to coerce confessions.
On February 23, authorities released from prison 23 opposition leaders and
activists arrested between mid-August and early September 2010 for alleged
terrorist offenses. Several in the group described lengthy interrogation sessions
during which they were blindfolded and subjected to both physical and psychological
abuse, some of which amounted to torture. The abuse included threats,
humiliation, solitary confinement, beatings to the head, chest, and other sensitive
areas, beatings on the soles of feet with sticks or hoses, sleep deprivation,
denying access to the bathroom, and electric shocks. Some said they were sexually harassed or assaulted. Most of the defendants have since been rearrested.
Authorities denied requests for visits to detention facilities by independent
human rights and humanitarian organizations as well as United Nations human
rights mechanisms.
Unfair Trials in Special Military Courts
On March 15 King Hamad established by decree special military courts, called
the “Courts of National Safety,” to try protesters and people perceived as supporting
the street protests. BDF Commander-in-Chief Field Marshal Khalifa bin
Ahmed Al Khalifa appointed the military judge who presides over the court,
along with two civilian judges, and the military public prosecutor who prosecuted
the cases.
Since March, authorities have tried several hundred defendants before military
courts and have convicted and sentenced more than 300 persons.
Among those the special military court sentenced to prison terms ranging from
five years to life were Sharif al-Khawaja, and 19 other protest leaders, seven of
them in absentia, on June 22. The charges against them ranged from calling for
a change of government, leading “illegal” demonstrations, “spreading false
news,” and “harming the reputation” of the country. The trial record cited no
evidence linking any of the accused to acts of violence or other recognizable
criminal offenses. An appeals court upheld their convictions and sentences on
September 28.
On April 28 the special military court sentenced four defendants to death and
three others to life in prison for their alleged involvement in the murder of two
police officers. Two of the death sentences were upheld by the Appeals Court of
National Safety, while the other two were changed to life imprisonment. On
September 29 the special military court sentenced another defendant to death
for the alleged murder of a third police officer.
Lawyers defending suspects before the special military court had extremely limited
access to their clients and were unable to adequately prepare their clients’ defenses. In many cases convictions were based solely on secret evidence that
the military prosecution provided, the testimony of interrogators, and confessions
that defendants claimed were coerced.
The special military courts ended their operation on October 7, more than four
months after a June 29 decree by King Hamad that supposedly transferred all
protest-related cases to civilian courts.
Attacks on Doctors and Other Health Care Staff
Since the outbreak of anti-government protests in mid-February, Human Rights
Watch documented restrictions on provision of emergency care at temporary
health posts, sieges at hospitals and clinics by security forces, arrests and
beatings of people with protest-related injuries, and arrests of doctors and
other health care staff who had criticized these actions.
Police attacked a volunteer medical tent in the February 17 raid on Pearl
Roundabout, beating and arresting nurses and doctors as well as protesters. In
response to this attack and to allegations that authorities prevented the dispatch
of ambulances to attend to wounded protesters, demonstrators gathered
outside the emergency facilities of Salmaniya hospital, with the support of
some of the health care staff. For several weeks the grounds outside the complex
became a staging ground for anti-government demonstrations, with
posters, tents, photos of wounded protesters, and speeches by opposition
leaders.
The BDF took over Salmaniya hospital on March 16 and restricted entry to and
exit from the complex. Hospital staff and protesters being treated for injuries
inside the hospital were subjected to harassment, beatings that sometimes
rose to the level of torture, and arrest. Security forces also raided health care
facilities elsewhere, where they interrogated and arrested medical staff.
On September 29 the special military court sentenced 20 doctors and other
health care staff charged with serious crimes, including kidnapping and storing
weapons at Salmaniya hospital, and terms of imprisonment ranging from 5 to
15 years. The court denied the doctors and other health care staff a fair trial by
relying on tainted or questionable evidence including coerced confessions, hearsay, and “secret evidence” submitted by interrogators, who often served as
the prosecutor’s main witness. Judges also prevented the doctors and other
health care staff from testifying in their own defense. At this writing a civilian
court was scheduled to hear the doctors and health care staff’s appeal on
November 28.
Twenty-eight other doctors and health care staff faced misdemeanor charges
before a civil court.
Summary Workplace and University Dismissals
According to the General Federation of Bahraini Trade Unions, ministries, other
official bodies, and private companies in which the state held a substantial
interest dismissed more than 2,500 employees in the first half of the year.
In most cases the stated reason for dismissal was absence from work during
and immediately after street protests, but the dismissals appear to have been
arbitrary and carried out in violation of Bahraini law.
On April 19 the Bahrain News Agency (BNA) reported that the University of
Bahrain had dismissed 200 students, academics, and other employees in connection
with protests and clashes on the campus in March. On May 25, according
to the BNA, Education Minister Majid al-Nuaimi confirmed that some students
in Bahrain and abroad who participated in anti-government protests lost
their government scholarships. The University of Bahrain required all students
to sign a loyalty pledge to the ruling family before they could re-enroll when the
university reopened in early May and again in September.
Women’s Rights
Unlike for Sunnis, there is no codified personal status law dealing with marriage,
divorce, guardianship and child custody, and inheritance for Shias. Such
matters are left to the judge’s discretion in Shia courts. The penal code does
not adequately deal with violence against women as there are no comprehensive
provisions on sexual harassment or domestic abuse. Rape can be punished
with life in prison, but marital rape is not recognized as a crime.
Migrant Workers
More than 460,000 migrant workers, primarily from Asia, work in Bahrain on
temporary contracts in construction, domestic work, and other services. Abuses
such as unpaid wages, passport confiscation, unsafe housing, excessive work
hours, and physical abuse are common. A 2009 reform allowing workers to
change jobs more freely has yet to be publicized widely and does not apply to
domestic workers, who are also excluded from protection under the labor law.
Bahrain voted to adopt the International Labour Organization Convention on
Domestic Work, but has yet to ratify it or to pass draft national legislation on
domestic work.
Key International Actors
Troops primarily from Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates entered
Bahrain on March 14 to support Bahrain’s crackdown against largely peaceful
protests.
Bahrain hosts the United States Navy’s Fifth Fleet, and the US sells military
equipment to Bahrain, a “major non-NATO ally.” After the February attacks on
demonstrators the United Kingdom and France announced they would cut off
security and military sales and assistance to Bahrain, and the US announced it
would “review” such sales. In September the US Department of Defense formally
notified Congress of a proposed the sale of US$53 million in armored
Humvees and other equipment to the BDF as well as $15 million in Foreign
Military Financing for Bahrain.
US President Barack Obama telephoned King Hamad on February 18 after
Bahraini forces fired on demonstrators and, according to a White House statement,
“reiterated his condemnation of the violence used against peaceful protesters,”
and in a speech on May 19 criticized the government’s “mass arrests
and brute force.” For the most part, however, Bahrain’s major western allies—
the US and the European Union and its member states—were muted in their
public criticism of Bahrain’s serious human rights violations in a manner that
contrasted sharply with their public statements concerning other governments engaged in similar abuses in the region. They also failed to prompt any action
at the UN Human Rights Council.
On June 29 King Hamad issued a decree establishing the Bahrain Independent
Commission of Investigation (BICI) headed by M. Cherif Bassiouni and four
other internationally recognized human rights experts. The commission’s mandate
is to investigate “the events occurring in Bahrain February/March 2011,
and any consequences arising out of the aforementioned events.” The commission
was scheduled to issue its findings on November 23.
The Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights and the UN secretarygeneral
welcomed the establishment of the BICI. The US government has said it
will wait for the commission’s final report and the government’s response
before deciding on the $53 million arms sales.
After the March crackdown the government sharply restricted access to the
country by independent journalists and international rights organizations,
including Human Rights Watch.