Bahrain
Human rights conditions in Bahrain worsened in 2007. Although the king, Shaikh
Hamad bin `Isa al-Khalifa, undertook important reforms in 2001-2002, the government
still has done little to institutionalize human rights protections in law. The
government continued to subject freedom of expression, assembly, and association
and to arbitrary restrictions.
Bahrain’s counterterrorism law as well as a new Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Law, enacted in August 2007, prescribe the death penalty for certain
offences. In December 2006, the government executed a Bangladeshi man and
woman and a Pakistani man convicted in separate murder cases. Except for a single
execution in 1996, a time of great political turmoil, Bahrain had not executed
anyone since 1977.
Bahrain held National Assembly and municipal elections in November and
December 2006. Opposition political societies that boycotted the first elections,
in 2002, participated in 2006, but some groups continue to boycott the
Assembly, protesting what they regarded as the absence of real legislative authority
for the elected representatives.
Freedom of Expression
Authorities continue to use the press law (Law 47/2002) to restrict coverage of
controversial matters, particularly issues such as official corruption. In the first
nine months of 2007, authorities referred the cases of 15 journalists to the public
prosecutor, in most instances for alleged defamation of a government official or
department. In May 2007, the government-appointed Shura Council, the upper
chamber of the parliament, approved draft legislation that would remove criminal
penalties for journalistic offenses, but as of November the government had not
forwarded the draft to the elected National Assembly for approval.
In mid-November 2006 authorities arrested a 35-year-old dentist and a 32-yearold
insurance salesman for attempting to distribute leaflets calling on Bahrainis
to boycott the upcoming parliamentary elections. On January 30 a court sentenced
them to prison terms of six months and one year, respectively, for dissemination and possession of materials that could “damage the public interest.” The
government released them several weeks later, apparently following a pardon
from the king.
In early February authorities arrested `Abd al-Hadi Khawaja, president of the
Bahrain Center for Human Rights (BCHR), and Hassan Mushaima, head of Al Haq,
a political opposition group, on charges of circulating false information, insulting
the king, and inciting hatred against the government. In May, following demonstrations
protesting their prosecution, the king declared the court proceedings
against them “frozen.”
The country’s sole residential internet service provider, Batelco, is governmentowned;
the BCHR said in November that the authorities were blocking 23 discussion
forums and other websites, including its own.
Freedom of Assembly
Law 32 of 2006 requires the organizers of any public meeting to notify the head
of Public Security at least three days in advance and authorizes that official to
determine whether a meeting warrants police presence on the basis of “its subject
… or any other circumstance.” The law stipulates that meeting organizers are
responsible for “forbidding any speech or discussion infringing on public order or
morals,” but leaves “public order or morals” undefined.
During 2007 Bahraini authorities, citing Law 32/2006, banned meetings and on
several occasions forcibly prevented or dispersed unauthorized gatherings. In
several instances the police used what appeared to be excessive force and inflicted
severe beatings on persons they seized, sometimes amounting to torture. On
May 20 police reportedly fired rubber bullets at a gathering at which opposition
political figures, including members of parliament, were speaking, injuring
Ibrahim Sharif, a leader of the opposition National Democratic Action Society. The
next evening, when riot police confronted a street demonstration protesting the
May 20 incident, security forces seized and beat 22-year-old Ali Sa`id al-Khabaz
and 46-year-old Hamid Yusif Ahmad, inflicting serious injuries on both men.
Freedom of Association
The government continues to deny legal status to the BCHR, which it ordered dissolved
in 2004 after the BCHR’s president publicly criticized the prime minister.
Several other groups, including the National Committee for the Unemployed and
the Bahrain Youth Human Rights Society, attempted in 2005 to register with the
Ministry of Social Development, as required by law, but at this writing had
received no response to their application.
In 2007 the Ministry of Social Development drafted new legislation on civil society
organizations, but at this writing the ministry had not submitted the draft to the
Shura Council or the Chamber of Deputies. The draft law contains some improvements
over the existing Law 21/1989, but includes numerous provisions incompatible
with international standards and best practices regarding freedom of
association. For example, the draft law maintains the authority of the minister of
social development to close any organization for up to 60 days without having to
provide any justification or court order, and includes criminal penalties for “any”
violation of the law.
Bahrain has ratified some conventions of the International Labor Organization,
but neither of the two core conventions governing freedom of association. Law
33/2002 permits workers to form and join unions, but the General Federation of
Bahrain Trade Unions (GFBTU) filed a complaint with the ILO in June 2005 protesting
what it said was the government’s repeated refusal to register six trade unions
in the public sector. In 2007 the GFBTU filed another complaint protesting a
November 2006 edict by the prime minister prohibiting strikes in numerous sectors
of the economy.
Counterterrorism Measures
In August 2006 the king signed into law the “Protecting Society from Terrorist
Acts” bill, despite concerns expressed by the UN special rapporteur on human
rights and counterterrorism that it contained excessively broad definitions of terrorism
and terrorist acts. Article 1 prohibits any act that would “damage national
unity” or “obstruct public authorities from performing their duties.” Article 6 prescribes
the death penalty for acts that “disrupt the provisions of the Constitution or laws, or prevent state enterprises or public authorities from exercising their
duties.” The law also allows for extended periods of detention without charge or
judicial review. The first trial of suspects, four Bahrainis and a Qatari, charged
under the new law with funding and preparing terrorist attacks abroad, was
scheduled to begin in late November 2007.
Women’s Rights
Bahrain has no written personal status law. Instead, separate Sharia-based family
courts for Sunni and Shia Muslims hear marriage, divorce, custody, and inheritance
cases. Family court judges, who are generally conservative religious scholars
with limited formal legal training, render judgments according to their individual
reading of Islamic jurisprudence. They have consistently favored men in their
rulings and are unapologetically adverse to women’s equality. In June, a Sharia
court denied the former wife of a Bahraini policeman custody of their three children
and any rights to the marital home. Prior to the ruling, the 29-year-old
woman appeared on television criticizing these judges for their handling of the
case and the Ministry of Interior for failing to take any action against her ex-husband
despite numerous allegations of physical abuse and harassment. The government
has intensified its harassment of women’s rights activist Ghada
Jamsheer following an April letter she addressed to Shaikh Hamad calling for the
dissolution of the Supreme Council for Women (chaired by the king’s wife) for failing
to do more to advance women’s status in the kingdom. Women’s rights organizations
continued to call for a written unified personal status law.
Human Rights Defenders
As already noted, the Bahrain Center for Human Rights (BCHR) was ordered dissolved
in 2004 and remains closed. Authorities arrested BCHR president `Abd al-
Hadi Khawaja in early February 2007 on charges that included circulating false
information, but in May the king “froze” judicial proceedings against him. In
March the public prosecutor summoned BCHR Vice President Nabeel Rajab for
questioning on the violation of a gag order prohibiting public discussion of
alleged government efforts to manipulate National Assembly elections November
2006. The Bahrain Human Rights Society (BHRS), another independent rights organization, visited Jaw prison, a major detention facility, in December 2005, but
despite requests, the government did not grant further access to detention centers
in 2007.
Decree 56/2002, which confers immunity from investigation or prosecution on
government officials alleged to be responsible for torture and other serious
human rights abuses committed prior to 2001, remains on the books. The BCHR
and BHRS together led a coalition of rights groups and opposition political societies
in sponsoring workshops in June and September 2007 on setting up a truth
and reconciliation mechanism to address such violations. The government continues
to insist that it considers such matters closed. In its November 2006
response to the review conducted by the UN Committee Against Torture, the government
said that the king’s reform project had “paved the way for the provision
of humanitarian assistance and the realization of transitional justice, beginning
with a general amnesty … closing a chapter on the past.” The authorities, however,
did not prevent the transitional justice meetings from taking place and the
minister of social development addressed the opening session of the June conference.
Key International Actors
Bahrain hosts the headquarters of the US Navy’s Fifth Fleet as well as “important
air assets.” The US State Department’s Fiscal Year 2007 budget justification submitted
to Congress identified access to Bahrain-based military facilities and airspace
as “critical” to US military operations in Iraq, Afghanistan, and the Horn of
Africa as well as “any contingency operations and/or force projections in the Gulf
and Southwest Asian areas.”
In June 2007 the UN Human Rights Council initiated its Universal Periodic Review
(UPR) process, in which the council will review the human rights record of every
country once every four years. The United Nations announced in September that
Bahrain would be among the first 16 countries reviewed at the first UPR session in
February 2008.