Bahrain
The Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry (BICI), which King Hamad bin
Isa al-Khalifa appointed to investigate the government’s response to prodemocracy
demonstrations in February and March 2011, issued its findings in
late November 2011. The BICI concluded that security forces had used excessive
force against peaceful protesters, and had arbitrarily arrested, tortured, ill-treated,
and denied them fair trials.
The BICI proposed recommendations to redress those violations and for the first
time, the authorities investigated some low-ranking security officials in connection
with torture allegations. However, the government failed to fully implement
the commission’s core recommendations, notably the release of protest leaders
convicted for exercising their right to freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly; and the investigation of high-ranking officials responsible for abuses.
Security forces used excessive force in 2012 to disperse anti-government
protests. Authorities jailed human rights defenders and individuals for participating
in peaceful demonstrations and criticizing officials.
In November 2011, the Ministry of Social Development cancelled the election
results of the Bahrain Lawyers’ Society (BLS) and reinstated the previous board
and president. In July 2012, a court ruling sought by the Ministry of Justice dissolved
the opposition Islamic Action Association (Amal).
Freedom of Assembly
After lifting the state of emergency on June 1, 2011, authorities permitted opposition
political societies to hold several rallies, which remained peaceful, but
clashes with security forces regularly broke out when protesters held demonstrations
in Shia villages.
In 2012, authorities increasingly rejected permit requests from opposition
groups and riot police often used force to disperse peaceful protests. On June
22, riot police fired tear gas and shot sound grenades at close range to disperse
a peaceful demonstration in Manama, the capital. A tear gas canister seriously injured one protestor in the head. During protests in which demonstrators threw
rocks and Molotov cocktails, police often attacked crowds indiscriminately
using teargas, sound grenades, and pellet guns.
While abuse in detention appears to have declined during 2012, police routinely
beat protesters, in some cases severely, at the time of arrest and during their
transfer to police stations.
According to opposition groups, at least 26 protesters and bystanders died in
protest-related injuries between November 1, 2011 and November 1, 2012. Many
of the deaths have been attributed to excessive use of teargas. The government
claimed that anti-government protesters injured 1,500 policemen in 2012.
Prosecuting Government Critics
Human Rights Watch documented serious and systematic due process violations
in trials of opposition leaders and activists before Bahrain’s special military
courts in 2011. Violations included denying the right to counsel and failure
to investigate credible allegations of torture and ill-treatment during interrogation.
The BICI reached a similar conclusion, saying that military courts convicted
around 300 people solely for exercising their right to freedom of expression and
assembly.
Despite authorities’ promise to review military courts’ sentences for speech
crimes and to void convictions imposed after grossly unfair trials, the protest
leaders and many others remained behind bars at this writing.
On August 2, 2012, authorities arrested rights activist Zainab al-Khawaja for
allegedly tearing up a picture of the king and participating in illegal demonstrations.
On September 25, a court sentenced her to two months’ imprisonment for
destroying government property.
On August 16, Nabeel Rajab, president of the Bahrain Center for Human Rights,
was sentenced to three years’ imprisonment for calling for and participating in
peaceful demonstrations without permits between January and March 2012.
Earlier, Rajab received a three-month sentence for “tweets” that called for the
prime minister to step down. On August 23, an appeals court overturned the
Twitter conviction, but at this writing he remained in prison pending appeal on
the illegal assembly convictions. The court’s verdict gave no indication that
Rajab had called for, or participated in, violence.
On September 4, 2012, a civilian appeals court upheld the military court’s convictions
and long sentences of 20 protest leaders.
On November 6, 2012, the Interior Ministry revoked the citizenship of the 31
people, including opposition political activists, lawyers, and rights activists,
accusing them of “damaging the security of the state.” The order left most of
those affected stateless.
Freedom of Association
On August 12, the government approved a draft law for nongovernmental organizations.
Local associations complained that authorities had not consulted them
and that they were not aware of the law’s adoption until media reported it.
On November 30, 2011, a few days after the Bahraini Lawyers’ Society elected
new board members, Minister of Social Development Fatima al-Balooshi cancelled
the election results, declaring that the society had “not complied with the
legal procedures.” Al-Balooshi reinstated the previous board and president to
manage the affairs of the society. The society challenged the order, saying it
had notified the ministry of the election two weeks before holding its election
as required by law.
On June 3, 2012, the Ministry of Justice filed a lawsuit accusing the opposition
Islamic Action Association (Amal) of violating provisions of the 2006 political
societies law, such as failing to “convene a general conference for more than
four years” and “taking its decisions from a religious authority that calls openly
for violence and incites hatred.” An administrative court ordered the group’s
dissolution on July 9. At this writing, a court of appeals was reviewing the ruling.
Accountability
The BICI noted that Bahrain’s security forces operated within a “culture of
impunity” and concluded that the abuses “could not have happened without
the knowledge of higher echelons of the command structure” of the security
forces.
The authorities claimed they investigated 122 officers for alleged torture and
unlawful killings documented by the BICI. However, the few prosecutions
involve mainly low-ranking officers, most of them non-Bahraini. On September
27, a criminal court sentenced a Bahraini police lieutenant—the highest-ranking
security official known to have been convicted for abuses—to seven years in
prison for the murder of Hani Abd al-Aziz Jumaa in March 2011.
Investigations and prosecutions have so far not included any high-ranking official
at the Interior Ministry or the National Security Agency. No official from the
Bahrain Defense Forces is known to have been investigated, although the military
played a leading role in the 2011 campaign of repression.
Migrant Workers
More than 460,000 migrant workers, primarily from Asia, work in Bahrain on
temporary contracts in construction, domestic work, and other services. Human
Rights Watch documented abuses against migrant workers in Bahrain such as
unpaid wages, passport confiscation, unsafe housing, excessive work hours,
physical abuse, and forced labor. In July, King Hamad signed a new private sector
labor law that contained improved safety regulations, measures to combat
human trafficking, and granted migrants greater ability to leave their employers.
The law extends a few protections to domestic workers such as annual leave,
but excludes them from most key provisions, including limits to hours of work,
weekly days off, and ability to leave their employers. Authorities inadequately
enforce existing laws against withholding wages, charging recruitment fees, and
confiscating passports.
Enforcement of a 2009 law sharply reduced transport of workers in open-air
trucks, previously a cause of many injuries and deaths.
Women’s Rights
Unlike for Sunni Muslims, Bahrain has no codified personal status law dealing
with marriage, divorce, child custody, and inheritance for Shia Muslims. Such
matters are left to the judge’s discretion in sharia courts. The penal code does
not adequately address violence against women. There are no provisions on
sexual harassment or domestic abuse. Rape can be punished with life in prison,
but marital rape is not recognized as a crime.
Key International Actors
Bahrain hosts the United States Navy’s Fifth Fleet. In May, the US resumed the
sale of some military equipment to Bahrain, a “major non-NATO ally,” after having
suspended sales in the wake of the government’s repression of peaceful
protests. The US continued to restrict provision of arms that could be used for
domestic repression, such as helicopters and armored vehicles. After the
February 2011 attacks on demonstrators the United Kingdom and France
announced they would cut off security and military sales and assistance. In
February 2012, several news organizations reported that the UK continued to
supply arms to Bahrain.
On March 15, the European Parliament adopted a resolution calling on Bahrain
to respect freedom of expression and assembly, and unconditionally release
peaceful protesters and political prisoners.
In May, the United Nations Human Rights Council (HRC) examined Bahrain’s
human rights record under the Universal Periodic Review (UPR) process. Many
countries expressed concern about the human rights crisis in Bahrain, lack of
accountability for abuses, and restrictions on international rights groups’ access
to the country. In September, Bahrain officially accepted most of the recommendations
it received during the UPR, including holding security forces accountable
for rights abuses and the immediate release of prisoners convicted for participating
in peaceful demonstrations, but at this writing the government had
not implemented these key recommendations.
On June 28, countries, including France and Germany, condemned ongoing violations
in Bahrain through a joint declaration read by Switzerland during a HRC
debate. The statement called on Bahrain to implement fully the recommendations
of the BICI, including releasing political prisoners and holding officials
responsible for abuses accountable for their actions.