Bahrain
Bahrain’s human rights record regressed further in key areas in 2013 and the
government made little real progress regarding reforms it claimed to pursue.
Security forces continued to arrest scores of individuals arbitrarily in towns
where anti-government protests regularly take place. Continuing reports of torture
and ill-treatment in detention were consistent with the findings of the 2011
Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry (BICI). The government’s failure to
implement key recommendations of the BICI stand in contrast to its claims it is
making progress on human rights. The judicial system, headed by ruling family
members, has yet to hold any senior official responsible for serious human
rights violations that have occurred since 2011, including torture-related deaths
in detention.
High-profile critics of the government remain in jail on charges that relate solely
to exercising their rights to freedom of expression and assembly. Authorities
continue to arrest and prosecute dissidents, including human rights defenders,
on security-related charges. The arrest of the deputy head of al-Wefaq, the
largest opposition group, prompted all the other opposition groups participating
in a deeply flawed national dialogue process to suspend their involvement.
The process resumed in February after a one-year hiatus. Of the 27 participating
groups, 18 are linked to the government and they had still had not agreed on an
agenda at time of writing.
In August, the government passed a set of laws that further restrict the right to
freedom of assembly and may further restrict the right to freedom of expression.
Arbitrary Detentions, Ill-Treatment, and Torture
Security forces continued to detain scores of individuals arbitrarily every
month, according to local rights activists. In May, masked plainclothes police
conducted targeted night-time raids in towns around Bahrain’s motor racing circuit
in advance of the Formula 1 Grand Prix. Arresting officers failed to produce
arrest or search warrants. Authorities often deny holding detainees when family
members seek to locate them and initial interrogations typically take place without the presence of a lawyer, in violation of Bahrain’s constitution and
code of criminal procedure. The Bahrain Centre for Human Rights documented
approximately 200 cases in a six-week period between July and mid-August
during which authorities falsely denied holding detained individuals for two to
ten days.
Many detainees complained of ill-treatment in detention, sometimes rising to
the level of torture. Four former detainees told Human Rights Watch that they
were severely beaten, and in one case sexually assaulted, while in detention at
the Interior Ministry’s Criminal Investigations Directorate (CID) in 2013.
Bahrain’s constitution forbids the use of torture and use of evidence secured by
torture, and Bahrain is a state party to the United Nations Convention Against
Torture.
According to local rights groups, authorities detained scores of children for participating
in anti-government protests in 2013 and regularly held them in detention
facilities alongside adults. One 17-year-old boy detained at CID headquarters
told Human Rights Watch that he was forced to stand in a corridor, handcuffed,
and blindfolded for several hours as passing officers insulted him and
one officer threatened they would rape him.
In April, authorities indefinitely postponed the planned visit of UN Special
Rapporteur on Torture Juan Mendez.
Prosecution and Harassment of Government Critics
In January, Bahrain’s Court of Cassation upheld lengthy convictions for 13 highprofile
critics of the government. The evidence against them consisted of public
statements advocating reforms to curtail the power of the ruling family, Al
Khalifa, and confessions that the defendants alleged were coerced while they
were in incommunicado detention.
In September, authorities arrested Khalil al-Marzooq, the assistant secretarygeneral
of al-Wefaq, the main legal opposition group. Prosecutors ordered al-
Marzooq to be held for 30 days to investigate charges that he had been “inciting
and advocating terrorism.” The charges relate to comments he made at a
rally in which he publicly denounced violence. Shortly after his arrest, al-Wefaq and other participating opposition groups announced they were suspending
their involvement in the national dialogue.
On September 29, a Bahrain court sentenced 50 persons, including several
rights activists, alleged to be part of the February 14th Youth Coalition, to jail
terms ranging from 5 to 15 years for security-related offenses, including “establishing
a terrorist group for the purpose of disturbing public security, disabling
constitution and law, preventing public institution and authorities from performing
their duties, attacking public and personal rights, and harming national
unity.”
At time of writing Human Rights Watch was unable to determine if any of the
convictions were for recognizable criminal acts warranting such serious sentences.
Defense lawyers and detainees alleged that confessions were coerced.
One defendant, rights and opposition activist Naji Fateel, who received a 15-
year sentence, claimed he was badly tortured in April during his first three days
in detention. He alleged that authorities handcuffed and blindfolded him, beat
him severely, subjected him to electric shocks, and suspended him from the
ceiling. Political activist Reyhana al-Mousawi, who received a five-year sentence,
alleged she was subjected to electro-shocks and forced to sign a confession.
Abdul Ghani Kanjar, the former spokesperson for the National Committee for
Martyrs and Victims of Torture who fled Bahrain in 2012 and is now the overseas
spokesperson for the Haq Movement for Liberty and Democracy, an unrecognized
opposition group, received a 15-year sentence in absentia. Kanjar told
Human Rights Watch he had no relation to the 14th February Coalition and was
not familiar with the names of many of those convicted.
In August, staff at Copenhagen Airport, apparently acting on directions from
Bahraini authorities, prevented the acting director of the Bahrain Center for
Human Rights, Maryam al-Khawaja, from boarding a flight to Manama. Al-
Khawaja, whose father and sister are in jail in Bahrain as a result of their
protests against the government, had publicly announced her plans to fly to
Bahrain to monitor anti-government protests planned for August 14.
The targeting of medical professionals continues to be a concern. In January,
seven physicians and one nurse were dismissed from their positions at the Ministry of Health and convicted for providing medical care to protesters in
2011. The continuing presence of security forces around hospitals prevents neutral
medical access, in violation of medical ethics and the right to health.
Accountability
Since 2011, Bahrain established an ombudsman’s office in the Ministry of
Interior and a Special Investigations Unit in the Public Prosecution Office, but
neither of these offices took steps to hold senior officials accountable for serious
human rights abuses or address what the BICI characterized as a “culture
of impunity.” Senior officials told Human Rights Watch that a platoon commander
in the police and a battalion commander in the criminal investigations
division had been found responsible for rights violations, but it is not clear
what action, if any, was taken in these cases.
In May, a Bahrain appeals court reduced the seven-year sentence of a Bahrain
police lieutenant convicted of the April 2011 murder of Hani Abd al-Aziz Jumaa
to six months. The lieutenant is the highest ranking security official known to
have been convicted for abuses.
Freedom of Assembly, Association, and Expression
In April, Bahrain’s cabinet endorsed an amendment to article 214 of the penal
code to increase from two to five years the maximum sentence for insulting the
king. Lawyer Mahdi al-Basri was one of at least five individuals sentenced to
prison in 2013 for allegedly insulting King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa on social
media.
In early August, the parliament issued 22 recommendations to King Hamad in
advance of planned anti-government protests on August 14. One recommendation
led to the amendment of article 11 of the 1973 Law on Public Gatherings. All
demonstrations, marches, rallies, or sit-ins must now have the prior written permission
of the head of state security, who can stipulate the number of permitted
protesters and the time and place of any protest.
Political parties remain prohibited, but in 2013, 20 licensed political societies
operated in the country, including Islamist and secular, pro-government and
opposition groups. In September, Justice Minister Shaikh Khalid bin Ali Al Khalifa announced an amendment to the 2005 Law for Political Societies to
require that political groups secure advance government permission to meet
with foreign diplomats in Bahrain and abroad and that a Foreign Ministry representative
accompany them in such meetings.
Authorities continue to restrict freedom of association by arbitrarily rejecting
registration applications for civil and political groups and intrusively supervising
independent organizations. The provisions of a 2012 Draft Law on Civil
Organizations and Institutions submitted to parliament in January 2013 for
approval are much more restrictive than those in an earlier 2007 draft, and in
some respects worse than the 1989 law still in effect. At time of writing the parliament
had not acted on the draft.
Women’s Rights
Law no.19 of 2009 on the Promulgation of the Law of Family Rulings regulates
matters of personal status in Bahrain’s Sunni courts, but it does not apply in
the country’s Shia courts, which means that the majority of Bahraini women are
not covered by a codified personal status law. Domestic violence is not specifically
addressed in the penal code and marital rape is not considered a crime.
Migrant Workers
Approximately 460,000 migrant workers, primarily from Asia, make up 77 percent
of Bahrain’s private workforce. Due to shortcomings in Bahrain’s legal and
regulatory framework and failure to enforce laws, they endure serious abuses
such as unpaid wages, passport confiscation, unsafe housing, excessive work
hours, physical abuse, and forced labor. Conditions for domestic workers are of
particular concern. A regional Gulf Cooperation Council unified contract for
domestic workers, expected to be approved in early 2014, falls short of the minimum
standards outlined in the Domestic Workers Convention that the
International Labour Organization adopted in 2011.
International Actors
Two European Parliament resolutions strongly criticized Bahrain’s human rights
record, as did a joint statement supported by 47 states in September 2013 at the United Nations Human Rights Council in Geneva. The United Kingdom and
the United States, key allies of Bahrain, joined the HRC statement but generally
failed to criticize publicly abusive steps taken by Bahrain in 2013. The European
Union failed to use its collective weight in actively and publically pressing for
the immediate and unconditional release of imprisoned Bahraini activists,
three of whom are dual nationals of Bahrain and EU member states. In August,
media reported that Britain was in talks with Bahrain over the sale of 12
Typhoon jets.