Bahrain
Human rights conditions in Bahrain deteriorated sharply in the latter half of 2010.
Starting in mid-August authorities detained an estimated 250 persons, including
nonviolent critics of the government, and shut down websites and publications of
legal opposition political societies.
Authorities detained 25 of the most prominent opposition activists and accused
many of them of “spreading false information” and “meeting with outside organizations.”
Some rights activists were among those held and allegedly tortured.
Authorities prevented detainees from meeting with their lawyers prior to the first
session of their trial, and allowed only extremely brief meetings with some family
members.
This crackdown came after months of street protests, which often involved burning
tires and throwing stones and Molotov cocktails. Among the first people
arrested were activists who had just participated in a public meeting in London
where they criticized Bahrain’s human rights record.
The main exception to these dismal human rights developments involved
improved protections for migrant workers.
Torture and Ill-Treatment
Almost all of the 25 prominent activists–whose trial began on October 28–told
the court, some in considerable detail, that they had been subjected to torture.
Lawyers able to attend the public prosecutor’s pretrial interrogations of clients
said that in some cases they observed marks and wounds that appeared consistent
with the allegations.
A Human Rights Watch report released in February 2010 concluded that in the
2007-2009 period, the authorities regularly resorted to torture and ill-treatment
when interrogating security suspects. Officials denied these findings, but apparently
conducted no criminal investigations and ordered no disciplinary measures
against alleged perpetrators.
On March 28 an appellate court convicted 19 men of the murder of a security officer,
overturning their acquittal by a lower court in October 2009. The lower court
judge determined that there was no evidence linking them to the crimes other
than confessions that appeared to have been coerced.
Counterterrorism Measures
The government charged at least 23 of those detained in August and September
under Law 58/2006, Protecting Society from Terrorist Acts, which allows for
extended periods of detention without charge or judicial review. The United
Nations special rapporteur on human rights and counterterrorism has criticized
the law’s broad definitions of terrorism.
Freedom of Expression
In September the Information Affairs Authority blocked websites and blogs associated
with the opposition. On state-run Bahrain TV on September 20 Abdullah
Yateem, the general director of press and publications at the authority, said that
websites and bloggers had committed 12 crimes, and he specifically mentioned:
offending the person of King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa, incitement to overthrow
the government, publishing information about bomb-making, and slander and
defamation. Yateem also banned publication of the newsletters of several opposition
political societies, which are political groups the government allows, unlike
other opposition groups that have no legal status.
On September 4 Ali Abdelemam, whose popular Bahrain online blog carried information
about human rights developments, responded to a summons to appear at
the headquarters of the National Security Agency, a body that operates outside
the criminal justice system and reports directly to King Hamad. Authorities
refused his request to contact a lawyer, even at his formal interrogation. At the
opening session of the October 28 trial of 25 prominent activists, Abdulemam
said he was subjected to torture and degrading treatment.
Municipal officials ordered one Waad Party candidate in the National Assembly
election scheduled for October 23 to remove billboards with the slogan “Enough
to Corruption,” saying it was “a breach of the law” but not indicating which law. A court ruled on October 4 that the banners did not violate the law, but the government
appealed.
The Ministry of Information suspended the satellite station Al Jazeera on May 18,
the day after the channel broadcast a feature about poverty in Bahrain. On July 2,
police summoned for questioning two volunteers with the Bahrain Women’s
Association who had spoken with Al Jazeera about challenges they face being
married to non-Bahrainis.
On August 16, 2010, Al-Wasat, Bahrain’s one independent newspaper, reported
that the minister of information suspended its online audio reports. The suspension
came after several of the reports featured persons alleging mistreatment of
inmates in Jaw prison.
Freedom of Association
In April the minister of social development denied the request of the Bahrain
Human Rights Society to hold a monitoring workshop for human rights defenders
in the Gulf region, saying it would violate the association law, which prohibits
organizations from involvement in political activities. The ministry subsequently
allowed the workshop to take place in late May.
In August the ministry wrote to the Migrant Workers’ Protection Society saying
that the society’s shelter was not legally registered and would have to close. This
followed an incident in which a migrant domestic worker fled to the shelter from
the home of a high ministry official, claiming she had been abused. The society
responded by providing a copy of the government’s 2005 authorization of the
shelter, noting that in previous years the ministry had donated funds to support
the shelter.
The government continues to deny legal status to the Bahrain Center for Human
Rights (BCHR), which it ordered dissolved in 2004 after the group’s then-president
criticized the prime minister for corruption and human rights violations.
On April 5 Bahrain’s Lower Criminal Court fined Mohammad al-Maskati, president
of the Bahrain Youth Human Rights Society (BYHRS), BD500 (US$ 1,325) for operating
an unregistered NGO. The BYHRS attempted in 2005 to register with the Ministry of Social Development, as required by law, but received no response to
its application.
Human Rights Defenders
Those detained in the wave of arrests in August and September and allegedly tortured
included Abd al-Ghani al-Khanjar, spokesperson for the National Committee
for the Victims of Torture, and Muhammad Saeed al-Sahlawi, a BCHR board member.
On September 1 the pro-government daily Al Watan featured a front-page article
alleging that BCHR president Nabeel Rajab and former president Abd al-Hadi al-
Khawaja were linked to a “terrorist network” responsible for arson attacks and
plotting sabotage. A similar article appeared on the official Bahrain News Agency
website on September 4, but was removed the following day.
On September 6 Salman Kamaleddin resigned as the head of the newly established
official National Institution for Human Rights to protest the institution’s
failure to criticize the recent arrests.
On September 8–after the Bahrain Human Rights Society (BHRS) criticized the
widespread arrests and alleged torture of detainees–the Ministry of Social
Development dismissed Abdullah al-Dirazi, the group’s secretary general, dissolved
the group’s board of directors, and appointed a ministry official as “interim
director.” The minister accused the organization of “only serving one segment
of society,” communicating with illegal organizations, and conducting “secret
training” of regional rights defenders, referring to the May workshops that the
ministry expressly approved and that were well publicized at the time. The BHRS
had been the main Bahraini organization permitted to monitor parliamentary
elections scheduled for October 23; the government refused to allow international
observers.
Migrant Worker Rights
Over 460,000 migrant workers, primarily from South Asia, work in Bahrain. Many
experience prolonged periods of withheld wages, passport confiscation, unsafe housing, excessive work hours and physical abuse. Government redress mechanisms
remained largely ineffective.
In August 2009 Bahrain adopted Decision 79/2009 allowing workers to change
jobs more freely. The reform does not apply to domestic workers and many workers
remain unaware that they have the right to change employment freely.
A draft labor law circulated in May 2010 extends some rights to domestic workers,
including annual vacation and end-of-term pay, but still excludes them from provisions
mandating maximum work hours and days off. The law also creates a new
“case management” mechanism to ensure the adjudication of labor complaints
within two months, potentially making litigation a more viable option for migrant
workers seeking redress for abuses.
Women’s Rights
Bahrain’s first written personal status law (Law 19/2009), adopted in 2009,
applies only to Sunnis. Shia religious leaders demand a constitutional guarantee
that, should a separate personal status law be passed for Shias, parliament will
not be able to amend any provision of the law. Women’s groups favor a unified
law for all citizens in part because Sharia court judges—generally conservative
religious scholars with limited formal legal training—decide marriage, divorce,
custody, and inheritance cases according to their own individual readings of
Islamic jurisprudence, which consistently favor men. It remains unclear to what
extent codification has alleviated these problems for Sunni women.
Key International Actors
Bahrain hosts the headquarters of the United States Navy’s Fifth Fleet and provides
logistical support for military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan, and the
US provides military aid to Bahrain. The US initially did not publicly criticize the
government’s crackdown on civil society or other serious abuses; on October 31
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton issued a statement congratulating Bahrain for its
recent parliamentary election, but also expressing concern about “efforts in the
lead-up to the elections to restrict freedom of expression and association targeted
at civil society.”
British officials expressed little concern publicly about the sharp deterioration of
human rights conditions. One of the activists arrested in August, Jaffar al-Hasabi,
is a dual national, and it reportedly took a phone call from British Foreign
Secretary William Hague to Bahrain’s crown prince before a British consular visit
to al-Hasabi was permitted, about a month after his arrest. Bahrain publicly
called on the United Kingdom to investigate and prosecute or extradite two of
those indicted in the alleged terrorism case whom reside in London. The UK
responded that it would investigate if Bahrain provided evidence of criminal activity.
At this writing, Bahrain has provided no such evidence.