Bahrain
Bahrain’s government in 2009 continued to subject freedom of expression,
assembly, and association to arbitrary restrictions. The year saw increased confrontations
between security forces and demonstrators protesting alleged discrimination
by the Sunni-dominated government against the country’s majority Shia
population. Local rights groups accused authorities of using excessive force
against protestors and subjecting detained opposition activists to torture and illtreatment.
In March and April clashes led to the deaths of a Pakistani worker
(whose car was hit by a Molotov cocktail) and a Pakistani member of the security
forces.
On April 11, Shaikh Hamad Bin Isa al-Khalifa, Bahrain’s king, pardoned 178 opposition
activists charged with and in some cases convicted of security-related
offenses. However, the decree never appeared in the official gazette, leaving it
unclear whether charges and prison terms might be revived.
On November 10, in line with a pledge it had made to the United Nations Human
Rights Council, Bahrain established a National Institution for Human Rights, a
government body charged with reviewing and developing legislation to comply
with international human rights instruments.
Freedom of Expression and the Media
Authorities continue to use the press law (Law 47/2002) to restrict coverage of
controversial matters, including official corruption. In May 2008 the government
announced a new draft press law that would remove criminal penalties for most
journalistic infractions but appeared to retain the option of criminal penalties for
certain types of written or spoken comment, including those found to “harm
national unity.” The draft still awaits approval by the National Assembly at this
writing. Several journalists faced criminal prosecution under the current law for
articles alleging favoritism and corruption by government agencies.
Several journalists told Human Rights Watch that Ministry of Interior officials contacted
them to complain after they published articles that were even mildly critical
of government policies, and in some cases intervened to prevent publication of information. In April 2009 authorities ordered the closure of the daily Akhbar
al-Khaleej, citing violations of the press law, but lifted the ban after 24 hours.
The country’s sole residential internet service provider, Batelco, is governmentowned.
The independent Bahrain Center for Human Rights (BCHR) reported that in
2009 authorities blocked over 1,000 websites, including sites of political forums,
blogs, newspapers, and human rights organizations such as the Arab Network for
Human Rights Information.
In June 2009 the University of Bahrain, the country’s sole public university, punished
business student Noor Abbas by revoking one year of her academic record
after she circulated a statement criticizing university policies and facilities. The
university later reduced Abbas’s punishment to “three warnings,” meaning one
more infraction would result in her expulsion. Abbas consequently ceased her
student activism.
In November 2008, after several Bahraini rights and opposition activists held
meetings in Washington, DC, Interior Minister Rashid bin Abdullah al-Khalifa
threatened them with prosecution for violating article 134 of the penal code,
which states that citizens who fail to obtain government permission to attend
meetings abroad to discuss Bahraini domestic affairs may be subject to prison
terms and fines.
Freedom of Assembly
Law 32/2006 requires the organizers of any public meeting to notify the head of
Public Security at least three days in advance, and authorizes that official to
determine whether a meeting warrants police presence on the basis of “its subject
... or any other circumstance.” The law stipulates that meeting organizers are
responsible for “forbidding any speech or discussion infringing on public order or
morals,” but leaves “public order or morals” undefined.
The BCHR reported that authorities forced the Al-Attar Center to cancel an August
2009 event at which several opposition leaders were scheduled to speak. Interior
Ministry officials informed the center’s president that they would deploy security
forces to stop the event, and pressured the administrator to sign a statement taking personal responsibility if the event was held. On the day of the event, security
forces prevented anyone from approaching the center.
Civil Society and Freedom of Association
The government continues to deny legal status to the BCHR, which it ordered to
be dissolved in 2004 after its then-president accused the prime minister of corruption
and human rights violations. Several other groups, including the National
Committee for the Unemployed and the Bahrain Youth Human Rights Society
(BYHRS), attempted in 2005 to register with the Ministry of Social Development,
as required by law, but at this writing have received no response to their applications.
As of October 2009, Muhammad al-Maskati, president of the BYHRS, was
facing up to six months in jail and/or a fine on charges related to working for an
unrecognized association.
In 2007 the Ministry of Social Development drafted new legislation on civil society
organizations, but at this writing the ministry has not yet submitted the draft to
parliament. The draft law contains some improvements over the existing Law
21/1989, but includes numerous provisions incompatible with international standards.
A version of the draft law circulated in November 2007 authorizes the
Ministry of Social Development to close any organization for up to 60 days without
a court order if it deems the organization to have violated any Bahraini law,
including the associations law.
Bahrain has ratified some International Labour Organization conventions, but neither
of the two core conventions governing freedom of association. Law 33/2002
permits workers to form and join trade unions.Contrary to recommendations of
the ILO Committee on Freedom of Association, a November 2006 edict by the
prime minister remains in force prohibiting strikes in numerous sectors of the
economy on the grounds that they provide essential services.
Migrant Worker Rights
There are an estimated 462,139 migrant workers in Bahrain, primarily from South
Asia. In May 2009 Minister of Labor Majeed al-Alawi announced a proposed revision
to Bahrain’s kafala (sponsorship) system designed to reduce the risk of exploitation and abuse of migrant workers. The former system tied migrants’ work
visas and immigration status to their employers, enabling employer abuses and
preventing workers from changing jobs or leaving the country. Under the amended
law, which was adopted on August 1, the government officially sponsors each
worker, allowing him or her to more easily change employers. At this writing it
remains unclear whether the reform has been fully implemented. Bahrain’s business
community strongly opposed the changes, and workers still need the de
facto sponsorship of an individual or company in order to remain in the country
legally. Migrant workers complain that some employers illegally withhold passports
and fail to pay wages.
The amended law excludes migrant domestic workers, who are at especially high
risk of abuse due to their isolation in private homes. In 2009 prominent cases
involved physical abuse, forced confinement, and the death of domestic workers.
Women’s Rights
In May 2009 Bahrain passed its first written personal status law (Law 19/2009),
but it applies only to Sunnis. Shia religious scholars demand a constitutional
guarantee that the personal status law cannot be amended, while women’s
groups are pressing for a unified personal status law for all citizens. The government
said that it is working toward social consensus in order to pass a personal
status law applicable to Shia as well.
Sharia court judges—generally conservative religious scholars with limited formal
legal training—decide marriage, divorce, custody, and inheritance cases according
to their individual reading of Islamic jurisprudence and without reference to
codified law. They consistently favor men in their rulings and are unapologetically
adverse to women’s equality. It remains unclear whether codification has alleviated
these problems for Sunni women.
In July 2009 the semi-official Supreme Council for Women launched a campaign
calling for equal nationality rights. Article 4 of the Citizenship Law of 1963 does
not allow Bahraini women married to non-Bahraini men to pass on their nationality
to their children, discriminating against more than 2,000 families in Bahrain.
The king endorsed Law 35/2009, which mandates that children of Bahraini women married to non-Bahrainis pay the same fees as citizens for government
services such as health, education, and accommodation.
Counterterrorism Measures
In August 2006 the king signed into law the “Protecting Society from Terrorist
Acts” bill, despite concerns expressed by the UN special rapporteur on human
rights while countering terrorism that it contained excessively broad definitions of
terrorism and terrorist acts. The law also allows for extended periods of detention
without charge or judicial review.
In February 2009 judicial authorities charged several high-profile opposition figures
under the counterterrorism law. They were among those freed as a result of
the king’s April pardon.
Torture and Ill-Treatment
Local rights groups reported numerous allegations of due process violations,
including 11 televised confessions that appeared to have been coerced. The government
denied that officials had subjected any detainees to torture or inhumane
treatment. In its submission to the UN Human Rights Council’s Universal Periodic
Review mechanism in April 2008, Bahrain stated that “there are no cases of torture
in the kingdom.”
Decree 56/2002, which confers immunity from investigation or prosecution on
government officials alleged to be responsible for torture and other serious
human rights abuses committed prior to 2001, remains on the books.
Key International Actors
Bahrain hosts the headquarters of the United States Navy’s Fifth Fleet and provides
logistical support for military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Labor Rights
Egypt witnessed waves of protests and unauthorized strikes throughout 2009,
from textile workers in Mahalla and Menoufia demanding better pay, to public
transit drivers demanding exemption from high traffic fines. Security officials
harassed strike leaders, and employers threatened reprisals. Under Egyptian
Labor Law No. 35/1975, the official Egyptian Trade Union Federation (ETUF) or the
government must approve all strikes.
Egyptian labor law also prohibits the formation of any union not sanctioned by
the government, and requires workers to be members of the ETUF. In December
2008 real estate tax collectors who had successfully conducted several strikes
voted to establish an independent trade union. In April 2009 the Ministry of
Finance implicitly recognized the union by approving the Real Estate Tax Authority
(RETA) application to establish a Social Care Fund, which provides retirement benefits
to union members. Members, however, have been subjected to harassment
and intimidation, systematic attempts to discredit union leaders, and arrests of
members and restrictions on their movement. In August, in response to a complaint
by ETUF president Hussein Megawer, the Office of the Public Prosecutor
summoned RETA president Kamal Abu Eita for questioning.
Torture and Ill-Treatment
Police and security forces regularly engage in torture and brutality in police stations
and detention centers, and at points of arrest. On May 17, 2009, two state
security officers pushed Fares Barakat off a fourth-floor balcony when he asked to
see an arrest warrant. In hospital intensive care Barakat was handcuffed to his
bed.
In August police arrested Rajai Mounir Sultan, who has mental disabilities, as he
walked along the beach in Alexandria. They beat him at the police station, fracturing
his skull. On November 7 the Alexandria criminal court sentenced Col. Akram
Soliman to five years’ imprisonment and a fine of 10,000 Egyptian pounds
(US$1,838) for using excessive force and causing Sultan permanent disability.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
Egypt still lacks a legal environment that protects women from violence, encourages
victims to report attacks, or deters perpetrators from committing abuses. A
2009 survey by the National Council for Women, a government-sponsored
women’s group, found that 62.6 percent of women suffer domestic violence and
that four out of five men admit being violent toward their spouse. In July 2009, in
a positive step, the government delivered informational booklets on sexual
harassment to mosques across the country, but women’s groups in Egypt have
called for additional measures including legislation.
In August 2009 authorities for the first time arrested and charged a man for circumcising
a young girl, under a 2008 law criminalizing the practice.
HIV/AIDS and Privacy Rights
In January 2009 police in Cairo arrested 10 men on suspicion of having consensual
sex with other men, forcibly tested them for HIV, beat them, and charged them
with the “habitual practice of debauchery”—interpreted in Egyptian law to include
criminalizing consensual sex between adult men.
Freedom of Religion
Although Egypt’s constitution provides for equal rights without regard to religion,
discrimination against Egyptian Christians, and official intolerance of Baha’is,
some Muslim sects, and Muslims who convert to Christianity continue. In a positive
move, however, on March 9 the Ministry of Interior issued a decree allowing
Baha’is and other adherents of “non-recognized” religions to obtain essential
identification documents without having to misidentify themselves as Muslims or
Christians.
On several days in March, scores of men in the village of al-Shuraniya, in Sohag,
attacked the homes of Baha’is, throwing rocks and Molotov cocktails. The police
dispersed the crowds but did not make any arrests. Disputes between Muslim
and Christian Egyptians flared into violent clashes on several occasions, resulting
in deaths and injuries as well as destruction of property. In May a fight between Muslims and Christians in Bulak al-Dakrour quickly escalated into a shoot-out
that injured several people. Authorities used the emergency law to arrest those
involved in clashes, but failed to fully investigate many incidents.
Refugees and Migrants
As of November, Egyptian border guards in 2009 had shot dead 16 migrants
attempting to cross the Sinai border into Israel. An Egyptian official in September
said this policy was to deter migrants from approaching the border.
Egypt continues to detain refugees and migrants and charge them with illegal
entry before military courts that do not meet international fair trial standards.
Egypt still denies officials of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
access to detained refugees and migrants, preventing them from making asylum
claims. Authorities also continued to deport refugees and migrants without
assessing their protection needs. In December 2008 and January 2009, Egypt violated
the international prohibition against refoulement by forcibly repatriating at
least 45 Eritreans.
Key International Actors
The United States remains Egypt’s largest donor, but significantly reduced its
funding for democracy and human rights in 2009. The United States also agreed
to Egyptian demands not to directly fund unregistered organizations. On August
18 President Mubarak visited Washington, DC for the first time in four years.
On June 4 President Barack Obama chose the occasion of a speech at Cairo
University to declare US intent to rebuild a relationship of trust with the Muslim
world.