Bosnia and Herzegovina
Entrenched ethnic divisions among the political elites in Bosnia continue
to shape political and human rights developments in the country.
While ethnic violence has for the most part ended, ongoing ethnic divisions
among Bosnia’s constituent peoples – Bosniacs (Bosnian Muslims),
Serbs, and Croats – continue to impede progress in key human rights
areas, such as war crimes accountability and the return of refugees and
displaced persons.
War Crimes Accountability
For the first time in years, the NATO-led Stabilization Force (SFOR)
did not arrest a single Bosnian citizen indicted before the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in 2004.
Nevertheless, SFOR intensified efforts to arrest Bosnian Serb wartime
leader Radovan Karadzic, conducting several operations near Sarajevo
and in remote mountain villages in the east of the country, where
Karadzic was believed to be hiding. SFOR also arrested several individuals
believed to belong to the network of persons who were helping
Karadzic hide. Still, Karadzic remained at large as of October 2004.
Leading political and military figures in the wartime Croatian Republic
of Herzeg-Bosnia – Jadranko Prlic, Bruno Stojic, Slobodan Praljak,
Milivoj Petkovic, Valentin Coric, and Berislav Pusic – surrendered to
the Tribunal on April 5, 2004. They are charged with crimes against
humanity and war crimes committed against Bosnian Muslims in
Western Bosnia and Herzegovina during the early 1990s.
Although officials in Republika Srpska (the majority Serb area of
Bosnia) repeatedly agreed to cooperate with the ICTY, Republika
Srpska continued to be the only area of the former Yugoslavia that has
not surrendered a single war crimes indictee to the Tribunal. On
October 15, 2004, the Republika Srpska Commission on Srebrenica submitted to the Republika Srpska government a report concerning the
1995 events in Srebrenica and acknowledged for the first time that the
Bosnian Serb Army had been responsible for the killing of more than
seven thousand Bosniac men and boys. Republika Srpska authorities had
previously claimed that only one hundred Bosniacs had been executed
and that another 1,900 had died in combat or from exhaustion.
Local officials in each entity of Bosnia remain unwilling to prosecute
members of the ethnic majority in their region for war crimes.
Hundreds, possibly thousands, of war crimes committed in Republika
Srpska have yet to be investigated and tried before the Republika Srpska
courts. In May 2004, Republika Srpska opened the first war crimes trial
ever against ethnic Serbs; eleven Serbs are accused of the illegal detention
of Catholic priest Tomislav Matanovic in 1995, who was later
found murdered. In the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (the
Bosniac majority area), there have been more indictments against members
of the local ethnic majority, but these efforts have been plagued by
a lack of support on the part of police and political elites, as well as poor
cooperation between the countries in the region and entities in Bosnia
and Herzegovina on judicial matters, and a lack of witness protection
mechanisms.
At the end of 2004, the process of establishing a special war crimes
chamber, as part of the State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, was
nearing completion. The chamber, which is to be based in the Bosnian
capital Sarajevo, is expected to try the most serious war crimes cases. As
of October, however, the position of the special war crimes prosecutor
had not yet been established.
Return of Refugees and Displaced Persons
According to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), as of the end of August 2004, 1,001,520 out of a total of
more than 2 million people forcibly displaced during the war had returned to their home areas. Of these, 445,735 persons had returned to
municipalities where they currently constitute an ethnic minority.
UNHCR hailed the figures as a sign of success. However, these statistics
would appear to show that the results of ethnic cleansing in the
country remain largely intact.
The sharp decrease in minority returns that began in 2003 continued in
2004. Between January and the end of August, UNHCR registered
11,529 minority returns to pre-war homes, two-thirds less than in the
same period in 2003. This trend reveals that, nine or more years after
they initially fled, a decreasing number of people are willing to return
to their pre-war homes. Limited economic opportunities in the areas of
return, aggravated by ethnic discrimination in employment, are a principal
impediment to return. What is more, nine years after the war
ended, the homes of tens of thousands of families who had expressed a
desire to return have yet to be repaired.
Key International Actors
The Office of the High Representative (OHR), which oversees civilian
aspects of the 1995 Dayton Peace Accords, stepped up its efforts to
advance the process of war crimes accountability. The OHR played a
key role in establishing the special war crimes chamber in Bosnia’s State
Court and in drafting the legislation on witness protection, use of ICTY
evidence in domestic proceedings, and the Office of the State Court
Prosecutor, which was introduced in the Bosnian parliament in October
2004.
The ICTY issued a series of important, and in some cases controversial,
judgments in cases arising from the war in Bosnia in 2004. Other
important trials commenced or reached an advanced stage during the
year. On April 19, the Appeals Chamber of the ICTY confirmed an earlier
finding by a trial chamber that in July 1995, Serb forces had committed
genocide in Srebrenica. The Appeals Chamber sentenced Bosnian Serb Army General Radislav Krstic to thirty-five years of
imprisonment. A trial chamber in the case of Bosnian Serb Radoslav
Brdjanin, however, found that no genocide had occurred in 1992 in the
area of Krajina, where Serb forces killed hundreds of Muslim and Croat
civilians and expelled hundreds of thousands. In another controversial
decision, on July 29, the Appeals Chamber reversed the majority of the
trial chamber’s March 2000 conviction of Bosnian Croat Tihomir
Blaskic and reduced his sentence to nine years. He had initially been
sentenced to forty-five years of imprisonment. While ICTY decisions
have sometimes caused at least initial perplexity among some victim
groups in Bosnia, the integrity of the proceedings before the tribunal
and the legal reasoning underlying its decisions remained remarkable.
Other ICTY judgments in 2004 include the ten year prison sentence for
Miroslav Deronjic, a Bosnian Serb guilty of crimes against humanity in
eastern Bosnia in 1992, and the eighteen year prison sentence for Ranko
Cesic, another Bosnian Serb, for crimes against humanity and war
crimes committed in 1992 in the Luka prison camp near Brcko.
The court also tried two major cases against accused Bosnian Muslims.
On July 23, the prosecution presented its closing argument and concluded
its case against Bosnian Muslim generals Enver Hadzihasanovic
and Amir Kubura, both charged with war crimes against Bosnian Croats
and Serbs in Central Bosnia in 1993-94 The trial of Naser Oric, commander
of the forces of the Army of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
Srebrenica area, for crimes against Serb civilians, began on October 6.
Along with the OHR, the ICTY initiated the establishment of the special
war crimes chamber in Bosnia’s State Court. In September, the
Office of the Prosecutor made a motion to refer the cases against
Bosnian Serbs Zeljko Mejakic, Momcilo Gruban, Dusko Knezevic, and
Dusan Fustar, regarding the Omarska and Keraterm detention camps in
northwestern Bosnia, to the war crimes chamber. The president of the
ICTY requested additional information from the Office of the Prosecutor on the ability of Bosnia and Herzegovina to provide fair trials
before a competent court.
In June, the E.U. Council approved European Partnership, a document
detailing short- and medium-term priorities for Bosnia and
Herzegovina‘s preparations for further integration with the E.U., which
had been identified in the European Commission’s 2004 Annual Report.
The human rights objectives, which serve as a checklist against which to
measure progress, include: assuming full organizational and financial
responsibility for the 2004 municipal elections; creating an effective
judiciary (including establishing a single High Judicial and Prosecutorial
Council for Bosnia and Herzegovina); adopting and bringing into force
outstanding legislation supporting refugee returns; completing the
transfer of the human rights bodies to Bosnian control; making progress
on the merger of the State and Entity Ombudsmen; and, full cooperation
with the ICTY, particularly on the part of Republika Srpska. On
October 4, the Commission praised the conduct of the municipal elections
and declared that Bosnia had fulfilled this political condition from
the Partnership.
The E.U. police mission to Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUPM) continues
the international policing operation in the country, which it took over
from the United Nations in the beginning of 2003. At the June 28-29
summit in Istanbul, NATO announced that an E.U.-led peacekeeping
force (EUFOR) would replace its Stabilization Force (SFOR) before the
end of 2004. On July 12, the E.U. Council indicated formally that,
beginning in December 2004, the E.U. would conduct a peacekeeping
operation in Bosnia in order to contribute to a safe and secure environment
in the country.