Bosnia and Herzegovina
There was progress on accountability for war crimes from the armed conflict of the
first half of the 1990s, including through domestic prosecutions. However, the
number of refugees and displaced persons returning to their areas of origin continues
to decline.
War Crimes Accountability
Improved Bosnian official cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), including by Republika Srpska, delivered concrete
results in 2007. Bosnias War Crimes Chamber continued successfully to pursue
its mandate of prosecuting those responsible for war atrocities. Nonetheless,
there are concerns regarding the chamber prosecutions prioritization of cases,
excessive use of closed sessions (justified on witness protection grounds), and
inadequate public outreach.
Bosnian collaboration with Serbian authorities and the European Union peacekeeping
force in Bosnia (EUFOR) resulted in the arrest of indicted Bosnian Serb
army general Zdravko Tolimir in May and his transfer to the ICTY. The two most
wanted ICTY indictees, Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic, remain at large, however.
Dragan Zelenovic pled guilty and was sentenced to 15 years imprisonment
by the ICTY in April for the rape and torture of Bosniak (Bosnian Muslim) women
and girls in the Foca area. The ICTY Appeals Chamber reduced the sentences of
Radoslav Brdjanin (convicted of failing to prevent war crimes against Bosniak and
Croat civilians) and Vidoje Blagojevic (convicted for crimes against humanity at
Srebrenica) in April and May, respectively.
In Bosnias War Crimes Chamber defendants included former Yugoslav Army commander
Marko Samardzija; Gojko Jankovic, the former commander of Republika
Srpska military units operating in Foca; and 11 members of the Serbian special
police and military charged with genocide over the Srebrenica massacre. Gojko
Klickovic, former prime minister of Republika Srpska, was extradited to Bosnia
from Serbia in June 2007. Klickovic is charged with crimes against humanity.
In May Radovan Stankovic, the first indictee to be transferred from the ICTY to
Bosnia, escaped while being transferred to hospital. Stankovic was serving a 20
year sentence for crimes against Bosniak civilians in the Foca area, following his
November 2006 conviction by the Bosnian chamber. At this writing he remains at
large.
The ICTY transferred five cases to the chamber for trial during 2007, including that
of Milorad Trbic, charged with involvement in the Srebrenica genocide. But the
ICTY Appeals Chamber ruled in July 2007 against the transfer of the case of Milan
and Sredoje Lukic for their alleged role in the killings of civilians in the Visegrad
area, reversing an earlier decision. The court cited the enormity of crimes committed
and possible distress to victims if the case was transferred.
War crimes prosecutions also continue in the Federation cantonal courts (26
cases at this writing), Republika Srpska district courts (nine cases), and Brcko
special area court (one case). Local prosecutors and judges are increasingly
proactive in investigating and prosecuting war crimes, but remain hampered by
weak witness protection, a lack of funding, and limited political and public support.
The unwillingness of the Banja Luka court (Republika Srpska) to classify
wartime sexual crimes as war crimes drew criticism domestically.
The number of lawsuits filed in the Republika Srpska and Federation courts
against both entities for compensation for wartime death and injury continue to
grow. Neither entity has a strategy to systematically address the thousands of
claims.
On February 26 the International Court of Justice ruled that the Serbian government
was not directly responsible for genocide during the Bosnian war (see chapter
on Serbia). Bosnian victims associations were dismayed at the verdict and
staged a number of peaceful protests.
The whereabouts of approximately 13,000 missing persons from the war remain
unknown. The majority are Bosniak. Mass graves containing 200 victims of the
Srebrenica massacre, including children, were discovered in September.
Return of Refugees and Displaced Persons
As of June more than 134,000 Bosnians remain internally displaced. The United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) registered around 1,250 IDP
and 300 refugee returns during the first half of 2007, around half the number from
the same period in 2006. The majority of returning refugees in 2007 were
Bosniak, while most returning IDPs were Bosniaks or Bosnian Serbs.
Not all of those registered as returning remained permanently, especially in areas
where the returnees ethnic group is now in a minority. Limited economic opportunity
and perceptions of insecurity provide part of the explanation. Anti-minority
violence remained sporadic, but in some instancessuch as the violent assault in
July on Bosnian Serb Bishop Hrizostom in Bosanski Petrovac, for which no one
has yet been chargedit undermines confidence in return. Property repossessions
by pre-war owners under a national restitution scheme increased, but most
minority returnees then sell their property, particularly in urban areas.
Many of those who remain displaced lacked property before the war. Despite government
housing schemes in 30 municipalities aimed at displaced persons, lack
of housing remains an obstacle to return. Approximately 7,000 IDPs still live in
collective centers, some of which are sub-standard.
Roma refugees in Bosnia, the majority of whom come from Kosovo, remain vulnerable
and dependent on periodic extensions of their temporary protection status.
Citizenship and National Security
The Bosnian commission established to review wartime decisions on the naturalization
of foreign citizens continues its work. At this writing around 1,300 cases
have been reviewed, with around 500 individuals stripped of Bosnian citizenship,
including some 350 of North African origin who came during the war. While the
process is said to be motivated solely by concerns over irregularities in naturalization
decisions, it is clearly linked to concerns about the presence in Bosnia of
Islamist radicals with links to terrorism.
Many appealed against loss of their citizenship and were allowed to remain in
Bosnia pending the outcome. At this writing none has been deported. National and international human rights organizations expressed concern that Bosnia
lacks adequate safeguards against risk of return to serious human rights abuse,
including torture or ill-treatment, for those subject to deportation.
The six Algerian national security suspects illegally transferred to Guantanamo
Bay in 2002 with the complicity of the Bosnian authorities remain there at this
writing. In May 2007 the men (four of whom are Bosnian citizens) filed a claim
against Bosnia in the European Court of Human Rights for failing to intervene on
their behalf with the United States government, resulting in ongoing human rights
violations.
Police Decertification
In April 2007 the United Nations Security Council agreed to terms under which
598 Bosnian police officers disqualified from service on the grounds of alleged
involvement in human rights abuses could reapply for police jobs. The decision
followed concerns expressed by the Council of Europes Venice Commission and
commissioner for human rights that the decertification process lacked transparency
and a meaningful appeals system. Decertified former police seeking
reappointment must admit to the previous decertification when applying for a
new position.
In July the international high representative dismissed Republika Srpska senior
police officer Dragomir Adnan for using his position to protect fugitives, and 35
other police officers for their alleged role in the Srebrenica massacre.
Human Rights Defenders
The killing in February of Dusko Kondor, co-founder of the Helsinki Committee for
Human Rights in Republika Srpska, in a machine gun attack carried out by local
gangsters, in which his daughter was also severely injured, was viewed with
alarm among Bosnian human rights defenders. Although the attack appeared
unrelated to Kondors human rights work, colleagues claimed that the police
failed to give him adequate protection, despite requests for assistance following
earlier threats. The trial of persons accused of involvement in Kondors death is
ongoing at this writing.
In March the Ministry of Justice simplified the requirements for nongovernmental
organization registration at state level.
Key International Actors
The mandate of the international high representative was extended to June 2008,
reversing a plan by the Peace Implementation Council to end it in June 2007 and
retain only an EU special representative with limited powers. In July Slovak diplomat
Miroslav Lajcak was appointed to both positions.
Bosnias negotiations with the EU for a Stabilization and Association Agreement
(SAA) remained stalled due to unresolved issues concerning police, public broadcasting,
and public administration reform. The EU peacekeeping force in Bosnia
was reduced from 6,000 to 2,500 in December 2006 in light of an improved security
situation. The mandate of the EU Monitoring Mission (EUMM) expires in
December 2007.
In May Bosnia was elected to the UN Human Rights Council. Members are
required to uphold the highest standards in the promotion and protection of
human rights.
To its credit, the government of Bosnia and Herzegovina agreed in June to publish
the report of the Council of Europes Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT)
following their March visit. The report published in July noted the failure to segregate
dangerous prisoners and some incidents of mistreatment of prisoners by
prison guards, and inadequate provisions and safeguards for juvenile and mentally
ill offenders.