Bosnia and Herzegovina
The legacy of the 1992-95 war in Bosnia and Herzegovina continued to define the
key human rights challenges during 2006, with war crimes accountability and the
rights of former refugees and displaced persons the most pressing concerns.
While nationalist parties lost some ground in the October 2006 elections, the
election of Bosnian Muslim and Serb nationalists to the country’s three-person
presidency threatened to continue the dangerous rhetoric of the pre-election period.
The presidency’s Muslim representative Haris Silajdzic called for the dissolution
of the two entities that make up Bosnia (Republika Srpska and the
Federation), while Milorad Dodik, the Republika Srpska prime minister and head
of the party holding the Serb seat on the presidency, called for Republika
Srpska’s self-determination. The international community’s high representative in
Bosnia responded by threatening to remove Dodik from office should he call a
mooted referendum on the issue.
War Crimes Accountability
During 2006 the specialized war crimes chamber within the Bosnian State Court
began to hear cases referred from the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). The ICTY has transferred five cases (involving nine accused)
since September 2005 as part of its completion strategy. In June 2006 the United
States extradited two Bosnian Serbs accused of war crimes in Srebrenica in July
1995 for trial by the State Court.
At this writing, the Bosnian war crimes chamber was hearing 18 cases, some
involving multiple suspects, including 11 Bosnian Serbs charged with genocide
relating to Srebrenica. The chamber delivered judgments in four cases during
2006. In October its conviction of Nedjo Samardzic for war crimes was overturned
by the appeal chamber and a retrial ordered.
The district courts in Republika Srpska continued to try war crimes cases, albeit at
a slow pace. Only two of the entity’s five district courts—Banja Luka and
Trebinje— were hearing war crimes cases (one in each court) at this writing. In the Federation, war crimes trials continued at a faster pace, with half of its 10 cantonal
courts hearing cases during 2006.
The efforts of cantonal and district courts to prosecute war crimes continue to be
hindered by lack of support from the public, under-resourcing, and witness cooperation
issues: victims are generally reluctant to travel to another entity’s courts
to testify against the accused, and entity-level witness protection schemes need
developing. But the non-availability of suspects remains the biggest impediment
to accountability.
Many war crimes suspects are Bosnian Serbs and Croats now resident as citizens
in Serbia and Croatia. The constitutions of these countries prohibit extradition of
their citizens. Bosnia refused to sign up to a September 2006 agreement between
Croatia and Serbia that would facilitate prosecutions in the country of residence,
insisting that defendants be tried in the country where the crimes took place.
At this writing, the Bosnian authorities during 2006 had not apprehended any
persons indicted by the ICTY. Five indictees remain at large, including Radovan
Karadzic and Ratko Mladic.
In March the ICTY sentenced Bosnian Muslim Gens. Enver Hadzihasanovic and
Amir Kubura to five and three-and-a-half years’ imprisonment respectively for failing
to prevent crimes against Croats and Serbs in central Bosnia. It sentenced
Bosnian Croat Ivica Rajic to 12 years’ imprisonment in May after he pleaded guilty
to war crimes committed against Bosnian Muslims in Stupni Do village in October
1993. In July 2006 the ICTY sentenced Bosnian Muslim Naser Oric to two years’
imprisonment for crimes against Bosnian Serbs in Srebrenica during 1992 and
1993. In September it sentenced high-ranking Bosnian Serb wartime official
Momcilo Krajisnik to 27 years in prison for crimes against humanity across
Bosnia, but acquitted him of genocide.
The ICTY Appeals Chamber affirmed in May the convictions and sentences of
Bosnian Croat commanders Mladen Naletilic and Vinko Martinovic for crimes
against Bosnian Muslims in the Mostar area. In March the Appeals Chamber confirmed
the conviction of Milomir Stakic, a Bosnian Serb wartime official in
Prijedor, for crimes committed there in 1992, but reduced his life sentence to 40
years’ imprisonment.
In June 2006 the Russian Federation extradited Bosnian Serb ICTY indictee
Dragan Zelenovic to Bosnia, which transferred him to the ICTY the same month.
Return of Refugees and Displaced Persons
The annual numbers of refugees and displaced persons returning to their homes
continue to decline. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
registered 2,946 such returns by July 31, 2006, compared to 5,059 by the same
point in 2005. Around half of more than two million people displaced during the
war have registered return to their pre-war homes, around 450,000 of them to
areas where they now constitute an ethnic minority. But the actual numbers of
returns are much smaller: a 2005 field study by the Bosnian Helsinki Committee
for Human Rights indicated that fewer than half of those registered as returnees
actually live in their pre-war places of residence.
The situation for those returning to areas where they now constitute a minority
remains the most difficult. Cases of harassment and attack against minority
returnees increased in the pre-election period. There was also evidence of public
and private sector employment discrimination against minority returnees. Other
obstacles included insufficient funds to reconstruct destroyed properties, and
lack of access to social and medical benefits.
Citizenship and National Security
The formation in March of a state commission to examine more than 1,000 decisions
to grant citizenship to foreign nationals since 1992 raised human rights
concerns. Suspicions on the part of the Bosnian and foreign governments that a
number of naturalized Bosnian citizens may be involved in terrorism provided the
impetus for its establishment. Many of those under scrutiny are Arab and other
Muslims who arrived during the war, either to fight for Bosnian Muslim forces or
work in Islamic charities. Human rights groups are concerned that the commission’s
decisions and the lack of effective procedural safeguards may put individuals
at risk of return to places where they could face torture or persecution. To
date, the commission has revoked the citizenship of 92 perso In his June report on European states’ involvement in “extraordinary renditions”
by the CIA, Dick Marty, rapporteur of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe, found that Bosnia had deliberately assisted in the 2002 rendition of six
Algerian terrorism suspects to United States custody at Guantanamo.
Human Rights Defenders
In February 2006 the staff of the independent Research and Documentation
Center were threatened through an anonymous phone call and warned to stop
their analysis on war-related deaths. The center’s downward revision of the number
of wartime casualties has drawn criticism from Bosnian Muslims, the war’s
principal victims.
Key International Actors
In January 2006, Bosnia and Herzegovina began the first round of negotiations
with the European Union on a Stabilization and Association agreement (SAA), a
precursor to eventual membership. Despite initial signals from Brussels that the
SAA talks could be concluded by the end of 2006, the limited progress on reform
assessed in the European Commission’s November progress report on Bosnia
made agreement unlikely within that timeframe. The EU continues to give an
insufficient focus to domestic war crimes prosecutions in its relations with
Bosnia.
Also in January, Christian Schwarz-Schilling replaced Paddy Ashdown as the international
community’s (and the EU’s) high representative to Bosnia and
Herzegovina. He did not fulfill his promise to exercise his powers in a more limited
manner than his predecessor: during the summer, Schwarz-Schilling lifted
bans on individuals holding public office imposed by previous high representatives.
In June he imposed amendments to the law on the transfer of cases from
the ICTY to Bosnia, and to Bosnia’s criminal procedure code (extending detention
time limits). In September he appointed a special envoy to resolve outstanding
issues in ethnically divided Mostar, as well as warning Dodik over calls for a referendum.
In June the Peace Implementation Council (PIC, which represents 55 governments
and agencies), announced that the office of High Representative would be abolished
by June 2007, and replaced by the office of the European Union’s Special
Representative (EUSR) with much more limited powers. The PIC will review and
confirm its decision in early 2007.
In January 2006 EU peacekeeping force in Bosnia (EUFOR) personnel killed the
wife of war crime suspect Dragomir Abazovic as they sought to arrest him in
Rogatica; Abazovic and his 11-year-old son were wounded in the operation.
EUFOR officials claimed that Abazovic, his wife and son fired first and that
Abazovic’s head wound was self-inflicted. EUFOR said it was acting on an arrest
warrant from Sarajevo Cantonal Court. The case was later taken up by the State
Court, which released Abazovic from custody in February without charge. EUFOR
had previously been criticized for failing to apprehend any war crime suspects.
In September the United States announced the withdrawal from Bosnia of its
remaining 150 NATO soldiers by the end of 2006, leaving peacekeeping entirely in
the hands of the EU. In October EU defense ministers agreed at a meeting in
Finland to reduce their force numbers in Bosnia and Herzegovina to about 1,500
from the current 6,000 personnel, but did not set a date for the reduction.