Bosnia and Herzegovina
While a number of themes unrelated to the 1992-95 war in Bosnia and
Herzegovina—including prison conditions, rights of asylum seekers, and
implementation of libel laws—received attention during 2005, war crimes
accountability and the return of persons displaced by the war remained the
key human rights issues in the country.
War Crimes Accountability
Republika Srpska (the Serb-majority entity) for the first time transferred war
crimes indictees to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). On January 15, 2005, Bosnian Serb authorities transferred
Savo Todovic, former deputy commander in a detention camp in Foca,
to the tribunal. Gojko Jankovic, also charged in relation to crimes against
Bosnian Muslims in Foca, surrendered to Bosnian Serb authorities on March
13. Finally, Sredoje Lukic, charged with crimes against Bosnian Muslims in
Visegrad in 1992, surrendered on September 14. Todovic had been in hiding
in Serbia, while Jankovic and Lukic had been living in Russia. The circumstances
surrounding their surrender in Republika Srpska remain unknown.
On October 9 and 10, 2005, Republika Srpska police raided several buildings
in Banja Luka, Kotor Varos and Celinac, ostensibly in an attempt to apprehend
war crimes indictee Stojan Zupljanin.
Six war crimes trials took place in Republika Srpska during the year, more
than in the entire period since the end of the war. While still insufficient,
recent efforts to prosecute war crimes suspects in the Bosnian Serb entity
may indicate a change in the decade-long policy of impunity. Two war crimes
trials were completed in Banja Luka, the capital of Republika Srpska; three
war crimes trials were ongoing in Trebinje and one in Banja Luka at year’s
end. In all but one trial the defendants were Bosnian Serbs. Republika Srpska
also arrested sixteen Bosnian Serb war crimes suspects in June, September,
and November 2005, at the request of the Bosnian State Prosecutor and cantonal
prosecutors in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (the Bosniacand
Croat-majority entity).
The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina held twenty trials against suspects
of various ethnicities during 2005. A major impediment to successful
war crimes prosecutions in the Federation was the non-availability of Bosnian
Croat and Serb suspects who had fled to Croatia and Serbia after the war and
received citizenship there. The constitutions of Croatia and Serbia prohibit
extradition of their nationals to other countries.
Availability of the accused is likely to be the greatest challenge to the effective
functioning of the newly established special war crimes chamber, based
in the Bosnian capital Sarajevo as part of the State Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The chamber became operative in 2005, and the first case,
against Boban Simsic, a Bosnian Serb, began on September 14.
Return of Refugees and Displaced Persons
With the exception of a few areas in Republika Srpska (Prijedor, Doboj,
Janja) and the Federation (Drvar, Bugojno, Stolac), the current figures on the
return of refugees and displaced persons in the country appear too small to
reverse the effects of the wartime ethnic cleansing. According to the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), as of the end of
September 2005, just over a million, out of a total of more than two million
people forcibly displaced during the war, had returned to their home areas.
Of these, 453,464 persons had returned to municipalities where they currently
constitute an ethnic minority (so-called “minority returns”). However,
both the local authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina and respected human
rights activists argued during the year that the official figures grossly exaggerate
the actual number of minority returns, because, according to a field
survey by the Bosnian Helsinki Committee for Human Rights, fewer than
half of those who repossessed their properties and registered as returnees
remained to actually live in their pre-war places of residence.
The return figures were particularly discouraging in 2005. Between January
and the end of September, UNHCR registered 5,059 minority returns, a
twelve-fold drop compared to the same period in 2002. Continuing attacks
and harassment targeting returnees, scarce employment opportunities in
places of return, insufficient funding for reconstruction of destroyed properties, and obstacles affecting social and economic needs of prospective
returnees, frustrated the return process.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights activists faced a hostile environment when their activities challenged
the dominant attitudes relating to the wartime period. In the
Federation, the work of the independent Research and Documentation
Center was largely ignored by the government, and met with occasional
threats from private actors, because the organization assessed the number of
casualties during the Bosnian war at around one hundred thousand. The estimate
challenged the widespread belief among the war’s principal victims, the
Bosnian Muslims, that the number of casualties exceeded two hundred thousand.
The Helsinki Committee for Human Rights in Republika Srpska experienced
similar responses to its efforts to promote accountability for war
crimes and ongoing human rights abuses. The High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Paddy Ashdown, failed to express strong support
for the work of independent human rights groups in the country.
Key International Actors
The focus of the work of the Office of the High Representative (OHR),
which oversees civilian aspects of the 1995 Dayton Peace Accords, was police
reform. On October 5, 2005, under intensive pressure from the OHR, the
United States, and the European Union, the Republika Srpska parliament
finally accepted the fundamentals of the proposed reform, which envisage a
more unified police force. Between December 2004 and October 2005, the
OHR imposed sixteen laws at the state and entity level, and removed eleven
officials and public servants from office.
The debate in Bosnia about the proper role for the high representative intensified
during the year, with an increasing number of critics arguing that the
removals from office under a procedure that allows for no legal remedies,
and the practice of imposing laws, did not encourage respect for human
rights and the rule of law. In an authoritative report published in March
2005, the Council of Europe’s European Commission for Democracy Through Law (Venice Commission) concluded that the need for wide powers
had existed in the early period following the conclusion of the 1995 Dayton
Peace Agreement, but that the longer such an arrangement stayed in place,
the more it risked becoming incompatible with Council of Europe human
rights standards.
On January 17, 2005, a trial chamber of the ICTY sentenced Bosnian Serbs
Vidoje Blagojevic and Dragan Jokic to eighteen and nine years in prison
respectively, for their role in the killings of some eight thousand Muslim men
in Srebrenica in July 1995. The ICTY Appeals Chamber affirmed the sentences
of four Bosnian Serbs and two Bosnian Croats guilty of crimes in
Prijedor and in central Bosnia.
Three important trials against Bosnian Muslim indictees took place in 2005.
On November 16, a trial chamber acquitted the Bosnian Army General Sefer
Halilovic, accused of crimes against Bosnian Croat civilians in Herzegovina
in 1993. In the trial against Generals Enver Hadzihasanovic and Amir
Kubura, both charged with war crimes against Bosnian Croats and Serbs in
central Bosnia in 1993-94, the prosecution and the defense presented closing
arguments in July 2005. The trial of Naser Oric, commander of Bosnian
Muslim forces in the Srebrenica area, for crimes against Serb civilians, continued
throughout the year. The spate of trials against Bosnian Muslims
somewhat eroded the once unanimous support for the tribunal’s work within
Bosnia’s most numerous ethnic community. At the same time, support for the
tribunal increased among Bosnian Croats and Serbs, where the prevailing
stance since the war has been one of mistrust.
On November 21, 2005, the day of the tenth anniversary of the Dayton
Peace Accords, the E.U. General Affairs and External Relations Council
decided to start negotiating a Stabilization and Association Agreement (SAA)
with Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Council had previously decided, on
October 3, that it was not possible to open the negotiations because of the
failure of the Republika Srpska parliament to accept the proposed police
reform. The Council emphasized that the establishment of a more unified
and efficient police force, free from political interference, was crucial for
respect for human rights, the rule of law, and the protection of minorities.
The parliament of Republika Srpska accepted the principles of the proposed
reform on October 5.
On December 2, 2004, the E.U.-led peacekeeping force in Bosnia (EUFOR)
replaced the NATO-led Stabilization Force (SFOR). For the second consecutive
year, international forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina did not arrest a
single Bosnian citizen indicted by the ICTY. While most indictees resided in
Serbia and were not within the reach of the seven thousand EUFOR troops
or a 150-strong contingent of U.S. troops based in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bosnian Serb wartime leader Radovan Karadzic was believed to be hiding in
the eastern parts of the country. The absence of a requisite political will and
intelligence resources may account for the failure of the international forces
to locate Karadzic and bring about his arrest.
The Council of Europe’s European Commission against Racism and
Intolerance (ECRI) issued a report in February 2005 faulting ethnically based
political parties with nationalist policies that engender “severe problems of
racism and racial (including ethnic and religious) discrimination and segregation”
and make it difficult for those not belonging to locally or nationally
dominant ethnic groups to access rights and opportunities.