Bosnia and Herzegovina
There was little improvement in human rights in 2012 in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (BiH) despite the formation of a national government in February
after a delay of 14 months.
The government missed several deadlines to make changes to the constitution
that were needed to end discriminatory restrictions on Jews and Roma holding
political office. Roma remain subject to widespread discrimination. Some
refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) wishing to return to their prewar
homes faced an obstacle in the courts, and there was no progress on implementing
a return strategy. Journalists remained vulnerable to threats and attack.
Ethnic and Religious Discrimination
The new Bosnian government failed to implement a 2009 European Court of
Human Rights (ECtHR) ruling ordering the country to amend its constitution to
eliminate ethnic discrimination in the national tri-partite presidency and House
of Peoples, both currently restricted to the three main ethnic groups (Bosniaks,
Serbs, and Croats).
This was despite the government agreeing in June to present reform proposals
by August 31, and a binding September 3 deadline set by the ECtHR itself. A
joint working group established to propose changes has not met since March,
and there are sharp disagreements among the main parties on the way forward.
Local elections scheduled for October 2012 were held under the existing constitution.
A questionnaire for BiH’s first national census since 1991, made public in April
2012 and scheduled for 2013, drew criticism from the International Monitoring
Operation (IMO) and the Conference of European Statisticians. The IMO was
established by the European Union and Council of Europe (CoE) to monitor the
census. Criticism was based on questions requiring respondents to identify
their ethnicity, religion, and mother tongue in the form of a closed question and
limiting them to a single response. Amendments to the questionnaire largely
failed to address the IMO’s criticisms, and continued to require respondents to identify their mother tongue, which may have a discriminatory effect on national
minority groups and those who want to declare themselves as multilingual and
multi-ethnic.
Roma remain the most vulnerable minority group, subject to widespread discrimination.
Many Roma are still not on the national public registry that records
births, deaths, and marriage, impeding their access to public services. Roma
continue to face problems accessing health care due to registration restrictions,
lower educational enrollment than other groups, and employment discrimination.
Many Roma, particularly refugees and IDPs, including from Kosovo, remain
in informal settlements. The practice of placing Roma in special schools in
Mostar, a city in the Federation, instead of mainstream schools, continued during
the year.
Most of the 100 Roma evicted from their homes in Mostar in October 2011 to
make room for a housing project for other Roma families simply relocated to
other informal settlements in the city and remain vulnerable to further evictions.
Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons
There was virtually no progress on implementing the 2010 strategy to support
the return of refugees and IDPs to their pre-war homes, even after the new government
was formed in February 2012. In the first 6 months of 2012, 185
refugees and 198 IDPs returned, according to the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), a slight increase relative to same period in
2011. According to the latest updates in June 2012, there were still 112,802 IDPs
registered, down from 113,188 at the end of June of the previous year.
District court rulings awarding excessive compensation to temporary occupants
of property were an obstacle to displaced people wanting to return to pre-war
homes, prompting repeated criticism during the year by the Office of the
International High Representative (OHR). Faik Zulcic, a returnee to Bjeljina in
Republika Srpska, was evicted from his home in April after he was unable to pay
40,000KM (around US$26,000) to the former occupant as ordered in March
2012 by the Bjeljina District Court.
National Security and Human Rights
BiH continued to subject foreign nationals to indefinite detention without trial
on national security grounds. In February, the ECtHR halted the deportation of
Imad Al Husin to Syria because of the risk of torture on return and ordered
Bosnian authorities to charge him with a crime, find a third country to which he
could safely travel, or release him. He remained in Bosnian detention without
trial at this writing.
Also at this writing, Zeyad Khalad Al Gertani, another foreign national security
suspect remained in detention without trial. Four others left BiH in 2012:
Noureddine Gacci (deported to Algeria in January), Omar Frendi (deported to
Algeria in March), Fadhil Al Hamadini (escaped house arrest to an unknown
location in May), and Ammar Al Hanchi (deported to Tunisia in September after
the ECtHR in June rejected his claim that he risked torture on return).
War Crimes Accountability
On May 16, the trial against Bosnian Serb wartime General Radtko Mladic commenced
at the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
The trial was periodically delayed by Mladic’s ill-health. Mladic is charged with
genocide, including the murder of 8,000 men and boys from Srebrenica in 1995,
war crimes, and crimes against humanity.
The trial of Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb wartime president who is
charged with many of the same crimes as Mladic, continued at the ICTY with the
prosecution concluding its case on May 25 and the defense seeking Karadzic’s
acquittal on all counts. The court upheld all charges except one genocide charge
not involving Srebrenica, which it dismissed due to insufficient evidence. On
September 24, the office of the prosecutor at the ICTY appealed this decision;
the appeal procedure was ongoing at this writing.
On January 21, Bosnia police captured convicted war criminal Radovan
Stankovic in the city of Foca. Stankovic had been at large since escaping from
Foca prison in BiH in 2007, where he was serving a 20-year sentence for crimes
against humanity committed in 1992 when he was serving as a soldier in the
army of the Serb Republic of BiH.
The War Crimes Chamber of the State Court of BiH reached verdicts on 13 cases
between September 2011 and 2012.
Inadequate capacity and funding for war crimes prosecutions continued to hamper
implementation of the national war crimes strategy in cantonal and district
courts. In May, the OHR and ICTY chief prosecutor discussed ways to strengthen
local prosecutor and courts on war crimes cases. The mandate of the international
judges and prosecutors is scheduled to expire by the end of 2012, having
been extended once in 2009.
Human Rights Defenders
The national journalists’ association and the Helsinki Committee in BiH
expressed concern about the high frequency of verbal abuse of journalists leveled
mostly by politicians but also by religious leaders and media regulators,
with 42 violations of free expression and personal freedoms recorded between
September 2011 and 2012, including 19 verbal assaults, 3 physical assaults,
and one death threat.
On July 18, Stefica Galic, chief editor of the web portal tacno.net, was attacked
in the city of Ljubuski after a documentary screening that honored her late husband’s
efforts to protect Bosniaks during the 1992 to 1995 Bosnian War.
Nedjeljko Galic was a Croat living in the federation and helped hundreds of
Bosniaks to leave Ljubuski during the war. Despite appeals by the EU, United
States, and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe’s (OSCE)
representative on freedom of the media to investigate the case thoroughly, the
police failed to address the issue adequately, labeling it a minor offence against
peace and order that was exaggerated by media.
In June, the local lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transsexual (LGBT) rights organization
Sarajevo Open Centre reported a telephone threat to police relating to their
work. The organization did not organize a Sarajevo Gay Pride parade for 2012
because it regarded other issues affecting LGBT people as more pressing.
Key International Actors
A March report on post-war justice in the Western Balkans from outgoing CoE
Human Rights Commissioner Thomas Hammarberg recommended that Bosnian
authorities strengthen local courts’ capacity to try war crimes and protect witnesses,
and expressed support for a regional truth and reconciliation commission.
In May, ambassadors to BiH from the US, Brazil, Germany, Norway, the
Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom, together with the
CoE office, issued a joint statement calling on the government of BiH to ensure
equal rights for LGBT people.
In a September 2012 joint statement, EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fule
and CoE Secretary General Thorbjorn Jagland expressed their “great disappointment”
that the BiH government had failed to meet the August deadline on constitutional
reform. They affirmed that doing so remains a precondition for formal
EU candidate status.
Also in September 2012, EU Special Representative Peter Sorensen, together
with OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media Dunja Mijatovic, and the
head of the OSCE mission to Bosnia and Herzegovina, issued a statement calling
for legal reforms to ensure media freedom in the country.
Following a country visit in late September, Rita Izsak, UN expert on minority
issues, criticized continuing ethnic segregation in the education system and
discrimination against Roma.
The European Commission’s annual progress report on Bosnia and Herzegovina
in October identified the failure to reform the constitution, discrimination
against Roma, intimidation and violence against human rights advocates, and
segregated education amongst its main concerns.
The UN Human Rights Committee in its concluding observations on BiH, adopted
in
October, highlighted poor conditions in prisons and detention centers and
urged the authorities to address overcrowding and combat prison violence.
Following a country visit in November, Rashida Manjoo, UN special rapporteur
on violence against women, voiced concern about the prevalence of domestic
violence in BiH.
In a report published in November, the OSCE Mission to BiH emphasized the
need to combat hate crimes, including those committed against returning
refugees and IDPs, Roma, Jews, and sexual minorities.