Belarus
The situation for civil society and independent media remains dismal, with
Belarusian authorities continuing pressure and threats ahead of the December
2010 presidential elections. Journalists and civil society activists face harassment
in the form of interrogations, detentions, arrests, and seizure of personal property.
NGOs struggle with registration procedures, and media outlets have been
threatened with closure.
Elections
In September the Belarusian parliament scheduled presidential elections for
December 2010. President Aleksandr Lukashenka will run for a fourth term. First
elected in 1994, Lukashenka was re-elected in 2001 and 2006 despite protests of
election fraud from activists, international NGOs, and concerned governments,
such as those of the United States and most European Union member states.
Government crackdowns on civil society and independent media preceded previous
presidential elections, and activists reported continued punitive measures in
the run up to the December elections.
Some positive amendments, including eliminating the need for candidates to
obtain permission for public events, were made to the electoral code in January,
and more candidates were allowed to register in the April 2010 local elections.
However, electoral code violations and lack of transparency marred the April elections.
In the Maladziechna district, four members of the Divisional Electoral
Commission ran for the Council of Deputies, in violation of electoral law. Belarus
refused long-term election monitoring proposed by the Organization for Security
and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). The only long-term election-monitoring presence
was provided by local observers, who were forced to maintain a distance of
3 to 10 meters from ballot counting.
Freedom of Association
Independent civil society groups report government pressure, but many remain
active in Belarus. Four activists—Zmicier Dashkevich, Yauhien Afnahiel, Artur Finkievich, and Uladzimir Lemiesh—from the youth opposition movements Young
Front, Young Belarus, and European Belarus, were kidnapped in public in
November and December 2009. Assailants in civilian clothes pulled the men into
waiting cars, and dumped them outside the city limits. The kidnappers warned
three of the men to cease political activities before releasing them.
In May authorities in more than 20 cities raided apartments and confiscated computer
equipment from activists for the “Speak the Truth Campaign,” founded in
February 2010 to encourage public discussion about social problems. Leaders of
the movement were detained for three days on suspicion of disseminating false
information. The campaign’s founder, Uladzimir Niaklayau, has voiced interest in
running for president.
In March 2010 the Ministry of Justice refused for the third time to register the
Belarusian Assembly of Pro-democratic NGOs, citing procedural violations in its
creation, and alleging that the organization’s name does not describe its activities.
The assembly serves as an unofficial umbrella organization for more than
250 Belarusian NGOs and provides legal guidance and conducts advocacy on
their behalf.
Freedom of Assembly
Activists are required to apply for demonstration permits, but the onerous application
process restricts the right to hold peaceful assemblies. Civil society
activists are frequently arrested, fined, and detained for participating in unsanctioned
assemblies. In January 2010, 43 activists and leaders of the unofficial
Union of Poles in Belarus (UPB) were detained while en route to an assembly to
re-elect Teresa Sobol as chairperson of the Ivenets Polish House, a culture and
education center for the Ivenets region. In February authorities arrested 40 UPB
activists for an unsanctioned protest over Sobol’s closed trial, in which the court
ordered her to hand over control of the Polish House building to the officiallysanctioned
Union of Poles in Belarus.
Authorities used force to disburse three unsanctioned democratic opposition
demonstrations in February, and detained several participants in an unsanctioned
Minsk parade supporting lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender rights in May. When authorities do sanction opposition rallies, they grant permission for
locations far from public view.
Media Freedom
The government tightened its control on media through stricter internet controls,
harassing and detaining independent journalists, and issuing warnings to publications.
In July 2010 a presidential edict restricting the internet came into force. It requires
registration of online resources, identification of users at internet cafes and storage
of their internet history for a year, and restricts access to “banned” information
on the internet.
Independent news sources –theCharter97 news website, and Narodnaya Vola and
Novaya Gazeta newspapers—were all investigated for criminal defamation against
the former head of the Homel Region KGB Department in 2010. Authorities repeatedly
interrogated editors and staff, searched their apartments, and confiscated
their electronic equipment. In March police forcibly broke into Charter97’s editorial
office, injuring web-site editor Natalia Radzina. In September 2010 Aleh
Biabienin, founder of Charter97, was found hanged in his dacha. Bebenin’s colleagues
and international NGOs have called for a criminal investigation of his e
death, which was officially ruled a suicide. In an unprecedented development,
the authorities have allowed the OSCE to send two forensic experts to participate
in the investigation. Death threats against other Charter97 journalists have been
posted anonymously to the website since Bebenin’s death.
In a positive development, the majority of news publications were able to register
under a 2009 law requiring them to re-register, and 107 new publications were
registered in the first half of 2010. However, authorities denied registration to at
least eight independent newspapers, citing insufficient qualifications of the editors
or improper premises for the editorial offices. Additionally, the number of
official warnings against news outlets increased in 2010. Under the 2009 law, two
official warnings constitute sufficient grounds to close a media outlet.
Independent newspapers Narodnaya Vola and Nasha Niva have already received three warnings, and dozens of other papers, including Komsomolskaya Pravda in
Belarus, Va-Bank, Novy Chas, and Tovarishch, have received at least one warning.
Political Prisoners
Two activists arrested on politically-motivated charges in 2009 were sentenced to
prison in May 2010.
The court sentenced civil activist Mikalaj Autukhovich to five years and two
months in a maximum security prison for illegal possession and transportation of
five shotgun shells and a hunting rifle, despite claims that witness testimony was
obtained through intimidation. Autukhovich went on a hunger strike in June to
protest prison conditions and demand dental treatment, which he has not
received as of this writing.
His co-defendant, Uladzimir Asipienka, received a three-year prison sentence for
possessing and transporting firearms and explosives. The men’s convictions
appear connected with their civil society activism. Asipienka had previously been
imprisoned for involvement in an entrepreneurs’ movement, while Autukhovich
attempted to unite veterans in an opposition organization and ran in parliamentary
elections as an independent candidate.
Siariej Kavalenka, a Conservative Christian party activist, was sentenced to three
years of house arrest for displaying a white-red-white Belarusian flag, a symbol of
protest against the Lukashenka administration.
Death Penalty
Belarus remains the only country in Europe that still allows the death penalty. In
March 2010 Belarusian authorities executed Andrej Zhuk and Vasilii Yuzepchuk
for murder, even though their cases were pending before the United Nations
Human Rights Committee. In May, the Hrodna Regional Court sentenced Aleh
Hryshkaucou and Andrej Burdyka to death for murder. The executions and sentences
occurred after the Belarus National Assembly established a task force to
explore a possible death penalty moratorium—a stipulation for full suspension of
EU and Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe sanctions. In 2010, the Ministry of Justice reported that 321 people had been sentenced to death
between 1990 and 2009, with the number of sentences declining in the last
decade from its peak of 47 in 1998. The ministry did not provide information on
the number of actual executions.
Palliative Care
Belarus’ low consumption of morphine and other opioid medicines, reported
annually to the International Narcotics Control Board, indicates that access to
medicine for pain treatment is available to less than 20 percent of its terminal
cancer patients.
Key International Actors
Belarus’ relations with both Europe and Russia deteriorated in 2010, and foreign
governments failed to hold Belarus accountable for its domestic human rights situation.
Belarus came up for Universal Periodic Review by the UN Human Rights Council in
May 2010. The resulting report offered recommendations on freedom of speech,
association, and assembly, as well as a moratorium on the death penalty, but
Belarus rejected any commitment to implement them. Belarus accepted the recommendations
to absolutely prohibit torture and introduce a definition in line
with the Convention Against Torture in its legislation, but failed to recognize flaws
in investigating complaints of torture.
In October 2010 the EU called on Belarus “to fully cooperate” with the presidential
election monitoring of the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human
Rights (part of OSCE). The EU also extended its existing travel restrictions against
high-level officials, but simultaneously suspended restrictions through October
2011.
US President Barack Obama extended existing travel restrictions against highlevel
Belarusian officials until June 2011 due to concerns about detentions, disappearances,
and political repression.
The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) suspended high-level
contact with Belarus in April, declaring the lack of international observers at the
April elections, state discrimination against the country’s Polish minority, and the
execution of Zhuk and Yuzepchuk as “concrete steps backwards.” PACE also withdrew
its earlier recommendation that the Council of Europe restore Belarus’s
“special guest status,” initially suspended in 1997 over human rights concerns.
In June Belarus signed a customs agreement with Russia and Kazakhstan that
removes trade barriers between the three countries. Despite their economic cooperation,
Belarus distanced itself from Russia in August after Russia cut oil and gas
subsidies to the country.