Belarus
The Belarusian government continues to severely curtail freedoms of association,
assembly, and expression, and the right to fair trial. New restrictive legislative
amendments paved the way in 2012 for even more intense governmental
scrutiny of civil society organizations and activists. Governmental harassment of
human rights defenders, independent media, and defense lawyers continues,
including through arbitrary bans on foreign travel. At this writing, at least 12
political prisoners remain jailed. Allegations of torture and mistreatment in custody
persist.
Parliamentary Elections
Parliamentary elections took place in September against a backdrop of stifled
civil and political freedoms, and were marked by a lack of competitiveness and
a low level of public confidence.
The continuing political crackdown impeded a competitive campaign. The elections
resulted in 110 members elected for a four-year term to the lower chamber
of the parliament. The opposition did not win any seats.
The elections complied with recent amendments to the electoral code, which
the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) and the Venice
Commission assessed as a positive but insufficient step towards a legal framework
allowing for genuinely democratic elections. The OSCE’s Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights and the OSCE Parliamentary
Assembly found elections had fallen short of international standards, noting, in
particular, irregularities during the vote count, a flawed process for considering
complaints, and biased campaign coverage by state-controlled media.
Domestic monitors noted flaws in the rules on forming district and precinct election
commissions, resulting in a low level of representation in the commissions
by opposition parties. Monitors also documented incidents of intimidation by
officials of opposition activists.
Days before the voting, the two registered opposition parties decided to boycott
the elections, citing procedural violations, political repression, and the fact that
opposition activists were imprisoned on politically motivated charges and could
not run as candidates or vote.
Political Prisoners, Threats to Human Rights Defenders, and
Civil Society Groups
In April, apparently responding to international criticism, the authorities
released former opposition presidential candidate Andrei Sannikau and his
aide, convicted in connection with the peaceful protests in 2010. In August and
September 2012, the government pardoned three prisoners sentenced on criminal
charges of “rioting” in connection with the December 2010 mass protests.
All released prisoners had to sign a request for pardon that acknowledged their
guilt.
Throughout the year, the authorities intensified the crackdown on dissent.
Legislative amendments adopted in October 2011 established criminal liability
for receiving foreign grants in violation of the law, and broadened the definition
of treason to include “any form of assistance to a foreign state” that is detrimental
to Belarus’s national security. The amendments put civil society groups
at risk of arbitrary prosecution if they receive foreign funding or engage in international
advocacy.
In November 2011, a court sentenced leading human rights defender, Ales
Bialiatski, to four-and-a-half years in prison on politically motivated charges of
tax evasion. Prison officials have regularly subjected Bialiatski to arbitrary reprimands
and other kinds of pressure. The authorities frequently sentence opposition
activists and human rights defenders to arbitrary detention for “hooliganism”
and other misdemeanor charges.
In February, opposition activist Siarhei Kavalenka was sentenced to 25 months’
imprisonment for evading his supervised release, after being sentenced in 2010
for flying a banned pre-Lukashenka era national flag on a Christmas tree. He
was freed in September 2012, after authorities forced him, including by making veiled threats regarding his son, to sign a request for pardon that acknowledged
his guilt.
In May, a court handed human rights defender Aleh Vouchak a nine-day jail sentence
on misdemeanor charges of “minor hooliganism,” allegedly for swearing
at police. Vouchak’s arrest was apparently in retaliation for his human rights
work and for meeting with a Human Rights Watch researcher a day earlier.
In June, the prosecutor’s office issued a warning to human rights defender
Andrei Bandarenka, for “discrediting” Belarus by participating in an ultimately
unsuccessful campaign to convince the International Ice Hockey Federation not
to hold the 2014 Men’s World Ice Hockey Championship in Belarus because of
its human rights record. At least 15 activists and journalists were banned during
the year from leaving Belarus under arbitrary pretexts.
In July, President Aliaxander Lukashenka—in power since1994—signed a decree
expanding the grounds on which the State Security Service (KGB) can impose
travel bans on individuals.
Death Penalty
Belarus remains the only country in Europe to still use the death penalty. In
March, Belarusian authorities executed Dzmitry Kanavalau and Uladzislau
Kavalyou, convicted of carrying out a terrorist attack in the Minsk metro in April
2011 after a trial that raised serious due process concerns, including allegations
of torture to extract confessions. The execution was carried out while a complaint
regarding the men’s treatment was pending with the United Nations
Human Rights Committee. The committee had asked the authorities not to carry
out the sentence until the review was complete.
Freedom of Assembly
Legislative amendments adopted in October 2011 further restricted freedom of
peaceful assembly by broadening the definition of mass events and establishing
criminal liability for organizing them in violation of the law. The amendments
also required event organizers to report financing sources for mass events and expanded the powers of law enforcement during public gatherings
to, among other things, limit access to the event site and conduct personal
searches of participants.
Authorities regularly prohibit peaceful gatherings and use “hooliganism” or similar
misdemeanor charges to intimidate activists and prevent them from carrying
out their work. Dozens have been sentenced, some repeatedly, to short-term
detention.
In April, riot police broke up the screening of “Europe’s Last Dictator,” a documentary
about President Lukashenka, arrested all 19 viewers and staff, and took
them to a police station for interrogation and fingerprinting. They were later
released.
In February, a court sentenced activist Pavel Vinahradau to 10 days of detention
for holding an “unsanctioned protest” for placing stuffed toys with anti-government
slogans in front of government headquarters in Minsk. In August, two
independent journalists, who were taking photos with teddy bears on a street in
Minsk, were sentenced to fines for protesting.
Freedom of Expression
The government severely restricts freedom of expression. Most media is statecontrolled,
and television, radio, and internet censorship is widespread. The
authorities continue to harass independent journalists for their work, including
through arbitrary arrests, warnings, and criminal convictions. Journalists face
great difficulties obtaining accreditation.
In June 2012, Belarusian authorities charged a journalist, Andrzej Poczobut, for
libel against the president, a criminal offense punishable by up to five years’
imprisonment. He was later released under his own recognizance. In a separate
case brought in 2011, Poczobut had received a suspended sentence for allegedly
defaming President Lukashenka.
In July, blogger Anton Suryapin was arrested and charged with complicity in an
unlawful border crossing after posting in his blog photographs of a political
stunt that month organized by Swedish activists who dropped teddy bears carrying freedom of speech messages from a plane into Belarusian territory. Suryapin
denied involvement, and in August was released under his own recognizance.
The trial was ongoing at this writing and Suryapin faces up to seven years in
prison if convicted
In August, four Swedish journalists were refused entry into Belarus upon arriving
in Minsk airport. Two of them had been accredited by the government to
report on the September parliamentary elections.
In September, customs officials held an Australian journalist in Minsk airport
and confiscated his laptop, phone, video camera, and memory cards. The journalist
was released but his equipment was not returned.
Key International Actors
2012 marked a new low for the Belarusian government’s pariah status in the
international arena. The European Union and the United States government further
tightened existing sanctions imposed against Belarusian officials, private
individuals, and companies implicated in repression and human rights abuse.
Responding to the continuing crackdown on civil society, the UN Human Rights
Council (HRC) in July denounced abuses committed in Belarus, called for the
release of all political prisoners, and appointed a special rapporteur to document
and report back on violations in the country. The Belarusian Foreign
Ministry swiftly announced that the government did not recognize the special
rapporteur’s mandate and refused to cooperate with it.
A diplomatic scandal unfolded in February when Lukashenka’s government
expelled the Polish and EU delegation ambassadors, and recalled Belarusian
ambassadors in Warsaw and Brussels in response to the expansion of EU sanctions.
All EU member states recalled their ambassadors from Belarus in solidarity.
Belarus allowed all ambassadors to be reinstated after they later returned to
Minsk.
In March, the European Parliament adopted a resolution urging additional sanctions
that targeted several more officials and companies linked to the government
and prohibited the export to Belarus of arms and materials that could be
used for repression.
In a September 2012 report presented to the council, the UN high commissioner
for human rights singled out Belarus among 16 countries where government
intimidation of civil society activists is commonplace, and authorities mostly fail
to hold accountable those responsible.
After the July teddy bear stunt, the government expelled the Swedish ambassador
and closed the Swedish embassy in Minsk.
In September, the authorities refused visas to a Lithuanian politician and a
German parliamentarian who planned to visit the country during parliamentary
elections, stating that their presence in Belarus was “undesirable.”