B<C8ILJ
The December 2010 presidential election resulted in victory for Alyaksandr
Lukashenka, who has ruled the country for the last 16 years. The Organization
for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) found the election to be flawed,
crushing hopes for democratic progress in Belarus. On election night riot police
beat and arrested hundreds of largely peaceful protesters. Over 40 were imprisoned,
although in apparent response to international pressure the government
released many throughout the year.
In the following months the authorities unleashed a harassment campaign, targeting
human rights defenders, political activists, journalists, and lawyers.
Severe restrictions on freedoms of association, assembly, and media remain
and the level of repression is unprecedented.
In August 2011 prominent Belarusian human rights defender Ales Bialiatski was
arrested on politically motivated charges of tax evasion.
December 2010 Post-Election Unrest and Political Prisoners
On the night of December 19, tens of thousands of demonstrators took to the
streets of Minsk, the capital, protesting what they felt was another stolen election.
Riot police violently dispersed the largely peaceful demonstration, beating
everyone within reach. They arrested more than 700 protesters, including
dozens of journalists and seven presidential candidates. Hundreds served up
to 15 days in detention for misdemeanor charges of “hooliganism.” A coalition
of independent human rights NGOs in Minsk who documented the crackdown
found that hundreds of detainees alleged abuse while in police custody, including
beatings, no access to food and water, and being forced to sign police
reports containing false information about the circumstances of their arrest.
Trials were held behind closed doors and marred by multiple due process violations.
Most defendants had no access to defense counsel and were not allowed
to call witnesses. There were no acquittals.
Belarusian authorities sought to portray the December unrest as an attempt,
planned by the opposition and foreign states, to overthrow the government.
More than 40 persons—including journalists, civil society leaders, and five former
presidential candidates—were sentenced to up to six years of imprisonment
on trumped-up rioting charges. The NGO coalition found that detainees
were held in poor detention conditions, in virtual isolation from the outside
world, and had severely restricted access to legal counsel at all stages of
detention and trial. Human rights monitors reported that those accused of rioting
or public disorder were convicted despite lack of evidence of engaging in or
inciting violence.
There continue to be allegations of serious psychological and physical abuse
and due process rights violations of political prisoners who remain in custody.
Many are routinely denied meetings with their lawyers. They often do not
receive correspondences and are prohibited from family visits. Some are
repeatedly placed in solitary confinement or punishment cells without justification
and some are denied medical care.
Human Rights Defenders, Civil Society Groups, and Lawyers
In the weeks following the December protests, state security forces repeatedly
raided offices of human rights groups, confiscating equipment, interrogating
staff, and arresting those suspected of participating in pro-democracy protests.
Human rights NGOs report several cases of politically motivated expulsions
from universities and dismissals from public sector jobs.
Involvement in an unregistered organization constitutes a criminal offense
under Belarusian law. The authorities continue to routinely deny registration to
most civil society groups for arbitrary reasons, making activists constantly vulnerable
to prosecution.
In January and June 2011 the Belarusian Helsinki Committee, Belarus’s only
nationally registered human rights group, received two politically motivated
warnings from the Ministry of Justice. Under Belarusian law, two official warnings
may lead to suspension of an organization’s activities.
In August Ales Bialiatski, vice-president of the International Federation for
Human Rights (FIDH)and head of the Human Rights Centre Viasna (Viasna), an
independent human rights group, was arrested on criminal charges of largescale
tax evasion, after Lithuanian and Polish authorities released details of his
personal bank accounts to Belarusian authorities. Viasna used the funds,
received from international donors, for legal and financial assistance for political
prisoners and their families in Belarus.
Authorities withdrew Viasna’s registration in 2003 and have since routinely
denied it registration. As a result, Viasna cannot open a bank account in
Belarus.
In 2011, authorities expelled or banned from entering Belarus an unprecedented
13 foreign human rights defenders, seriously impeding independent monitoring
of the human rights situation in the country.
The authorities consistently targeted lawyers representing clients charged in
connection with the December events. The Ministry of Justice arbitrarily disbarred
or revoked the licenses of seven lawyers, a clear warning to lawyers
against taking on “political” cases. Lawyers who represent political prisoners
continue to face difficulties accessing their clients, resulting in some individuals
being left without legal counsel.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
Belarusian authorities continue to severely curtail the right to assemble peacefully.
In 2011 the political opposition held “silent” demonstrations to protest
Lukashenka’s government or express support for political prisoners. Police disperse,
sometimes harshly, protesters who do nothing more than stroll silently
or clap their hands. Many were sentenced to up to 15 days of administrative
detention for “hooliganism.” In October the Belarusian parliament adopted
restrictive amendments to a number of laws that seemed aimed at banning
silent demonstrations. The amendments included restrictions on where demonstrations
can be held, and introduced a more complicated procedure for obtaining
permits for public gatherings. Also according to the new legislation, actions
directed at spreading or sharing information about a planned gathering may constitute an offense unless the gathering had already been approved by the
authorities.
Freedom of Media
The government continued to severely restrict freedom of media. The authorities
routinely threatened the independent print media, and on several occasions
blocked social media and other websites. Police arrested dozens of journalists
covering pro-democracy protests in December and the later “silent”
protests. For example, in May 2011 a court handed independent journalist Iryna
Khalip a two-year suspended sentence on trumped-up riot charges in connection
with the December protests. In May the authorities initiated closure proceedings
for the independent newspapers Nasha Niva and Narodnaya Vola.
Although legal proceedings were discontinued in August, both newspapers
received fines for trumped-up violations of media law. In July a court convicted
Andrzej Poczobut, a correspondent for the Polish newspaper Gazeta Wyborcza,
for defaming Lukashenka. In his articles Poczobut called President Lukashenka
a dictator. He was handed a three-year suspended sentence. In September a
higher court upheld the conviction.
Death Penalty
In July 2011 Belarusian authorities executed two individuals, despite the United
Nations Human Rights Committee’s request to not carry out the executions
pending the committee’s review of their cases. Both men, convicted of murder,
admitted their guilt but alleged they were tortured during interrogations. The
committee deplored their executions, stating that Belarus violated its international
obligations by imposing death sentences on individuals whose right to
fair trial may have been violated.
Key International Actors
Many foreign governments and international organizations condemned the
post-election crackdown and expressed concern over the deepening human
rights crisis in Belarus.
In December 2010 Hillary Clinton, United States secretary of state, and
Catherine Ashton, European Union representative for foreign affairs and security
policy/ vice-president of the European Commission, issued a joint statement
calling the election “an unfortunate step backwards” in the democratic development
of Belarus. In January 2011 the foreign ministers of Germany, Sweden,
Poland, and the Czech Republic issued a joint statement condemning the postelection
crackdown.
In January the EU and the US imposed new financial and travel sanctions
against the Belarusian government. The US significantly extended the list of
Belarusian top-ranking officials subject to visa bans and travel restrictions, but
did not specify how many officials were affected by the limitations. In August
the US imposed new economic sanctions against four major state-owned
Belarusian companies.
In 2011 the European Parliament adopted four resolutions on the human rights
situation in Belarus. In its resolution on Belarus adopted in January, the
European Parliament expressed its dismay at the “unprecedented wave of violence,
intimidation, mass arrests, and prosecution of political opponents.”
In February 2011 UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon expressed concern about
“reports of harassment and continued detention of journalists, civil society
activists and opposition candidates” and called for their release.
In June 2011 the UN Human Rights Council adopted a resolution condemning
violations in Belarus, and called on the high commissioner for human rights to
monitor the human rights situation and report to the Council during the following
sessions. The resolution also encouraged relevant UN thematic special procedures
mandate holders to pay particular attention to the human rights situation
in Belarus.
During her speech at the Eastern Partnership summit in September, German
Chancellor Angela Merkel called the government’s actions against opposition
“unacceptable.”
In contrast, Russia has condemned international sanctions against Belarus,
calling them “counterproductive.” In August 2011 Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin announced that in 2012 Russia will supply gas to Belarus at a
discount price as a sign of support.
In response to international pressure, Lukashenka’s government gradually
released some political prisoners. In January 2011 Belarusian authorities
released several of the detainees facing riot charges and transferred several
others to house arrest. In March they re-classified riot charges against six
detainees to less serious offences. Between June and August the authorities
pardoned 13 individuals who were convicted in relation to December events;
most, however, had to admit guilt as a condition of their release.
In an unexpected public statement in August, Lukashenka called on opposition
leaders to join him in a strategic discussion on leading Belarus out of political
and economic crises. In September, 11 more political prisoners were released
after being granted a presidential pardon.
Meanwhile the Belarusian government ignored international requests to restore
the OSCE mandate in Belarus, which it discontinued in January, following the
organization’s critical assessment of the December election. Lukashenka’s government
also refused to cooperate with the Moscow Mechanism, the OSCE’s
only existing monitoring mechanism that does not require consensus. The OSCE
imposed the procedure in April.