Belarus
The government of Belarus failed to ensure free and fair election in
2004, in large part by attacking the independent media and undermining
freedom of association. The situation worsened in the months leading
up to October 2004 parliamentary elections and a simultaneous referendum
to remove presidential term limits. Several independent newspapers
were closed, and journalists jailed on libel charges.
Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and independent trade unions
were given warnings or closed. Many opposition politicians were prevented
from registering as election candidates. Some were arrested on
trumped-up charges.
Elections
The 110-member House of Representatives was elected in October
without the election of a single representative from the opposition parties.
According to official statistics, 77 percent of those who voted
approved the lifting of presidential term limits. The results pave the
way for President Alexander Lukashenka to stand for a third term of
office.
The government took full advantage of defective electoral legislation to
manipulate the election campaign and engineer the outcome of the
vote. An Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
observer mission to the October vote emphasized that the poll was
undermined by problems with the election laws, including: the accreditation
process for independent election observers; rules regarding early
voting and the storage of the resulting ballots, and procedures for adjudicating
electoral complaints.
In early 2004, authorities arrested three prominent opposition politicians
on politically-motivated charges. Valery Levonevsky, a member of
the coordination committee of “Free Belarus,” and his deputy Aleksandr Vasilyev were convicted of defamation on September 7. Both received
two-year prison sentences. Mikhail Marynich, who joined the opposition
after resigning his post as ambassador to Latvia, is awaiting trial on
charges of storing illegal arms.
Would-be candidates for the October elections were denied registration
of their candidacy on questionable grounds. The Central Election
Authority denied the candidacy of Mecheslav Grib, deputy chairman of
the Belarus Social-Democratic Party, “Narodnaya Gramada,” citing his
failure to register company stock purchased in the early 1990s. It also
rejected the candidacy of Vladimir Parfenovich of the Respublika parliamentary
group, alleging that signatures on his registration petition had
been falsified.
Those opposition candidates who did manage to register their candidacy
faced difficulty campaigning. Election law entitles each candidate to a
total of five minutes broadcast time during the course of the campaign.
However, state-controlled media allowed many pro-government candidates
more than five minutes, while limiting opposition candidates to
the statutory period. State-run newspapers published articles designed
to discredit opposition candidates in the run-up to the vote.
The October elections and referendum were marred by irregularities.
Members of the opposition were barred from observing at voting stations
during early voting and on election day. During the vote count,
officials did not announce numbers out loud as votes were being tabulated,
and observers had only a limited view of the counting process,
making verification impossible. The OSCE observer mission concluded
that the parliamentary elections fell significantly short of international
standards. The OSCE did not monitor the referendum.
During the week following the October vote, opposition activists organized
demonstrations to protest the official results. Belarusian police
beat, detained and arrested dozens of protesters, among them Anatoly
Lebedko, the leader of the leading opposition party, the United Civil
Party. Lebedko was hospitalized with severe injuries. He was discharged
after receiving treatment.
Human Rights Defenders
The government continues to use presidential decrees to suppress
human rights activities. Presidential Edict 24, introduced on November
28, 2003, allows for strict control over foreign financial assistance to
NGOs, and prohibits foreign funding to educational and “political”
activities. Any NGO, political party, or other organization, deemed to
violate the decree can be shut down. Several NGOs have been closed
down for alleged violations. Others received warnings from the
Ministry of Justice. Two warnings in a year constitute grounds for closure.
At this writing, the Belarusian Helsinki Committee (BHC), a prominent
NGO, faced closure on charges of alleged tax evasion. Although the
Minsk Economic Court and the Court of Cassation acquitted BHC of
tax violations on June 23, 2004, the Ministry of Justice decided on
September 16 to file another lawsuit on the same charges, after BHC
criticized publicly the October 17 referendum.
On January 29, 2004, authorities closed down the Independent Society
of Legal Research (ISLR), citing repeated violations of the Law on
Public Associations. Independent lawyers believe that the real reason
was that ISLR members had defended other NGOs in court proceedings.
Trade Unions
Independent trade unions are under threat in Belarus. The sole remaining
independent trade union federation, the Belarusian Congress of
Democratic Trade Unions (known by its Belarussian-language abbreviation BKPD) and its affiliates face the constant threat of denial of registration
or closure. The activities of unregistered unions are effectively
illegal. BKPD union members risk dismissal and imprisonment, and
pressure to join state-controlled unions. In March, authorities in
Navapolatsk denied registration to the Free Trade Union (FTU), a
BKPD member, for alleged deficiencies in application documents. The
organization had been registered since 2002, but was required to re-register
after amending its internal bylaws.
In September 2004, BKPD President Aleksandr Yaroshuk was sentenced
to ten days in prison. Yaroshuk was convicted of defamation following
the publication in the independent newspaper Narodnaya Volya
(Will of the People) of his article criticizing the August 2003 decision
by Supreme Court to liquidate the Trade Union of Air Traffic
Controllers of Belarus. Authorities had pressured members of the union
to resign before the court’s ruling closed it down entirely.
Media Freedom
All national television stations, and most radio stations, in Belarus are
controlled by the state. Independent radio broadcasts are limited to
non-political music and advertising. Citizens do not receive objective
information from the state-controlled media. Re-broadcasted Russian
television programs are often manipulated through the insertion of
Belarusian footage presented as part of the Russian program.
The long-standing government pressure on independent newspapers
intensified in the run-up to the October elections. Some printing houses
were pressured to stop printing independent newspapers, damaging
their circulation. Several large stores in Minsk refused to sell independent
print media. On August 27, 2004, the Ministry of Information suspended
the operations of the newspaper Navinki (The News) for three
months, saying it had failed to inform authorities about changes in its
publishing schedule, and published articles that the Ministry considered to “jeopardize public morals.” The Ministry also ordered a three-month
closure of the independent weekly Novaya Gazeta Smorgoni (The New
Newspaper of Smorgon) on August 16, citing an alleged failure to comply
with registration procedures.
Journalists who criticize the government face prosecution. On
September 30, a court convicted Alena Rawbetskaya, the editor-in-chief
of the independent newspaper Birzha Informacii (Stock-exchange
Information), on defamation charges and fined her 1.3 million rubles
(approximately U.S.$630), after the paper criticized the upcoming referendum.
On the day of the elections, Pavel Sheremet, a Russian journalist
from Channel One television was arrested on charges of “hooliganism.”
Channel One broadcast two documentaries immediately prior to
the elections in which Sheremet described the Lukashenka government
as dictatorial. Sheremet was later released and the case against him suspended
pending additional investigation.
Key International Actors
In June 2004, the U.N. Special Representative on human rights defenders,
Hina Jilani, expressed serious concern over restrictions on freedom
of association in Belarus. She highlighted legislation permitting the
authorities to deny registration to, and close down, NGOs without justification.
Jilani also criticized the government’s actions against the
Belarusian Helsinki Committee.
In September, the OSCE Office in Minsk criticized the prison sentences
given to Valery Levanevsky and Aleksandr Vasilyev for allegedly
defaming the president. In July, the OSCE condemned the closure of
the private European Humanities University.
In February, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe
(PACE) published a report accusing high-ranking officials of involvement
in the disappearances of former Interior Minister Yuri Zakharenko, former Prime Minister Viktor Gonchar, former electoral
commission chairman Anatoly Krasovski and journalist Dimitri
Zavadski between 1999 and 2000. The report accuses the current
Belarusian Interior Minister, Prosecutor-General and Sports Minister,
as well as a high-ranking officer in the special forces, of involvement.
PACE members demanded that the government investigate the disappearances.
PACE criticized the detention of the human rights activists
Tatsiana Reviaka and Hary Pahaniayla for distribution of its disappearances
report. The body also expressed concern over the decision of
President Lukashenka to hold a referendum on removal of presidential
term-limits.
On April 8, 2004, the U.N. Commission on Human Rights adopted a
resolution expressing concern about human rights in Belarus—including
the key disappearance cases, flawed elections, and the continued harassment
and closure of NGOs—and appointed a Special Rapporteur to
investigate the situation in the country.
In September, the European Union issued a travel ban against the three
government ministers and special forces officer named in the PACE disappearances
report. The ban prevents the four from entering the E.U.
U.S. officials twice criticized the Belarusian government during 2004
for its actions against NGOs, independent journalists, and opposition
politicians. The U.S. State Department has enacted a similar travel ban
to that imposed by the E.U. The State Department expressed doubts
that the results of the October referendum reflected the opinion of the
Belarusian people, and on October 20, three days after the elections,
President George W. Bush signed the Belarus Democracy Act, prohibiting
U.S. financial aid to the Belarusian government, while authorizing
assistance for NGOs and independent media. 