Belarus
The Belarusian authorities repressive grip on political and media freedom intensified
after the March 2006 presidential election, which was considered by the
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, United Nations Human Rights Council (HRC),
the US, and the EU to have failed to meet international standards for free and fair
elections. Opposition leaders and activists remain behind bars, and the authorities
continue to beat, detain, and intimidate civil society groups, making it difficult
for them to function.
Political Freedoms
Political opposition groups are not illegal in Belarus, but authorities make it
almost impossible for them to operate. Registration is obligatory but frequently
denied for arbitrary and unfounded reasons. In 2007 dozens of opposition
activists were beaten and arrested for a variety of trumped-up misdemeanors and
criminal offenses. For example, Alexander Kazulin, a former presidential hopeful
in the March 2006 election who was arrested during a peaceful post-election
opposition march, is serving a five-and-a-half-year prison term for hooliganism
and disturbing public order. When opposition leader Alexander Milinkevich organized
a European March in October to show Belarus commitment to become closer
to Europe, more than 50 opposition activists were detained in advance. Among
them was the leader of the United Civic Party in the Homiel region, who was sentenced
to seven days in jail allegedly for using obscene language in public.
In spring and summer 2007, more than 60 activists were beaten, fined, and jailed
for participating in and preparing for Freedom Day, the anniversary of the declaration
of Belarus sovereignty, an annual Chernobyl rally, and the European March.
A few members of the youth opposition group Young Front were charged with acting
on behalf of an unregistered group, and several more were detained for showing
their support for their fellow activists. Punishments ranged from large fines to
two years in jail; at the time of writing Young Front leaders Zmicier Dashkievich
and Artur Finkievich are still serving jail sentences. Young Fronts registration
application has been denied several times; in May 2007, registration was refused for supposed contradictions in the organizations charter. At least five activists
were detained across Belarus in July for alleged petty hooliganism. Riot police
beat the leader of the youth wing of the United Civil Party Young Democrats,
breaking his arm.
The government of President Lukashenka shut down Belarus only private university.
Recently, students have been sometimes expelled from universities in retaliation
for involvement in groups associated with the opposition. For example,
three students were expelled from Belarusian State Pedagogical University in late
2006 for their political activities.
Yuri Aleynik, of the Movement for Liberty and member of the Belarusian
Association of Journalists, a civil society group affiliated with Reporters Without
Borders, was expelled from the Presidential Management Academy in July 2007,
for allegedly missing too many classes despite his excellent grades; more likely,
he was expelled for his association with civil society groups.
Human Rights Defenders and Civil Society
Only five human rights organizations remain registered in Belarus: the Belarusian
Association of Journalists, Society for the Belarusian Language, Belarusian PEN
Center, Belarusian Helsinki Committee, and Pravavaia Initsiativa (Legal Initiative).
The authorities continually seek to intimidate and control these groups, including
by penalizing them for association with unregistered organizations. Other human
rights groups continue to operate without registration; their attempts to register
legally are repeatedly denied.
For example, on September 21, 2007 the human rights group Viasna filed suit
with the Belarusian Supreme Court, challenging the Ministry of Justices refusal to
register the organization. The ministry claimed that Viasna did not meet registration
requirements of the Nongovernmental Organizations Law and had used in its
application incorrect information on birthdates and the spelling of names. It also
noted that 20 of the organizations 69 founders have been convicted for various
misdemeanor offences. In July 2007, the United Nations Human Rights Committee
found that the closure of the organizations predecessor (of the same name) was a violation of Article 22 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(ICCPR).
The Supreme Court upheld a ruling by the Economic Court of Minsk ordering the
Belarusian Helsinki Committee (BHC) to pay 160m rubles (about US$6.4m) and
confiscating property valued at 255,000 rubles (about US$10,000) in fees and
back taxes for tax-exempt grants received from the EUs TACIS program (Technical
Assistance to the Commonwealth of Independent States).
Religious Freedom
The Belarusian constitution provides for freedom of religion, but the government
makes it difficult for religious institutions other than those affiliated with the
Belarusian Orthodox Church to practice. The authorities often refuse to register
spaces where religious organizations convene, choosing a strict interpretation of
the housing code, therefore making such gatherings illegal, and have fined,
threatened, and detained several religious leaders for holding religious services
in unauthorized spaces. More than 25 foreign Catholic and Protestant clergy
were expelled from Belarus between the summers of 2006 and 2007 for allegedly
posing a threat to national security.
Media Freedom
The government continues to tightly control the media. There are no independent
television or radio stations. The authorities monitor the Internet, and politically
sensitive sites are often temporarily shut down. Several privately-owned newspapers
are printed in Russia because local, state-run printing companies are not
permitted to print material that discredits Belarus by fraudulent representation
of developments in the country. Before the 2006 presidential election the
state postal service Belpochta stopped distributing several opposition newspapers.
In September 2007, 14,000 copies of the opposition newspaper Tovarishch were
confiscated for being printed in Belarus.
All Internet access passes through the state-owned operator Beltelcom, and a
subdivision of the special security services (KGB) is responsible for protecting
state secrets and for running the countrys top domain (.by). Following President
Lukashenkas assertion that there is anarchy on the Internet, Deputy
Information Minister Alexander Slabadchuk announced that the government
would create an inter-agency working group to create policies for controlling the
Internet. The parliament is working on a law that will make registration of all
Internet news sites obligatory.
The September 2007 conviction of opposition politician Andrei Klimov on charges
of calling to overturn the constitutional order of Belarus with the use of mass
media sent an unambiguous signal that the Internet was not a safe alternative to
the print media for expressing criticism of the government. Klimov was sentenced
to two years in jail following a closed trial.
Journalists from Reuters and Agence France Presse were detained in September
2007 without explanation. They were covering the trial of a member of the youth
opposition movement; later an official of the Brest Interior Department explained
that they participated in an unauthorized street act. Leading up to the October
14 European March, Igor Bancar, a journalist from Magazyn Polski Na Uchodztwie
(Polish Magazine on Emigration), was arrested and held for 10 days for hooliganism.
Key International Actors
Multilateral organizations as well as the EU and the US remained deeply critical of
Belarus human rights record, while Belarusian authorities persisted in their
refusal to heed key actors recommendations to improve the situation or respond
to penalties for failing to do so.
In June 2007, the EU suspended Belarus trade benefits under the Generalized
System of Preferences (GSP) after Belarus failed to implement recommendations
made by the International Labor Organization to improve the treatment of independent
unions. The United States had already suspended GSP in 2000 for failure
to take steps to allow the right of association and collective bargaining.
United States Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, David Kramer, made an official
visit to Belarus in April 2007. Kramer told the press that if Belarus wishes to
improve relations with US, it must release all political prisoners and stop persecution
of political activists.
In August 2007, the United States expanded the list of Belarusian governmental
officials banned from the United States. The original visa ban list was created in
May 2006, and included almost 40 names cited for violating human rights and
committing fraud during presidential elections.
In March 2007 the United Nations General Assembly adopted Resolution 61/175
sharply criticizing Belarus for the failure to hold free and fair elections, arbitrary
use of State power against opposition candidates, routine harassment and detention
of political and civil society activists, harassment and detention of journalists,
implication of government officials in the enforced disappearance or summary
execution of opposition politicians and a journalist, forced closure of the
University of Belarus, harassment and closure of civil society organizations, and
harassment and prosecution of human rights defenders. It also cited Belarus for
failing to cooperate with the Human Rights Council.
In May the United Nations General Assembly rejected Belarus bid for a seat on
the HRC. A broad coalition of international and national nongovernmental organizations,
including Human Rights Watch, raised strong objections about Belarus
candidacy, pointing to its poor human rights record and lack of cooperation with
the HRC.