Bolivia
Long-standing problems in Bolivia’s criminal justice system, such as extensive
and arbitrary use of pre-trial detention and long delays in trials, undermine
defendant’s rights and contribute to serious overcrowding in prisons. Impunity
persists for serious human rights abuses committed during the country’s
authoritarian rule from 1964 to 1982.
The administration of President Evo Morales continued to launch verbal attacks
on the press, accusing critical journalists of politically motivated lies.
After several high-profile killings of women sparked public protests, the government
passed a comprehensive law in March 2013 to combat gender-based violence.
Accountability for Past Abuses
Bolivia has made little progress investigating and prosecuting human rights
violations committed under authoritarian governments between 1964 and 1982.
A contributing factor has been the unwillingness of the armed forces to provide
information that might clarify the fate or whereabouts of people killed or disappeared
during this period.
Plans to create a truth commission announced by the Morales administration in
2008 have not materialized. Bolivia has failed to fulfill commitments to compensate
victims of political violence during that period. A 2004 law budgeted
US$3.6 million in government funds for this purpose, which would only cover
about 20 percent of the proposed costs. The remaining funds were to be
obtained from private donors, but were never raised.
In April 2012, Congress passed a law announcing one-off payments equivalent
to roughly 20 percent of the compensation amounts approved in 2004. As of
December 2012, 1,418 of the 1,714 approved beneficiaries had received one of
these reduced payments, according to the government. Many additional potential
beneficiaries said they were rejected due to overly stringent documentary
evidence required by the government commission appointed to review claims.
Long delays in the trials of opposition leaders and government officials have
obstructed justice for victims of violent clashes in 2008 between supporters and opponents of President Morales. Repeated changes of jurisdiction and
prosecutorial inefficiency have also undermined the right of the accused to due
process and a prompt trial. As of August 2013, a La Paz court was still hearing
evidence in a case involving Leopoldo Fernández, former prefect of Pando
department, and five local officials, charged in 2008 for their roles in a
September 2008 massacre in which 13 people were killed. The judge repeatedly
suspended proceedings when defendants failed to appear.
Despite international concern, the government has not reopened an investigation
into the April 2009 killing of two Hungarians (one of Bolivian birth) and an
Irishman, whom the government alleged were mercenaries involved in a separatist
plot. Police shot them dead after storming their hotel rooms in Santa
Cruz. Reports by an Irish government pathologist and an independent forensic
consultant suggested that at least two of the victims may have been extrajudicially
executed.
Military Jurisdiction
In a landmark December 2012 decision, the Constitutional Court ruled that a
civilian court should have jurisdiction in the case of a conscript who died in
2011 following a combat training exercise—allegedly after instructors beat him
on the head and chest. The court urged lawmakers to reform Bolivia’s military
justice code to bring it in line with international human rights standards, which
affirm that all human rights violations should be handled in civilian jurisdiction.
Due Process Violations
The broad discretion that judges enjoy in ordering pretrial detention and lack of
access to public defenders have greatly undermined due process rights for
those accused of a crime, particularly among Bolivia’s poor. According to a
report published by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(UNHCR), as of September 2012, 84 percent of prisoners in Bolivia were awaiting
trial. Bolivian law allows up to three years in pretrial detention, a limit often
contravened in practice.
High-profile defendants have also suffered due process violations and judicial
harassment. In October 2013, José María Bakovic, a 74-year-old former director
of the National Road Service (SNC), died from a heart attack after prosecutors ignoring warnings from doctors that a journey to the high altitudes of La Paz
could endanger his life—ordered him to attend a hearing there. Bakovic, who
worked aggressively to eradicate corruption within the SNC while he was its
director, himself became the target of a corruption investigation after President
Morales took office in 2006. Before his death, he said that he had defended
himself in 72 cases filed in different parts of Bolivia, and was eventually sentenced
in August 2013 to three years in prison for economic damage to the
state.
Prison Conditions
Extended pretrial detention and trial delays have led to increased overcrowding
in Bolivia’s prisons. As of September 2013, the government reported there were
14,770 inmates in prisons with a capacity of under 5,000. Eighty percent of
those prisoners, President Morales said at the time, were being held due to
“delays of the justice system.”
Prison conditions are poor: most are dilapidated; food and medical attention
are inadequate; and internal control is often left to prisoners. At least 35
inmates were killed and more than 50 injured in a fire resulting from a clash in
August 2013 between rival gangs in Palmasola prison. The dead included an 18-
month-old who was spending the night in the prison with his father, who reportedly
died while trying to shield him from the flames.
In September, President Morales signed a decree that allowed the pardoning of
prisoners serving sentences of up to eight years for lesser sentences, while
those in pretrial detention for crimes with penalties of four years or less could
be released and have their charges dropped under a government amnesty.
While the government estimated this would affect roughly 2,000 prisoners, the
Bolivian Catholic Church estimated that only approximately 600 prisoners in
pretrial detention would be eligible for release, due to stringent eligibility
requirements.
Gender-Based Violence and Reproductive Rights
Women and girls in Bolivia are at high risk for gender-based violence.
According to police statistics reported in the press, in 2012 there were over 140
gender-based killings of women, and thousands of complaints filed for acts of gender-based violence. Public protests following several high-profile murders
of women in early 2013, including the fatal stabbing in February of journalist
Hanalí Huaycho by her husband—a former police officer—led the government to
pass a comprehensive law in March to combat gender-based violence. Prior to
her killing, Huaycho had repeatedly reported abuses by her ex-husband to
authorities.
The new law adds “femicide” to the criminal code (with a mandatory 30-year
sentence), establishes a task force to combat domestic violence, and mandates
the construction of women’s shelters, among other reforms.
In Bolivia, victims of sexual violence must receive judicial authorization before
they may access legal abortion services. Failure to do so may result in prosecution:
an indigenous woman served eight months in prison in 2012 after being
convicted for obtaining an abortion without judicial authorization after she
became pregnant from rape.
Freedom of Expression
While public debate is robust, on occasions President Morales or his ministers
have aggressively criticized the press, accusing journalists of lies and politically
motivated distortions. In August 2013, the minister of the presidency accused
the La Paz newspaper, Página Siete, of being “indecorous, malicious, deceitful
and mendacious,” and of having links with Chilean right-wing politicians. The
minister’s comments followed an Independence Day speech the same month in
which President Morales accused unnamed newspapers and television outlets
of having a pro-Chilean stance (Bolivia has a long-standing maritime dispute
with Chile). In August 2012, the government filed a criminal lawsuit against
Página Siete and two other outlets for “inciting racism,” by publishing a headline
it alleged distorted a presidential speech about food shortages. As of
September 2013, the case remained open.
As of October 2013, the National Assembly was debating a bill presented by the
government on transparency and access to public information. The National
Press Association criticized several of the grounds for confidentiality envisaged
in the bill, which grants a wide range of government authorities broad powers
determine exceptions to access.
Key International Actors
Bolivia supported a campaign by Ecuador to undermine the independence of
the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and limit the funding and
effectiveness of its special rapporteurship on freedom of expression. While they
were unable to win support for this effort at the March 2013 meeting of the
Organization of American States General Assembly, both governments, as well
as other members of the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas (ALBA), made
clear their intent to press for these changes in the future.
In June 2013, the Committee against Torture (CAT) urged Bolivia to adopt legislation
establishing torture as a crime in its own right as defined in the
Convention Against Torture and expressed concern at delays in investigations
into allegations of torture.
In October 2013, in a draft version of its concluding observations on Bolivia’s
third periodic report, the UN Human Rights Committee urged Bolivia to implement
alternatives to preventive detention and to strictly limit its duration, and
to eliminate the requirement of prior judicial authorization for therapeutic abortion
and abortion in cases of rape and incest, among other recommendations.
In April 2013, the UN Committee on Migrant Workers expressed concern at persistent
discrimination against migrant workers and refugees in Bolivia and the
absence of any record of compensation paid to migrant workers whose rights
had been violated.
Also in April, Bolivia became the second International Labour Organization
member state in Latin America to ratify the Domestic Workers Convention,
which provides critical protections for millions of domestic workers—mostly
women and girls—who perform essential household work in other persons’
homes.