Brazil
Brazil is among the most influential democracies in regional and global affairs,
and in recent years has emerged as an increasingly important voice in debates
over international responses to human rights problems. At home, the country
continues to confront serious human rights challenges, including unlawful
police killings, the use of torture, prison overcrowding, and ongoing impunity
for abuses committed during the country’s military rule (1964-1985).
Faced with high levels of violent crime, some Brazilian police units engage in
abusive practices with impunity. In recent years, the São Paulo and Rio de
Janeiro state governments have implemented measures aimed at improving
police performance and curbing abuses, yet police misreporting and other
forms of cover-up persist.
Beginning in June, hundreds of thousands of protesters participated in nationwide
demonstrations against inadequate public services and the high cost of
staging the World Cup and Olympics in 2014 and 2016 respectively, as well as
government corruption and other grievances. In multiple incidents, police used
teargas, pepper-spray, and rubber bullets disproportionately against the
demonstrators. In October, Rio de Janeiro police arrested more than 200 people
following a protest during which banks, stores, and buildings were destroyed.
The federal minister of justice and public security officials in Rio and São Paulo
states announced in November that they would work together more closely to
prevent and punish violence by protesters and police alike.
In August, President Dilma Rousseff signed a law creating a National
Mechanism to Prevent and Combat Torture that will consist of 11 experts and
have authority to conduct unannounced visits to civilian and military establishments
where individuals are deprived of their liberty.
Public Security and Police Conduct
Widespread violence perpetrated by criminal gangs and abusive police plague
many Brazilian cities. According to the Brazilian Forum on Public Security, a
nongovernmental organization (NGO) that gathers official data from state and
federal bodies, 1,890 people died during police operations in Brazil in 2012, averaging 5 people per day. In Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo states alone, police
were responsible for 362 killings in the state of Rio de Janeiro, and 165 killings
in the state of São Paulo in the first six months of 2013. Police routinely report
these deaths as the result of shoot-outs with criminals. While some police
killings result from legitimate use of force, others do not, a fact documented by
Human Rights Watch and other groups and recognized by Brazilian criminal justice
officials.
In an effort to prevent cover-ups of unlawful police killings, the São Paulo state
government issued a resolution in January 2013 prohibiting police from removing
victims’ corpses from the scenes of the shootings. Police killings in the
state subsequently fell by approximately 34 percent in the first six months of
2013, according to government figures. Yet significant obstacles to accountability
for unlawful killings in São Paulo persist, including the failure of police to
preserve crucial evidence, and the lack of sufficient staff and resources provided
to prosecutors responsible for investigating these cases.
In the state of Rio de Janeiro, 11,749 police officers and other public servants
received financial compensation in April 2013 for meeting reduction targets for
crimes and acts of violence, including police homicides. As of September, 34
Pacifying Police Units (UPP) had also been established in low-income communities
with the goal of providing a more effective police presence. The UPP program
came under sharp scrutiny when a resident of the Rocinha community,
Amarildo Dias de Souza, disappeared on July 14 after being arrested by UPP
police, who later claimed to have released him. On August 2, the national minister
of human rights called on the Rio government to ensure an adequate
investigation into Souza’s disappearance. Twenty-five police officers were subject
to criminal charges for torture in October in connection with Souza’s disappearance.
Seventeen of these officers were also accused of unlawfully concealing
Souza’s body.
Prison Conditions, Torture, and Ill-Treatment of Detainees
Many Brazilian prisons and jails are severely overcrowded and plagued by violence.
The country’s incarceration rate increased almost 30 percent over the
last five years, according to the Ministry of Justice’s Integrated System of
Penitentiary Information (InfoPen). The adult prison population now exceeds half a million people—43 percent more than the prisons were built for. An additional
20,000 children are currently serving prison sentences. Delays within the
justice system contribute to the overcrowding. Nearly 200,000 inmates are in
pretrial detention. In Piauí state, 66 percent of detainees are in pretrial detention,
the highest rate in the country.
Overcrowding and poor sanitation facilitate the spread of disease, and prisoners’
access to medical care remains inadequate. Torture is a chronic problem in
police stations and detention centers. The United Nations Subcommittee on the
Prevention of Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment reported
that it received “repeated and consistent” accounts from inmates of beatings
and other allegations of ill-treatment during police custody. In July 2013,
law enforcement officers in Paraná state allegedly beat, suffocated, and applied
electric shocks to four men to force them to confess to the rape and murder of a
14-year-old girl. In August 2013, security camera footage from the Vila Maria
prison complex in São Paulo state was leaked to the press showing prison
guards beating six children. The prison unit director and three other employees
allegedly involved in the incident were removed from their posts.
Law enforcement agents who commit abuses against inmates and detainees
are rarely brought to justice. In a notable exception, in August 2013, 48 police
officers were convicted of homicide for their participation in the 1992 killing of
111 detainees in the Carandiru prison in São Paulo state.
President Rousseff signed a law in August 2013 establishing the National
Mechanism to Prevent and Combat Torture. The body will consist of 11 experts
with power to conduct unannounced visits to civilian and military establishments
where people are deprived of their liberty, open investigations into possible
cases of torture, and make recommendations to public and private institutions.
It was not operational at time of writing.
Freedom of Expression
Dozens of journalists who covered the nationwide demonstrations in June were
injured or detained by state police. For example, during a protest in São Paulo
on June 13, a reporter and a photographer were hit in the eyes with rubber bullets
and seriously injured. Following this incident, the São Paulo military police
internal affairs unit opened an investigation into the police’s use of force against the journalists and federal authorities called on state governments to
ensure their police forces provided “special protection” for members of the
media.
Six journalists were killed in Brazil between January and November 2013. Two of
the victims worked for the Vale do Aço newspaper in Minas Gerais state, where
investigators concluded in August that police officers were involved in their
killings. The officers implicated were subsequently detained and charged with
aggravated homicide.
By November 2013, 16 out of 27 states had passed legislation to implement the
federal access to information law that went into force in 2012. The law establishes
that the public should have unfettered access to information regarding
violations of fundamental rights.
Reproductive Rights and Gender-Based Violence
Brazil’s criminal code prohibits abortion except in cases of rape or when necessary
to save a woman’s life. In 2012, the Supreme Court expanded the exceptions
to include cases of anencephaly, in which the fetus has a fatal congenital
brain disorder. Women and girls who obtain an abortion outside of these exceptions
may face sentences of up to three years in jail, while people who perform
abortions face up to four years imprisonment.
In August 2013, President Rousseff signed into law a bill that requires public
hospitals to provide comprehensive care for victims of sexual violence, including
“pregnancy prophylaxis” for rape victims and information on the right to
access abortion in cases where it is legal. Rousseff concurrently sent a draft law
to Congress clarifying that “pregnancy prophylaxis” consists of emergency contraception.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
The national Human Rights Ombudsman’s Office received more than 3,000
complaints of violence against lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT)
persons in 2012, 166 percent more than in 2011, when the Ombudsman’s Office
began to track these complaints through a hotline service.
In March 2013, the newly elected president of the Commission for Human
Rights and Minorities of the federal Chamber of Deputies, Pastor Marcos
Feliciano, proposed a legislative bill that would partially suspend a resolution
by the Federal Psychology Council prohibiting psychologists from treating
homosexuality as a disorder. The bill was withdrawn from voting in July following
extensive public criticism.
In May 2013, the National Council of Justice (CNJ) issued a resolution establishing
that notaries who refuse to perform same-sex civil marriages or convert stable
same-sex unions into marriages shall be referred to the judiciary’s internal
affairs unit for disciplinary action. The Supreme Court recognized equal rights
for same-sex couples in 2011.
Labor Rights
Federal government efforts to eradicate forced labor have resulted in more than
44,000 workers being freed from slave-like conditions since 1995, according to
official data. However, the Pastoral Land Commission, a Catholic NGO, received
complaints involving approximately 3,000 workers allegedly subject to forced
labor in 2012. Criminal accountability for offending employers remains relatively
rare.
In June 2013, the Constitution and Justice Commission in the Senate approved a
constitutional amendment that would permit the government to confiscate
properties where forced labor is used without providing compensation to the
owners. Final approval will require a full Senate vote.
Brazil adopted a constitutional amendment in March 2013 that entitles the
country’s estimated 6.5 million domestic workers to overtime pay, unemployment
insurance, pension, a maximum 8-hour workday, and 44-hour work week.
Rural Violence
Rural activists and indigenous leaders involved in conflicts over land continue
to face threats and violence. According to the Pastoral Land Commission, 36
people involved in land conflicts were killed and 77 were victims of attempted
murder throughout the country in 2012. Nearly 2,500 rural activists have
received death threats over the past decade.
In May 2013, several members of the Terena indigenous group were wounded
and one was fatally shot during a court-ordered eviction in the state of Mato
Grosso do Sul. The National Indian Foundation (FUNAI) had designated the
ranch as ancestral Terena land in 2010, but a state court ruled in 2012 that it
belonged to a rancher. According to the Indigenous Missionary Council of the
Catholic Church, 37 members of indigenous tribes were killed in Mato Grosso
do Sul in 2012, the highest number of all Brazilian states.
Confronting Military-Era Abuses
In May 2012, a national truth commission began investigating the systematic
human rights violations that occurred during military rule, from 1964 to 1985,
which included extrajudicial killings, forced disappearances, torture, arbitrary
detention, and the curtailment of free expression.
The perpetrators of these crimes have been shielded from justice by a 1979
amnesty law. In April 2010, the Brazilian Supreme Court reaffirmed lower
courts’ interpretation that the amnesty barred most prosecutions of state
agents for these cases. However, six months later, the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights ruled that this interpretation violated Brazil’s obligations under
international law, and that the amnesty should not be an obstacle to prosecuting
serious human rights violations committed under military rule.
In April 2013, São Paulo prosecutors filed criminal charges against a retired
army colonel and police investigator for concealing the body of a medical student
killed during military rule. A federal judge determined in August that he
will take this case to trial. In contrast, in June, a judge in Rio de Janeiro refused
to try state agents for their alleged involvement in the forced disappearance of
a journalist in 1970.
Key International Actors
In March 2013, the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention expressed concern
regarding prolonged periods of pretrial detention and the lack of adequate public
legal assistance for detainees. In June, the UN special rapporteur on adequate
housing called on local authorities to “refrain from forced evictions” as Brazil prepares to host the 2014 World Cup and 2016 Olympic Games and to
comply with international guidelines when evictions are justified.
During a visit to Brazil in July, Pope Francis condemned unlawful police killings
during a prayer with homeless children in Rio de Janeiro and urged state
authorities and civil society to use dialogue as an alternative to “selfish indifference
and violent protest.”
Brazil’s Foreign Policy
As a returning member to the Human Rights Council, Brazil maintained a positive
voting record, supporting the adoption of resolutions on a number of critical
human rights situations, including Iran and Sri Lanka. In June, for example,
Brazil voted in favor of two resolutions addressing the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Syria and also approved the submission of the final report of the
Independent Commission of Inquiry on Syria to the UN General Assembly.
However, the Brazilian delegation significantly lowered its profile in the council
proceedings and negotiations compared to its prominent engagement during its
previous membership.
At the UN General Assembly, Brazil abstained from a resolution in May condemning
violence in Syria and recognizing the opposition Syrian National
Coalition as “an effective representative interlocutor for a political transition.” It
also abstained in November from a resolution at the UN General Assembly Third
Committee expressing concern regarding ongoing human rights violations in
Iran such as torture and public executions. However, that same month Brazil
supported a resolution calling on all parties in Syria to immediately end all violations
and abuses of international human rights and humanitarian law.
In 2011, the Rousseff administration recalled its ambassador to the
Organization of American States after the Inter-American Commission on
Human Rights issued precautionary measures for Brazil due to an alleged failure
to consult with indigenous groups prior to beginning the construction of the
Belo Monte hydroelectric dam. Brazil has yet to restore the ambassador.
Following press reports in September that the United States and the United
Kingdom carry out massive surveillance of Brazilian citizens, companies and
political leaders, President Rousseff cancelled a state visit to the United States planned for October and announced in a speech to the UN General Assembly
that Brazil would seek to play a leading role in the development of a global
Internet governance mechanism to protect the right to privacy.
Previously, Brazil had expressed concern to UK authorities that a Brazilian citizen
was detained for questioning at Heathrow Airport in London apparently in
connection with US surveillance information leaked to the press by his partner.
In November, Brazil and Germany proposed a UN General Assembly resolution
calling on countries to take measures to end violations of the right to privacy
and ensure effective oversight of state surveillance of communications and collection
of personal data.