BI8Q@C
Brazil is among the most influential democracies in regional and global affairs,
yet it continues to confront very serious human rights challenges at home.
Faced with high levels of violent crime, some Brazilian police units engage in
abusive practices with impunity, instead of pursuing sound policing practices.
Justice officials who seek to hold police officers accountable for unlawful practices
face threats of violence. In August 2011 Judge Patricia Acioli was gunned
down outside her home in the state of Rio de Janeiro, apparently in retaliation
for ordering the detention of police officers suspected of murder.
Detention centers in various states are severely overcrowded, lengthy pre-trial
detention is the norm, and torture continues to be a serious problem. Forced
labor persists in some states despite federal efforts to eradicate it.
Public Security and Police Conduct
Widespread violence perpetrated by criminal gangs and abusive police plague
many Brazilian cities. Violence especially impacts low-income communities. In
Rio de Janeiro, for example, drug gangs that routinely engage in violent crime
and extortion control hundreds of shantytowns. In November 2010, drug gangs
unleashed a wave of attacks in the streets of Rio, setting vehicles ablaze and
staging mass robberies, leading to massive deployment of police and armed
forces to the Complexo do Alemão community.
Police abuse, including extrajudicial execution, is also a chronic problem.
According to official data, police were responsible for 372 killings in the state of
Rio de Janeiro and 252 killings in the state of São Paulo in the first six months
of 2011. Police often claim these are “resistance” killings that occur in confrontations
with criminals. While many police killings undoubtedly result from
legitimate use of force by police officers, many others do not, a fact documented
by Human Rights Watch and other groups and recognized by Brazilian criminal
justice officials.
Reform efforts have fallen short because state criminal justice systems rely
almost entirely on police investigators to resolve these cases, leaving the police largely to regulate themselves. In 2010 São Paulo’s attorney general took
an important step to address the problem of police violence by establishing
that all cases involving alleged police abuse be investigated by a special unit
of prosecutors.
The state of Rio de Janeiro launched the System of Goals and Results Tracking
in 2009, whereby police are awarded financial compensation for meeting crime
reduction targets. These targets were redesigned in January 2011 to include
police homicides. In addition, almost 20 Pacifying Police Units (UPP) have been
installed in Rio since 2008, in order to establish a more effective police presence
at the community level. However, the state has not yet taken adequate
steps to ensure that police who commit abuses are held accountable.
Many Rio communities formerly controlled by drug dealers are now in the hands
of militias composed of police, jail guards, firefighters, and others who coerce
residents to pay for illegal utility hookups, transportation, and security. These
militias have been implicated in execution-style killings, far-reaching extortion
schemes, and the kidnapping and torture of a group of journalists investigating
their activities. In October 2011 Rio Congressman Marcelo Freixo announced his
decision to leave Brazil temporarily due to escalating death threats. He
presided over a parliamentary commission of inquiry that investigated militia
activity in Rio in 2008 and has been outspoken in denouncing links between
certain militia groups and local elected officials.
Judges and magistrates who take on cases of violence by illegal militia face
threats of violence. In August 2011 Judge Patricia Lourival Acioli was gunned
down outside her home in the city of São Gonçalo, apparently in retaliation for
ordering the detention of police officers suspected of murder. She had received
four death threats prior to her murder. The head of Rio’s military police subsequently
resigned and several São Gonçalo police officers were indicted.
Nevertheless, the Brazilian Association of Judges has reported that the number
of judicial workers requesting government protection increased 400 percent
since Acioli’s killing.
Detention Conditions, Torture, and Ill-Treatment of Detainees
Many Brazilian prisons and jails are violent and severely overcrowded.
According to the Ministry of Justice’s Penitentiary Information Integrated System
(INFOPEN), Brazil’s incarceration rate tripled over the last 15 years and the
prison population now exceeds half a million people. Delays within the justice
system contribute to the overcrowding: almost half of all inmates are in pre-trial
detention. On July 4, 2011, Congress passed a law prohibiting pre-trial detention
for crimes punishable by less than four years in jail.
Torture is a chronic problem throughout Brazil’s detention centers and police
stations. A 2010 report by the Pastoral Prison Commission documented cases
of torture in 20 out of 26 Brazilian states. HIV and tuberculosis prevalence rates
in Brazilian prisons are far higher than rates in the general population; inhumane
conditions facilitate the spread of disease, and prisoners’ access to medical
care remains inadequate. In early September 2011, hundreds of detainees
in Maranhão state rioted against prolonged pre-trial detention, unsanitary facilities,
limited access to drinking water, and sexual abuse by prison wards. Rival
factions killed at least 18 prisoners.
On September 30, 2011, President Dilma Roussef proposed legislation to create
a national mechanism—the National System to Prevent and Combat Torture—to
monitor detention centers throughout the country and investigate allegations of
torture and ill-treatment.
Women’s Health and Reproductive Rights
Although Brazil has significantly lowered its maternal mortality rate over the
last two decades, national statistics mask severe disparities based on race,
economic status, region, and urban or rural settings. In August 2011 the United
Nations Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
Women held that in the case of Alyne da Silva Pimental, who died after being
denied timely care at a public health facility, Brazil failed to fulfill its obligation
to guarantee timely, nondiscriminatory, and appropriate maternal health services.
The Brazilian Criminal Code criminalizes abortion except in cases of rape or
when necessary to save a woman’s life. Women and girls who undertake the
procedure voluntarily may be sentenced to up to three years in jail, and their
doctors to up to ten years. Raids on family planning clinics and aggressive prosecution
of abortion further limit women’s and girls’ access to reproductive
health services. There are currently more than 40 draft laws before the House of
Representatives proposing to further restrict access to contraception or punish
abortion more harshly. The Health Ministry estimates that more than one million
illegal abortions are performed every year and hundreds of women and
girls annually seek hospital attention due to complications arising from illicit
abortions.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In May 2011 the Supreme Court unanimously decided to legalize same-sex civil
unions in light of the constitutional guarantee of non-discrimination. Same-sex
spouses now have the same legal rights as their heterosexual counterparts:
broader health insurance coverage, hospital visits, pension plans, and inheritance
rights. The following month a trial court in the state of São Paulo recognized
the first same-sex civil marriage in Brazil. The Superior Justice Court followed
suit in October, setting an important precedent by interpreting the
Brazilian Civil Code as allowing same-sex marriages.
Forced Labor
The federal government has taken important steps to eradicate forced labor
since 1995, including creating mobile investigation units to examine conditions
in rural areas and publishing a “black list” of employers found to have used
forced labor. Official data suggests that more than 39,000 workers have been
freed since 1995. However, the Pastoral Land Commission reported that more
than 4,000 workers were subject to forced labor in 2010. Criminal accountability
for offending employers remains relatively rare.
Rural Violence
Indigenous leaders and rural activists continue to face threats and violence.
According to the Pastoral Land Commission, 34 people were killed and 55 were
victims of attempted murder throughout the country in 2010. Over 1,900 rural
activists have received death threats over the past decade; of these 42 have
been killed. The south of Pará state has long been a focal point of rural violence,
but frontier areas where illegal loggers and ranchers operate in
Maranhão, Mato Grosso, and Rondônia states are becoming dangerous for environmentalists
and government officials alike.
Confronting Past Abuses
Brazil has granted over US$1 billion in financial compensation to more than
12,000 victims of abuses committed by state agents during the military dictatorship
from 1964 to 1985. On October 26, 2011, Congress approved a law creating
a truth commission charged with “examining and clarifying” human rights
abuses committed between 1946 and 1988.
However, there has been little progress in prosecuting those responsible for
atrocities. A 1979 amnesty law has thus far been interpreted to bar prosecutions
of state agents, an interpretation that the Supreme Court reaffirmed in
April 2010.
Freedom of Expression and Access to Information
In July 2009 the Federal District Court of Justice issued an injunction prohibiting
the newspaper O Estado de São Paulo from publishing stories containing information
on the “Operação Faktor” police investigation involving Fernando
Sarney, son of Senate President José Sarney. Despite strenuous criticism from
national and international press freedom organizations, the Supreme Court
upheld the ruling in December 2009.
On June 15, 2011, the Supreme Court unanimously held that peaceful demonstrations
calling for marijuana to be legalized are protected under the constitutional
guarantees of freedom of expression and assembly. Certain state judges have prohibited such demonstrations on the grounds that they encouraged or
glorified drug use.
In September 2011 the host of a radio show on Radio Frontera, Vanderlei
Canuto Leandro, was shot by unidentified assailants in the city of Tabatinga,
Amazonas state, purportedly in retaliation of his investigations of corruption by
local government officials. It was the fifth such killing of a journalist in Brazil in
2011, according to the Inter-American system’s special rapporteur for freedom
of expression.
Key International Actors
The Inter-American system has played an important role in addressing key
human rights issues. In November 2010 the Inter-American Court of Human
Rights ruled that Brazil’s amnesty law cannot prevent the investigation and
prosecution of serious human rights violations and crimes against humanity
committed by state agents during the military regime. In resolutions in February
and September 2011 the court also instructed the state of Espírito Santo to take
steps to address alleged abuses against juveniles detained at the Unidade de
Internação Socioeducativa (UNIS) detention center.
In April 2011 the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights issued precautionary
measures for Brazil due to an alleged failure to consult with indigenous
groups prior to beginning the construction of the Belo Monte hydroelectric dam,
slated to be the world’s third largest. The Rousseff administration publicly
rejected the commission’s findings and characterized them as “premature and
unjustified.” On July 29, 2011, the commission modified its precautionary measures
on the basis of information provided by the Brazilian government. A federal
judge in the state of Pará enjoined work at the Xingu River basin in
September 2011 in order to protect local fish stocks deemed essential to the
livelihood of indigenous communities. The consortium building the dam
appealed the decision in November.
In May 2011 the UN special rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery
encouraged Brazil to strengthen efforts to close loopholes perpetuating the
practice of slavery, including forced labor in the country’s rural areas.
Brazil has emerged as an important and influential voice in debates over international
responses to human rights issues at the UN. At the UN Human Rights
Council during the July 2010 to June 2011 period, Brazil consistently voted in
support of resolutions addressing country situations, including on Sudan, North
Korea, Iran, Belarus, and Syria. However, at the UN Security Council in October
2011 it refused to support a resolution condemning state-sponsored violence in
Syria.