Brazil
Brazil is among the most influential democracies in regional and global affairs,
yet it continues to confront very serious human rights challenges at home.
Faced with high levels of violent crime, some Brazilian police units engage in
abusive practices with impunity, instead of pursuing sound policing practices.
Justice officials who seek to hold police officers accountable for unlawful practices
face threats of violence.
Detention centers in various states are severely overcrowded, lengthy pre-trial
detention is common, and torture continues to be a serious problem. Forced
labor persists in some states despite federal efforts to eradicate it.
In 2012, Brazil took significant steps toward addressing grave human rights
abuses that were committed during the country’s military dictatorship (1964-
1985). In May, a national truth commission began investigating abuse cases
from that era, and in August, a federal judge ordered the first criminal trials of
former state agents for their alleged roles in enforced disappearances committed
in 1973 and 1974.
Public Security and Police Conduct
Widespread violence perpetrated by criminal gangs and abusive police plague
many Brazilian cities. In Rio de Janeiro, for example, drug gangs routinely
engage in violent crime and militias composed of police, jail guards, firefighters,
and others have been implicated in far-reaching extortion schemes.
According to official data, police were responsible for 214 killings in the state of
Rio de Janeiro and 251 killings in the state of São Paulo in the first 6 months of
2012. Police routinely claim these are “resistance” killings that occur in confrontations
with criminals. While many police killings undoubtedly result from
legitimate use of force by police officers, others do not, a fact documented by
Human Rights Watch and other groups and recognized by Brazilian criminal justice
officials.
In 2012, the state of Rio de Janeiro continued to award financial compensation
for meeting crime reduction targets, including police homicides, as part of the
System of Goals and Results Tracking, which was established in 2009. In April,
more than US$20 million were distributed among 9,000 police officers. In addition,
as of October, 28 Pacifying Police Units (UPP) had been installed in Rio
since 2008 in order to establish a more effective police presence at the community
level. However, the state has not yet taken adequate steps to ensure that
police who commit abuses are held accountable.
Judges and magistrates who take on cases of violence by illegal militia and government
corruption face threats of violence. On August 23, 2012, human rights
defender Diego Luiz Berbare Bandeira was gunned down outside his home in
the state of São Paulo, apparently in retaliation for exposing abuses and corrupt
practices by police officers and prison authorities in Caraguatatuba.
President Dilma Rousseff signed a law in July 2012 to allow criminal cases
involving organized crime to be adjudicated by panels of three judges. In
September, the president signed a law increasing prison sentences for paramilitary
and militia activities.
Detention Conditions, Torture, and Ill-Treatment of Detainees
Many Brazilian prisons and jails are violent and severely overcrowded.
According to the Ministry of Justice’s Integrated System of Penitentiary
Information (InfoPen), Brazil’s incarceration rate increased approximately 40
percent over the last five years and the prison population now exceeds half a
million people—two-thirds more than the prisons were built for. Delays within
the justice system contribute to the overcrowding: nearly 175,000 inmates are in
pre-trial detention. For example, the Unidade de Internação do Plano Piloto
juvenile detention center in Brasilia operated at more than double its capacity
in 2012. Three children were killed there in August and September, reportedly
by gang members.
Inhumane prison conditions facilitate the spread of disease, and prisoners’
access to medical care remains inadequate. In April 2012, nearly 500 detainees Sergipe rioted in protest against alleged beatings by prison guards and inadequate
food.
Torture is a chronic problem throughout Brazil’s detention centers and police
stations. The United Nations Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment visited penitentiary and police institutions
in the states of São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, Espírito Santo, and Goiás in
September 2011 and reported receiving “repeated and consistent” accounts
from inmates of beatings and other allegations of ill-treatment during police
custody such as the obligation to sleep in unsanitary cells without proper
access to water and food.
At this writing, the Chamber of Deputies had yet to vote on legislation proposed
by President Rousseff in September 2011 to create a national mechanism—the
National System to Prevent and Combat Torture—to monitor detention centers
throughout the country and investigate allegations of torture and ill-treatment.
Reproductive Rights and Gender-Based Violence
Although Brazil has significantly lowered its maternal mortality rate over the last
two decades, national statistics mask severe disparities based on race, economic
status, region, and urban or rural settings.
In February 2012, the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of Federal Law
11340 on domestic violence (the Maria da Penha law) and ruled that prosecutors
may bring domestic violence cases regardless of whether the victim presses
charges or not.
Brazil’s criminal code criminalizes abortion except in cases of rape or when necessary
to save a woman’s life. Women and girls who obtain an abortion outside
of these two exceptions face sentences of up to three years in jail, while people
who perform abortions face up to four years. In March 2012, federal police in
the states of Mato Grosso and Goiás arrested a doctor and 10 pharmacy workers
for allegedly providing illegal abortions or selling abortion-inducing drugs.
On April 12, the Supreme Court ruled that abortion is also constitutional in
cases of anencephaly, in which the fetus has a fatal congenital brain disorder, given the woman’s right to dignity, autonomy, privacy, and physical,
psychological, and moral integrity.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In May 2012, the Senate Human Rights Committee approved a bill providing for
civil unions between two persons, without specifying gender, and the conversion
of civil unions to civil marriages. This follows the 2011 rulings by the
Supreme Court and the Superior Justice Court that recognize equal rights for
same-sex unions and that same-sex marriage is permitted under the civil code.
Forced Labor
The federal government has taken important steps to eradicate forced labor
since 1995, and official data suggests that more than 41,000 workers have been
freed from slave-like conditions since then. However, the Pastoral Land
Commission reported that nearly 4,000 workers were subject to forced labor in
2011. Criminal accountability for offending employers remains relatively rare.
Congress approved a constitutional amendment in May 2012 that permits the
government to confiscate properties where forced labor is used without providing
compensation.
Rural Violence
Indigenous leaders and rural activists continue to face threats and violence.
According to the Pastoral Land Commission, 29 people involved in land conflicts
were killed and 38 were victims of attempted murder throughout the country in
2011, and the number of rural conflicts nationwide rose to 1,363 that year. More
than 2,000 rural activists have received death threats over the past decade.
Confronting Past Abuses
In May 2012, a truth commission, charged with “examining and clarifying”
human rights abuses committed between 1946 and 1988, began its work. The commission announced in September that it will only investigate grave human
rights violations committed by or on behalf of state agents.
Prosecutors in São Paulo state filed criminal charges against a retired army
colonel and a civil police precinct chief in April 2012 for grave abuses committed
in the 1970s. This was the second case in Brazil in which criminal charges
have been brought against a Brazilian official for human rights crimes committed
during the country’s military dictatorship. A 1979 amnesty law has thus far
been interpreted to bar most prosecutions of state agents, an interpretation
that the Supreme Court reaffirmed in April 2010.
Brazil has granted more than US$1 billion in financial compensation to more
than 12,000 victims of abuses committed by state agents during the military
dictatorship.
Freedom of Expression and Access to Information
At least seven journalists were killed in Brazil in 2012 and many more were
threatened and assaulted. In May 2012, the Ministry of Human Rights proposed
creating an observatory to monitor violence against journalists.
An access to information law went into effect in May 2012, expanding access to
documents under the custody of local, state, and federal government officials.
The law ensures that information regarding violations of fundamental rights
shall not be subject to access restrictions.
In September, a state court in São Paulo ordered Youtube to remove the movie
“Innocence of Muslims” from its website in a lawsuit brought by the National
Union of Islamic Entities against Google Brasil Internet Ltda.
Key International Actors
The Inter-American system has played an important role in addressing key
human rights issues in Brazil. In November 2010, the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights (IACrtHR) ruled that the country’s amnesty law cannot prevent the
investigation and prosecution of serious human rights violations and crimes
against humanity committed by state agents during the military regime. In February and September 2011 resolutions, the court also instructed the state of
Espírito Santo to take steps to address alleged abuses against juveniles
detained at the Unidade de Internação Socioeducativa (UNIS) detention center.
In April 2011, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) issued
precautionary measures for Brazil due to an alleged failure to consult with
indigenous groups prior to beginning the construction of the Belo Monte hydroelectric
dam, slated to be the world’s third largest. The Rousseff administration
publicly rejected the commission’s findings and characterized them as “premature
and unjustified.” It also recalled its ambassador to the Organization of
American States (OAS) and withdrew its candidate for the Inter-American
Commission. It has since supported efforts to weaken the Inter-American system
of human rights—most recently at the OAS annual assembly in June 2012—
including a proposed reform that would reduce the commission’s power to issue
precautionary measures.
In August 2012, a federal district court in Brasília halted construction of the Belo
Monte dam on the grounds that Brazil’s congress had failed to consult local
indigenous communities before construction. However, when this judgment was
appealed to the Supreme Court, the chief justice authorized the work at Belo
Monte to proceed. In September 2012, federal prosecutors requested that the
chief justice reconsider his decision.
Brazil has emerged as an important and influential voice in debates over international
responses to human rights issues at the UN. At the UN Human Rights
Council (HRC) from July 2010 to June 2011, Brazil consistently voted in support of
resolutions addressing country situations, including on Sudan, North Korea,
Iran, Belarus, and Syria. Brazil will again be a member of the council in 2013.
At the UN General Assembly, Brazil voted in favor of two resolutions condemning
state-sponsored violence in Syria in February and August 2012. During a
Universal Periodic Review (UPR) at the HRC in September 2012, Brazil accepted
most of the country recommendations regarding torture, detention conditions,
and public security.
The UN special rapporteur on adequate housing expressed concern in April 2011
regarding allegations of displacement and evictions potentially leading to human rights violations as Brazil prepares to host the 2014 World Cup and 2016
Olympic Games.
In February 2012, the UN Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) acknowledged the country’s efforts to
implement measures for reducing the maternal mortality rate, but also
expressed concern that the sole focus on care services for pregnant women may
not sufficiently address all causes of maternal mortality in Brazil.