Brazil
Egregious abuses in the criminal justice system—including extrajudicial
killings and torture by police and prison authorities—remain Brazil’s
most pressing human rights problem, but in 2004 there were new
threats to freedom of expression. A foreign correspondent was nearly
expelled from Brazil for an article that President Luiz Inácio Lula da
Silva considered offensive, and the government took steps to create regulatory
bodies for the country’s film, broadcast, and print media.
Socially and economically marginalized populations are among those
hardest hit by long-standing and systemic weaknesses of the criminal
justice system. The problems of forced labor and human trafficking, as
well as rural violence and land conflicts, also target the country’s poorer
citizens. As in the past, perpetrators of human rights abuses enjoy
impunity in the vast majority of cases.
Police Violence
Both civil and military police forces are frequently responsible for serious
abuses, including torture, extrajudicial executions, “disappearances,”
and acts of racism. In the first six months of the year, the state police
ombudsman for São Paulo reported 109 homicides by police. Although
high, the figure represented a 73 percent decrease from that of the previous
year, when police killings reached an eleven-year high. In Rio de
Janeiro, the only state to publish such data monthly, police killed 593
people during the first eight months of 2004, representing a 25 percent
decline from the previous year’s figure. Despite these decreases, unofficial
estimates have placed the total number of police killings in Brazil at
around 3,000 annually. Indeed, the death toll may be even higher as
many states do not record such figures correctly and some do not
record them at all.
Complaints of police abuse tend to cite brutality, murder, corruption,
and a lack of interest in maintaining order in certain areas. In October
2004, rights groups accused the Rio police of sitting on the sidelines in
the favela of Vigario Geral while rival drug gangs engaged in deadly gun
battles, endangering the lives of the area’s residents.
Free Expression
Brazil tarnished its record of respect for freedom of expression in May
2004 when it took steps to expel a foreign correspondent for commenting
on the president’s alleged drinking habit. In response to an article
published in the New York Times, the government canceled Larry
Rohter’s visa, stating that it was “inconvenient” for him to stay in the
country. The government later changed course and allowed him to
remain.
With the introduction of legislation to create a National Journalists’
Council just three months later, the government cast further doubt on
its commitment to press freedom. The draft law, still pending at this
writing, would empower the council to “orient, discipline and monitor”
journalists and their work and require all journalists to register with the
body. A violation of the council’s rules could result in fines or even dismissal
from the official registry. Critics of the proposed measures,
among them the country’s main journalism, film, and television associations,
called the draft law the worst affront to press freedom since censorship
under the military dictatorship.
Also widely criticized is draft legislation that would establish a National
Cinema and Audiovisual Agency. The agency would have the power to
conduct prior review of programming and could veto certain programs
if they were judged not to meet standards of “editorial responsibility.”
In a related move, the government has also proposed legislation, passed
by the Senate on June 29, 2004, to “register, regulate and control” non-governmental organizations (NGOs). Federal funding to these organizations
would be conditioned on their registry, and they would be
required to report annually on all private and public funding they
receive, including donations.
Detention Conditions
According to the federal Ministry of Justice, the number of inmates in
Brazilian prisons rose from 114,000 in 1992 to 300,000 in 2004. Severe
overcrowding and institutionalized violence—such as beatings, torture
and even summary executions—are chronic and widespread in Brazilian
prisons. In April 2004, a riot in Urso Branco prison in the northwestern
state of Rondonia left nine inmates dead, two of whom were decapitated
in front of shocked onlookers. According to press reports, the prison
was designed to hold 350 inmates, but housed some one thousand more
than capacity at the time of the riots. In a step toward greater transparency,
the government recently announced the creation of a System
of Penitentiary Information (Infopen), which it says will make data on
prison conditions available online, and will be updated regularly by state
officials.
Children are vulnerable to abuses in the juvenile justice system.
Although they are promised special protection under Brazilian and
international law, children in Brazil are routinely detained in abusive
conditions, where they face violence at the hands of other youths or
prison guards, and are unnecessarily confined to their cells for lengthy
periods of time. As of early 2004, the Justice Ministry reported that
13,489 under-eighteen-year-olds were in detention, half of them in the
state of São Paulo alone, exceeding the capacity of the country’s juvenile
detention centers, which are designed to hold 11,199. In May 2004,
rights groups called for more transparency in cases of abuse, following
public allegations that a new body within São Paulo’s state juvenile
detention system charged with investigating such abuses had thrown out
94 percent of the cases that came before it in its first year of operations. According to these groups, official sources counted ten deaths in custody
and twenty-six riots in São Paulo juvenile facilities in the same
period.
Impunity and Access to Justice
The vast majority of human rights crimes in Brazil go unpunished,
reflecting widespread corruption and other factors. Lack of access to
justice—especially for the poorest and most vulnerable sectors of society—
is a major problem, even according to Brazil’s own Secretariat for
Human Rights. Though the federal government created a Public
Transparency and Anti-Corruption Council in September 2004, additional
efforts are necessary to increase transparency and to ensure that
human rights abusers are punished adequately.
The Brazilian government has yet to pass federal laws to criminalize a
number of serious human rights offenses. Such laws, if enacted and
enforced, would contribute significantly to improving the country’s
poor record of allowing abusers to go free.
Forced Labor and Trafficking in Human Beings
More than a hundred years after slavery was formally abolished in
Brazil, a modern-day version of this hateful practice continues to thrive
in rural areas. In 2004, the Labor Ministry made progress toward
addressing the issue of forced labor through a national campaign conducted
in partnership with the International Labor Organization. As of
September 2004, mobile inspections teams had freed 2,078 people in
situations of forced labor. Worryingly, however, three inspectors and
their driver were killed on January 28, 2004, in Unaí, Minas Gerais, as
they were investigating forced labor on ranches in the region.
The Brazilian Ministry of Justice, in partnership with UNODC,
launched a program in May 2004 against human trafficking. According to the U.N., most victims of such trafficking in Brazil are women, who
are trafficked through international prostitution networks. A U.S.
Congressional report estimated that between eight hundred and nine
hundred women are exported for these purposes each year.
Rural Violence and Land Conflict
Though urban violence in Brazil grabs the most attention, the problem
of rural violence is extremely serious. The Pastoral Land Commission
has reported that 1,349 people were murdered in rural areas between
1985 and 2003. Only seventy-five cases have gone to court, however,
and, of these, forty-four resulted in acquittal. In 2003 alone, seventythree
rural laborers were murdered, the highest number since 1990 and
up nearly 70 percent from the previous year.
In January 2004, twenty-nine illegal diamond miners were killed on the
Roosevelt reservation, home of the Cinta-Larga indigenous peoples in
the state of Rondônia. Members of the tribe claimed responsibility for
the massacre, stating they were acting to protect their land, which has
been the site of violent clashes and invasions by miners for decades.
Key International Actors
The U.N. special rapporteur on the right to adequate housing, Miloon
Kothari, visited Brazil in May and June 2004. He expressed concern
regarding the removal of indigenous communities from ancestral lands
in Alcântra, Maranhão—due to expansion of an aeronautical missile
launch base—urging that such removals be carried out only with the
consent of the populations facing displacement.
In an official visit to Brazil in early October, U.S. Secretary of State
Colin Powell praised the country’s role in supplying peacekeeping
troops to Haiti, a country suffering from political turmoil and natural
disasters.