Central African Republic
Since gaining independence in 1960, the poverty stricken Central African Republic
(CAR) has experienced dictatorial rule, corruption, and severe political instability.
François Bozizé, the current President, came to power in a March 2003 military
coup and in May 2005 won a contested election organized to legitimate his
administration.
Since 2005, the government of President François Bozizé has been facing two
major rebellions. The Popular Army for the Restoration of the Republic and
Democracy (Armee Populaire pour la Restauration de la Republique et la
Democratie, APRD) is active in the northwestern provinces of Ouham, Ouham-
Pende, and Nana-Grebizi. The Union of Democratic Forces for Unity (Union des
Forces Democratiques pour le Rassemblement, UFDR) is most active in the remote
northeastern provinces of Bamingui-Bangoran and Vakaga. Although the CAR borders
the volatile eastern region of Chad and war-ravaged Darfur in Sudan, the
roots and dynamics of rebellion within the country are largely local, rather than
being “spill-over” from the crises in neighboring states. The grievances of the
main rebel protagonists lie in part in the exclusion of former President Patassé
(1993-2003) from the political process, and in part in economic and social disparities.
Both rebel groups have used child soldiers, have been responsible for widespread
looting and the forced taxation of the civilian population in areas they
control; and rebels in the northeast have committed killings, beatings, and rape.
However, it is the government’s Central African Armed Forces (Forces armees
Centrafricaines, FACA) and elite Presidential Guard (Garde presidentielle, GP) that
have been responsible for the majority of abuses—summary executions, unlawful
killings, and village burnings—in northern CAR. Several hundred people have
been killed and over 200,000 civilians have been displaced and now live in desperate
conditions in the bush. Abuses by government forces often appear to have
been committed in retaliation for rebel attacks. The perpetrators of violence and
abuse, the vast majority of them government soldiers, have enjoyed total impunity
for acts that include war crimes.
Government Abuses in Northwestern CAR
The political grievances of supporters of former President Ange Felix Patassé, who
was toppled by the 2003 coup and barred from competing in the 2005 election,
and the failure of CAR security forces to protect local communities from banditry,
are both important elements behind the emergence of the APRD. Armed bandits,
known as zaraguinas or coupeurs de route, regularly attack villagers, kidnap children
for ransom, and kill civilians. Cattle-herders from the Peulh ethnic group in
the northwest have been particularly targeted because of their valuable livestock.
The APRD’s professed aim is to improve the security situation.
In direct response to APRD activity in the area, the CAR security forces have committed
serious and widespread abuses against the civilian population, including
multiple summary executions and unlawful killings, widespread burning of civilian
homes, and the forced displacement of hundreds of thousands of persons,
instilling terror in the civilian population.
Evidence collected by Human Rights Watch suggests that hundreds of people
have been killed by government security forces since 2005. In some cases dozens
of civilians were killed in a single day, many suffering unspeakable brutality. For
example, on February 11, 2006, a GP unit killed at least 30 civilians in more than
a dozen separate villages located along the Nana-Barya to Bemal road. On March
22, 2006 this same GP unit beheaded a teacher in Bemal with a knife while he
was still alive. Some victims are targeted simply for wearing amulets, a common
accessory in the region. On January 27, 2007, FACA soldiers executed Roger
Masamra, the son of the village catechist in Zoumanga, who was accused of
being a rebel because he was wearing a traditional gri-gri amulet. On January 30,
2007, FACA forces executed an unidentified Chadian Christian merchant at the
Kabo market, also because he was wearing protective gri-gri amulets, and had
scars on his hands that the FACA soldiers claimed were old bullet wounds.
According to a local humanitarian official the eyes of the victim had been gouged
out. Other civilians have simply “disappeared” in military custody, arrested and
not seen alive again.
Since December 2005, government forces, particularly the GP, have also been
almost solely responsible for the burning down of more than 10,000 civilian homes in northwestern CAR. Hundreds of villages across vast swathes of northern
CAR have been destroyed. Troops arrived in villages and indiscriminately fired
into the civilian population, forcing them to flee before burning down their
homes, sometimes looting them first. Over 100,000 civilians have been forced to
abandon their road-side homes and live deep inside the bush, too fearful to
return to their burned villages in case of repeat attack.
The displaced live in dire conditions with irregular access to clean water and
food. Their widely dispersed shelters are beyond the reach of the humanitarian
community. Educational facilities have been closed, and aside from mobile clinics
run by international organizations in some areas, health care is non-existent.
Government Abuses in Northeastern CAR
The UFDR rebellion has its roots in the deep marginalization of northeastern CAR,
which is virtually cut off from the rest of the country and is almost completely
undeveloped. Elements from the Gula ethnic group, many of them trained militarily
as anti-poaching units, are at the core of the rebellion, citing grievances such
as discrimination against their community.
From October to December 2006, the UFDR rebel movement gained international
attention by seizing military control of the major towns in the remote Vakaga and
Bamingui-Bangoran provinces of northeastern CAR, right on the border of Sudan’s
Darfur region. The UFDR’s bold military offensive led to French military intervention
on behalf of the CAR government in December 2006, allowing the security
forces to regain control of urban centers.
The rebellion has been accompanied by an increase in pre-existing anti-Gula sentiment
among government officials, the military, and the general population. In
late 2006, as CAR security forces were regaining control of northeastern urban
centers occupied by the rebels, several suspected UFDR rebels were summarily
executed, and numerous houses were burned down. Almost all of these abuses
were committed against ethnic Gulas, causing virtually the entire Gula population
to flee from towns and villages formerly occupied by the UFDR, including Ndele,
Ouadda, Ouanda Djalle, and Birao.
Rebel Abuses
APRD rebels in the northwest have engaged in widespread extortion, forced taxation,
kidnappings for ransom, and beatings of civilians, particularly in the
Batangafo-Kabo-Ouandago area of Ouham province. In that area, particularly on
the Batangafo-Ouandago road, almost all villages have been systematically looted
of all livestock, and village leaders have been regularly kidnapped for ransom.
APRD rebels also have large numbers of child soldiers in their ranks, some as
young as 12. Human Rights Watch documented one summary execution by the
APRD in 2006.
UFDR rebels in the northeast have attacked villages and towns, often indiscriminately
firing at fleeing civilians. UFDR rebels have also been responsible for summary
executions of captured civilians. From October to December 2006, rebels
carried out a massive looting campaign in areas they controlled. The UFDR also
has child soldiers in its ranks, some of them forcibly recruited.
The Need for Accountability
Government abuses in northern CAR are no secret inside the country. Local newspapers
and radio frequently report them, opposition parliamentarians have prepared
public reports documenting the atrocities, and diplomatic envoys regularly
raise their concerns with President Bozizé. However, even in the capital, Bangui,
security forces carry out summary killings of suspected bandits and rebels with
impunity.
In late 2007, following the publication of Human Rights Watch report in
September, President Bozizé has publicly admitted that CAR forces have committed
abuses and that those responsible will be held accountable. The Presidential
Guard was temporarily withdrawn to Bangui. Despite this statement, the government
has not investigated, prosecuted, or punished a single military officer and
five civilians were reportedly killed by the Presidential Guard and the FACA in late
October and early November 2007 in the northwestern region.
Key International Actors
For much of the year, the current conflicts and the human rights situation in CAR
were hardly on the international agenda. The International Criminal Court (ICC)
prosecutor’s office announced in May 2007 that they would investigate crimes
committed in CAR during the 2002-2003 fighting, and that they would continue to
monitor the current conflict. In October, the ICC opened a new field office in
Bangui.
A 19-person human rights unit in the office of the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in the Central African Republic (BONUCA) has not effectively monitored
or reported on human rights abuses in the north. The head of BONUCA was
replaced at the end of 2007 and it is anticipated that more senior staff will be
appointed to the human rights unit.
Largely in response to the risk of spillover from conflict in CAR’s neighbors, a
multi-dimensional international force for Chad and the Central African Republic
(MINURCAT) was authorized by United Nations Security Council Resolution 1778 in
September. It is due to deploy in Birao in northeastern CAR to secure the area but
will not operate in the northwestern region where most human rights abuses have
been committed.
Later in 2007 the issue of protection of civilians and abuses in the north became
a central part of international engagement in CAR. President Sarkozy of France—
without whose direct military support the government of President Bozizé would
not survive—has declared that he was expecting “efforts in improving human
rights” in CAR from President Bozizé. France has decided to review and may
reconsider its military cooperation agreements with CAR but has not publicly
demanded accountability for the crimes committed there.
In September 2007 Human Rights Watch published a major report on the human
rights situation in the northern war zones.