Central African Republic (CAR)
Civilians continue to suffer serious human rights abuses at the hands of multiple
armed groups active in the north of Central African Republic, which has been an
area of antigovernment insurgency since 2004. Loosely organized criminal gangs
known as zaraguinas that are not party to the conflict in CAR have also been
responsible for criminal abuse.
The CAR government and the major rebel groups signed a peace agreement in
June, but disagreements between rebels and the government over an amnesty
law passed by parliament in September threatened to derail the peace process.
Rebel leaders contended that the amnesty insulated government officials from
responsibility for war crimes.
Abuses in the North
Government security forces were responsible for the majority of human rights violations
in the northwest of CAR from 2005 to 2007. Abuses by government forces,
however, have diminished since most of the elite Presidential Guard (GP) forces,
which committed the most serious abuses, were withdrawn from the region in
mid-2007, in response to international concern. Taking the place of the GP in the
north were Central African Armed Forces (FACA) units, with well-trained commanders
installed in a deliberate effort to address indiscipline.
Although FACA soldiers were responsible for thefts and harassment of civilians in
2008, particularly at roadblocks and checkpoints along roads in the northwest,
violent abuses against civilians by FACA elements appeared to be isolated incidents
rather than systematic. In September the CAR government established an
office for international humanitarian law within the FACA that is responsible for
conveying the laws of war to members of the army.
However, civilians in the north continue to face violence and harassment at the
hands of multiple armed groups, and the government is failing to provide them
with protection. The FACA has yet to plug a security vacuum created by the withdrawal
of the GP, and rebel factions and criminal gangs have taken advantage of
this to commit abuses with complete impunity. In the northwest, rebel fighters from the Popular Army for the Restoration of the Republic and Democracy (APRD)
were responsible for unlawful killings, rapes and property thefts. APRD abuses
increased in 2008, with a high incidence of abuses in areas where none had
been reported one year earlier, thanks to the relative absence of government
security forces. Since January the Chadian National Army (ANT) has launched
cross-border raids on villages in northwestern CAR, killing civilians, burning villages,
and stealing cattle.
Lawlessness and the Zaraguinas
The past year has seen a sharp increase in the number, scope, and frequency of
attacks perpetrated by loosely organized criminal gangs known as zaraguinas,
which have come to constitute the single greatest threat to civilians in the north
of CAR. Zaraguinas are not parties to conflict in CAR but have goals that are purely
criminal and engage in tactics that include hostage-taking. Zaraguinas have
killed hostages when ransom demands were not met.
In July the United Nations estimated that 197,200 people in the north of the country
had been displaced due to insecurity, in many cases zaraguina attacks.
Zaraguina activities have had a deleterious impact on humanitarian operations in
the north of the country, with private transporters contracted by the UN to deliver
aid supplies frequently fired upon.
Lack of Accountability
The government has taken some steps to counter impunity in CAR by prosecuting
individual members of the CAR security forces found to be responsible for crimes
such as theft and assault, but for the most part the CAR government turned a
blind eye to abuses committed by its forces. Senior GP commanders responsible
for abuses in 2006-2007 that may have been at the level of war crimes have
never been brought to trial or even disciplined. Diplomats in Bangui urged CAR
President Francois Bozizé to institute judicial proceedings against Eugène
Ngaïkosset, the commander of a GP unit that has been implicated in widespread
atrocities in the northwest. Instead, Ngaïkosset was promoted to the rank of captain
and placed in charge of a GP security brigade. 
Activities of the International Criminal Court
On May 24, 2008, Belgian authorities arrested Jean-Pierre Bemba, leader of the
Movement for the Liberation of Congo (MLC). He was transferred to The Hague,
where the International Criminal Court (ICC) charged him with four counts of war
crimes and two counts of crimes against humanity, all allegedly committed in the
south of CAR between October 2002 and March 2003. In June 2008 the office of
the prosecutor was permitted to include two additional counts, one of war crimes
and one of crimes against humanity. In May 2007 the office of the prosecutor had
announced that it would monitor more recent events to determine whether an
investigation into crimes committed in the north of the country would warrant
investigation. On June 10, 2008, ICC Prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo addressed
a letter to President Bozizé noting that acts of violence committed in the north of
the country would require sustained attention.
Ocampo’s letter resulted in a letter from President Bozizé to UN Secretary-General
Ban-Ki Moon in August, wherein Bozizé asked the United Nations to intercede in
any possible ICC investigations of crimes in the north of the country pursuant to
article 16 of the Rome Statute of the ICC, which empowers the Security Council to
suspend court proceedings for up to 12 months renewable if required to maintain
international peace and security. Security Council intercession is highly unlikely
given that the only ongoing ICC proceedings in CAR pertain to crimes committed
in the south of the country in the 2002-2003 period, and there are no ICC investigations
concerning northern CAR at this point.
Key International Actors
The United Nations Peace Building Support Office in the Central African Republic
(BONUCA) has been present in Bangui since 2000 with a mandate to support
peace efforts. BONUCA raises human rights cases with CAR government officials.
In September 2007 the UN Security Council approved a resolution to dispatch a
European Union-United Nations hybrid civilian protection mission to Chad and
the Central African Republic. The UN humanitarian component of the mission, the
United Nations Mission in Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT), and the EU military component, the European Union Force (EUFOR Tchad/RCA), established
a base in Birao in northeast CAR in 2008.
In 2008, the Economic and Monetary Union of Central Africa (CEMAC) established
the Mission for the Consolidation of Peace in Central Africa (MICOPAX), a peacebuilding
mission incorporating combat troops, police, gendarmes and a civilian
element mandated to help revive political dialogue in CAR. MICOPAX assumed
operational responsibility in CAR from a predecessor force, the Multinational
Force of the Central African Economic and Monetary Community (FOMUC), which
was deployed by CEMAC in 2002 to support the regime of then-president Ange-
Félix Patassé.
Although MINURCAT personnel have yet to deploy to Birao, the presence of EUFOR
patrols has helped stabilize the fragile tri-border zone where CAR, Chad, and
Sudan meet, and is reported by the UN to have deterred attacks against civilians.
EUFOR troops airlifted nine humanitarian aid workers out of Ouandja, 120 kilometers
south of Birao, following an exchange of gunfire between unidentified armed
groups in November 2008.
The government of Chad wields a great deal of influence in CAR, especially since
President Bozizé’s ascension to the presidency in 2003. A significant number of
the soldiers who helped Bozizé seize power in 2003 were Chadian nationals,
many of them placed at Bozizé’s disposal with the consent of Chadian President
Idriss Déby Itno. The Chadian government maintains military forces in the north of
CAR, and provides the 100 commandos that make up President Bozizé’s personal
security detail. President Bozizé cancelled a planned trip to Sudan in 2006 after
Chad, which is engaged in a bitter proxy war with Sudan, threatened to withdraw
military assistance.
French military intervention in December 2006 helped quash rebellion by the
Union of Democratic Forces for Unity, allowing the government to regain control of
the northeast. Both France and South Africa maintain defense cooperation agreements
with Bangui.
CAR is due to be reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism of the
UN Human Rights Council in May 2009.