CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
Violations of children’s rights were all too common in 2001. Children were
beaten and tortured by police, forced to work long hours under hazardous
conditions, or warehoused in detention centers and orphanages.Millions crossed
international borders in search of safety or were displaced within their own countries.
Hundreds of thousands served as soldiers in armed conflicts.
In documenting human rights abuses, Human Rights Watch has traditionally
focused its efforts on monitoring state compliance with civil and political rights.
But the denial of economic and social rights, such as the right to education, health,
or shelter, often bars individuals from the effective enjoyment of their civil and
political rights.
Children are especially vulnerable to this dynamic. They frequently do not benefit
from the progressive realization of economic and social rights—to the contrary,
they often suffer discrimination in basic education, health care, and other services.
In particular, girls are often subjected to intentionally discriminatory treatment or
disproportionately affected by abuses.The deprivation of these fundamental rights
prevents children from realizing their full potential later in life.With limited capacity
to participate as equals in civil society, they are ill-equipped as adults to defend
their rights and to secure these rights for their own children.
In recognition of these facts,Human Rights Watch examined children’s access to
education, focusing on violence and discriminatory treatment in schools—often at
the hands of other students with official acquiescence or encouragement, in
extreme cases perpetrated by teachers and other staff members.We also began to
examine the devastating effect of the human immunodeficiency virus/acquired
immune deficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) pandemic on children around the
world.At the same time,we continued to monitor the human rights abuses suffered
by child soldiers, children in conflict with the law, children who were refugees,
migrants, stateless, or deprived of the benefits of citizenship, and children who
labored under hazardous conditions.
Effective remedies for these children must include a reaffirmation of their civil
and political rights. No girl or boy should be made a child soldier or a bonded
laborer. No child should be excluded from school because of her caste, color, religion,
or gender.At the same time, real protection from such abuses requires measures
to ensure that children enjoy access to education and health services and
protection for their other economic and social rights.
VIOLATIONS OF THE RIGHT TO EDUCATION
“Children do not lose their human rights by virtue of passing through the
school gates.”
United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child,
General Comment No. 1, The Aims of Education, April 2001
The Convention on the Rights of the Child establishes that children enjoy the
right to an education.Article 29 of the convention specifies five goals of education,
including “the development of the child’s personality, talents and mental and physical
abilities to their fullest potential,” “the development of respect for the child’s
parents, his or her own cultural identity, language and values, for the national values
of the country in which the child is living, the country from which he or she may
originate, and for civilizations different from his or her own,” and “the preparation
of the child for responsible life in a free society, in the spirit of understanding,
peace, tolerance, equality of sexes, and friendships among all peoples, ethnic,
national and religious groups and persons of indigenous origin.”
Children have the right to freedom from discrimination in education.This right
flows from the nondiscrimination provisions of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, and the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. It is explicitly
guaranteed in the Convention against Discrimination in Education,which had
ninety states party as of July 2001.
As with other economic, social, and cultural rights, the right to education may
be achieved progressively. A state party to the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights agrees “to take steps . . . to the maximum of its
available resources” to realize the right to education. But the prohibition on discrimination
in education is not progressive.As the Committee on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights has observed, the right to freedom from discrimination in education
“is subject to neither progressive realization nor the availability of resources;
it applies fully and immediately to all aspects of education and encompasses all
internationally prohibited grounds of discrimination.”
Instead of facilitating the healthy development of children and providing them
with equal opportunities for education, schools were too often sites of intolerance
and discrimination. In some cases, school officials failed to protect students from
harassment or attacks by classmates. In others, they themselves participated in
harassment or violence against particular youth because of their gender, race, ethnicity,
religion, nationality, sexual orientation, social group, or other status.
In many parts of the world, children from minorities and other socially disadvantaged
groups were denied education or segregated in inferior educational programs
that limited their opportunities for growth and restricted their access to
higher education and employment.
A 2001 Human Rights Watch investigation found pervasive and systematic discrimination
against nearly one-fourth of Israel’s 1.6 million schoolchildren—
Palestinian Arab citizens—who were educated in a public school system that was wholly separate from the schools of the Jewish majority. The Israeli government
spent less per Palestinian Arab child than per Jewish child, and Arab schools were
inferior to Jewish schools in virtually every respect.Arab schools offered fewer facilities
and educational opportunities than were offered other Israeli children, and
some lacked basic learning facilities like libraries, computers, science laboratories,
and recreation space. Palestinian Arab children attended schools with larger classes
and fewer teachers than those in the Jewish school system,with some children having
to travel long distances to reach the nearest school. Palestinian Arab children
with disabilities were particularly marginalized.Many Palestinian Arab communities
lacked kindergartens for three- and four-year-old students, despite legislation
making such schools—and attendance—obligatory. Jewish three-year-olds
attended kindergarten at four times the rate of their Palestinian Arab counterparts;
Jewish four-year-olds at three times the rate.
Palestinian Arab students studied from a government-prescribed Arabic curriculum
that was derived from the Hebrew curriculum: common subjects were
developed with little or no Palestinian Arab participation, and they were translated
years after the Hebrew language material was published. The government devoted
inadequate resources to developing the subjects unique to Arab education, and
Palestinian Arab teachers had significantly less choice in textbooks and teaching
materials than did Jewish teachers. The curricula’s content often alienated students
and teachers alike, particularly the study of Jewish religious texts, which was
required in secondary-level Hebrew language classes.
Palestinian Arab students dropped out of school at three times the rate of Jewish
students and were less likely to pass the national exams common to the two systems
for a high school diploma. Only a handful made it to university. Among
Palestinian Arabs, the Negev Bedouin and children in villages not recognized as
legal by the Israeli government fared the worst in every respect. In its 2001 report to
the Committee on the Rights of the Child, Israel acknowledged the gaps between
Arab and Jewish education, but as of October 2001 it had failed to take necessary
steps to equalize the two systems.
In countries throughout Europe, Romani children, sometimes known as Gypsies,
received substandard education when they attended schools at all. In November
2000 the parents association of Greece’s Halastra Public School closed the
school to prevent enrollment of thirty-two Romani children. The Romani children
were split up and sent to different schools, often quite far from their homes. Segregation
also took the form of educational tracking, in which Romani children were
arbitrarily sent to “special schools”for children with cognitive deficits or behavioral
problems.According to the European Roma Rights Center, Romani children in the
Czech Republic were fifteen times more likely to be placed in remedial education,
placement that greatly restricted their secondary school opportunities. When
Romani children did attend integrated schools, they often faced harassment by
other students and lowered expectations from teachers, factors that contributed to
their high dropout rates.
In many countries in Asia and Africa, including Nepal, Sri Lanka, and Japan,
children whose parents belonged to lower-caste or other shunned descent-based
social groups faced widespread discrimination in access to education and had
markedly lower literacy rates and school attendance rates than the general population. In India, Dalit children, also called “untouchables,” were largely segregated
from others and restricted to the worst government schools,deficient in basic infrastructure,
classrooms, teachers, and teaching aids, where they faced abusive, discriminatory
treatment at the hands of their teachers and fellow students.Half of all
Dalit children did not complete primary school, and less than one-quarter completed
secondary school, despite state assistance in primary education and constitutional
provisions guaranteeing free, compulsory primary education for all
children up to age fourteen. Those children who did stay in school were typically
enrolled in vernacular schools,whose graduates suffered serious disadvantages in a
job market that favored English-language school graduates.
Children in detention were frequently denied their right to an education on
equal terms with their peers.We found that, with the exception of the few juvenile
institutions, Pakistan’s prisons did not provide education to children in juvenile
wards. Religious foundations provided religious instruction; secular subjects were
rarely available and when they were,were taught by adult prisoners not necessarily
trained as teachers. Children in the three detention facilities specifically designed
for youth receive education through the eighth grade, but educational facilities
were understaffed and provided with few or no teaching aids. In Kenya, we found
that some juvenile detention centers provided secondary school instruction only to
boys, while other facilities offered no secondary education at all. Palestinian children
detained in Israel’s Telmond Prison continued to be denied an education
equivalent to that of detained Jewish children. In the United States,Human Rights
Watch’s investigation of detention facilities in the states of Louisiana and Maryland
found that the education offered was in many cases seriously deficient; some facilities
offered no classes whatsoever for some or all of their juvenile detainees.Detention
officials implemented changes only after the release of our reports, pressure by
local groups, and investigations by the U.S. Department of Justice or the U.S.
Department of Education.
Noncitizen children were often denied any education at all when states set
impossibly high barriers to education for refugee, asylum seeker, immigrant, and
stateless children. Many countries required schools to report on students’ or parents’
legal status, knowing that undocumented migrants’ fear of deportation would
lead them to keep their children at home. In February 2001, the Greek parliament
considered draft legislation that would have required migrant children to provide
documentation showing their legal status in Greece in order to enroll in public
schools. The requirement of such documentation would have effectively barred
school attendance for children of undocumented or irregular migrants. The provisions
were dropped from the final bill following protests by Greek nongovernmental
organizations, migrants groups, and Human Rights Watch (see Greece).
A 2000 Human Rights Watch report found that Kuwaiti government officials
frequently denied children of Bidun residents the birth certificates and other official
documents needed to attend public and private schools, claiming they were
“illegal residents” even when their families had lived in Kuwait for decades, or even
generations.Human Rights Watch’s 2000 report on Rohingya refugees from Burma
found that Malaysian officials frequently expelled Rohingya children from primary
schools when they could not prove legal residency, despite a provision in Malaysia’s constitution that granted citizenship to children born on its territory who, like
these refugees, would otherwise be stateless.
Children born in the Dominican Republic to Haitian parents were routinely
denied identity documents even though the Dominican constitution conferred citizenship
on all persons born within the country. Lacking legal documentation,
children of Haitian descent were frequently denied access to Dominican schools.
Although primary schools tended to be flexible with regard to the admission of
undocumented children, policies varied from district to district. Undocumented
children were generally denied high school diplomas, and, in many cases, were not
allowed to take the mandatory national examinations that were a prerequisite for
entry into secondary school. In July 2001, the Dominican vice president announced
that public schools would be instructed to admit all children, regardless of documentation,
but as of this writing it was not clear that this decision was being implemented.
Children in conflict zones braved tremendous dangers to reach those schools
still in operation. Following the September 29, 2000 renewal of violent clashes in
the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip (see Israel, the Occupied West Bank
and Gaza Strip, and Palestinian Authority Territories), Palestinian children were
frequently blocked from attending school by widespread road closures, curfews,
and attacks by armed Israeli soldiers and settlers. Those who did reach school did
not always find safety. In dozens of reported incidences, schools have been tear
gased, hit by live ammunition, or damaged by artillery shell fragments. Some Jewish
Israeli children living in illegal but government-sponsored settlements in the
West Bank and Gaza Strip faced difficulties in reaching schools as armed Palestinians
increasingly targeted for attacks Israelis traveling or living in these areas. For
example, on November 20, 2000, five Israeli children from the Kafr Darom settlement
in the Gaza Strip were injured, three seriously, when Palestinian militants
detonated a roadside bomb as a caravan of military and civilian vehicles passed.
The children were on their way to a school in a nearby settlement. A teacher and a
school worker traveling with them were killed.
Human Rights Watch investigations during the clashes found that in the Israelicontrolled
H-2 section of Hebron, Palestinian schools serving some 12,000 children
were closed for almost five months during almost continuous curfews
imposed on Palestinians. Israel announced in January 2001 that schools in the area
would be allowed to operate during curfews, but Israeli soldiers continued to prevent
some teachers and students from reaching these schools, and three major
schools serving 1,845 students remained closed because Israel had turned their
grounds into military bases. Children living in the H-2 area who transferred to
schools in Palestinian-controlled areas were still subject to the curfew, and Israeli
soldiers often prevented them from returning home at night if a curfew was reimposed.
Palestinian primary school students in Hebron told Human Rights Watch
that they were frequently cursed, stoned, or beaten by armed settlers while on their
way to or from school. Israeli soldiers or police rarely intervened, they said, except
to beat or arrest Palestinian children who struck back.
In Northern Ireland, parents and politicians complained that police failed to
adequately protect Catholic minority school children from attacks in September 2001 by Loyalist protesters. (Some Unionists—those who want to maintain the
union between Northern Ireland and the United Kingdom—call themselves “Loyalists,”
some of whom support the use of violence for political ends.) The protesters
sought to keep the children from reaching the Holy Cross Primary School, a
Catholic school located near a Protestant-dominated enclave in the Ardoyne section
of Belfast. Loyalist protesters spit, cursed, and threw bottles and stones at the
children and their parents. A Loyalist paramilitary organization took responsibility
for a petrol bomb explosion outside the school while children and parents were
approaching. Loyalist paramilitaries warned parents to keep their children away
from the school and police informed some parents that death threats had been
issued against them.
In eastern Democratic Republic of Congo, a December 2000 investigation by
Human Rights Watch found that schools were a common site of child recruitment
by rebel groups backed by Rwanda. Frequent targeting of schools for such recruitment
caused some parents to keep their children from attending school and some
schools to be shut down. Because soldiers are known to abduct children from
school, the mere appearance of soldiers in the vicinity of a school can cause the children
to panic. In December 2000, soldiers approached a secondary school near
Goma one morning while classes were underway; the students scattered and ran.
The school suspended classes for some time afterward as parents and pupils were
not prepared to risk further raids by soldiers bent on seizing students to serve as
child soldiers.
Elsewhere in the region, a Burundi rebel group abducted more than 150 students
from two schools in November 2001 and burned several classrooms.
Worldwide, children of many social groups were all too often subject to violence
and harassment that undermined their opportunities to learn, caused them to drop
out of school, or resulted in psychological trauma, physical injury, and even death.
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender youth in many U.S. schools were subjected
to unrelenting harassment from their peers. A 2001 Human Rights Watch
report found that harassment and violence against lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
youth took many forms, including brutal physical attacks, mock rapes,
unwelcome sexual advances and other acts of sexual harassment, taunts, obscene
notes or graffiti, and the destruction of personal property.
Over time, verbal harassment often escalated into physical violence. These
abuses were compounded by the failure of federal, state, and local governments to
enact laws that would provide students with express protection from discrimination
based on their actual or perceived sexual orientation or gender identity.
Such abuses were not limited to the United States. Researchers studying lesbian,
gay, bisexual, and transgender youth in Australia, Canada, France, New Zealand,
and the United Kingdom, among other countries, reached similar conclusions
about the pervasiveness of antigay violence in schools. The Europe Region of the
International Lesbian and Gay Association concluded that teachers and other
adults were “more likely to reject than support” gay and lesbian youth. Amnesty
International reported that gay youth elsewhere in the world suffered torture and
ill-treatment because of their sexual orientation or gender identity.
Discrimination, harassment, and violence hampered students’ ability to get an education and took a tremendous toll on their emotional well-being. Perhaps
because so many lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender youth experienced abuses
on a daily basis, these youth were more likely than their heterosexual peers to use
alcohol or other drugs, engage in risky sexual behaviors, or run away from home.A
disproportionate number of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender youth
attempted or considered suicide—youth who report attractions to or relationships
with persons of the same sex were more than twice as likely as their heterosexual
counterparts to attempt suicide, a 1998 study found.
The abuse of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender youth was frequently predicated
on the belief that girls and boys must adhere strictly to rigid rules of conduct,
dress, and appearances based on their sex. That is, homophobia was linked to
stereotypical gender roles. Boys were expected to be athletic, strong, stoic, and
dominant relative to girls. Girls were expected to be attentive to boys and to accept
a subordinate status to them.Regardless of their sexual orientation or gender identity,
youth who violated these rules ran the risk of punishment at the hands of their
peers and at times by adults. Transgender youth were the most vulnerable to violence
by peers and harassment by adults.
Discussions of antigay violence in schools often focused on the youthful perpetrators
of these acts and failed to consider the responsibility of teachers and other
school officials to maintain a safe learning environment for all youth.
Despite the pervasiveness of the abuse, few school officials intervened to stop the
harassment or to hold the abusive students accountable. The most common
response to harassment, according to the students we interviewed, was no response
at all.More disturbing, some teachers and administrators actually took part in acts
of harassment.
In addition, teachers and administrators were themselves subjected to harassment,
often with few legal recourses. In every one of the seven U.S. states that
Human Rights Watch visited—California, Georgia, Kansas, Massachusetts, New
York, Texas, and Utah—teachers were reluctant to be open about their sexual orientation
at school because they feared losing their jobs.Of the states we visited,only
California and Massachusetts prohibit discrimination in private employment on
the basis of sexual orientation. Nationwide, only eleven state and the District of
Columbia offer protection against sexual orientation-based discrimination in private
employment; eighteen states and the District of Columbia prohibit such discrimination
in private employment.
Corporal punishment was permitted as a method of school discipline in at least
sixty-five countries, according to EPOCH (End Physical Punishment of Children)
Worldwide. Children were spanked, slapped, caned, strapped, or beaten by teachers
as a result of misbehavior, poor academic performance, or sometimes for no
reason at all.
Human Rights Watch investigated the use of corporal punishment in Kenyan
schools in 1999, visiting twenty schools and interviewing more than 200 children.
We found that schoolchildren were routinely subjected to caning, slapping, and
whipping by their teachers, sometimes on a daily basis. Such school “discipline”
regularly resulted in bruises, cuts, and humiliation and in some cases serious injury
or death.
Corporal punishment was used against Kenyan students for a wide range of disciplinary
infractions, some of which were serious and others extraordinarily minor.
For example, children were physically punished for coming to school late, missing
school without permission (even for illness), or having a dirty or torn school uniform.
They were also punished for unsatisfactory performance or for not being able
to afford school fees.
In a welcome development in April 2001,Kenya’s minister of education formally
banned corporal punishment in the schools as a matter of policy and proposed to
Parliament the elimination of the sections of the Education Act of 1968 that provided
for such punishment.However, the official notice did not establish penalties
for teachers who continued to carry out acts of corporal punishment or provide for
training in alternative methods of discipline.Many teachers expressed dissatisfaction
with the ban, asserting that they would be unable to maintain order in the
classroom without resorting to corporal punishment.
Girls constituted nearly two-thirds of the 130 million children out of school in
the developing world, according to 1998 estimates by the United Nations Children’s
Fund. In part, this disparity reflected the serious obstacles girls faced at school.
Gender-based violence—rape, sexual assault, sexual abuse, and sexual harassment—
was chief among these obstacles.
In 2000, Human Rights Watch investigated gender-based violence in South
Africa’s schools, Based on interviews with dozens of students, teachers, and government
officials, we found that South African schoolgirls of every race and economic
group encountered sexual violence and harassment on a daily basis. Girls
reported that they were raped in school bathrooms, in empty classrooms and hallways,
and in hostels and dormitories. Girls were also fondled, subjected to aggressive
sexual advances, and verbally degraded at school. They suffered such abuses at
the hands of both teachers and other students.
Too often, school authorities concealed sexual violence and delayed disciplinary
action against those who committed such acts. Some school officials failed to
respond adequately because they simply did not know what to do; some responded
with hostility and indifference toward girls who complained of sexual violence and
harassment. Others were afraid to assist their students. In many instances, schools
actively discouraged the victims of school-based sexual violence from alerting anyone
outside the school.
The South African government has recognized publicly the problems faced in
prosecuting cases of violence against women and girls in its criminal justice system.
Human Rights Watch’s research confirmed that coordination in such cases between
the education and justice systems was often ineffective, ill-conceived, or nonexistent.
School officials, police, and prosecutors were often confused about their
responsibility for resolving such cases, and the tendency of all actors to shift responsibility
meant that cases of violence against girls were regularly ignored.
In some countries, school officials used the threat of denial of education to
intimidate or punish students whose behavior or religious belief was seen to challenge
mainstream norms or dominant political trends. Girls were frequent targets
of such policies. For example, beginning in 1994, and increasingly after 1997,
female Muslim students of all ages in Uzbekistan faced harassment and even expulsion for wearing hijab, a religious head covering, to government schools. Turkey
prevented girls from attending most government schools if they chose to wear
hijab, and after 1997 enforced this policy increasingly energetically. Girls who continued
to wear religious attire to school could be charged with “interrupting education,”
a criminal offence punished by incarceration for up to two years. Turkish
law also allowed schools to expel girls deemed to be “unchaste,” an accusation officials
often made against girls who challenged conservative social norms. A 1995
Ministry of Education circular provided for high school students’“expulsion from
the formal education system” based on “proof of unchastity,” and in July 2001 Minister
of Health Osman Durmus decreed that “virginity tests” could be performed
on medical high school students “known to be having sex or engaging in prostitution.”
Banned since 1999, such gynecological exams involved intimidation and pain
and violated girls’ right to bodily integrity. Prior to the ban, some girls attempted
suicide rather than submit to this abusive examination.The minister of health indicated
that the implementation of such examinations was not planned, but the circular
remains in force.
Girls in Taliban-controlled areas of Afghanistan were often banned from receiving
all but elementary levels of education. Some girls were able to attend homebased
schools secretly, but these schools were forcibly closed upon discovery. A
teacher told Human Rights Watch that she and her students, girls in grades one
through seven, were beaten in June 2001 by members of the Taliban’s Religious
Police. “The Taliban have paralyzed half of society—half of society is dead in
Afghanistan because the women are prevented from working or studying,” another
woman explained to Human Rights Watch in September 2001 (see Afghanistan and
Women’s Rights).
The rapid spread of HIV/AIDS posed a particular and complex threat to children’s
realization of their right to education, especially in sub-Saharan Africa where
the epidemic has been most destructive. In December 2000 UNICEF made its first
global call for free and compulsory primary education at the African Development
Forum on leadership and HIV/AIDS.
Reaching children with appropriate information on HIV transmission and care
for those with AIDS is arguably the most effective means of combating the epidemic
over the long term, yet schools in Africa were called upon to be part of the
solution to AIDS at a time when the epidemic itself had left them weaker than ever.
In many countries in eastern and southern Africa, teachers died of AIDS at rates
much higher than those of the general population. The government of Zambia, for
example, began reporting in 1998 that teachers in government primary and secondary
schools were dying faster than they could be replaced. In many countries
rural and marginal areas were particularly affected by teacher shortages when
teachers ill with AIDS chose to be near the larger and better equipped hospitals in
urban areas. In Botswana, the country with the highest HIV prevalence rate in the
world, some government schools closed for lack of qualified staff.
Education too often became unaffordable for children in AIDS-affected families
when the illness caused the incapacitation and death of breadwinners as well as
expenditure of scarce household resources on medical services.As ill or dying parents
became unable to pay school fees, children were called upon to leave their studies and earn income or become heads of household. A study in a heavily AIDSaffected
region of Zimbabwe in 2000 found that 48 percent of primary school-age
orphans had dropped out, and none orphaned by AIDS in secondary school were
unable to continue their studies. In many countries, government statistics confirmed
that, particularly among primary school-aged children, girls in AIDSaffected
families were more likely than boys to be withdrawn from school when
parents were short of resources or needed help caring for the family.
The belief that schools themselves were a locus for HIV transmission served as
a barrier to children’s exercising their right to education. A 1999 Oxfam study in
Mozambique reported that parents cited the fear that their daughters would contract
HIV at school as the principal reason for keeping their daughters out of
school. Children themselves, including many of those interviewed by Human
Rights Watch in Kenya in 2001, described stigmatization and ostracism of AIDSaffected
children or orphans in school.
HIV/AIDS AND CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
HIV/AIDS continued to pose an acute threat to children’s human rights in general.
Unlike many virulent epidemics in history that have killed mainly young children
and the elderly, AIDS for the most part infects and kills adults aged eighteen
to forty years, in or near the most productive years of their lives. Globally, most persons
in this age group are parents. Thus, for children, the epidemic too often represents
both the loss of a parent or parents and exposure to the stigma and
discrimination that go hand in hand with AIDS throughout the world.
In heavily affected countries, for each child who had lost a parent to AIDS, one
or two school-age children were likely to be caring for an ill parent, acting as breadwinners
for the household, or otherwise unable to attend school because of AIDS.
Children who were not orphaned were also affected when orphans were brought
into their homes or when they themselves were infected with HIV. Thus, AIDSaffected
children comprised a much larger population than just orphans.
In sub-Saharan Africa—the most heavily AIDS-affected region of the world—
AIDS orphaned children at a rate unprecedented in history. The United Nations
conservatively estimated that by December 2000, about 13 million children under
age fifteen in sub-Saharan Africa had lost their mother or both parents to AIDS. In
July 2000, the United States Bureau of the Census,which keeps data on AIDS independent
of the United Nations, estimated that there were about 15 million children
under age fifteen who had lost at least one parent to AIDS in Africa and that by 2010
this number would be at least 28 million, including over 30 percent of all children
under age fifteen in five countries of eastern and southern Africa. The percentage
of the child population represented by orphans will remain very high in some
African countries for decades, according to the Census Bureau.
AIDS’s impact on children was felt far beyond Africa as the epidemic’s devastation
spread to other regions of the world. In Thailand, the estimated 300,000 deaths
from AIDS since the beginning of the epidemic have resulted in many orphans, of
which a large percentage are thought to be in the care of a grandparent or other relative. The most rapid spread of HIV/AIDS was experienced in Eastern Europe and
the former Soviet states, where widespread use of injected drugs drove the epidemic.
Children were affected both as they were drawn into drug use at a young age
and as they lost their parents. Globally, access to services such as syringe exchange
or simple materials for syringe sterilization, which would reduce the likelihood of
HIV transmission, was limited, partly due to the stigmatization of drug users and
their families. Numbers of children orphaned and otherwise made vulnerable by
AIDS also grew rapidly in the heavily affected countries of the Caribbean basin.
But African children saw the worst of it. The United Nations estimated in
December 2000 that 92 percent of children orphaned by AIDS were in sub-Saharan
Africa, where AIDS ate away at communities already wracked by poverty, war, and
corruption. In the African countries hardest hit by HIV/AIDS, the extended family
was traditionally the source of support and care for orphans and other children
needing special protection. In the face of enormous numbers of children without
parental care, the extended family became increasingly overextended, if not completely
unraveled, and unable to provide its traditional level of protection and support.
The pattern was all too commonly seen: a parent became ill, the loss of his or
her labor in the household or income generated outside the household and
increased medical expenses impoverished the family, and school fees became unaffordable.
Children were withdrawn from school and required to care for sick
household members and young children, engaged in income-generating activities,
or some combination of these.
Unskilled children who had to become the family breadwinners were particularly
vulnerable to exploitation and being forced into the worst forms of child labor,
a situation greatly exacerbated by the stigma of AIDS. The United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF) reported in July 2001 that AIDS was pushing large numbers
of children into hazardous labor in Kenya, Uganda, Mozambique, Ethiopia,
Lesotho, and South Africa.An investigation of the experience of one hundred children
orphaned by AIDS in South Africa, summarized in a June 2001 report by the
Nelson Mandela Children’s Fund, found widespread hunger and other deprivation
among these children and a number of girls as young as eight being forced to engage
in prostitution to survive.Other research in Africa in 2000 and 2001 attributed the
large rise in the number of street children in countries such as Zambia and Kenya
to HIV/AIDS.
Loss of inheritance rights was another common problem of children orphaned
by AIDS, as documented by Human Rights Watch’s investigation of the problem
in Kenya in a report released in June 2001. AIDS orphaned over a million children
in Kenya by the end of 2000 and affected many more in other ways. A large percentage
of the children interviewed by Human Rights Watch experienced the
unlawful appropriation of property, usually by distant relatives, that the children
were entitled to inherit. NGO reports suggested that thousands of children in the
country have had this experience. Property-grabbing from children on a large
scale is a relatively recent phenomenon in the country, related again both to AIDS
and to the deterioration of the extended family. Human Rights Watch concluded
that the existing institutions of the judicial system in Kenya did not allow for adequate
consideration of property cases of children and recommended that the government establish a streamlined, user-friendly mechanism for civil court hearings
of these cases.
One of the most frequent AIDS-related rights violations suffered by children
worldwide was that of their right to information on HIV/AIDS, a matter of life and
death for children where the epidemic has a foothold. While most government
HIV/AIDS programs in Africa have focused on information in some form, a number
of reports released in 2001 showed young people to have poor access to appropriate
information across Africa. This problem was compounded by the effect of
AIDS on school enrollment, but even for children able to stay in school, appropriate
AIDS information—particularly in the later primary school years,where it was
arguably most needed—is absent from too many government curricula. In Kenya,
for example, resistance by Roman Catholic leaders to education on sex and reproductive
health impeded the development of an AIDS curriculum for primary and
secondary schools until 2000 and continued to handicap its full implementation
in 2001.
The U.N.General Assembly Special Session on HIV/AIDS in June agreed that all
countries should work toward implementation by 2005 of comprehensive national
programs to protect and support children affected by AIDS, including “providing
appropriate counseling and psychosocial support, ensuring their enrolment in
school and access to shelter . . . and protect[ing] orphans and vulnerable children
from all forms of abuse, violence, exploitation, discrimination, trafficking and loss
of inheritance.”The emergency already faced by children affected by AIDS urgently
demanded a comprehensive response.
CHILD SOLDIERS
Support continued to grow for an international treaty prohibiting the use of
children in armed conflict. The optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, adopted by the U.N.General Assembly in May 2000, established eighteen
as the minimum age for direct participation in armed conflict, for forced or
compulsory recruitment, and for any recruitment or use by nongovernmental
armed groups. From November 2000 to mid-November 2001 the number of
nations that signed the protocol grew from seventy to eighty-seven, and the number
of ratifications increased from three (Canada, Bangladesh, and Sri Lanka) to
ten, with the addition of Andorra,Morocco, Panama, Iceland, Vietnam, Holy See,
the Democratic Republic of Congo and New Zealand.Having reached the ten ratifications
needed, the protocol will enter into force on February 12, 2002.
Demobilizations of child soldiers took place in several countries. In late February,
the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) coordinated the demobilization
of over 2,500 children between the ages of eight and eighteen from the Sudan
People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) in Southern Sudan, airlifting them to transition
camps. By September 2001 the last of the group had been reunited with their families.
UNICEF indicated that the process of demobilization would continue in
2002 until all SPLA child soldiers—an estimated 10,000 before the February initiative—
were demobilized. From May through November over 2,903 children,
including 1,506 from the rebel Revolutionary United Front and 1,303 from government-allied militias were released and/or disarmed in Sierra Leone. In mid-
May, the government of the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) decreed the
demobilization of child soldiers serving in its army who, according to conservative
estimates, numbered in the thousands. In June, President Joseph Kabila
announced that the DRC would no longer recruit child soldiers, and ordered an
education campaign for military commanders to facilitate the demobilization of
children. By July, teams of government and civil society workers were touring military
barracks to identify child soldiers and prepare for family reunification and
their reintegration into society.
However, the recruitment and use of children remained a global problem. The
Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers released its first global survey in June,
finding that more than half a million children were subject to recruitment into
national armed forces, paramilitaries, or non-state armed groups in a total of
eighty-seven countries, and at least 300,000 of these children were actively participating
in armed conflicts in forty-one countries.
In the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo, rebel groupings backed by the
governments of Uganda and Rwanda coerced and forced children to join their
ranks. Instructors from the two occupying armies trained the recruits for their
respective local surrogates, and in certain cases Congolese children were taken to
Uganda and Rwanda for further training. A December 2000 U.N. report estimated
that between 15 and 30 percent of all newly recruited combatants in the DRC were
children under eighteen years of age, and a substantial number were under age
twelve. The Rwandan-backed Congolese Rally for Democracy-Goma (Rassemblement
Congolais pour la Démocratie-Goma, RCD-Goma) conducted an intensive
recruitment drive in late 2000 and abducted children from schools, roadsides, markets,
and their homes. In some communities, schools were closed and children and
young men began sleeping outdoors, away from their homes, to avoid recruitment.
A Rutshuru resident reported that RCD-Goma and Rwandan Patriotic Army
(RPA) soldiers abducted boys and girls from his community in November 2000,
targeting children and youth between the ages of thirteen and twenty. In other
cases, Human Rights Watch received reports of children aged twelve and even
younger being recruited and sent to camps for military training.
International criticism prompted the RCD-Goma to pledge in early April 2001
to end the recruitment of child soldiers and demobilize those in their ranks.But just
a few days later at a ceremony marking the end of a training program at the
Mushaki military camp, nearly 1800 of the 3000 graduates were observed to be children
aged twelve to seventeen. By mid-year, it became apparent that the RCD
recruitment plan had continued unabated in rural areas.
The opposition Army for the Liberation of Rwanda (Armeé pour la Libération
du Rwanda, ALIR) abducted children as young as ten in the eastern Democratic
Republic of Congo. Children recruited by ALIR were given weapons training and
used to fetch water, do other domestic chores, and transport supplies. Children
were also used by ALIR to shout or bang on pots to create diversions during battle.
Some older children, aged sixteen and seventeen, were used to participate directly
in combat.At least one fifteen-year-old also served in the ranks of the Local Defense
Force, a Rwandan auxiliary force, which engaged in combat against ALIR.
At least several dozen ALIR children were killed in combat between May and September; the actual number may have been far higher. In early August, 280 children
from ALIR were in Rwandan government custody after having been captured
or surrendered. Over fifty of these children were Congolese and were handed over
to RCD rebel authorities in eastern Congo, while the Rwandan children were sent
to a rehabilitation center south of Kigali.
In Burundi, military and civilian authorities recruited hundreds of children as
paramilitaries known as “Guardians of the Peace.” One source estimated that
between 750 and 900 children aged seven to twelve years of age were recruited and
trained in one year in Burundi.Recent recruitment spared very young children, but
recruitment of those fourteen and older continued. Recruits were subjected to
harsh conditions, and frequently beaten by soldiers. In one training program, three
young recruits—aged twelve, fifteen, and seventeen years—died as a result of beatings
suffered during their training. Many others died in combat after being sent
into battle ahead of regular soldiers.
A Burundian rebel group, the Forces for the Defense of Democracy (Forces pour
la Défense de la Démocratie, FDD), abducted thirty students in grades four to six
from Kirambi primary school in the eastern province of Ruyigi on November 6,
2001.Three days later, other FDD rebels abducted more than one hundred students
from Musema high school in Kayanza province and burned the school to the
ground.The rebels forced the students to transport good stolen from nearby homes
and shops and beat those who faltered en route.Rebels reportedly told the students
that they would turn them into soldiers to help in their war against the government,
now in its eighth year.As of November 15, the FDD had released the students from
Musema high school, but twenty-three Kirambi primary school boys between the
ages of twelve and sixteen were still in the hands of the rebel group.
In Liberia children fleeing the fighting in the north of the country were forcibly
recruited and later trained by government forces to help fight insurgents. Credible
sources reported to Human Rights Watch that from January through April 2001
scores of children as young as nine were taken off of buses as they fled the fighting,
at military checkpoints, or from camps for the internally displaced. They were
reportedly later trained for military service by government forces.Other aid agencies
reported that Liberian insurgents from the Liberians United for Reconciliation
and Democracy (LURD), based in Guinea, abducted numerous children during
raids on villages in northern Liberia.
In Colombia, the government estimated that up to 10,000 members of the
armed groups operating there, including guerrillas and army-backed paramilitaries,
were under eighteen. In late 2000, independent observers reported to
Human Rights Watch that dozens of children were among the supposed guerrillas
registered as killed or captured after an encounter between government troops and
the FARC-EP (Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo,
FARC-EP). The Colombian Army announced that thirty-two of those captured
were aged seventeen or under, including several younger than fourteen, and a third
were females. Of those killed, twenty were said by the army to be children.
Colombian paramilitaries linked to the army also continued to recruit and use
children. In July, paramilitaries reportedly seized a youth detention center and
abducted ten children in an apparent recruitment drive. In July, UNICEF criticized the rebel Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam in Sri
Lanka for recruiting and using child soldiers as young as age twelve. The United
Nations reported increased recruitment activity by the Tigers in or near schools,
despite assurances given in 1998 to the special representative to the U.N. secretarygeneral
on children and armed conflict, Olara Otunnu, to end the recruitment of
children under the age of seventeen.
CHILDREN IN THE JUSTICE SYSTEM
The treatment of children in the justice system continued to raise concerns in
2001.Abuses often began with the first contact with law enforcement officials, during
which children were at risk of ill-treatment, torture, and even death. Asma
Jahangir, the United Nations special rapporteur on extrajudicial executions, highlighted
an extreme example in September, charging that up to 800 children and
young adults had been murdered in Honduras since 1998, many at the hands of
police.
In June, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights ordered Guatemala to pay
nearly U.S. $500,000 in a case brought on behalf of five street children killed by
police. The court also directed Guatemala to name a youth educational center for
the children, establish a memorial to them, and provide other nonmonetary reparations.
The case was the first in which the Inter-American Court had ordered reparations,
including monetary damages, in a case involving violations of children’s
rights.
Once arrested and charged, children were often held in poor conditions of confinement,
sometimes together with adults. A former child soldier under sentence of
death died on September 26 after contracting tuberculosis in Kinshasa’s central
prison, a local group reported. In Paraguay,Amnesty International and Defence for
Children International-Paraguay Section reported that children were warehoused
in overcrowded prisons for adults, where they were subjected to constant ill-treatment
and daily isolation. Palestinian children held in Israel’s Telmond Prison
reported that they were subjected to attacks by adult inmates and severe beatings by
guards. Yemen reported to the Committee on the Rights of the Child in 1999 that
its reformatories and penal institutions housing children lacked educational and
social services, provided poor quality and insufficient food, and frequently used
corporal punishment and torture. In Saudi Arabia, the 1977 Detention and Imprisonment
Regulations permitted flogging and other corporal punishment as disciplinary
measures for children in detention.
Because of the low numbers of girls typically in detention, they were at particular
risk of being housed with adults. For example, Yemen, which lacked separate
facilities for girls awaiting trial or after sentencing, housed girls with adult prisoners
in penal facilities. Saudi Arabia’s 1975 Statutes of the Welfare Institutions for
Young Women also allowed girls to be held with adult detainees.
Sentencing practices also raised serious human rights concerns. Countries
around the world continued to detain children for “status offenses,” acts that would
not be crimes if committed by an adult. In Yemen, for example, the vast majority of children in custodial institutions were “potential delinquents,” a category that
included children found begging, orphans, and children whose fathers were absent
or whose parents were divorced or separated, according to its 1999 report to the
Committee on the Rights of the Child.
In Egypt, a boy between the ages of fifteen and seventeen was sentenced to three
years of imprisonment for “indecency and debauchery” by a juvenile court in September.
One of at least fifty-five men arrested during the year in a crackdown
against homosexuality, the boy was convicted on the basis of a confession that he
said had been extracted under torture. Police made most of the arrests in a May 11
raid on a Cairo discotheque popular with gay men.Egypt does not criminalize consensual
sexual relations between members of the same sex; the adult men,who also
claimed that they were subject to beatings and other abuses while detained, were
charged with “obscene behavior” and “contempt of religion” (see Egypt chapter).
Many countries continued to impose corporal punishment on children as part
of their sentence. The Committee on the Rights of the Child found that in Saudi
Arabia, judicial authorities regularly sentenced people who were children at the
time of their offenses to flogging, stoning, and amputation. InNigeria’s Kebbi State,
a fifteen-year-old boy was reportedly sentenced to the amputation of one of his
hands after he was convicted of stealing 32,000 Naira (approximately U.S. $285). It
was not known if the sentence had been carried out at the time of writing.
Following a trend that began in the early 1990s, the United States continued to
try children as adults for a large number of offenses that had traditionally been handled
in the juvenile justice system.
The United States was also virtually alone in imposing sentences of death on
those who were children at the time of the crimes for which they were convicted.
On October 22, 2001, the state executed Gerald Lee Mitchell,who became the eighteenth
juvenile offender executed in the U.S. and the tenth in Texas since 1976.
Eighty-three juvenile offenders were on death rows in fifteen U.S. states as of October
1.With twenty-nine juvenile offenders on its death row, Texas accounted for
over one-third of the national total. In all, twenty-three U.S. states continued to
allow the death penalty to be imposed for crimes committed by those below the age
of eighteen.
Two juvenile offenders received last-minute stays of execution after their attorneys
presented new evidence or raised constitutional issues on appeal. On August
15,Napoleon Beazley, convicted in Texas for a murder he committed at age seventeen,
came within hours of execution when the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals
issued a stay to enable it to consider whether his first appellate attorney provided
ineffective assistance. Missouri death row inmate Antonio Richardson received a
stay from the U.S. Supreme Court in March. Sixteen at the time of his crime,
Richardson may be mentally retarded; his case was on hold while the Supreme
Court resolved another case that questioned the constitutionality of imposing the
death sentence on persons with mental retardation.
In Pakistan, where a July 2000 ordinance raised the minimum age for capital
punishment to eighteen, forty-nine people remained on death row for crimes they
committed as children, the Dawn reported in July 2001.
The Democratic Republic of Congo and Iran had mixed records on capital punishment during the year. Following a meeting with Human Rights Watch in May
2001, the Democratic Republic of Congo agreed to spare the lives of four child soldiers.
The four were arrested and sentenced to death by the Court ofMilitary Order
when they were between fourteen and sixteen years of age. President Joseph Kabila
subsequently commuted the sentences of these children, along with that of a fifth
former child soldier, to five years’ imprisonment. At least one additional former
child soldier remained under sentence of death, according to the World Organization
Against Torture (Organisation mondiale contre la torture, OMCT). In Iran,
the death sentence of a thirteen-year-old boy was commuted to life imprisonment,
Amnesty International reported; the reduced sentence may still violate international
standards, which prohibited the imposition of capital punishment or life
imprisonment without possibility of release for offenses committed by persons
below the age of eighteen.
REFUGEE AND MIGRANT CHILDREN
Refugee and migrant children, among the world’s most vulnerable populations,
were at particular risk of abuse when they were separated from their parents and
other caregivers.
In July, local authorities in the Spanish autonomous enclaves of Ceuta and
Melilla stepped up summary expulsions of unaccompanied Moroccan children living
there. The children, including some as young as eleven, were reportedly beaten
and threatened by both Spanish and Moroccan police and did not receive individualized
review of their cases before Spanish authorities dumped them on the
Moroccan side of the border.
In Greece, unaccompanied children were largely excluded from participation in
the June 5 to August 2 program that gave legal status to undocumented immigrants
who could prove they had arrived in Greece before June 2, 2000. Under the terms
of the program, undocumented migrants who could not provide extensive documentation
of their presence—including proof of identity,wage receipts,utility payment
receipts, and other documents unaccompanied children could not be
expected to have—were subject to forced deportation if they did not leave the
country voluntarily.
In the United States, the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) continued
to detain a substantial proportion of the unaccompanied children in its custody
in jail-like settings, sometimes holding them in cells with juvenile offenders.
The agency was criticized for denying full access to independent monitors, including
the Women’s Commission for Refugee Women and Children and the lawyers
who represented detained children in a successful class-action lawsuit challenging
the conditions of confinement for youth in INS custody. In a positive development,
Senator Dianne Feinstein proposed legislation that would correct these and other
abusive conditions for unaccompanied children in the United States.
CHILD LABOR
With the addition of Estonia at the end of September, one hundred countries
had ratified the International Labor Organization’s Convention concerning the
Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child
Labor (ILO Convention 182),which prohibits debt bondage, forced or compulsory
labor (including forced recruitment into military service), prostitution and the
production of pornography, and other work likely to “harm the health, safety or
morals of children.”Nevertheless, far too many children around the world worked
under conditions that were hazardous to their health and safety. In Ecuador, a 2001
Human Rights Watch investigation found that children were routinely employed in
the banana industry, where they were exposed to pesticides and required to perform
hazardous labor. In addition, two girls interviewed by Human Rights Watch
reported that they were often subjected to sexual harassment by their supervisors.
In a tragic development, Carlos Alberto Santos de Oliveira, president of the
Sergipe Citrus Fruit Workers’Union and known for his advocacy in opposition to
child labor, was killed on September 23 by two gunmen who shot him eight times
at point-blank range in the Brazilian town of Pedrinhas, in Sergipe state.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
Eighty heads of state and over 1,000 nongovernmental organizations were
expected to attend a U.N. General Assembly Special Session for Children in New
York from September 19-21.The session was intended to evaluate progress made in
meeting the goals of the 1990 World Summit on Children and to adopt a declaration
and plan of action for the future. The draft plan of action identified four priority
areas: health, education, HIV/AIDS, and protection from violence, abuse,
neglect, and exploitation. Following the September 11 attacks on New York and
Washington, the session was postponed until 2002.
Hundreds of nongovernmental organizations from around the world participated
in two preparatory committee sessions held during the year. A Child Rights
Caucus led by Human Rights Watch and Save the Children won the support of governments
for the inclusion of key issues in the draft plan of action, notably concerning
protection for children from violence, abuse and exploitation.
The draft declaration and plan of action did not break significant new ground,
however, as many governments were unwilling to move beyond previously agreed
commitments to children.The United States, one of only two states that have failed
to ratify the Convention on the Rights of the Child, opposed a rights-oriented plan
of action and sought to minimize references to the convention. Joined by the Holy
See and a grouping of primarily Islamic countries, the United States also sought to
roll back international agreements regarding the access of adolescents to sexual and
reproductive health care, information, and services. Issues related to child labor,
armed conflict, and mobilization of resources were also contentious.
The Committee on the Rights of the Child continued a focus on violence against children by holding a second general day of discussion on the topic, focused on violence
against children in the home and in schools. A similar discussion day had
been held in 2001 on violence against children in state-run institutions and in the
context of “law and public order.”Among its final recommendations, the committee
urged the General Assembly to initiate an in-depth study of violence against
children, comparable to the ground-breaking U.N. study led by Graça Machel on
the impact of armed conflict on children. In late November, the U.N.’s Third Committee
passed a resolution requesting the secretary-general to “conduct an in-depth
study on the issue of violence against children . . . and to put forward recommendations,
for consideration by member states, for appropriate action, including
effective remedies and preventive and rehabilitation measures.”
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports
To Protect the People: The Government-Sponsored “Self-Defense” Program in
Burundi, 12/01.
Israel: Second Class: Discrimination Against Palestinian Arab Children in Israel’s
Schools, 12/01
Humanity Denied: Systematic Violations ofWomen’s Rights in Afghanistan, 10/01
Caste Discrimination: A Global Concern, 9/01
Easy Targets: Violence Against Children Worldwide, 9/01
Kenya: In the Shadow of Death: HIV/AIDS and Children’s Rights in Kenya, 6/01
Democratic Republic of Congo: Reluctant Recruits: Children and Adults Forcibly
Recruited for Military Service in North Kivu, 5/01
United States: Hatred in the Hallways: Violence and Discrimination Against Lesbian,
Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Students in U.S. Schools, 5/01.
Israel, the Occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, and the Palestinian Authority Territories:
Center of the Storm: A Case Study of Human Rights Abuses in Hebron
District, 4/01
South Africa: Scared at School: Sexual Violence Against Girls in South African
Schools, 3/01
Egypt: Underage and Underprotected: Child Labor in Egypt’s Cotton Fields, 1/01