CHILD SOLDIERS CAMPAIGN
Global efforts to end the use of child soldiers continued to advance during
the year. Following the United Nations’ adoption in May 2000 of a new
treaty to end the participation of children under the age of eighteen in armed conflict
(an optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child), the number
of countries signing the treaty grew to eighty-seven, and the number of
ratifications increased to ten.Having achieved the ten ratifications needed, the protocol
will enter into force on February 12, 2002.
The Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers continued its campaigning
efforts to achieve broad ratification and implementation of the protocol.Coalition
members, including national campaigns in many countries, lobbied governments
to sign and/or ratify the protocol in advance of the session. Campaign activities in
Australia,Bangladesh,Belgium,Colombia,Germany, Indonesia, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Nepal,Pakistan,Paraguay,Peru, Philippines,Russia, Sierra Leone, the United Kingdom,
and the United States included public education, exhibitions, media campaigns,
petition drives, symposia, street theater, children’s demonstrations,
marches, meetings with governments, and parliamentary initiatives.
In several countries campaign efforts resulted in changes of laws regulating
recruitment. In Italy, sustained campaigning saw the adoption of new legislation
raising the minimum age of recruitment to eighteen. In Israel, after persistent NGO
efforts, the Israeli Defence Forces announced that it would end the deployment of
under-eighteens and stop accepting conscripts before their eighteenth birthday. In
East Timor, the National Council adopted military legislation setting eighteen as
the minimum age for military recruitment. In Greece, after petitioning by coalition
members, a new law was adopted in 2001 that annulled previous legislation that
allowed the conscription of under-eighteens. Legislation to prohibit the voluntary
recruitment of under-eighteens was also under discussion in the Greek Parliament.
In the Netherlands, coalition members worked with members of parliament to
introduce a draft bill that would raise the minimum age for recruitment into the
Dutch Armed Forces to eighteen.
Support for the efforts to end the use of child soldiers also came from Pope John
Paul II,who devoted February 2001 to prayer for an end to the exploitation of children
in armed conflict under the theme “Never Again Child Soldiers,” and from the
World Veterans Federation, which adopted a resolution in December 2000 calling
for universal ratification of the protocol.
The Amman Conference on the Use of Child Soldiers was held in Amman, Jordan
from April 8-10, 2001 under the patronage of Her Majesty Queen Rania Al-
Abdallah. This was the fifth in a series of regional conferences organized by the
coalition in order to highlight the worldwide exploitation of children as soldiers
and build momentum and effective strategies for a global ban on such abuse.
The conference was attended by representatives of the governments of Algeria,
Bahrain, Egypt, Jordan, Morocco, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, and Turkey. Participants also included representatives from the Palestinian Authority
and more than seventy representatives of local and international NGOs from across
the region, national human rights and children’s rights institutions, international
agencies, and U.N. bodies. At the conclusion of the conference, participants
adopted the Amman Declaration on the Use of Children as Soldiers,which strongly
condemned the military recruitment and use of children by governments and
armed groups across the region, called for prompt ratification and implementation
of the new Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and other international standards, and
included a large number of concrete recommendations for follow up in the region.
Prior to and following the Amman conference, the coalition held consultations
in Israel with the deputy minister of defense, representatives of the Israeli Defence
Forces,Ministry of Foreign Affairs officials,members of the Knesset and with nongovernmental
organizations to discuss military recruitment policy and issues
related to the use of children as soldiers in the Middle East.
In June 2001, the Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers published the firstever
global survey of child soldiers, documenting military recruitment by government
armed forces, civil militia, paramilitaries, and non-state armed groups in 180
countries. It found that more than half a million children were recruited into government
forces and armed groups in more than eighty-seven countries, and that at
least 300,000 of these children were actively fighting in forty-one countries.
The coalition released the report at press conferences in Johannesburg and in
New York, where it was also presented to NGO and government delegates to the
final preparatory meeting for the U.N. Special Session on Children.National coalitions
also released the report from various locations around the world, including
Bangkok,Karachi, and Kathmandu;Amman and Beirut; London, Paris,Rome, and
Stockholm; and Asuncion and Bogotá.
During the year, the coalition also developed several country programs to
strengthen national and regional initiatives by nongovernmental organizations to
address the participation of children in armed conflict. In Colombia, national
coalition members held a series of successful workshops in conflict zones of the
countries, the first series focusing on recruitment prevention with key local actors
and the second focusing on indigenous and Afro-Colombian children at risk of
recruitment. In Southeast Asia, regional and national NGOs organized a national
workshop for the Philippines in Mindanao, bringing together nearly forty NGOs
and local government agencies. The workshop assessed trends in the New People’s
Army, and in Mindanao’s separatist and indigenous people’s conflicts; prepared a
strategic plan for influencing the evolving peace process between the government
and armed groups in the country; and created a loose NGO coalition for follow-up.
Additional workshops were scheduled to take place before the end of the year in
other countries of South and Southeast Asia.
Through its international, regional and national partners, the Coalition also
launched a number of targeted campaigning actions during the year, including on
the use of child soldiers during the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea; deaths of
underage military conscripts in Paraguay; the establishment of a Special Court to
try war crimes (including child recruitment) in Sierra Leone; recruitment policy and practice by the United Kingdom; and child recruitment by government forces
and armed groups in the Democratic Republic of Congo and neighboring countries
that are party to the conflict.