Chile
During 2011 and 2012, Sebastián Piñera’s government faced student unrest and
other protests that often ended in the destruction of property and violent clashes
between police and demonstrators. Police abuses, including inappropriate
use of anti-riot weapons and ill-treatment of detainees, were reported. The
Piñera administration has ended the trial of civilians by military courts and
amended elements of counterterrorism legislation that were incompatible with
international standards of due process. However, military courts that lack independence
from the military hierarchy still try police accused of human rights
abuses. Although the government has not pressed terrorism charges against
indigenous protesters, some prosecutors have continued to bring charges
against them under the counterterrorism law for actions that should be considered
common crimes.
Most recorded cases of extrajudicial executions and enforced disappearances
committed during military rule (1973-1990) have been heard in court or are now
under judicial investigation. Judges continue to convict former military personnel
for these crimes. However, final sentences are often unacceptably lenient
given the seriousness of the crimes.
The passage of a law protecting sexual minorities and other vulnerable groups
from discrimination was a notable advance in 2012. Abortion continues to be
prohibited in all circumstances, even when the mother’s life is at risk.
Police Abuses
In 2011 and 2012, student marches and occupations demanding educational
reforms sometimes ended in violent clashes in which police were injured and
public and private property destroyed. A policeman was shot dead in September
2012 during disturbances on the anniversary of the 1973 military coup.
Carabineros (uniformed police) sometimes used excessive force against protestors,
including the misuse of non-lethal anti-riot weaponry such as tear gas and
rubber bullets, arbitrary arrests, and the ill-treatment of detainees.
During February and March protests over regional economic and social demands
in Aysen, southern Chile, local human rights monitors reported that police special
anti-riot forces fired water-cannons and tear gas into homes, and shot tear
gas cartridges directly at people. A 49-year-old mechanic, Teófilo Haro, was
blinded by a steel pellet in the eye fired by a Carabinero, according to press
reports. At a meeting of the Congressional Human Rights Commission, the head
of Carabineros admitted the use of excessive force, and that metal shotgun pellets
had been used incorrectly. The government spokesperson said in August
2012 that abuses by the police were “completely and categorically rejected, and
immediately investigated.”
At this writing, a police sergeant faced charges before a military court for unlawful
use of lethal force in connection with the fatal shooting of 16-year-old student
Manuel Gutiérrez Reynoso while he was watching a demonstration in
August 2011 from a Santiago footbridge during a national strike.
Reports of police abuses against Mapuches during evictions of occupied land
and attempts to arrest suspects in Mapuche communities continue. In July
2012, Carabineros fired rubber bullets at a group of Mapuches outside a hospital
in Collipulli, in the southern region of Araucanía, where doctors were checking
the injuries of people detained during a land eviction. According to an eyewitness,
the shots were fired at short range, without provocation or warning,
wounding seven people, including a 13-year-old girl and two 17-year-old boys.
Military Jurisdiction
Police accused of human rights abuses continue to be tried by military courts
that are not independent. Following the recommendations of the Inter-American
Court of Human Rights (IACrtHR) in its 2005 ruling against Chile in the Palamara
case, legislation introduced by Piñera’s administration and approved by
Congress in September 2010 finally ended the jurisdiction of military courts over
civilians.
However, the reforms did not address jurisdiction over abuses against civilians
by Carabineros, which is still exercised by military courts composed of military
officers on active service. Apart from their lack of independence, these courts do not provide the due process guarantees that have existed in ordinary criminal
proceedings since their reform in 2005.
Investigations are secret, criminal proceedings are conducted mainly in writing,
and lawyers representing victims of police abuse have limited opportunities to
cross-examine witnesses. Decisions by the Corte Marcial (the military appeals
court) in cases involving the alleged unlawful use of lethal force by Carabineros
have not inspired confidence in the court’s impartiality. At this writing, the government
was preparing a bill to restructure the military justice system.
Counterterrorism Laws
The inappropriate use of counterterrorism legislation to deal with common
crimes against property, such as arson, committed by indigenous Mapuche
activists remains an important due process issue. In September 2010, following
concern expressed by the United Nations and regional human rights bodies, the
government amended the counterterrorism law. Some due process guarantees
were strengthened, such as allowing witnesses whose identity can be concealed
to be cross-examined by defense attorneys, and children could no longer
be tried under the law. However, the inclusion in the law of crimes against property
was left unchanged and prosecutors continue to apply the law in such
cases, even though the government has refrained from doing so.
Confronting Past Abuses
More than three-quarters of the 3,186 documented killings and “disappearances”
during the Augusto Pinochet dictatorship (1973-1990) have been heard
by courts or are now under court jurisdiction, according to Diego Portales
University’s Human Rights Observatory, a nongovernmental organization that
monitors progress in human rights trials.
Between 2000 and September 2011, more than 800 former state security agents
had been indicted or convicted, and as of August 2012, 64 agents were serving
prison sentences. In many cases, the Supreme Court has used its discretionary
powers to reduce sentences against human rights violators in recognition of the
time elapsed since the criminal act. Others had their sentences commuted.
These practices raise concerns about Chile’s fulfillment of its obligation to hold
accountable perpetrators of crimes against humanity by imposing appropriate
punishments or sanctions.
Prison Conditions
Overcrowding and poor conditions in many prisons continue to be a problem.
As of May 2012, the official capacity of the prison system was 39,832, but there
were 54,339 prisoners.
Following a fire in December 2010 in Santiago’s San Miguel prison in which 81
prisoners died, the Ministry of Justice undertook important reforms both to
improve conditions and reduce overcrowding. In June 2012 a law entered into
force that allowed the release of low-risk inmates, including women with young
children who were within six months of completing two-thirds of their sentence,
and the voluntary return of non-Chilean inmates to their countries of origin.
Another law, promulgated the same month, provides six alternatives to prison
for low risk offenders, including community service and the use of electronic
bracelets.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In July 2012, President Piñera promulgated a law to provide legal protection for
Chile’s vulnerable minorities, including lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
(LGBT) individuals. The law explicitly includes sexual orientation and gender
identity as prohibited grounds of discrimination. It also creates a special judicial
process aimed at providing rapid redress to victims of discriminatory acts,
which allows judges to halt or reverse them and provide protection for victims
and toughens penalties. However, the law does not provide victims of discrimination
with a mechanism for compensation.
Reproductive Rights
Chile in is one of only three countries in Latin America (the other two being El
Salvador and Nicaragua) with an absolute prohibition on abortion, even prohibiting
medical necessity as a defense. In April 2012, the Senate rejected three bills to legalize abortion in cases in which the mother’s life was at risk or the
fetus was unviable. Such an absolute prohibition violates a woman’s fundamental
right to the highest attainable standard of health, life, nondiscrimination,
physical integrity, and freedom from cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment.
Key International Actors
In February 2012, the IACrtHR found that Chile had violated the rights of Karen
Atala, a lesbian, and her three children to equal treatment and to non-discrimination.
Atala lost custody of her children when Chilean courts ruled that, due to
her sexual orientation, her children would be at risk if she were to raise them
with her female partner.
As reparations for the violation of Atala’s rights, the court ordered Chile, inter
alia, to invite the victims and the organizations that represented them in the
case to a public event in which the state would recognize its responsibility. The
court also ordered Chile to implement training programs for judges and other
public officials to ensure respect for the rights of the LGBT population.