Chile
Chile continues to prosecute former military personnel accused of committing
grave human rights violations during the dictatorship of General Augusto
Pinochet. Since she took office in March 2006, President Michelle Bachelet has
said she will push legislation to prevent an amnesty law from obstructing prosecutions
for past abuses, and to allow Chile to join the International Criminal
Court.
Chile has also made significant advances in protecting the rights of detainees
and ensuring due process in criminal trials. Conditions in Chile’s seriously overcrowded
prisons remain a serious concern, however, and Chile’s over-extended
system of military justice still allows civilians to be prosecuted by military courts.
Prosecutions for Past Human Rights Violations
As of October 2006, courts had convicted 109 individuals for crimes including
“disappearances,” extrajudicial executions, and torture under military rule. Thirtyfive
former generals of the army, police, and air force have been convicted or are
facing trial. Paradoxically, these advances have been achieved even though successive
governments have allowed an amnesty law exempting military personnel
from punishment for crimes committed between 1973 and 1978 to stand. In cases
of enforced disappearance the Supreme Court has generally held the law to be
inapplicable, considering them to be kidnappings that are ongoing until the victim’s
death can be proven. For example, in May and June 2006, the Supreme
Court reversed decisions of the Santiago Appeals Court which had granted
amnesty to the alleged kidnappers of Jacqueline Binfa and Diana Aron in 1974.
Several judges, however, consider the amnesty applicable to killings that took
place during the period covered by the law. In March, for example, Judge Víctor
Montiglio amnestied three military officers accused of “disappearances” in Arica
in 1973, after concluding that the victims had been killed. Other appellate judges
disagree and have ruled that international human rights law invalidates the
amnesty in all cases of grave human rights abuse. At this writing, the Supreme
Court had yet to issue a ruling on this crucial issue.
In October 2006, however, President Bachelet announced that she would present
a bill to prevent the amnesty law from being applied in cases of grave human
rights abuse. Her announcement came in response to a ruling of the Inter-
American Court of Human Rights that the law was incompatible with the American
Convention on Human Rights, and therefore without legal effect.
Court cases against former dictator Augusto Pinochet continue to accumulate. In
October 2006, Pinochet was charged for the torture and disappearance of more
than 50 people who were held after the military coup at the Villa Grimaldi, a notorious
Santiago detention center. He is still being prosecuted for an elaborate
scheme in 1975 to cover up the abduction and murder of 119 Chilean leftists,
known as Operation Colombo. Pinochet also faces charges of tax evasion and forgery
following the discovery of secret bank accounts in the United States in which
he had stashed away millions of dollars.
Identifying the remains of victims of the dictatorship continues to be a major
problem. Mistaken identifications have caused the victims’ relatives uncertainty
and anguish for many years. In April 2006, the director of the Medical Legal
Service (Servicio Medico Legal, SML), the forensic service affiliated with the
Justice Ministry, admitted that the SML had wrongly identified the remains of at
least 48 victims of extrajudicial executions whose bodies had been exhumed in
1991 from unmarked graves in the Santiago General Cemetery. In August 2006, a
panel of international experts arrived in Santiago to revise and correct the SML’s
procedures and findings.
Army Abuses Committed after the Return to Democracy
Court investigations into human rights abuses by the army committed after the
return to democracy in 1990 have advanced. Such abuses include killings to prevent
former agents from testifying in human rights and arms trafficking cases. In
April 2006, three Uruguayan army officers were extradited to Chile to face charges
of involvement—with two former directors of Chilean army intelligence—in a conspiracy
to hide in Uruguay a former Chilean agent who had developed chemical
weapons believed to have been used in political assassinations. The agent,
Eugenio Berríos, was found on a Uruguayan beach in 1995 with a bullet through
his head. In addition, five army officers, including two generals, are facing trial for covering up the murder in 1992 of Gerardo Huber, a Chilean army colonel who
was a key witness in an investigation into illegal arms sales to Croatia.
Torture Commission
The government has continued to confront the military-era legacy of torture, even
though it has not supported prosecutions for this systematic abuse. The main
political parties agreed in 2006 that torture victims who were unable to give their
testimonies to the Commission on Political Imprisonment and Torture, which
reported in November 2004, should be given an opportunity to do so. On the negative
side, in June 2006, the Supreme Court unanimously upheld former
President Ricardo Lagos’s order that all testimonies be kept secret for 50 years.
Prison Conditions
Chile’s prison population increases by 8 percent a year and its prisons are severely
overcrowded. In 2006 approximately 39,000 prisoners were being housed in
facilities designed to accommodate 24,000. Much of the increase is due to the
greater efficiency of the courts following the introduction of a new nationwide
prosecutorial system. It has been aggravated by delays in the construction of new
prisons contracted out to private companies.
A report published by the Diego Portales University Law Faculty in June 2006
highlighted serious problems of overcrowding, lack of adequate medical attention,
violent deaths, torture and ill-treatment, and corruption by prison guards.
The Southern Santiago Center for Preventive Detention, with a maximum capacity
of 3,170, contained 5,617 inmates at the time of the report’s publication.
According to a report sent to the Minister of Justice by a Supreme Court official,
prisoners were kept locked up in overcrowded cells, mostly without sanitation or
ventilation and poorly lit, for 15 hours at a time.
Prison overcrowding and an inadequate prison service contribute to violent
deaths in prison fights. Thirty-three prisoners were reported in September 2006
to have died during the year in fights, many of them stabbed to death with homemade
knives.
Terrorism Prosecutions of Mapuche
The Bachelet government has tried to end the use of Chile’s anti-terrorism law to
prosecute members of Chile’s largest indigenous group, the Mapuche, for crimes
against property committed during land protests. In April, the government
announced that it would cease invoking the law in such cases. However, Congress
has refused to allow parole for Mapuche prisoners already convicted under the
law, three of whom, together with a sympathizer, staged an unsuccessful 70-day
hunger strike in May to obtain their release. A bill proposed by the government to
remove from the anti-terrorism law crimes against property in which there are no
victims, also failed to garner support.
Police Abuses and Military Justice
Police brutality and excessive use of force against the Mapuche are problems in
parts of southern Chile where there are continuing conflicts over land.
Investigations into these incidents are usually conducted by military prosecutors.
Any charges of violence against the police, or of violent abuses by the police, are
heard by military courts that are staffed by officers on active service and therefore
provide no guarantees of independence and impartiality.
A government-sponsored commission exists to draw up proposals to restrict the
scope of military courts and to bring them into line with due process standards,
but no bill has yet been presented to Congress.
International Criminal Court Ratification
Chile is the only nation in Latin America that has signed but not yet ratified the
Rome Statute for the International Criminal Court. The reform has been stalled
since April 2002, when the Constitutional Court, ruling on a petition by a group of
opposition senators, declared the ratification bill unconstitutional. In August
2006, senators postponed the debate once again, asking the government to clarify
the potential effects on Chile’s defense acquisitions should the United States
apply sanctions under the American Service-Members’ Protection Act (ASPA),
which prohibits US aid to countries that ratify the Rome Statute without promising
not to refer United States citizens for prosecution by the court.
Key International Actors
The Inter-American Court of Human Rights has issued several landmark rulings on
Chilean cases. In November 2005, it ruled against Chile in the Palamara case,
involving a former civilian navy employee whose treatise on military intelligence
was censored by the navy, and who was convicted by a naval court in 1995 for
disrespect. The court found that Chile’s military tribunals had excessively wide
jurisdiction, including over civilians, and failed to comply with international standards
of competence, independence, and impartiality. It ordered Chile to reform
its military courts, to ensure that they meet these standards, and to end their
jurisdiction over civilians.
In September 2006, the court ruled against Chile for failing to provide a nongovernmental
environmental group with access to information about a logging
project in the south of Chile. It ordered the government to take measures to
ensure the right of access to public information.