Chile
Chilean military courts that fall short of international standards of independence
and impartiality continue to investigate and try police accused of human rights
abuses. Counterterrorism legislation has been used inappropriately to deal with
common crimes committed by indigenous protesters. Legislation enacted in 2010
only partially corrected these problems.
Judges continue to convict former military personnel accused of committing grave
human rights violations during the military dictatorship (1973-1990). However,
final sentences are often unacceptably lenient given the seriousness of the
crimes. Overcrowding and inhumane conditions in many Chilean prisons remains
a serious problem.
Military Jurisdiction
Beginning in 2000, Chile has overhauled its criminal justice procedure and reinforced
due process guarantees, however, until 2010, military courts continued to
exercise jurisdiction over civilians accused of acts of violence against Carabineros
(uniformed police), which is part of the armed forces. Military courts still hold
jurisdiction over crimes committed by Carabineros against civilians, such as use
of excessive force, torture, and ill-treatment.
In a 2005 ruling in the Palamara case, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights
ordered Chile to ensure that military courts no longer exercise jurisdiction over
civilians. Subsequent court decisions have held that members of the armed
forces accused of humans rights violations should also be tried under civilian
jurisdiction.
Legislation approved by Congress in September 2010 finally complied with Chile’s
obligation to ensure that civilian courts try civilians in all cases. However, it did
not transfer to civilian jurisdiction cases of abuse by police officers against civilians,
thereby failing to meet Chile’s obligations under international law to ensure
that law enforcement officials accused of human rights abuses are tried by independent
and impartial courts.
Police Abuses
In repeated incidents, carabineros have used excessive force during operations in
indigenous Mapuche communities in the Araucanía region. Abuses typically occur
when police try to control Mapuche protests and prevent land occupations, or
when they enter communities to pursue activists suspected of crimes allegedly
committed during land disputes with farmers and logging companies.
Since 2002, police have been responsible for the deaths of at least three
Mapuches. As noted, such cases are investigated by military courts that do not
meet international standards of independence and impartiality; sentences have
either resulted in acquittals or been extremely lenient. In August 2010, for example,
Corte Marcial (the military appeals court) placed on probation for three years
a police corporal convicted of using excessive force by shooting a Mapuche
activist, Matías Catrileo, in the back with a submachine gun. Three military judges
on active service have a majority on the panel, which also includes two civilian
appellate judges. The same court acquitted a policeman accused of shooting a
young Mapuche, Alex Lemun, in 2002. In July 2010 it ordered charges dropped
against four policeman accused of beating Carlos Curinao, the son of a Mapuche
community leader, while he lay prostrate on the ground.
Counterterrorism Laws
Since 2004 Human Rights Watch has expressed concern about inappropriate use
of counterterrorism legislation to deal with common crimes, such as arson, committed
by indigenous Mapuche activists. Under Chile’s counterterrorism law,
crimes against property, such as burning homesteads, woods, or crops; or damaging
vehicles or machinery, are considered terrorist crimes if judges believe they
are intended to spread fear among the population. Defendants under the law
have restricted due process rights and face much higher sentences. As of June
2010 more than 50 Mapuches faced terrorism charges and five had been convicted
of terrorist crimes.
In October 2010 the government enacted legislation to modify the counterterrorism
law in response to a hunger strike by 32 Mapuche prisoners protesting the
law’s application to their cases, as well as their prosecution by military courts.
The reforms of the counterterrorism law strengthened some due process guarantees,
such as allowing witnesses whose identity can be concealed by prosecutors
to be cross-examined by defense attorneys. The government also announced it
would drop all accusations of terrorism against Mapuches currently in the courts,
and accuse them only under the ordinary criminal law. However, the inclusion in
the law of crimes against property was left unchanged, and public prosecutors
continued to apply the law to such crimes.
Confronting Past Abuses
Cases of human rights abuses committed during military rule under investigation
by the courts rose from 350 in April 2010 to 452 in June 2010 due to relatives’
associations filing new cases. President Sebastian Piñera continues to provide
government support for the Human Rights Program attached to the Ministry of the
Interior, whose lawyers help relatives of victims pursue their cases before the
courts.
As of June 2010, 292 former military personnel and civilian collaborators had
been convicted on charges of enforced disappearances, extrajudicial executions,
and torture (of whom 210 had the verdict confirmed on final appeal). Sixty-four
were serving prison sentences; 490 more were facing charges.
In July 2010 Piñera announced he would exclude prisoners convicted of human
rights violations from presidential clemency measures that the Catholic Church
had requested to mark the 200th anniversary of Chile’s founding as a republic.
In July 2010 the Supreme Court’s criminal chamber confirmed the conviction of
Augusto Pinochet’s secret police chief, Manuel Contreras, and eight other agents
for the 1974 car bomb assassination of former army commander Carlos Prats and
his wife. The court sentenced Contreras and his associate Pedro Espinoza to 20
years in prison for aggravated homicide and criminal association. The court held
these were crimes against humanity, and that Chile is bound under the Geneva
Conventions to judge and punish those responsible for such crimes, regardless of
the self-amnesty law that Pinochet introduced in 1977.
However, in many cases the Supreme Court has routinely used its discretionary
powers to reduce sentences against human rights violators in recognition of the time elapsed since the criminal act. Often the sentence finally imposed is low
enough to exempt those convicted from going to prison. This practice raises concerns
about Chile’s fulfillment of its obligation to hold perpetrators of disappearances
accountable by imposing appropriate punishment or sanctions; less than
one-third of those convicted were actually serving prison time in August 2010.
Prison Conditions
Chile has yet to take effective measures to relieve severe overcrowding in its prisons,
and alleviate conditions that a senior justice official has described as “inhumane.”
In Chile’s most crowded prisons in 2010, at least two prisoners on average occupied
facilities intended for one. Prison conditions include overcrowding; poor
sanitation, ventilation, and nutrition; and lack of potable water. Yet despite conditions
conducive to ill-health and the spread of infectious disease, access to medical
care remains inadequate. According to a report that a government-appointed
prison review commission issued in March 2010, the problem stems from delays
in the construction of new facilities, the introduction of faster criminal procedures,
harsher sentencing policies, and failure to implement effective alternatives
to prison. Following visits to facilities across the country in July and August,
Minister of Justice Felipe Bulnes said that the problem of overcrowding had been
“invisible for a long time,” and announced measures to improve conditions.
Reproductive Rights
Chile is one of a handful of countries that prohibits abortion in all circumstances,
even in cases of rape or incest, or to save the life or health of a pregnant woman.
Despite this, an estimated 60,000 to 200,000 clandestine abortions occur annually,
corresponding to between 20 and 40 percent of all pregnancies. The lack of
precise statistics on the prevalence of abortion speaks to the highly stigmatized
and clandestine nature of the practice. Chile also has one of the highest teenage
pregnancy rates in the world, with over 15 percent of all births corresponding to
adolescent mothers. There was continued controversy in 2010 over the distribution
of modern contraceptive methods. For example, the main health authority of
Coquimbo region withdrew the authority of midwives to distribute contraception, contravening national norms. Many women, especially in rural or less accessible
areas, lose real access when only medical doctors can distribute contraception.
Key International Actors
United Nations experts have repeatedly criticized the use of counterterrorism legislation
against Mapuche activists, including the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination and the special rapporteur on the situation of human rights
and fundamental freedoms of indigenous peoples.
In September the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights filed a case with
the Inter-American Court on Human Rights accusing Chile of discriminating
against Karen Atala, a judge who is an open lesbian, by depriving her of custody
of her children because of her sexual orientation. The Supreme Court refused to
participate in a panel formed by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to debate ways of
implementing the commission’s recommendations, arguing the final court decision
was not subject to discussion. The Inter-American Court will decide for the
first time whether such discrimination violates the American Convention on
Human Rights.