Chile
Since the death of former dictator Gen. Augusto Pinochet in December 2006,
Chilean judges have continued to prosecute and convict former military personnel
accused of committing grave human rights violations under the military government.
However, the Supreme Court’s criminal chamber has reduced sentences in
many recent cases, with the result that many convicted perpetrators eventually do
not serve time in prison.
Police abuses continue to be reported in the Araucanía region, where members of
some indigenous Mapuche communities asserting land claims periodically
engage in violent attacks on homes and property. Overcrowding and inhumane
conditions in many of Chile’s prisons remain serious problems.
Confronting Past Abuses
In the pursuit of accountability for human rights abuses under military rule, as of
October 2009, 559 former military personnel and civilian collaborators were facing
charges for enforced disappearances, extrajudicial executions, and torture;
277 had been convicted (of whom 175 had had the verdict confirmed on final
appeal), and 56 were serving prison sentences. Thirty-two of those charged or
convicted had been generals in the Chilean army. Pinochet himself had been
under house arrest and faced prosecution at the time of his death in 2006, but
was unpunished for any crime.
In September 2009 Judge Víctor Montiglio indicted 129 former members of the
DINA, Pinochet’s secret police, for “disappearances” and extrajudicial executions
dating from the 1970s. Half of them were facing charges for the first time. Also in
September, the Supreme Court’s criminal chamber confirmed a three-and-a-half
year sentence against two retired air force officers for the torture of 17 people
between 1973 and 1975. For the first time, the Court expressly declared torture, a
systematic practice during the Pinochet years, to be a crime against humanity.
A majority of the five judges in the Supreme Court’s criminal chamber now rule
that an amnesty decreed by the military government in 1978 is inapplicable to war
crimes or crimes against humanity, and that these crimes are not subject to a statute of limitations. However, not all of the judges agree that the amnesty is
inapplicable. Given that court rulings in Chile are not binding in cases other than
the one under review, and that the composition of the Supreme Court panel may
change from case to case, the legal obstacles to convictions have not been entirely
overcome. A bill promoted by the government to amend the criminal code so
that crimes against humanity are not subject to amnesties or statutes of limitation
has been deadlocked in Congress since 2005.
During 2008 and increasingly in 2009, the Supreme Court’s criminal chamber has
applied a “partial statute of limitations” (known in Chile as media prescripción)
that allows those convicted for human rights violations to receive a reduced sentence
in recognition of the time elapsed since the criminal act (more than 30
years in some cases). If the final sentence is less than five years, they can benefit
from an alternative to prison. In fact, fewer than one-third of the 175 perpetrators
whose prison sentence has been confirmed by the Supreme Court were actually
serving time as of October 2009.
Criminal Justice System
Even though Chile has completely overhauled its criminal justice procedure in
recent years and reinforced due process guarantees, military courts still have
wide jurisdiction over civilians and over human rights abuses committed by
the Carabineros (uniformed police), which is part of the armed forces. Following a
2005 decision by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights in the Palamara case
ordering Chile to ensure that military courts no longer exercise jurisdiction over
civilians, the government has been working on legislation to comprehensively
reform the system of military justice. In October 2009, after long consultations, it
finally presented two bills in Congress that would restrict the jurisdiction of military
courts solely to military crimes committed by military personnel, and promised
a third bill to ensure that military courts comply with the due process guarantees
protected in the ordinary justice system.
Another issue has been the abuse of counterterrorism legislation to deal with
common crimes, such as arson, committed by Mapuche activists, a practice
about which several United Nations bodies have expressed concern. Under
Chile’s counterterrorism law, crimes against property such as burning homesteads, woods, or crops, or damaging vehicles or machinery, are considered to be
terrorist crimes if judges see them as intended to spread fear in the population.
Defendants under the law have restricted due process rights and face higher sentences.
Unlike preceding administrations, President Michelle Bachelet’s government
adopted a policy of relying on the ordinary criminal law in dealing with
crimes like these. However, as violence in the Araucanía region of southern Chile
flared during 2009 and Mapuche activists armed with shotguns were reported to
be holding up and burning trucks in nighttime attacks, the government reverted
to using the counterterrorism law.
Police Abuses
In repeated incidents, carabineros have used excessive force during operations in
indigenous Mapuche communities in the Araucanía region. The abuses typically
occur when police intervene to control Mapuche protests and prevent land occupations,
or when they enter communities in pursuit of Mapuches suspected of
crimes allegedly committed during ongoing land disputes with farmers and logging
companies.
Since 2002 three Mapuches have been killed by police unlawfully using lethal
force. In the most recent case, in August 2009 a carabinero fatally shot Jaime
Mendoza Collío, age 24, who had been participating in a land occupation near
Ercilla. The police claimed that the carabinero acted in self defense, but forensic
reports indicated that the bullet hit Mendoza in the back and that he had not
fired a weapon. The carabinero official responsible for the zone reportedly continued
to defend the officer responsible, even after the forensic results had been
reported in the press. Although military prosecutors filed charges of “unnecessary
violence resulting in death” against the police involved in all three cases, at this
writing military courts have yet to convict anyone.
There have also been repeated incidents involving alleged ill-treatment of
detainees, including children. Few cases have been clarified by judicial investigations.
In October 2009 Citizen’s Watch, an NGO that monitors indigenous rights,
reported the case of a 14-year-old Mapuche boy who was allegedly beaten and
threatened with being thrown from a police helicopter after he was captured
while gathering medicinal herbs. During the same month, the government announced that a carabinero caught on film kicking a Mapuche detainee in the
head would be expelled from the force. The United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF) urged the government to improve procedures for registering and investigating
complaints against the police.
Prison Conditions
Chile has more prisoners per capita than any other country in South America. The
prison population has grown by almost 50 percent since 2004, in large part due
to the greater efficiency of a new code of criminal procedure progressively introduced
since 2000. Despite the opening of six new privately contracted prisons, 74
percent of the prison population is still held in aging facilities, and overcrowding
remains a serious problem. For example, in 2009 the Southern Santiago Center
for Preventive Detention, with a planned capacity of 3,170 places, had 6,690
inmates. Violence in prisons has increased in recent years. According to prison
service statistics cited in a major newspaper, 46 prisoners died in fights between
prisoners in the first eight months of 2009.
In June 2009 a Supreme Court official testifying before the Senate Committee on
Constitution, Legislation and Justice described the conditions in which prisoners
are held in punishment cells without natural light or sanitary provision as cruel
and degrading. Reacting to her report, the deputy minister of justice announced
the formation of a Council for Prison Reform, including NGO experts, to analyze
prison policies.
Reproductive Rights
Chile is one of a handful of countries in the world that prohibits abortion for any
reason, even in cases of rape or incest, or to save the life of the mother. Despite
the comprehensive ban, an estimated 60,000 to 200,000 clandestine abortions
are performed each year. In April 2008 the Constitutional Court ruled against a
legal provision that allows free distribution of emergency contraception, including
the “morning after pill.” The World Health Organization recognizes that emergency
contraceptive pills can prevent pregnancy and does not consider them to
induce abortion. However, Chile’s court ruled that such methods violate the constitutional
protection of the right to life of the unborn. It thus ignored the rights of living women—particularly the poor and adolescents—to health, information,
autonomy, non-discrimination, freedom of conscience, and freedom to enjoy the
benefits of scientific progress.
Key International Actors
Chile has played an important advocacy role as a member of the UN Human
Rights Council since 2008. Chile was one of the few governments to intervene
during the 2009 Universal Periodic Review (UPR) of Cuba to raise significant
human rights issues there. Chile also voted against a resolution co-sponsored by
Cuba, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and Brazil that failed to deplore the killing of civilians
in Sri Lanka. It has insisted—as in the case of the Democratic Republic of Congo—
that country-specific action is a key instrument of the UN to hold governments
accountable, shed light on violations, and reveal the truth about the suffering of
victims.
In May 2009 Chile’s own human rights performance came under UPR scrutiny.
Protection of the human rights of its indigenous peoples was an issue that came
up frequently in questions and comments by states. Chile rejected only two recommendations,
both of them concerned with extending access to abortion.