China
China’s new leadership, consisting of the Communist Party’s seven permanent
standing committee members, assumed power at the 18th Party Congress in
November, ending the decade-long leadership of Hu Jintao and Wen Jiabao.
That era saw sustained economic growth, urbanization, and China’s rise as a
global power, but little progress on human rights. The government rolled back
protections on the administration of justice, presided over a significant rise in
social unrest, including the largest inter-ethnic incidents in decades in Tibet
and Xinjiang, and expanded the power of the security apparatus.
Chinese people had no say in the selection of their new leaders, highlighting
that despite the country’s three decades of rapid modernization, the government
remains an authoritarian one-party system that places arbitrary curbs on
freedom of expression, association, religion, prohibits independent labor
unions and human rights organizations, and maintains party control over all
judicial institutions. The government also censors the press, internet, and publishing
industry, and enforces highly repressive policies in ethnic minority areas
in Tibet, Xinjiang, and Inner Mongolia.
At the same time, citizens are increasingly prepared to challenge authorities
over volatile livelihood issues, such as land seizures, forced evictions, abuses
of power by corrupt cadres, discrimination, and economic inequalities. Based
on law enforcement reports, official and scholarly statistics estimate that there
are 250-500 protests each day, with anywhere from ten to tens of thousands of
participants. Despite facing risks, internet users and reform-oriented media are
aggressively pushing censorship boundaries by advocating for the rule of law
and transparency, exposing official wrongdoing, and calling for political
reforms.
Despite their precarious legal status and surveillance by the authorities, civil
society groups continue to try to expand their work. An informal but dedicated
network of activists monitors and documents human rights cases under the
banner of a country-wide weiquan (rights defense) movement. These activists
face a host of repressive state measures.
The government announced in its 2012-2015 “National Human Rights Action
Plan” that it would interpret its international legal obligations on human rights
with a new vaguely defined “principle of practicality”—departing from the its
previous rhetorical commitment to the principle of universality of human rights.
The new principle appears to be another iteration of the government’s oftrepeated
justification that China’s “national conditions” do not allow for participatory
politics.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders in China regularly face police harassment, house arrest,
short-term detention, “reeducation through labor,” forcible commitment to psychiatric
facilities, or imprisonment on criminal charges, often on state security
or public order grounds.
Nobel Peace Prize laureate Liu Xiaobo is serving an 11-year sentence in
Heilongjiang province for incitement to subvert state power. His wife, Liu Xia,
has been missing since December 2010. She is believed to be under house
arrest in the capital Beijing to prevent her from campaigning on her husband’s
behalf.
Li Tie, a writer and dissident from Wuhan in Hubei province, was sentenced on
January 18 to 10 years in prison for subversion. Li’s especially harsh sentence
was the last of several given to several long-standing democracy activists in the
wake of the Arab Spring.
After a year in detention, veteran activists Ni Yulan and Dong Jiqin were sentenced
on April 10 to two years and eight months, and two years respectively for
“creating a disturbance.” An appeal court shortened Ni’s sentence by two
months in July.
In late April, the blind activist Chen Guangcheng escaped from his home in
Shandong province where he had been unlawfully confined with his family since
his release from an unjustified prison term for “intentionally damaging property
and gathering crowds to disturb transport order.” In September 2010, helped by
a network of activists, Chen sought refuge at the United States Embassy in
Beijing. Following tense negotiations between the US and China over several weeks, Chen was finally allowed to leave with his family on May 19 to study in
the US, after central government envoys gave assurances there would be an
investigation into his unlawful detention. Chen Kegui, Chen’s nephew, faces
homicide charges for injuring several guards who raided Chen’s brother’s home
in the middle of the night after they realized Chen had escaped. Local judicial
authorities barred Chen Kegui’s lawyers from representing him, claiming they
had already appointed a legal aid lawyer for him.
On July 25, Hunan activist Zhu Chengzhi was formally arrested on a charge of
“inciting subversion of state power” for exposing the suspicious conditions surrounding
the alleged suicide of veteran dissident Li Wangyang. Li, who spent
most of his life imprisoned, was found hanged in a hospital room in Shaoyang
city, Hunan province, on June 6, his feet touching the ground. His suspicious
death prompted an internet outcry amongst Chinese rights activists and led to
several large demonstrations in Hong Kong. Relatives and supporters of Li were
placed under house arrest to stop them challenging the results of a second
party-led investigation into the case, which Li’s supporters see as a part of the
official cover- up.
On August 13, police detained a dozen activists in Beijing and arrested another,
Peng Lanlan, in Hunan province. These activists had pressed the State Council
to disclose government-held information about implementing measures of the
country’s second National Human Rights Action plan, publicized earlier in June.
Legal Reforms
While legal reforms effectively stalled under the Hu-Wen leadership and the government
rejects judicial independence, large parts of the legal community continue
to be a force for change, spurred by increasing popular legal awareness
and activism. The party maintains authority over all judicial institutions and
mechanisms, and coordinates the work of the judiciary through its political and
legal committees. The Public Security, or police, remains its most powerful
actor. Forced confessions under torture remain prevalent and miscarriages of
justice frequent due to weak courts and tight limits on the rights of the defense.
In March 2012, in an effort to reduce such cases and improve the administration
of justice, the government adopted comprehensive revisions to the Criminal
Procedure Law (CPL). However, the new revisions also legalize the power of the
police to place “state security, terrorism, and major corruption” suspects in
detention in a location of the police’s choice, outside the formal detention system,
for up to six months. These measures put suspects at risk of torture while
giving the government a justification for “disappearance” of dissidents and
activists.
Domestic critics of the administrative detention system of “reeducation through
labor,” frequently used against people petitioning the authorities for redress,
received a boost following a national outcry over the police sentencing to 18
months a woman who had pressed officials over the rape of her 11-year-old
daughter. She was released after approximately a week in detention.
China continued in 2012 to lead the world in executions. The exact number
remains a state secret but experts estimate it to be 5,000 to 8,000 a year.
Freedom of Expression
Government restrictions on journalists, bloggers, and an estimated 538 million
internet users continued to violate domestic and international legal guarantees
of freedom of press and expression. Sina Weibo, the largest of China’s social
media microblog services, gives 300 million subscribers space to express opinions
and discontent to an extent previously unavailable. But like all online content,
Weibo is subject to strict scrutiny and manipulation by China’s censors
tasked with shaping online debate in line with government policy. Alternative
social media operations including Twitter, YouTube, and Facebook are blocked.
In mid-June, internet censors blocked all searches for Yili milk powder, an infant
formula, after the company recalled products contaminated with mercury.
Government censors excised eight pages of Southern Weekend newspaper’s
coverage of the disastrous July 21-22 Beijing flood that caused widespread property
damage and disrupted transportation infrastructure. On September 12, censors
banned searches for the name “Jinping” amid frantic speculation as to why
Chinese Vice President Xi Jinping had disappeared from public view and from mention in Chinese state media for almost two weeks. He later reappeared with
no official explanation for his absence.
At least 27 Chinese journalists were serving prison terms in 2012 due to ambiguous
laws on “revealing state secrets” and “inciting subversion.” Journalists are
also at risk of perceived violations of censorship restrictions. Southern
Metropolitan editor Yu Chen was removed from his position after an anonymous
posting to the paper’s website criticized the Chinese Communist Party’s control
over the People’s Liberation Army. Xian Evening News reporter Shi Junrong was
suspended on July 2 for an unspecified time for writing a June 27 expose about
local Communist Party member spending money on cigarettes. He remained
suspended at this writing.
Journalists who report on sensitive topics remained vulnerable to physical violence
in 2012. In one of the higher profile of such incidents, Lei Zhaohe, a
reporter with Hong Kong’s Asia Television, was punched and kicked by two men
on August 10 while filming police detain protesters outside a courthouse in
Hefei, Anhui province. Other journalists at the scene identified the two men as
plainclothes police.
2012 marked the first expulsion of a foreign journalist since 1998. On May 7, the
Chinese government expelled Al Jazeera correspondent Melissa Chan for alleged
violations of unspecified rules and regulations. On August 21, the Foreign
Correspondents’ Clubs of Hong Kong, China, and Shanghai issued a joint statement
expressing “extreme concern” over four incidents between July 28-August
12 in which seven foreign journalists were “threatened, harassed and even
beaten.” The statement said that several of those incidents “involved members
of the official security forces and associated elements.”
The Chinese government sought to extend its stringent controls on freedom of
expression overseas on at least two occasions. In March, the Chinese government
successfully pressured the organizers of the annual London Book fair to
exclude any dissident or exiled Chinese writers from the list of official participants.
In September, the Chinese consulate in San Francisco unsuccessfully
sought to persuade the mayor of Corvallis, Oregon, to remove a mural on a private
building that supported Tibetan and Taiwanese independence.
Freedom of Religion
Despite a constitutional guarantee of freedom of religion, the Chinese government
restricts religious practices to officially approved mosques, churches, temples,
and monasteries. The government also audits the activities, employee
details, and financial records of religious bodies. Religious personnel appointments,
religious publications, and seminary applications are subject to government
review.
Unregistered spiritual groups such as Protestant “house churches” are deemed
unlawful and the government subjects their members to fines and prosecution.
The government classifies Falun Gong—a meditation-focused spiritual group
banned since July 1999—as an “an evil cult” and arrests, harasses, and intimidates
its members.
In February, municipal religious management officials in Wugang city, Hunan
province, required parents to sign a guarantee to not participate in “evil cult”
activities as a condition for registering their children in city schools. The registration
was part of a wider municipal campaign against Falun Gong and
Protestant house churches during the Chinese Lunar New Year period.
On August 22, the Shanghai municipal government indefinitely suspended
classes at the city’s Sheshan Catholic seminary as a reprisal related to the July 7
decision of Ma Daqin, the new auxiliary bishop of Shanghai, to resign from the
official Chinese Catholic Patriotic Association. Ma has been under house arrest
following his decision and remained so at this writing.
The government continues to heavily restrict religious activities in the name of
security in ethnic minority areas. See sections below on Tibet and Xinjiang.
Health and Disability Rights
The government remains hostile towards claims for compensation stemming
from the 1990s blood scandal in Henan province. On August 27, baton-wielding
police beat several members of a group of 300 people with HIV-AIDS protesting
outside headquarters of the Henan provincial government headquarters in
Zhengzhou. The crowd was protesting the government’s refusal to pay compensation to those infected with the virus via government-organized mass blood
plasma sales in Henan province in the 1990s.
The government’s National Human Rights Action Plan (2012-2015) issued on
June 11 commits the government to greater protection from widespread heavy
metal pollution, yet no redress or medical attention had materialized at this
writing for children poisoned by lead in in Henan, Yunnan, Shaanxi, and Hunan
in recent years.
Although it is a party to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (CRPD), China’s protections of the rights of persons with disabilities
remains inadequate. During China’s first CRPD review on September 18-19 in
Geneva, government officials generally denied the existence of abuses and their
failure to provide people with disabilities access to information, justice, and
basic services.
On October 26, the Chinese government adopted a mental health law, which
had been in the works for more than 20 years. The law has numerous flaws,
including inadequate safeguards to protect against involuntary detention in
psychiatric institutions.
Women’s Rights
Women’s reproductive rights and access to reproductive health remain severely
curtailed under China’s family planning regulations. The government continues
to impose administrative sanctions, fines, and coercive measures, including
forced abortion. In recent years coercive birth control policies increasingly
extend to ethnic minority areas such as Tibet and Xinjiang. These policies contribute
to an increasing gender-imbalance (118.08 males for every 100 females
according to the 2010 census), which in turn contribute to different rights violations,
including forced marriage and trafficking.
The government’s erratic and punitive crackdowns on sex work often lead to
serious abuses, including physical and sexual violence, increased disease risk,
and constrained access to justice for the country’s estimated 4 to 10 million sex
workers.
Although the government acknowledges that domestic violence, employment
discrimination, and discriminatory social attitudes are acute and widespread, it
limits the activities of independent women’s rights groups and discourages
public interest litigation.
Migrant and Labor Rights
Chinese workers are becoming more active and outspoken in their efforts to
improve wages and conditions despite the absence of meaningful union representation.
The official All-China Federation of Trade Unions (ACFTU) is the sole
legal representative of China’s workers due to a ban on independent labor
unions.
Nongovernmental labor groups devoted to protecting migrant workers’ rights in
Guangdong province’s assembly manufacturing areas came under sustained
attack from government officials and security forces in 2012. In 2012, government
authorities or landlords under pressure from local government officials targeted
at least a dozen other migrant labor NGOs in Shenzhen with forced evictions.
On August 30, two dozen plainclothes thugs who appeared to be operating
at official behest attacked the Shenzhen office of Little Grass Center for
Migrant Workers, smashing windows and breaking the front door in an apparent
act of intimidation.
In June, joint research by the official All-China Women’s Federation and the
Guangdong provincial judiciary revealed that thousands of children left behind
in rural villages by their migrant worker parents due to restrictions of the hukou
(household registration) system are victims of sexual abuse. The hukou system,
which the government has pledged to abolish, unfairly limits the access of
China’s 220 million migrant workers to education, medical services, and housing.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
The Chinese government stopped classifying homosexuality as a mental illness
in 2001 following decriminalization of homosexual behavior in 1997. In June,
more than 80 lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) activists gathered in Beijing for China’s first LGBT conference. However, activists describe deliberate
official harassment through occasional police raids on popular gay venues.
China also lacks anti-discrimination laws based on sexual orientation and the
state does not recognize same sex relationships or adoption rights.
In September, parents of gay men and women protested the publication of an
educational booklet produced for Zhejiang province’s Hangzhou Education
Bureau that described homosexuality as “sexual deviance” and advocated that
parents seek to “prevent” it. The publishing company later announced those
passages would be excised from the booklet’s second edition in October.
In May, for the second year in a row, the Beijing LGBT Center was the target of a
forced eviction after the center’s landlord insisted that homosexuality was “too
sensitive” a topic for his property and demanded the center relocate. The facility
subsequently relocated.
Tibet
The situation in the Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR) and the neighboring Tibetan
autonomous areas of Qinghai, Sichuan, Gansu, and Yunnan provinces remained
tense following the massive crackdown on popular protests that swept the
plateau in 2008, and the introduction of measures designed to place all Tibetan
monasteries under the direct control of government officials who will be permanently
stationed there.
The government has yet to indicate that it will accommodate the aspirations of
Tibetan people for greater autonomy, even within the narrow confines of the
country’s autonomy law on ethnic minorities’ areas. At this writing, 85 Tibetans
had self-immolated since the first recorded case on February 27, 2009—72 of
them in 2012 alone. At least 69 of those who self-immolated have died.
Chinese security forces maintain a heavy presence and the authorities continue
to tightly restrict access and travel to Tibetan areas, particularly for journalists
and foreign visitors. Tibetans suspected of being critical of political, religious,
cultural, or economic state policies are systematically targeted on charges of
“separatism.” On June 18, a Sichuan province court sentenced senior Tibetan cleric, Yonten Gyatso, to seven years in prison for disseminating information
about the situation in Tibet and contacting human rights organizations abroad.
Secret arrests and torture in custody remains widespread. In June, a 36-year-old
Tibetan monk named Karwang died due to prolonged torture in police custody in
Ganzi (Kardze in Tibetan). He had been arrested mid-May on suspicion of having
put up posters calling for Tibetan independence.
As part of its drive to build “a New Socialist Countryside” on the Tibetan
plateau, the government continues to implement large development programs
mandating rehousing or relocating up to 80 percent of the rural population. The
relocation policies have been carried out—contrary to Chinese government
claims—with no effective choice and without genuine consultation of those
affected, while compensation mechanisms are opaque and inadequate.
Pastoralists deprived of their traditional livelihood face declining living standards
and increased dependency on government subsidies.
Xinjiang
Under the guise of counterterrorism and “anti-separatism” efforts, the government
maintains a pervasive system of ethnic discrimination against Uighurs and
other ethnic minorities in the Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region, and sharply
curbs religious and cultural expression. Politically motivated arrests are common.
A pervasive atmosphere of fear among the Uighur population contributes to
growing ethnic polarization. Factors contributing to this bleak atmosphere
include the omnipresence of the secret police, the recent history of disappearances,
and an overtly politicized judiciary.
Also contributing to this polarization is the legacy of the Urumqi riots of July
2009, the most deadly episode of ethnic unrest in recent Chinese history. The
government has not accounted for hundreds of persons detained after the riots,
investigated serious allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees that
have surfaced in testimonies of refugees and relatives living outside China, or
released definitive numbers or names of victims—the majority of whom were
ethnic Chinese—killed during the riots.
Several violent incidents took place in a year of increasing restrictions on religious
and cultural expression. In one of the most severe, On February 28, a
group of Uighurs, led by a man the government claimed was an underground
radical cleric, attacked passers-by in a mainly Chinese-inhabited street of
Yechen (Kargilik in Uighur), killing at least 12 people. The cleric, Abdudukeremu
Mamut, was sentenced to death on March 26.
A policy to raze traditional Uighur neighborhoods and relocate or forcibly evict
inhabitants, accompanied by a campaign to settle the majority of the nomadic
and pastoralist population of Xinjiang, are the most visible aspects of a comprehensive
development policy launched in 2010 that is supposed to reduce socioeconomic
disparities and lift the livelihood of ethnic groups and help “smash
separatist sentiment.”
Hong Kong
Civic groups and the public have challenged the Hong Kong government on
rights issues. Hong Kong authorities appear unwilling to deviate much from pro-
Beijing interests. They have not moved towards universal suffrage as mandated
by the territory’s mini-constitution, and have shown weakness in safeguarding
the territory’s autonomy, civil and political freedoms, and the rule of law.
In September, the government bowed to popular pressure and suspended introducing
patriotic education teaching material aimed at inculcating loyalty to the
Chinese Communist Party. Concerns continue to grow about the use of excessively
restrictive methods by the police in controlling assembly and procession,
and over the Immigration Department’s arbitrary bans on individuals critical of
Beijing. Concerns are also growing about the failure of the government to properly
investigate the rising number of claims that mainland security personnel or
individual working at their behest are operating in the territory, monitoring or
intimidating critics of the Beijing government.
In July, two mainland petitioners were each sentenced to 14 months of “reeducation
through labor” in their home province of Jiangxi for having participated to
the annual July 1st pro-democracy demonstration in Hong Kong, the first known
such instance.
Key International Actors
Despite claims to “making unremitting efforts” at peace in Syria, the Chinese
government, along with Russia, vetoed three resolutions aimed at pressuring
the Syrian government. China also demonstrated its disdain for international
law by pushing back from Yunnan province at least 7,000 ethnic Kachin refugees
into a conflict zone in northern Burma, insisting that they were not refugees.
Although the United States won praise for helping Chen Guangcheng and his
family, neither it nor other governments moved to alter or improve their largely
ineffective bilateral human rights dialogues with the Chinese government. Few
of these dialogues involve meaningful participation by civil society groups.
In early April, Japanese Diet members adopted a highly unusual resolution on
Tibet calling for the Chinese government to resume talks with the Dalai
Lama. Beijing also found itself forced to respond to critical South Korean press
reports that China had forcibly repatriated North Koreans; in response, Beijing
allowed a handful of North Koreans sheltered in the South Korean consulates in
China to depart for Seoul.