China
Despite Chinas official assurances that hosting the 2008 Olympic Games will
help to strengthen the development of human rights in the country, the Chinese
government continues to deny or restrict its citizens fundamental rights, including
freedom of expression, freedom of association, and freedom of religion.
The governments extensive police and state security apparatus continues to
impose multiple layers of controls on civil society activists, critics, and protesters.
Those layers include professional and administrative measures, limitations on
foreign travel and domestic movement, monitoring (covert or overt) of internet
and phone communications, abduction and confinement incommunicado, and
unofficial house arrests. A variety of vaguely defined crimes including inciting
subversion, leaking state secrets, and disrupting social order provide the
government with wide legal remit to stifle critics.
Human Rights and the 2008 Olympics
Despite temporary regulations in effect from January 1, 2007, to October 17, 2008,
that give correspondents freedom to interview anyone who consents, foreign journalists
continue to be harassed, detained, and intimidated by government and
police officials. The temporary regulations do not extend to Chinese journalists or
foreign correspondents Chinese assistants, researchers, and sources, who continue
to risk reprisals for violating government directives on taboo reporting topics.
Official efforts to rid Beijing of undesirables ahead of the Olympics have accelerated
the eviction of petitionerscitizens from the countryside who come to the
capital seeking redress for grievances ranging from illegal land seizures to official
corruption. In September-October the Beijing municipal government demolished
a settlement in Fengtai district that housed up to 4,000 petitioners.
The countdown to the Olympics has also sparked a construction boom. An estimated
one million migrant construction workers are integral to this effort, yet
their labor conditions are harsh and unsafe, and workers are often unable to
access public services. When a subway tunnel under construction collapsed in March, trapping six workers, the first step the employer took was to prevent workers
from reporting the accident by confiscating their mobile phones.
Freedom of Expression
In 2007 the Chinese government stepped up its efforts to control increasingly
vibrant print and online forms of expression, and sanctioned individuals, journalists,
and editors for failing to conform to highly restrictive but inconsistently
implemented laws and regulations.
Chinas system of internet censorship and surveillance is the most advanced in
the world. Filtering, blocking, and monitoring technologies are built into all layers
of Chinas internet infrastructure. Tens of thousands of police remotely monitor
internet use around the clock. The elaborate system of censorship is aided by
extensive corporate and private sector cooperationincluding by some of the
worlds major international technology and internet companies such as Google,
Yahoo, and Microsoft. Writers, editors, bloggers, webmasters, writers, and journalists
risk punishments ranging from immediate dismissal to prosecution and
lengthy jail terms for sending news outside China or posting articles critical of the
political system. For example, Zhang Jianhong, former editor-in-chief of the
Aegean Sea website, was sentenced to six years imprisonment on March 19 for
inciting subversion.
The countdown to the Beijing Olympics has seen the threshold lowered for internet
content considered sensitive by Chinas censors and prompted closure of
access to thousands of websites in 2007, including popular international sites
such as Wikipedia and Flickr. The government has expanded its traditional criteria
for internet censorship from topics including references to the 1989 Tiananmen
Massacre, the outlawed Falungong evil cult, and content perceived as sympathetic
to separatist elements in Tibet, Xinjiang, and Taiwan, to include unauthorized
coverage of everything from natural disasters to corruption scandals
that might embarrass the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). By official estimate the
government shut down more than 18,000 individual blogs and websites since
April 2007, and in August censors widened their focus to include shutting down
numerous internet data centers. Official measures to filter or remove sensitive content from domestic websites sharply accelerated in the run up to the 17th CCP
Congress in October.
Chinese journalists continue to risk severe repercussions for pursuing stories that
touch on officially taboo subjects or threaten powerful private interests. Miao
Wei, former executive editor of Sanlian Life Weekly, confirmed in April that he had
been demoted in connection with a cover story on the aftermath of the Cultural
Revolution (1966-1976). Lan Chengzhang, a reporter with China Trade News, was
murdered in January while investigating an illegal coalmine in Datong, Shanxi
province. In mid-August five journalists, including a reporter from the party
mouthpiece Peoples Daily, were interviewing witnesses to the Fenghuang bridge
collapse in Hunan province when plainclothes thugs interrupted the interviews
and kicked and punched the journalists, who were then detained by police.
Legal Reform
Legal reforms proceeded at a fast pace in 2007 in order to achieve the CCPs overriding
goal of making the rule of law the principal tool to govern the country.
New legislation was adopted on a wide range of issues such as property rights,
labor contracts, administration of lawyers, access to public records, and the handling
of emergencies. But the partys continued dominance over, and interference
with, judicial institutions, as well as weak and inconsistent enforcement of judicial
decisions, means that overall the legal system remains vulnerable to arbitrary
interference.
Ordinary citizens face immense obstacles to accessing justice, in particular over
issues such as illegal land seizures, forced evictions, environmental pollution,
unpaid wages, corruption, and abuse of power by local officials, a situation that
fuels rising social unrest across the country. The authorities have stopped disclosing
figures about the number of riots and demonstrations after they
announced a decline from over 200 incidents per day in 2006, but large-scale
incidents were reported in 2007 in almost all of Chinas 34 province-level administrative
units. Several demonstrations involved tens of thousand of people, such
as in Yongzhou (Hunan) in March 2007 and Xiamen (Fujian) in June. In speeches
and articles top security officials acknowledged the heightening of social conflicts,
but remained defiant toward greater independence of the judiciary, blaming hostile or enemy forces for trying to use the nations legal system to undermine
and westernize China. A string of lawyers defending human rights cases
have been suspended or disbarred under a yearly licensing system that acts as a
general deterrent to taking cases viewed as sensitive by the authorities.
The rights of criminal defendants continued to be sharply limited and violated by
law enforcement agencies. Defense lawyers face chronic difficulties including
accessing defendants in custody, consulting court documents, and producing
exculpatory evidence before the court. Despite the reiteration by the Supreme
Peoples Court in September that judges ought to pay more attention to evidence
and treat confessions with more skepticism, torture, especially at the pretrial
stage, remains prevalent. The Public Security Bureau continues to make wide
use, including for political and religious dissidents, of the reeducation-throughlabor
system, which allows detention for up to four years of minor offenders,
without trial.
Human Rights Defenders
Chinese human rights defenders, seizing on the official promise of lawful governance,
are becoming more assertive and skillful at documenting abuses and
mounting legal challenges. But the authorities, who have never tolerated independent
human rights monitoring, have retaliated with harassment, unlawful
detention, forced disappearances, and long prison sentences, often on trumpedup
charges.
Authorities have targeted a small, loosely-organized network of lawyers, legal
academics, rights activists, and journalists, known as the weiquan movement,
which aims to pursue social justice and constitutional rights through litigation.
The movement focuses on the protection of ordinary citizens in matters such as
housing rights, land seizures, workers rights, and police abuse. Yang Chunlin, a
land rights activist, was arrested in July and charged with subversion for his role
in organizing a petition titled We want human rights, not the Olympics. Lu
Gengsong, a former lecturer turned activist who documented illegal eviction
cases and official collusion, was arrested in August on suspicion of subverting
state power. Both are awaiting trial. The same month environmental activist Wu
Lihong was sentenced to three years imprisonment under ill-defined business fraud charges; his wife reported he had been tortured while held incommunicado.
Yang Maodong, a Guangzhou-based land rights activist arrested in September
2006 and still awaiting trial, also reported that he had been repeatedly tortured
in detention.
Defenders who document and report abuses against other activists are particularly
vulnerable. In September lawyer Li Heping was abducted in broad daylight,
held for six hours, severely beaten, and told he should leave Beijing. Li Jianqiang,
a renowned human rights lawyer, was disbarred without reason. The human
rights monitor Hu Jia has been kept under extralegal house arrest in Beijing for
most of the year. Yuan Weijing, the wife of the blind activist Chen Guangcheng
who is currently serving a three-year sentence for exposing family planning abuses,
was prevented from traveling abroad to collect a human rights prize on his
behalf.
Labor Rights
Chinese workers continue to be forbidden to form independent trade unions, as
the government maintains that the party-controlled All-China Federation of Trade
Unions (ACFTU) adequately protects workers rights. This restriction on legallysanctioned
labor activism coupled with increasingly tense labor disputes in which
protesting workers have few realistic routes for redress have contributed to
increasing numbers of workers taking to the streets and to the courts to press
claims about forced and uncompensated overtime, employer violations of minimum
wage rules, unpaid pensions and wages, and dangerous and unhealthy
working environments.
Workers who seek redress through strike action are often subject to attacks by
plainclothes thugs who appear to operate at the behest of employers. In July a
group of 200 thugs armed with spades, axes, and steel pipes attacked a group of
workers in Heyuan (Guangdong), who were protesting over not having been paid
for four months; they beat one worker to death.
Childrens Rights
Under Work and Study programs regulated by the Ministry of Education,
schools in impoverished areas are encouraged to set up income-generating activities
to make up for budgetary shortfalls. According to the ministry, nationwide
more than 400,000 middle and junior high schools, for children ages 12 to 16, are
running agricultural and manufacturing schemes. Overly vague program regulations
and poor supervision have led to chronic abuse by schools and employers
alike: some of the programs interfere with childrens education, lack basic health
and safety guarantees, and involve long hours and dangerous work. Children as
young as 12 have been employed in heavy agricultural and hazardous construction
work. Others have been dispatched to local factories for weeks or months of
summer employment. Some schools have turned into full-fledged workshops to
produce local handiwork or foodstuff while relegating teaching to a few hours a
week.
Womens Rights
Gender-based discrimination and violence remain entrenched problems in China.
Despite slowly increasing attention to domestic violence, public awareness and
access to services in rural areas are especially low. Strong son preference contributes
to sex-selective abortions, differential care of girls leading to significantly
higher rates of female infant mortality, and in extreme cases female infanticide or
sale to human traffickers.
HIV/AIDS
A senior central government official in September described Chinas HIV/AIDS situation
in several provinces as very serious due to drug trafficking and illegal
blood sales. But despite government assurances that it had prioritized all possible
measures to contain the spread of HIV/AIDS, activists and grassroots organizations
continued to come under attack in 2007 by local officials and security officials.
Dr. Gao Yaojie, a doctor who helped expose the Henan province HIV-contaminated
blood sales scandal, was barred in February from going to the United States to receive a human rights award until an international outcry forced the government
to reverse that decision. In August the government forced the cancellation of two
meetings of HIV/AIDS activists in Guangzhou (Guangdong) and Kaifeng (Henan).
On August 15 Henan Public Security Bureau officials also ordered, without explanation,
the temporary closure of two provincial offices of the nonprofit China
Orchid AIDS project.
The governments announcement in September that it would introduce compulsory
screening of all blood products beginning on January 1, 2008, to prevent the
transmission of HIV and other blood-borne diseases through transfusions and
pharmaceutical products is an important step forward in official efforts to help
control the spread of HIV/AIDS.
Freedom of Religion
The Chinese government recognizes the right to believe, but limits worship to a
state-controlled system of registered and controlled churches, congregations,
mosques, monasteries, and temples.
The official registration process requires government vetting and ongoing scrutiny
of religious publications, seminary applications, and religious personnel. The
government also closely monitors the membership and financial records of religious
institutions and the personnel they employ, and retains the right to approve
or deny applications for any group activities by religious organizations. Those
who fail to register are considered illegal and are liable for criminal prosecution,
fines, and closure.
Reprisals against non-registered religious organizations have primarily focused on
arrests of Protestants who attend house churches, for Bible study meetings and
training sessions. The majority of those arrested are rapidly released, some after
paying fines, but leaders of such underground churches are sometimes held on
fabricated charges including illegal business practices. The freedom of belief of
certain groups designated by the government as evil cults, including Falungong,
continues to be severely restricted.Involuntary Resettlement Programs
The growing scale of forced resettlement projects across China to make way for
infrastructure, environmental, and urbanization projects in 2007 continued to be
marked by widespread irregularities, including lack of consultation, forced evictions,
embezzlement, and corruption. China announced in October plans to relocate
up to 4 million more people from areas surrounding the Three Gorges Dam
the worlds biggest hydroelectric power project.
Multiple programs to remove indigenous populations from environmentally fragile
areas, such as on the Tibetan plateau, appear to be motivated, at least in part, by
an integrationist agenda aimed at weakening minority cultural distinctiveness
and extending Chinese control over their lives. An official policy of forcibly relocating
ethnic Tibetan herders in Tibet, Gansu, Qinghai and Sichuan to urban areas
is seriously disrupting traditional lifestyles and has put under threat the livelihoods
of approximately 700,000 such people already resettled. In September the
Chinese government announced that it would resettle another 100,000 nomads
from Qinghai province alone.
Tibet
The Chinese government accuses the Dalai Lama, in exile in India since 1959, of
being the linchpin of alleged plots to separate Tibet from China. It views Tibetan
Buddhism as complicit in those efforts. The government lodged strong objections
to meetings between the Dalai Lama and US, Australian, Austrian, and German
leaders in 2007.
Widespread and numerous instances of repression target ordinary citizens,
monks, nuns, and even children in an effort to quash alleged separatism.
Seven Tibetan boys in Gansu province were detained for over a month in early
September after they allegedly wrote slogans on the walls of a village police station
and elsewhere calling for the return of the Dalai Lama and a free Tibet.
Ronggyal Adrak was detained and charged under state security offenses by police
on August 1 after he called for the Dalai Lamas return at a horse race festival in
Sichuan province. He is awaiting trial.
The Chinese government has failed to bring to justice those responsible for the
shooting death by Peoples Armed Police officers of a 17-year-old nun, Kelsang
Namtso, while trying to cross the border into Nepal on September 30, 2006.
Xinjiang
Drastic controls over religious, cultural, and political expression of Muslim populations
remained in place in 2007 in the Uighur Autonomous Region of Xinjiang
aside from Tibet, the only province of China where the ethnic Chinese population
is not the majority, despite in-migration of over a million people from other parts
of China in the past decade. The government only tolerates religious activities in
state-controlled religious venues, conducted by state-appointed clerics. Minors
are prohibited from participating in religious activities and, in some localities,
barred from entering mosques.
In June Xinjiang authorities started confiscating Muslims passports in an apparent
bid to prevent them from making non-state-approved pilgrimages to Mecca.
Civil servants, teachers, and clerics are subjected to intense indoctrination
against the three evil forcesseparatism, religious extremism, and terrorism.
Eighteen people were killed and 17 arrested in January in a raid on what the government
described as a terrorist training camp of the East Turkistan Islamic
Movement, a group whose existence independent analysts have been questioning
since 2001. In November five of them were sentenced to death, and one to
life imprisonment under various terrorism charges.
There is widespread evidence that the government uses isolated incidents to conflate
any expression of public discontent with terrorism or separatism. Chinese
officials have labeled the exiled activist Rebiya Kadeera Nobel Peace Prize nominee
a terrorist, and in April 2007 Ablikim Abdiriyim, her son, was sentenced to
nine years imprisonment for having spread secessionist articles over the internet.
Another son, Alim Abdiriyim, was sentenced in November 2006 to seven
years imprisonment for tax evasion. Huseyincan Celil, a former political prisoner
who had fled China in 2000, was forcibly returned by Uzbek authorities to China
in 2006, and sentenced to life imprisonment in April 2007. China refused to recognize
his Canadian citizenship and did not allow Canadian diplomats to attend
his trial.
Hong Kong
The government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region has failed to
clearly indicate how it will fulfill two requirements of the Basic Law (the territorys
mini-constitution) that have crucial human rights implications: the direct election
of the chief executive and the drafting of anti-subversion legislation under article
23. Despite an adequate legal framework to uphold freedom of expression, Hong
Kong journalists denounced the self-censorship prevalent in the media, particularly
with respect to the coverage of mainland issues.
Key International Actors
China continues to describe itself as a responsible power. Yet its resistance to
the United Nations Security Councils and the Human Rights Councils taking decisive
action to respond to serious human rights violations and hold individual
countries accountable for their human rights records contradicted that label.
China increasingly uses its leverage to minimize criticism in international institutions,
most notably by forcing the World Bank in June to remove information
about the consequences of pollution in China from a draft report. It continues to
resist requests for cooperation with key UN offices, including the special rapporteur
on North Korea, and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), regarding the status of North Koreans in China.
Largely in response to considerable international pressure, China took more concrete
and public steps to help ameliorate the human rights crisis in Darfur,
Sudan. It appointed a new special envoy on Darfur and agreed to contribute
peacekeeping troops, but it continued to enable Khartoums brutality by consistently
blocking international efforts to impose sanctions. In addition, while China
consented to some critical UN Security Council language following the August-
September repression in Burma, it refused to speak strongly itself or take steps to
end the crisis, such as suspending all military aid and cooperation.