China
Imprisoned dissident Liu Xiaobo’s selection as the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize winner
in October was a defining moment for China’s human rights movement. It also
focused global attention on the extent of human rights violations in China, and
on its unreformed, authoritarian political system as it emerges as a world power.
The Chinese government tried to censor news about the prize domestically,
immediately placing Liu’s wife Liu Xia under house arrest and clamping down on
rights activists and Liu’s supporters. It then attempted to portray the prize as part
of a conspiracy by Western countries, insisting that Chinese citizens do not value
civil and political freedoms.
That argument was significantly challenged by a public letter that circulated the
next week: written by retired Chinese Communist Party (CPC) elders, it called for
political reforms to defend the right to free expression and a free press as guaranteed
by the constitution. The letter cited the domestic censorship of comments
that Premier Wen Jiabao made in New York in October, in which he acknowledged
that “the people’s wishes for, and needs for, democracy and freedom are irresistible.”
In an unprecedented move, several newspapers printed Wen’s comments
the next day, openly challenging censorship orders.
The Nobel Prize and the letter highlighted the growing importance of debate within
mainstream society, the party, and the government about the role of “universal
values.” These ideas were also advocated by Charter 08, the landmark document
that called for a gradual overhaul of China’s political system. Liu’s participation in
drafting the charter prompted his December 2008 arrest and his 11-year prison
sentence one year later.
Freedom of Expression
The government continued to restrict the rights and freedoms of journalists, bloggers
and an estimated 384 million internet users, in violation of domestic legal
guarantees of freedom of press and expression. The government requires state
media and internet search firms to censor references to issues ranging from the
June 1989 Tiananmen massacres to details of the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize.
On January 12, 2010, the US search engine company Google announced it would
seek an agreement with China’s government to end the firm’s self-censorship of
Chinese internet users’ search results, which it undertook partly because of government
requirements. The government refused. On March 22, 2010, Google
stopped censoring searches on its http://www.google.cn site and began redirecting
them to its uncensored Hong Kong-based site.
On April 22, 2010, the government approved an amendment to the revised draft
Law on Guarding State Secrets. The revised law requires internet and telecom
firms to “cooperate with public security organs, state security agencies [and]
prosecutors” on suspected cases of state secrets transmission.
At least 24 Chinese journalists are jailed on ambiguous charges ranging from
“inciting subversion” to “revealing state secrets.” They include Gheyret Niyaz, a
Uighur journalist and website editor, sentenced to 15 years in June for “endangering
state security” related to a foreign media interview he gave after the July 2009
protests in Xinjiang. That same week a Xinjiang court convicted three Uighur bloggers
on the same charge. Dilshat Perhat, webmaster of Diyarim; the webmaster of
Salkinm who goes by the name Nureli; and Nijat Azat, webmaster of Shabnam,
received sentences of five, three, and ten years respectively.
Journalists who overstepped censorship guidelines continued to face official
reprisals. Zhang Hong, a deputy editor with the Economic Observer newspaper,
was fired after co-writing a March 1, 2010, editorial carried in 13 Chinese newspapers
advocating the abolition of China’s discriminatory hukou (household registration)
system. China Economic Times editor Bao Yuehang was fired in May 2010
in apparent retaliation for a March 17, 2010, story that exposed vaccine quality
shortfalls in Shanxi province linked to four children dying and at least 74 others
falling ill.
Chinese journalists also continued to face physical violence for reporting on “sensitive”
topics. On April 20, 2010, 10 unidentified assailants attacked Beijing News
reporter Yang Jie while he photographed the site of a forced eviction. Police at the
scene briefly detained the assailants before releasing them, characterizing their
actions as a “misunderstanding.” On September 8, 2010, security guards beat three reporters from Jilin and Changchun television stations attempting to cover a
fire at the City College of Jilin Architecture and Civil Engineering.
Foreign correspondents in China continue to face reporting restrictions despite
the government’s October 2008 decision to eliminate requirements for official
permission to travel the country and interview Chinese citizens. Those restrictions
include a prohibition on foreign correspondents visiting Tibet freely.
Legal Reforms
Legal awareness among citizens continues to grow and legal reforms progress
slowly, although the government’s overt hostility towards genuine judicial independence
undercuts legislative improvements. It also defeats efforts to progressively
curtail the Chinese Communist Party’s authority over all judicial institutions
and mechanisms.
Two potentially significant reforms progressed on paper but not in practice. In
May the Supreme People’s Court, the Supreme People’s Procuratorate (the state
prosecution), and the ministries of public security, state security, and justice
issued two directives regarding excluding evidence obtained through torture. This
includes confessions of defendants and testimonies of prosecution witnesses,
which underpin most criminal convictions in China.
However, these new regulations were not followed in the case of Fan Qihang, who
in a video made public by his lawyer, described daily torture for six months and
failed attempts to retract his forced confession during trial. The Supreme People’s
Court refused to investigate the torture allegations and upheld the original death
sentence.
In August the government announced a draft amendment to China’s criminal law
that would eliminate the death penalty for 13 “economy-related non-violent
offences.” But in September a senior member of the legislature’s Legal Affairs
Committee announced the government would not pursue this initiative. China
leads the world in executions: five to eight thousand take place every year.
Human Rights Defenders
Most human rights advocates, defenders, and organizations endure varying
degrees of surveillance, harassment, or suppression by police and state security
agencies. Several leading figures have been jailed in the past three years, and
several NGOs shuttered or constrained. Yet the domestic “rights defense movement”—
an informal movement connecting lawyers, activists, dissidents, journalists,
ordinary citizens, and peasant and workers’ advocates—continues to expand
as demands grow for the state to respect its own laws.
Despite pervasive state censorship, rights advocates helped generate public and
media debate on issues including illegal detention centers for petitioners travelling
to the capital to lodge grievances (known as “black jails”), abnormal deaths
in custody, widespread torture to extract confessions, use of psychiatric facilities
to detain dissenters, socioeconomic discrimination against ethnic minorities in
Xinjiang, and endemic abuses linked to forced demolitions and eviction.
Activists nonetheless paid a heavy price for these advances. In addition to routine
harassment, they endure aggressive police surveillance, illegal home confinement,
interception of communications, warnings and threats, repeated summons
for “discussions” with security officers, and short-term detention.
Human rights lawyer Gao Zhisheng has been missing for two years. He reemerged
in Beijing in early April 2010 after a year of official obfuscation about his status,
telling journalists and supporters that security agents had repeatedly tortured
and kept him captive. He disappeared again a few days later. In October police
rejected his brother’s effort to register him as a missing person.
The blind legal activist Chen Guangcheng was freed from prison in September,
only to be confined with his entire family in his home village and denied medical
treatment for ailments he developed in prison. Unidentified men working at the
behest of local police officials threatened and roughed up journalists and
activists who tried visiting him.
On November 10 Zhao Lianhai, the father of a child who developed kidney stones
due to the contaminated milk scandal, was sentenced to two-and-a-half years’ imprisonment on charges of “causing a serious disturbance” for his role in organizing
a victims association to file a class action lawsuit.
Migrant and Labor Rights
The All-China Federation of Trade Unions (ACFTU) remains the sole legal representative
of workers in China; independent labor unions are banned. Labor
activism–mainly by migrant workers–in several foreign-invested factories in
southern Guangdong province in the summer of 2010 challenged that prohibition,
resulting in improved pay and benefits for strikers at production facilities for
Japan’s Honda and Denso Corporation. In August the ACFTU announced reforms
aimed at developing a more democratic selection process for union leaders. Yet
its insistence that reforms “not deviate from the leadership of the Communist
Party” indicates that restrictions on independent union activity will remain.
The government has yet to deliver on longstanding promises to abolish the hukou
system. Access to public benefits such as education and healthcare are linked to
place of birth; China’s 230 million migrant workers are denied access to these
services when they move elsewhere in the country.
In June 2010 the State Council, China’s cabinet, announced a proposal to replace
the hukou system with a residential permit system, which would extend public
welfare benefits to migrants in China’s cities. However, the proposal lacks a
timetable and financial provisions for the hukou system’s elimination.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
The government decriminalized homosexuality in 1997 and removed it from the
official list of mental disorders in 2001 but does not allow same-sex marriage. In
March 2010 former vice-minister of health Wang Longde told state media the government
needed to end discrimination against gay men in order to more effectively
combat the country’s HIV/AIDS epidemic.
Despite such indications of progress, entrenched social and official discrimination
against lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people in China limits them
from realizing fundamental rights of expression and association. Beijing police forced cancellation of the first Mr. Gay China pageant in January 2010 without
explanation. In September 2010 Beijing police detained hundreds of gay men
rounded up in a Haidian district park in an apparent effort to harass and intimidate
homosexuals. The men were reportedly released only after providing identification
and submitting to blood tests.
Women’s Rights
Entrenched gender-based discrimination and violence continue to afflict Chinese
women. Inequality is particularly serious in rural areas, where gender-based discrimination,
unequal access to services and employment, trafficking into forced
prostitution, and violence are more common than in cities. In June 2001 the nongovernmental
Anti-Domestic Violence Network of China Law Society (ADVN) called
for revisions to domestic violence provisions of the Marriage Law. The ADVN criticized
the current Marriage Law for requiring victims of domestic violence to provide
what the organization considers to be impossibly high standards of proof of
long-term physical abuse.
Police typically subject suspected female sex workers to public “shaming”
parades in violation of their rights of privacy and due process. Public criticism of
the practice peaked after a widely publicized June 2010 incident in which police
forced two suspected sex workers to walk bound and barefoot through the streets
of Dongguan. On July 27, 2010, state media announced an official ban on the
practice, although it remains uncertain whether it will be enforced.
Health
The Chinese government moved in 2010 to protect the rights of people with
HIV/AIDS. On April 27, 2010, it lifted its 20-year-old entry ban on HIV-positive foreign
visitors. And on August 30, 2010, an Anhui provincial court accepted China’s
first-ever job discrimination lawsuit on the grounds of HIV-positive status. In
November the provincial court ruled against the defendant.
However, HIV/AIDS activists and nongovernmental advocacy organizations continued
to face government harassment. In May 2010 Wan Yanhai, China’s leading
HIV/AIDS activist, fled to the United States, citing official harassment of his NGO, the Aizhixing Institute. On August 16, 2010, police in Henan province detained
Tian Xi, a veteran HIV/AIDS rights activist pursuing state compensation for victims
of the province’s blood contamination scandal, on charges of “intentionally damaging
property” after a minor altercation at a hospital. Tian faces up to three
years in prison.
Government officials and security forces continue to incarcerate suspected users
of illicit drugs without trial or judicial oversight in drug detention centers for up to
six years under China’s June 2008 Anti-Drug Law. Detainees in drug detention
centers suffer widespread human rights abuses, including arbitrary detention,
forced labor, physical violence, and denial of medical services, including evidence-
based drug dependency treatment and treatment for HIV/AIDS.
China’s rapid economic growth has led to widespread industrial pollution. The
government is failing to address the public health repercussions resulting from
severe environmental degradation. Lead has poisoned tens of thousands of
Chinese children, many of whom suffer permanent physical and mental disabilities
as a result. Despite Chinese and international law that purport to protect people
from polluted and hazardous environments, Human Rights Watch research to
be published next year shows that local governments across China have prioritized
concealing the problem, turning children away from hospitals, refusing to
test them for lead, and withholding or falsifying test results.
Freedom of Religion
Despite a constitutional guarantee of freedom of religion, China’s government
restricts spiritual expression to officially registered churches, mosques, monasteries,
and temples. Religious personnel appointments require government
approval. Religious publications and seminary applications are subject to official
review. The government subjects employees, membership financial records, and
activities of religious institutions to periodic audits. It deems all unregistered religious
organizations illegal, including Protestant “house churches,” whose members
risk fines and criminal prosecution. Certain groups, including the Falun
Gong, are seen as “evil cults,” and their followers are subject to official harassment
and intimidation.
Police and government officials raided a training session on law and theology
organized by a Christian house church in Henan’s Fangcheng County on March 11,
2010, and temporarily detained three attendees. On May 9, 2010, Guangzhou
police broke up an outdoor house church service in a local park and later temporarily
detained the church’s leader for questioning. On October 10, 2010,
Beijing International Airport immigration officials blocked five Protestant house
church leaders from boarding planes en route to an international evangelical conference
in South Africa.
Tibet
The Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR) and the neighboring Tibetan autonomous
areas of Qinghai, Sichuan, Gansu, and Yunnan province, remained tense. The
Chinese government gave no indication it would accommodate the aspirations of
Tibetan people for greater autonomy, even within the narrow confines of the
country’s autonomy law on ethnic minorities’ areas. There were no mass arrests
in 2010 of the kind that followed the spring 2008 protests, but the government
maintains a heavy security presence across the Tibetan plateau and continues to
sharply curtail outside access to most Tibetan areas.
Tibetans suspected of being critical of political, religious, cultural, or economic
state policies are targets for persecution. In June the 15-year sentence given to
Karma Sandrup, a prominent art dealer and environmental philanthropist, on
unfounded charges of “grave robbing” signaled a departure from the government’s
previous willingness to embrace economically successful Tibetan elites
who abstained from political pursuits. Multiple due process violations marred the
trial, including evidence the suspect and witnesses had been tortured.
In July 2010 the government rejected the findings of a comprehensive Human
Rights Watch report, which established that China had broken international law in
its handling of the 2008 protests. The report, based on eyewitness testimonies,
detailed abuses committed by security forces during and after protests, including
use of disproportionate force in breaking up protests, firing on unarmed protesters,
conducting large-scale arbitrary arrests, brutalizing detainees, and torturing
suspects in custody. The government accused Human Rights Watch of “fabricating
material aimed at boosting the morale of anti-China forces, misleading the general public and vilifying the Chinese government,” but failed to respond to any
of the report’s substantive allegations.
Xinjiang
The Urumqi riots of July 2009—the most lethal episode of ethnic unrest in recent
Chinese history—continued to cast a shadow over developments in the Xinjiang
Uighur Autonomous Region. The government has not accounted for hundreds of
persons detained after the riots, nor investigated serious allegations of torture
and ill-treatment of detainees that have surfaced in testimonies of refugees and
relatives living outside China. The few publicized trials of suspected rioters were
marred by restrictions on legal representation, overt politicization of the judiciary,
failure to publish public notification of the trials, and failure to hold genuinely
open trials as mandated by law.
Pervasive ethnic discrimination against Uighurs and other ethnic minorities persisted,
along with sharp curbs on religious and cultural expression and politicallymotivated
arrests under the guise of counterterrorism and anti-separatism efforts.
In April Beijing installed a new leader for the autonomous region, Zhang
Chunxian, to preside over an ambitious economic overhaul. In May the first
national Work Conference on Xinjiang unveiled numerous measures that are likely
to rapidly transform the region into an economic hub but also risk further marginalizing
ethnic minorities and accelerating migration of ethnic Han Chinese into
the region.
By the end of 2011, 80 percent of traditional neighborhoods in the ancient Uighur
city of Kashgar will have been razed. Many Uighur inhabitants have been forcibly
evicted and relocated to make way for a new city likely to be dominated by the
Han population.
Key International Actors
China’s government became more brazen in thwarting international norms and
opinion. In late December 2009 it successfully pressured Cambodia to forcibly
return 20 Uighur asylum seekers, despite its record of torturing Uighurs and vocal opposition from the US and others. A few months later, when the US suspended
a shipment of trucks to punish Cambodia for violating the 1951 Refugee
Convention, China provided a comparable shipment within a few weeks.
The Chinese government also continued to obstruct international efforts to
defend human rights by taking steps to derail growing international momentum
for a commission of inquiry into war crimes and crimes against humanity in
Burma. China’s United Nations delegation also opposed the release of a UN
report documenting use of Chinese ammunition in Darfur in violation of an arms
embargo. The Chinese government has still not issued invitations to the UN high
commissioner for human rights or a half-dozen other special rapporteurs who
requested visits in the wake of the Tibet and Xinjiang protests.
Although more than a dozen countries continue to pursue human rights dialogues
with the Chinese government, few of these opaque discussions produced
meaningful outcomes in 2010. While most of these governments offered strong
support for the Nobel Committee’s choice of Liu Xiaobo as winner of the peace
prize, many failed to seize other opportunities, such as conducting high-profile
visits to China or meeting senior Chinese officials to raise human rights concerns.