C?@E8
Against a backdrop of rapid socio-economic change and modernization, China
continues to be an authoritarian one-party state that imposes sharp curbs on
freedom of expression, association, and religion; openly rejects judicial independence
and press freedom; and arbitrarily restricts and suppresses human
rights defenders and organizations, often through extra-judicial measures.
The government also censors the internet; maintains highly repressive policies
in ethnic minority areas such as Tibet, Xinjiang, and Inner Mongolia; systematically
condones—with rare exceptions—abuses of power in the name of “social
stability”; and rejects domestic and international scrutiny of its human rights
record as attempts to destabilize and impose “Western values” on the country.
The security apparatus—hostile to liberalization and legal reform—seems to
have steadily increased its power since the 2008 Beijing Olympics. China’s
“social stability maintenance” expenses are now larger than its defense budget.
At the same time Chinese citizens are increasingly rights-conscious and challenging
the authorities over livelihood issues, land seizures, forced evictions,
abuses of power by corrupt cadres, discrimination, and economic inequalities.
Official and scholarly statistics estimate that 250-500 protests occur per day;
participants number from ten to tens of thousands. Internet users and reformoriented
media are aggressively pushing the boundaries of censorship, despite
the risks of doing so, by advocating for the rule of law and transparency, exposing
official wrong-doing, and calling for reforms.
Despite their precarious legal status and surveillance by the authorities, civil
society groups continue to try to expand their work, and increasingly engage
with international NGOs. A small but dedicated network of activists continues
to exposes abuses as part of the weiquan (“rights defense”)movement, despite
systematic repression ranging from police monitoring to detention, arrest,
enforced disappearance, and torture.
Human Rights Defenders
In February 2011, unnerved by the pro-democracy Arab Spring movements and a
scheduled Chinese leadership transition in October 2012, the government
launched the largest crackdown on human rights lawyers, activists, and critics
in a decade. The authorities also strengthened internet and press censorship,
put the activities of many dissidents and critics under surveillance, restricted
their activities, and took the unprecedented step of rounding up over 30 of the
most outspoken critics and “disappearing” them for weeks.
The April 3 arrest of contemporary artist and outspoken government critic Ai
Weiwei, who was detained in an undisclosed location without access to a
lawyer, prompted an international outcry and contributed to his release on bail
on June 22. Tax authorities notified him on November 1 that he had to pay
US$2.4 million in tax arrears and fines for the company registered in his wife’s
name. Most of the other activists were also ultimately released, but forced to
adopt a much less vocal stance for fear of further reprisals. Several lawyers
detained in 2011, including Liu Shihui, described being interrogated, tortured,
threatened, and released only upon signing “confessions” and pledges not to
use Twitter, or talk to media, human rights groups, or foreign diplomats about
their detention.
The government continues to impose indefinite house arrest on its critics. Liu
Xia, the wife of imprisoned Nobel Peace Laureate Liu Xiaobo, has been missing
since December 2010 and is believed to be under house arrest to prevent her
from campaigning on her husband’s behalf. In February 2011 she said in a brief
online exchange that she and her family were like “hostages” and that she felt
“miserable.” She is allowed to visit Liu Xiaobo once a month, subject to agreement
from the prison authorities.
Chen Guangcheng, a blind legal activist who was released from prison in
September 2010, remained under house arrest in 2011. Security personnel
assaulted Chen and his wife in February after he released footage documenting
his family’s house arrest. Noted activist Hu Jia, who was released after completing
a three-and-a-half-year prison sentence in June, is also under house arrest
in Beijing, the capital, with his activist wife Zeng Jinyan and their daughter.
Grave concerns exist about the fate of lawyer Gao Zhisheng, who was “disappeared”
by the authorities in September 2009 and briefly surfaced in March
2010 detailing severe and continuous torture against him, before going missing
again that April.
On June 12, 2011, despite the steady deterioration in China’s human rights environment,
the Chinese government declared it had fulfilled “all tasks and targets”
of its National Human Rights Action Plans (2009-2010).
Legal Reforms
While legal awareness among citizens continues to grow, the government’s
overt hostility towards genuine judicial independence undercuts legal reform
and defeats efforts to limit the Chinese Communist Party’s authority over all
judicial institutions and mechanisms.
The police dominate the criminal justice system, which relies disproportionately
on defendants’ confessions. Weak courts and tight limits on the rights of the
defense mean that forced confessions under torture remain prevalent and miscarriages
of justice frequent. In August 2011, in an effort to reduce such cases
and improve the administration of justice, the government published new rules
to eliminate unlawfully obtained evidence and strengthened the procedural
rights of the defense in its draft revisions to the Criminal Procedure Law. It is
likely it will be adopted in March 2012.
However, the draft revisions also introduced an alarming provision that would
effectively legalize enforced disappearances by allowing police to secretly
detain suspects for up to six months at a location of their choice in “state security,
terrorism and major corruption cases.” The measure would put suspects at
great risk of torture while giving the government justification for the “disappearance”
of dissidents and activists in the future. Adoption of this measure—which
is hotly criticized in Chinese media by human rights lawyers, activists, and part
of the legal community—would significantly deviate from China’s previous
stance of gradual convergence with international norms on administering justice,
such as the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which
China signed in 1997 but has yet to ratify.
China continued in 2011 to lead the world in executions. The exact number
remains a state secret but is estimated to range from 5,000 to 8,000 a year.
Freedom of Expression
The government continued in 2011 to violate domestic and international legal
guarantees of freedom of press and expression by restricting bloggers, journalists,
and an estimated more than 500 million internet users. The government
requires internet search firms and state media to censor issues deemed officially
“sensitive,” and blocks access to foreign websites including Facebook,
Twitter, and YouTube. However, the rise of Chinese online social networks—in
particularly Sina’s Weibo, which has 200 million users—has created a new platform
for citizens to express opinions and to challenge official limitations on
freedom of speech despite intense scrutiny by China’s censors.
On January 30 official concern about Egyptian anti-government protests prompted
a ban on internet searches for “Egypt.” On February 20 internet rumors
about a Chinese “Jasmine Revolution” resulted in a ban on web searches for
“jasmine.” In August a cascade of internet criticism of the government’s
response to the July 23 Wenzhou train crash prompted the government to warn
of new penalties, including suspension of microblog access, against bloggers
who transmit “false or misleading information.”
Ambiguous “inciting subversion” and “revealing state secrets” laws contributed
to the imprisonment of at least 34 Chinese journalists. Those jailed
include Qi Chonghuai, originally sentenced to a four-year prison term in August
2008 for “extortion and blackmail” after exposing government corruption in his
home province of Shandong. His prison sentence was extended in June for
eight years when the same court found him guilty of fresh charges of extortion
and “embezzlement.”
Censorship restrictions continue to pose a threat to journalists whose reporting
oversteps official guidelines. In May Southern Metropolis Daily editor Song
Zhibiao was demoted as a reprisal for criticism of the government’s 2008
Sichuan earthquake recovery efforts. In June the government threatened to
blacklist journalists guilty of “distorted” reporting of food safety scandals. In July the China Economic Times disbanded its investigative unit, an apparent
response to official pressure against its outspoken reporting on official malfeasance.
Physical violence against journalists who report on “sensitive” topics remained
a problem in 2011. On June 1, plainclothes Beijing police assaulted and injured
two Beijing Times reporters who refused to delete photos they had taken at the
scene of a stabbing. The two officers were subsequently suspended. On
September 19 Li Xiang, a reporter with Henan province’s Luoyang Television,
was stabbed to death in what has been widely speculated was retaliation for
his exposé of a local food safety scandal. Police have arrested two suspects
and insist that Li’s murder was due to a robbery.
Police deliberately targeted foreign correspondents with physical violence at
the site of a rumored anti-government protest in Beijing on February 27. A video
journalist at the scene required medical treatment for severe bruising and possible
internal injuries after men who appeared to be plain clothes security officers
repeatedly punched and kicked him in the face. Uniformed police manhandled,
detained, and delayed more than a dozen other foreign media at the
scene.
Government and security bureaus prevented the biennial Beijing Queer Film
Festival from screening in Beijing’s Xicheng District. Parts of the festival were
held surreptitiously in community venues.
Freedom of Religion
The Chinese government limits religious practices to officially-approved temples,
monasteries, churches, and mosques despite a constitutional guarantee
of freedom of religion. Religious institutions must submit data—including financial
records, activities, and employee details—for periodic official audits. The
government also reviews seminary applications and religious publications, and
approves all religious personnel appointments. Protestant “house churches”
and other unregistered spiritual organizations are considered illegal and their
members subject to prosecution and fines. The Falun Gong and some other groups are deemed “evil cults” and members risk intimidation, harassment,
and arrest.
In April the government pressured the landlord of the Beijing Shouwang
Church, a “house church” with 1,000 congregants, to evict the church from its
location in a Beijing restaurant. Over the course of at least five Sundays in April
and May, the Shouwang congregation held its services in outdoor locations,
attracting police attention and resulting in the temporary detention of more
than 100 of its members.
The government continues to heavily restrict religious activities in the name of
security in ethnic minority areas. See sections below on Tibet and Xinjiang.
Health
On August 2 the government announced the closure of 583 battery-recycling
factories linked to widespread lead poisoning. However, it has failed to substantively
recognize and address abuses including denial of treatment for child
lead poisoning victims and harassment of parents seeking legal redress that
Human Rights Watch uncovered in a June 2011 report of lead poisoning in
Henan, Yunnan, Shaanxi, and Hunan.
People with HIV/AIDS continued to face discrimination. In September an HIVpositive
female burn victim was denied treatment at three hospitals in
Guangdong province due to stigma about her status. On September 8 an HIVpositive
school teacher launched a wrongful dismissal suit against the Guizhou
provincial government after it refused to hire him on April 3 due to his HIV status.
Disability Rights
The Chinese government is inadequately protecting the rights of people with
disabilities, despite its ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities (CRPD), and its forthcoming review by the treaty’s monitoring
body.
In September a group of part-time teachers with disabilities requested that
China’s Ministry of Education lift restrictions imposed by 20 cities and
provinces on full-time employment of teachers with physical disabilities. On
September 7, Henan officials freed 30 people with mental disabilities who had
been abducted and trafficked into slave labor conditions in illegal brick kiln
factories in the province. The discovery cast doubt on official efforts to end
such abuses in the wake of a similar scandal in Shaanxi in 2007.
On August 10 the Chinese government invited public comment on its longawaited
draft mental health law. Domestic legal experts warn the draft contains
potentially serious risks to the rights of persons with mental disabilities,
including involuntary institutionalization, forced treatment and deprivation
of legal capacity.
Migrant and Labor Rights
Lack of meaningful union representation remained an obstacle to systemic
improvement in workers’ wages and conditions in 2011.The government prohibits
independent labor unions, so the official All-China Federation of Trade
Unions (ACFTU) is the sole legal representative of China’s workers. A persistent
labor shortage linked to changing demographics—official statistics indicate
that nationwide job vacancies outpaced available workers by five percent in the
first three months of 2011—has led to occasional reports of rising wages and
improved benefits for some workers.
In January a government survey of migrant workers indicated that the hukou
(household registration) system continued to impose systemic discrimination
on migrants. Survey respondents blamed the hukou system, which the government
has repeatedly promised to abolish, for unfairly limiting their access to
housing, medical services, and education. In August 2011 the Beijing city government
ordered the closure of 24 illegal private schools that catered to
migrant children. Most found alternate schools, although an estimated 10 to 20
percent had to be separated from their parents and sent to their hukou-linked
rural hometowns due to their parents’ inability to secure suitable and affordable
schooling in Beijing.
Women’s Rights
Women’s reproductive rights remain severely curtailed in 2011 under China’s
family planning regulations. Administrative sanctions, fines, and forced abortions
continue to be imposed, if somewhat erratically, on rural women, including
when they become migrant laborers in urban or manufacturing areas, and
are increasingly extended to ethnic minority areas such as Tibet and Xinjiang.
These policies contribute to an increasing gender-imbalance (118.08 males for
every 100 females according to the 2010 census), which in turn fuels trafficking
and prostitution.
Sex workers, numbering four to ten million, remain a particularly vulnerable
segment of the population due to the government’s harsh policies and regular
mobilization campaigns to crack down on prostitution.
Although the government acknowledges that domestic violence, employment
discrimination, and discriminatory social attitudes remain acute and widespread
problems, it continues to stunt the development of independent
women’s rights groups and discourages public interest litigation. A new interpretation
of the country’s Marriage Law by the Supreme People’s Court in
August 2011 might further exacerbate the gender wealth gap by stating that
after divorce, marital property belongs solely to the person who took out a
mortgage and registered as the homeowner, which in most cases is the husband.
Illegal Adoptions and Child Trafficking
On August 16 the Chinese government announced it would tighten rules to prevent
illegal adoptions and child trafficking. Revised Registration Measures for
the Adoption of Children by Chinese Citizens were expected to be introduced by
the end of 2011 and would restrict the source of adoptions to orphanages,
rather than hospitals or other institutions. The planned rule change follows revelations
in May 2011 that members of a government family planning unit in
Hunan had kidnapped and trafficked at least 15 babies to couples in the United
States and Holland for US$3,000 each between 2002 and 2005. A subsequent
police investigation determined there had been no illegal trafficking, despite testimony from parents who insist their children were abducted and subsequently
trafficked overseas.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In 1997 the government decriminalized homosexual conduct and in 2001
ceased to classify homosexuality as a mental illness. However, police continue
to occasionally raid popular gay venues in what activists describe as deliberate
harassment. Same-sex relationships are not legally recognized, adoption rights
are denied to people in same-sex relationships, and there are no anti-discrimination
laws based on sexual orientation. On April 4, 2011, Shanghai police raided
Q Bar, a popular gay venue, alleging it was staging “pornographic shows.”
Police detained more than 60 people, including customers and bar staff, and
released them later that day. High-profile public support for overcoming social
and official prejudice against lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT)
people is increasingly common. On July 5 a China Central Television talk show
host criticized homophobic online comments posted by a famous Chinese
actress and urged respect for the LGBT community.
Tibet
The situation in the Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR) and the neighboring
Tibetan autonomous areas of Qinghai, Sichuan, Gansu, and Yunnan province,
remained tense in 2011 following the massive crackdown on popular protests
that swept the plateau in 2008. Chinese security forces maintain a heavy presence
and the authorities continue to tightly restrict access and travel to Tibetan
areas, particularly for journalists and foreign visitors. Tibetans suspected of
being critical of political, religious, cultural, or economic state policies are targeted
on charges of “separatism.”
The government continues to build a “new socialist countryside” by relocating
and rehousing up to 80 percent of the TAR population, including all pastoralists
and nomads.
The Chinese government has given no indication it would accommodate the
aspirations of Tibetan people for greater autonomy, even within the narrow confines of the country’s autonomy law on ethnic minorities’ areas. It has rejected
holding negotiations with the new elected leader of the Tibetan community in
exile, Lobsang Sangay, and warned that it would designate the next Dalai Lama
itself.
In August Sichuan authorities imposed heavy prison sentences on three ethnic
Tibetan monks from the Kirti monastery for assisting another monk who selfimmolated
in protest in March. Ten more Tibetan monks and one nun had selfimmolated
through mid-November, all expressing their desperation over the
lack of religious freedom.
Xinjiang
The Urumqi riots of July 2009—the most deadly episode of ethnic unrest in
recent Chinese history—continued to cast a shadow over developments in the
Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region. The government has not accounted for
hundreds of persons detained after the riots, nor investigated the serious allegations
of torture and ill-treatment of detainees that have surfaced in testimonies
of refugees and relatives living outside China. The few publicized trials
of suspected rioters were marred by restrictions on legal representation, overt
politicization of the judiciary, and failure to publish notification of the trials and
to hold genuinely open trials as mandated by law.
Several violent incidents occurred in the region in 2011, though culpability
remains unclear. On July 12 the government said it had killed 14 Uighur attackers
who had overrun a police station in Hetian and were holding several
hostages. On July 30 and 31 a series of knife and bomb attacks took place in
Kashgar. In both cases the government blamed Islamist extremists. In mid-
August it launched a two-month “strike hard” campaign aimed at “destroying a
number of violent terrorist groups and ensuring the region’s stability.”
Under the guise of counterterrorism and anti-separatism efforts, the government
also maintains a pervasive system of ethnic discrimination against
Uighurs and other ethnic minorities, along with sharp curbs on religious and
cultural expression and politically motivated arrests.
The first national Work Conference on Xinjiang, held in 2010, endorsed economic
measures that may generate revenue but are likely to further marginalize ethnic
minorities. By the end of 2011, 80 percent of traditional neighborhoods in
the ancient Uighur city of Kashgar will have been razed. Many Uighur inhabitants
have been forcibly evicted and relocated to make way for a new city likely
to be dominated by the Han population.
Hong Kong
Hong Kong immigration authorities’ refusal in 2011 to grant entry to several visitors
critical of the Chinese government’s human rights record raised concerns
that the territory’s autonomy was being eroded. Concerns about police powers
also continue to grow following heavy restrictions imposed on students and
media during the visit of a Chinese state leader in September 2011.
The status of migrant domestic workers in Hong Kong was strengthened in
September when a court judged that rules excluding those workers from seeking
the right of abode were unconstitutional. However, the Hong Kong government
suggested it would appeal to Beijing for a review, further eroding the territory’s
judicial autonomy.
Key International Actors
Despite voting in favor of a Security Council resolution referring Libya to the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in February, the Chinese government continued
to ignore or undermine international human rights norms and institutions.
In June, amidst outcry against the visit, China hosted Sudanese President Omar
al-Bashir, who is wanted by the ICC on charges of war crimes, crimes against
humanity, and genocide. In 2011 it significantly increased pressure on governments
in Central and Southeast Asia to forcibly return Uighur refugees, leading
to the refoulement of at least 20 people, and in October prevailed upon the
South African government to deny a visa to the Dalai Lama, who wished to
attend the birthday celebrations of Archbishop Desmond Tutu. That same
month it exercised a rare veto together with Russia at the Security Council to
help defeat a resolution condemning gross human rights abuses in Syria.
Although several dozen governments attended the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize ceremonies
honoring activist Liu Xiaobo, relatively few engaged in effective advocacy
on behalf of human rights in China during 2011. While the US emphasized
human rights issues during Hu Jintao’s January state visit to Washington, that
emphasis—and the attention of other governments—declined precipitously
once the Arab Spring began, making it easier for the Chinese government to
silence dissent. Few audibly continued their calls for the release of Liu and others.
Perhaps demonstrating the influence of growing popular objections to abusive
Chinese investment projects, the Burmese government made a surprise
announcement in September that it would suspend the primarily Chinesebacked
and highly controversial Myitsone Dam. In Zambia, Chinese-run mining
firms announced a sudden wage increase following the election of the opposition
Patriotic Front, which had campaigned in part on securing minimum wage
guarantees.