China
While many governments have praised recent developments in China, the
country remains a one-party state that does not hold national elections, has
no independent judiciary, leads the world in executions, aggressively censors
the Internet, bans independent trade unions, and represses minorities such as
Tibetans, Uighurs, and Mongolians.
The Chinese Communist Party (CCP) still has not come to terms with the
1989 Tiananmen massacre, refusing to publish information about the number
of persons killed, injured, “disappeared,” or arrested or to admit that the
attack on peaceful protestors was a mistake.
In spite of its socialist roots, China faces serious challenges stemming from
growing disparities between rich and poor, and urban and rural populations.
Along with official corruption, such disparities in 2005 fueled a rise in
protests and demonstrations from workers, farmers, people forcibly evicted
from their homes, victims of police abuse, and HIV/AIDS activists, among
others. According to official figures, there were seventy-four thousand
protests in China in 2004 involving 3.5 million people, up from fifty-eight
thousand protests in 2003. China’s leaders’ preoccupation with social stability
has increased accordingly.
Government and CCP leaders have responded to the increasing social mobilization
with a multi-faceted crackdown on demonstrators and their allies and
with repression of means for disseminating information and organizing
protests, particularly the Internet. Apprehension that so-called hostile foreign
forces are bent on destabilizing China has led authorities to censor incoming
and outgoing news and personal communications across borders and to
impose long prison sentences on academics, intellectuals, and journalists for
expressing political opinions challenging official views. Plans by some officials
to ease regulations and give more room to civil society, including grassroots
groups, appear to have been shelved.
There has been some progress. In March 2004, China amended its constitution
to read “The State respects and protects human rights.” Although the constitution is not directly enforceable, the amendment does offer some hope
that human rights will be legally protected. The term human rights has now
made its way into common discourse in China.
China’s Legal System
New laws and regulations in 2005 detailing the parameters of permitted religious
activities and limiting the formation of news organizations are the latest
manifestations of China’s ongoing attempt to position itself as a society ruled
by law. Although improvements in some areas, particularly in commercial
law, are noticeable, judicial processes are still compromised by political interference,
reliance on coerced confessions, legal procedures weighted in favor
of the state, closed trials, and administrative sentencing.
Convictions on charges of “subversion” and of “leaking state secrets” continue
to result from vaguely-worded state security and state secrets laws. Shi
Tao, an established journalist, was sentenced to a ten-year prison term in
April 2005 for “leaking state secrets abroad.” The secret was a directive banning
journalists from reporting on the presence of overseas dissidents seeking
to commemorate the fifteenth anniversary of the Tiananmen massacre. In
September, Zheng Yichun was sentenced to a seven-year prison term for
“incitement to subversion.” Evidence included articles he had written for foreign
publications and websites and for his association with the Epoch Times, a
publication allied with Falungong, a spiritual group banned in China as a
cult.
Plans to revise China’s Criminal Procedure Law proceeded slowly in 2005.
Long-discussed proposals to add a judicial component to reeducation
through labor regulations appear to have stalled.
Restrictions on Freedom of Expression
Critics have labeled China’s ever more sophisticated system of controls on
the Internet the “Great Firewall of China.” More than sixty individuals were
imprisoned at this writing for peaceful expression over the Internet.
In early January 2005, the head of the Publicity Department of the Chinese
Communist Party Central Committee signaled that controls over publishing,
the Internet, and short messaging systems (SMS) would be significantly
tightened to ensure social stability. In September, the Ministry of
Information Industry and the State Council introduced new regulations on
Internet news which prevent distribution of any uncensored version of a news
event or commentary. Internet portals, e-mail systems, and SMS were all
affected.
More than 103 million Internet users face sophisticated filters, registration of
all personal domestic websites, and personal responsibility for all content.
The government closes websites without warning. In October, two
Mongolian sites and Yannan, which tracked a rural protest, were shut down.
Internet café users, after presenting identification, are issued user numbers
which make it easy to track their web use. In February, education officials cut
off hundreds of thousands of users by decreeing that only enrolled, on-site
college students, using their real names, could access university Internet message
boards.
In an increasing number of instances, global Internet companies have been
complicit in the repression, insisting they must abide by the rules and regulations
of the countries in which they operate. Google does not list links to
sites banned in China; certain words may not be used as titles for Microsoft
blogs; and Yahoo!, which three years ago signed a Public Pledge on Self-discipline
for the Chinese Internet Industry, provided information that helped
Chinese authorities arrest Shi Tao (see above).
New restrictions have affected traditional media. A 2005 regulation now
obliges Chinese reporters not affiliated with official media outlets to secure a
license, obtainable only after attending classes, passing a written examination,
and submitting an essay reflecting the ideological training they received.
Certain topics are taboo. In 2005, mainland journalists could not file their
own stories about the death of Zhao Ziyang, former premier of China, the
anti-Japanese protests, the election of a new Pope, or the incidence of bird
flu in China.
Chinese assistants and activists who work for or assist foreign journalists run
severe risks. In October 2005, local thugs savagely beat Lu Banglie, who
worked with residents of Taishi village, Guangdong province, to unseat a village
chief they accused of corruption. Lu was helping a journalist from The
Guardian, a British newspaper.
In July 2005, the State Administration of Radio, Film, and Television banned
regional broadcasters from cooperating with overseas media organizations. In
August, the Culture Ministry announced that new applications for licenses to
import print and electronic publications would not be accepted. To ensure
censorship worked, the police announced a regional system of hotlines for
reporting illegal publications.
Labor Rights
Workers in China may not form autonomous unions. Officials insist that the
Party-run All-China Federation of Trade Unions (ACFTU) sufficiently
ensures their rights, in spite of unsafe and unhealthy working
conditions––according to official figures, sixteen million enterprises are
“toxic” and over two hundred million workers suffer from 115 occupational
diseases––unpaid wages, pensions lost when state-owned enterprises go bankrupt
or are privatized, and forced and uncompensated overtime.
During 2005, workers repeatedly took to the streets. Some went to prison. Li
Xintao, formerly a worker at the Huamei Garment Company in Shandong
province, was sentenced to a five-year term in May 2005 for “disturbing public
order [and] government institutions.” He had tried to collect wages owed
by a bankrupt state-owned enterprise. In October, police detained eight
workers leading a protest against the closure of a steel plant in Chongqing.
Miners and a “floating population” of rural laborers have suffered disastrous
accident rates. In spite of new policies, official figures report that 4,228 people
lost their lives in 2,337 coal mining accidents from January through
September 2005.
Religious Belief and Expression
The Regulations on Religious Affairs that went into effect in March 2005
codified religious policy in effect since 1982. All congregations, mosques,
temples, churches, and monasteries must be registered to be legal. However,
registration brings vetting and ongoing monitoring of religious personnel,
seminary applicants, and publications; scrutiny of financial records and membership
rolls; and veto power over group activities. Failure to register renders
a group illegal and subject to closure, fines, and criminal sanctions.
Particularly troublesome are limits on large-scale religious gatherings and on
the number of religious sites in a given area; acceptance of “guidance, supervision
and inspection” by “relevant departments of the local people’s government;”
and a requirement that religious bodies “safeguard unification of the
country, unity of all nationalities, and stability of society.” This last requirement
is vague enough to give the state control of any and all religious teachings
and is rigorously enforced in the Tibet Autonomous Region, in the
Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region, and in other areas with large concentrations
of non-Han populations.
Equally troubling is increased vetting of relationships between Chinese religious
bodies and their foreign counterparts. Officials continue to express
fears that international religious ties are a façade for Western infiltration.
The new policies have been reflected in round-ups of non-registered
Christians attending training sessions. Most are released quickly, some after
paying fines. Despite statements suggesting accommodation between China
and the Vatican, at this writing some forty Catholic clergy were being
detained, imprisoned, or otherwise restricted from freely moving about.
Petitioners––The Xinfang System
Under China’s unique petitioning system, citizens dissatisfied with decisions
by local officials or courts may write letters of complaint or appear in person
at petition bureaus, and they may appeal to petition offices in regional capitals and even in Beijing. Repression of petitioners has increased as the number
of petitions has grown.
Aggrieved parties have learned that public pressure forces officials to pay
attention to issues such as corruption, forced evictions, and police abuse, and
millions have taken to filing petitions. Local and regional officials whose
careers and income could be jeopardized by popular expressions of discontent
have, in turn, relied on ever harsher measures to disperse petitioners, frequently
employing “retrievers,” who use force to break up protests and
forcibly return home petitioners congregating in Beijing or in provincial capitals.
Although petitions are rarely effective, the growth in number and increased
presence of petitioners in major urban areas has forced central authorities to
confront systemic problems. New amendments to petitioning regulations, in
effect since May 1, 2005, mandate punishment for those who retaliate against
petitioners and for officials who fail to carry out their duties. The same regulations,
however, restrict petitioner activism.
Xinjiang and the “War on Terror”
Chinese authorities appear determined to eradicate an independent cultural
identity, and the religious beliefs closely intertwined with that identity, for
Uighurs, a Turkic-speaking Muslim population in China’s Xinjiang Uighur
Autonomous Region. The campaign, which extends to personal behavior and
appearance, includes vetting of literature, destruction of mosques, and discharge
of Uighur cadres unwilling to forcibly implement religious directives.
Authorities also have fostered extensive Chinese migration into the region
leading to economic disparities favoring the newcomers.
Under current policies, children under eighteen may not receive religious
instruction and college students fear reprisals, including expulsion, for overt
religious expression. “Strike Hard” campaigns subject Uighurs who express
“separatist” tendencies to quick, secret, and summary trials, sometimes
accompanied by mass sentencing rallies. Imposition of the death penalty is
common.
After September 11, 2001, China used the “war on terrorism” to justify its
policies, making no distinction between the handful of separatists who condone
violence and those who desire genuine autonomy or a separate state. In
fact, the authorities treat cultural expressions of identity as equivalent to violent
agitation. In February 2005, Uighur writer Nurmemet Yasin was sentenced
to a ten-year prison term for publishing “The Wild Pigeon,” an
alleged separatist tract. Korash Huseyin, editor of the journal that published
the story, is serving a three-year term.
Tibet
Chinese authorities view the Dalai Lama, in exile in India since 1959, as the
linchpin of the effort to separate Tibet from China and view Tibetan
Buddhist belief as supportive of his efforts. Thus, the government limits the
number of monasteries and monks, vets all applicants for the monkhood,
interferes with the selection of monastic leaders, prohibits performance of
traditional rites, and conducts ongoing reeducation campaigns centered on
opposition to the Dalai Lama. In July 2005, the chairman of the Tibetan
Autonomous Region announced that China would choose the next Dalai
Lama.
Suspected separatists are routinely imprisoned; at this writing such individuals
included two monks from Sichuan who received eleven-year prison sentences,
probably in early 2005, for hoisting the banned Tibetan flag. Chinese
authorities have long refused to allow access to the boy the Dalai Lama identified
in 1995 as the new Panchen Lama (the second most important personage
in Tibetan Buddhism), instead keeping him under virtual house arrest
most likely in Beijing. In his place, Chinese authorities recognized another
boy as the Panchen Lama and in June 2005 in Sichuan they ordered monks
to come out in force to greet him. Authorities held several suspected “troublemakers”
in preventive detention in advance of the visit.
In January 2005, Nepal abruptly closed the Tibetan Refugee Welfare Office
in Kathmandu, jeopardizing a long-standing agreement under which
Tibetans hoping to reach India could wait in Nepal until the office of the
U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) cleared them. Although Tibetans in Nepal have met the government’s conditions for replacing the
office, Nepali authorities have stonewalled. Pressure from China is assumed
to have been behind the closing and the refusal to accept another Tibetan
organization as a replacement.
Schools in Tibet limit use of the Tibetan language and neglect to teach students
Tibetan history and culture. Officials do not tolerate privately-run
Tibetan schools.
HIV/AIDS
Although Chinese authorities have announced new steps to address the country’s
burgeoning HIV/AIDS crisis, they continue to obstruct the efforts of
activists and grassroots organizations to contribute to prevention and education
among vulnerable groups and to organize care-giving for those infected.
Regulations have thwarted activists’ attempts to register their organizations
and to raise funds, while Internet censorship has restricted the kind of information
available to individuals at high-risk. Activists who attempt to bring
problems related to the crisis to media attention have been particularly vulnerable
to harassment.
Forced Evictions
With courts offering little protection, urban and rural residents have banded
together to protest collusion between developers and local officials who
forcibly evict them from their urban homes or, without offering adequate
compensation, sell off the land they have been farming. Residents rarely win,
in part because land is not individually owned and in part because local
judges owe their jobs to local government and Party leaders. A 2003 constitutional
amendment that protects “lawful private property” has not brought
redress.
Protest organizers, such as Song Shitai in Shanghai, face intimidation and
violence. The city forcibly relocated fifty-five thousand families in 2004.
With building for the 2010 World Expo already underway, the 2005 tally is
expected to be even higher. In March 2005, Chinese officials announced plans to move five hundred thousand families to the outskirts of Beijing in
order to protect the environment. In September, they announced that twelve
“shabby” villages near 2008 Olympic sites would be demolished.
Hong Kong
When Hong Kong became a Special Autonomous Region within the People’s
Republic of China in 1997 under the principle of “one country, two systems,”
it was promised a “high degree of autonomy.” The Hong Kong government’s
October 2005 proposal for constitutional reform, ostensibly an incremental
step toward “universal suffrage,” failed to mention how and when Hong
Kong’s citizens would achieve that goal.
There is no indication that Beijing, which reserves to itself the right to veto
any proposed electoral change and to interpret the Basic Law, Hong’s Kong’s
mini-constitution, will support any initiative to further “one-person, onevote”
democracy in Hong Kong. At the first meeting of its kind between
Hong Kong’s pro-democracy legislators and Guangdong provincial officials,
sharp disagreement erupted over the issue.
Human Rights Defenders
China has never tolerated independent monitoring and reporting of human
rights abuses. Lawyers and activists who use Chinese law to assist rights victims
are particularly at risk. Since August 2005, officials in Shandong
province have confined Chen Guangcheng, a blind local farmer, to his home
and tolerated his repeated beatings by local thugs. Chen had been working
with Beijing-based lawyers to prepare a suit against local officials who committed
human rights abuses during enforcement of China’s family planning
policy.
Later in August, China closed down the Empowerment and Rights Institute
and, for a time, restricted the freedom of Hou Wenzhou, its founder. The
organization had been advising farmers and petitioners about their rights.
Yang Maodong (more commonly known as Guo Feixiong), a lawyer who
assisted Taishi villagers (see above), was formally arrested on October 4,
2005. He was first detained in September on suspicion of gathering crowds
to disrupt social order.
In November 2005, using a thinly veiled administrative pretext, authorities
ordered Gao Zhisheng to close his law firm for one year or risk restriction on
his personal freedom. Gao’s firm had taken on sensitive cases involving labor
issues, cyberdissidents, Falungong and religious practitioners, and the case of
Yang Maodong.
HIV/AIDS activists, as mentioned above, have been routinely harassed,
detained, and roughed up, but to date, officials have permitted some of their
organizations to stay open so long as they operated within governmentenforced
strictures.
Key International Actors
China has taken an increasingly active role in international affairs in recent
years, in a number of cases blocking independent U.N. investigations into
country situations, asserting that the issues under discussion are “the internal
affairs” of that country.
At the U.N. Security Council, China was one of several countries initially
unwilling to refer the situation in the Darfur region of Sudan to the
International Criminal Court in 2005. In the end, rather than veto the measure,
China abstained and the referral was made. China reportedly also has
used its position on the council’s Sanctions Committee for Darfur to impede
identification of individuals responsible for arms trade into and offensive military
flights over Darfur.
China also has played an important role in blocking the Security Council
from addressing systematic human rights abuses by Burma’s military government.
China is Burma’s largest investor and supplier of economic and military
aid.
In May 2005, two weeks after the Uzbek army killed hundreds of civilians in
Andijan, Uzbekistan, the Chinese government greeted Uzbek’s president in
Beijing with a twenty-one-gun salute and failed to endorse calls for an independent
international investigation into the Andijan violence. The Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, composed of Russia, China, and four Central
Asian states, characterized the Andijan incident as a terrorist plot.
The Chinese government refuses to cooperate with the U.N. special rapporteur
on North Korea and refuses to allow the office of the U.N. High
Commissioner for Refugees access to border areas where most North
Koreans reside.
In 2005, the presidents of China and the United States met briefly in New
York in August and in Beijing in mid-November. President Hu also met with
Premier Paul Martin in Canada and with Prime Minister Tony Blair, representing
the E.U., in Beijing and later in London. Although President Bush,
in a speech in Kyoto, Japan on November 17, prodded China to extend political
and religious freedoms and to embrace democracy, his Beijing agenda
was long on economic and security concerns and short on human rights.
Other Western governments’ preoccupations were similar. Exchanges with
China over human rights have been largely relegated to ineffective bilateral
dialogues.
The United States did not table a resolution on China’s human rights practices
at the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in 2005, apparently
in exchange for China’s willingness to cooperate with U.N. human
rights mechanisms, among other steps. China extended an invitation to the
U.N. special rapporteur on torture in 2005 but at this writing still had not
extended one to the special rapporteur on religious freedom.
Following his visit to China in October 2005, World Bank President Paul
Wolfowitz singled out two non-economic factors, rule of law and participation
of civil society, as important for economic development. Both are issues
with important human rights aspects. The Bank expects to lend China
between U.S.$1 billion to U.S. $1.5 billion a year for the next five years.