China
The Chinese government broke its promise to improve human rights in conjunction
with its hosting of the 2008 Summer Olympic Games. The months prior to
the Olympics were marked by a significant tightening of restrictions on freedom of
association, expression, and religion.
Fundamental rights and freedoms are not guaranteed in China, particularly as the
government continues to control and direct judicial institutions and decisions.
Such control raises serious concerns about the integrity of legal proceedings in
controversial cases and has made courts a less attractive venue for citizens seeking
redress for official corruption, illegal land seizures, labor rights violations, and
other abuses. With nowhere else to turn, people increasingly are taking to the
streets, with tens of thousands of public protests, at times violent, now taking
place across China each year.
2008 Beijing Olympics
In the run-up to the Olympics, authorities tightened restrictions on human rights
defenders, obstructed the activities of civil society organizations, including
groups devoted to assisting China’s population living with HIV/AIDS, and heightened
security controls on Tibetans and Uighurs. More stringent visa rules curtailed
business and tourist travel into China for the duration of the games.
Olympics-related temporary regulations for foreign media freedom in effect from
January 1, 2007, to October 17, 2008, gave foreign correspondents some
increased freedom but failed to prevent dozens of incidents of harassment,
detention, and physical assault by government officials and security forces. The
government obstructed foreign journalists from reporting on “sensitive” issues,
including instances of civil unrest, corruption, and detention facilities.
Despite pledges to allow foreign journalists unfettered access to the internet during
the games, the Chinese government only did so after coming under intense
international pressure in the days just prior to the games. It allowed access to
previously blocked websites, including those of international human rights organizations. However, websites of pro-Tibetan independence groups and the Falun
Gong remained blocked throughout the duration of the games.
The government targeted high-profile critics who linked human rights abuses to
preparations for the games. For example, land rights activist Yang Chunlin was
sentenced to five years in prison on March 24, 2008, on charges of “inciting subversion
of state power,” for initiating a petition titled “We Want Human Rights,
Not the Olympics” that protested officials’ illegal land seizures.
The government also backtracked on its promise to allow citizens to demonstrate
at designated protest zones in three Beijing parks. Instead, officials announced
on August 20 that that they had denied all 77 protest applications that had been
filed, claiming that they had successfully resolved the applicants’ concerns
through “dialogue and communication.” They also detained several people who
made such applications, including two elderly women, Wu Dianyuan, 79, and
Wang Xiuying, 77, who received a one-year sentence of “Re-education through
Labor” on August 17 for seeking more compensation for the demolition of their
homes. International condemnation prompted the government to rescind the sentence
two weeks later.
Freedom of Expression
The Chinese government continues to strictly control journalists, and sanctions
individuals and print and online media which fail to comply with extremely
restrictive but unpredictably enforced laws and regulations. Potential punishments
for journalists, webmasters, writers, bloggers, and editors who write or
post articles critical of the political system or send news outside China range
from instant dismissal to prosecution and lengthy imprisonment.
At this writing, at least 26 Chinese journalists remain in prison due to their work,
many on ambiguous charges including “revealing state secrets” and “inciting
subversion.” They include freelance reporter Lü Gengsong, who was sentenced to
four years in prison in February 2008 on charges of “inciting subversion” for stories
he had written for overseas websites on corruption and the trial of a Chinese
human rights activist.
Foreign media have been effectively barred from freely reporting in Tibetan areas
with the exception of five government-organized and controlled tours since
protest by monks and violence in the Tibetan capital Lhasa in March 2008. On
June 26, the Foreign Ministry announced that Tibet was officially reopened to foreign
media “in line with previous procedure,” a process which rarely resulted in
permission to freely visit Tibet.
China’s censors temporarily loosened tight controls on freedom of expression in
the aftermath of the May 12, 2008, Sichuan earthquake. Within days, however,
domestic media were instructed to avoid reporting on topics including protests by
parents of some of the thousands of children who died in the collapse of public
schools during the quake. In mid-June, the Chinese government imposed tighter
restrictions on foreign correspondents in the area.
The global consequences of stifled expression in China dominated post-Olympics
coverage of the country. On September 10, the state media finally began to report
that milk powder tainted by melamine continued to be sold domestically and
internationally. Five weeks earlier, after being forced to admit the problem by an
international partner, the Sanlu dairy group appealed to the government to “control
and coordinate” media coverage of the issue rather than publicize it. 53,000
infants became sick and four died.
On October 17, 2008, the Chinese government permanently lifted certain restrictions
on foreign journalists. However, the new freedoms do not extend to Chinese
journalists and foreign journalists still have limited access to certain parts of the
country, including Tibet.
Legal Reform
Despite significant achievements over the past decade in strengthening legal
institutions, the Chinese Communist Party’s domination of judicial institutions
and inconsistent enforcement of judicial decisions has meant that the legal system
remains vulnerable to arbitrary and often politically-motivated interference.
In 2008 the pace of legal reforms appeared to slow.
Police torture and coerced confessions remain important criminal justice concerns.
Such concerns are particularly acute in death penalty cases, though judicial authorities have announced a substantial decrease in the number of sentences
imposed since the People’s Supreme Court regained the authority to vet
death penalty cases in 2007. The police also continue to make frequent use of the
“Re-education through Labor” system, including for political and religious dissidents,
which allows detention of “minor offenders” for up to four years without
trial.
In March 2008 revisions to the Law on Lawyers were promulgated. These included
some limited advances, such as affirmation of defense attorneys’ procedural
rights to meet their clients in detention, but failed to offer meaningful remedies
for when these rights are violated. A top official from the Supreme People’s
Procuratorate (the public prosecution) announced in late April that defense attorneys’
right to meet with criminal suspects in detention did not extend to cases
involving “state secrets.” The revisions also introduced a provision prohibiting
lawyers from making statements in court that “harm national security.”
Party and government authorities often associate lawyers with their clients’ causes,
rendering the lawyers vulnerable to official reprisals and undercutting efforts
to establish the rule of law. In late May the Ministry of Justice threatened not to
renew the professional licenses of a dozen Beijing lawyers who had publicly
offered to represent Tibetan protesters. The ministry also prohibited lawyers from
representing victims in two major national scandals that shook public opinion:
the shoddy construction of schools that collapsed in the Sichuan earthquake,
and dairy companies’ poisoning of baby formula.
On May 1, new regulations regarding the disclosure of government-held information
went into effect, allowing ordinary citizens to force government departments
to disclose information. But an important exception is made for information classified
as “state secrets,” a broad category not limited to matters of national security
but also to “social, economic, and cultural” information.
That tens of thousands of public protests—a fraction of them violent that erupt
each year highlight the inherent dangers of not providing meaningful avenues for
expression and redress for official misconduct. In one of several similar incidents
in 2008, up to 30,000 people rioted in Weng’An county (Guizhou province), following
suspicions that the police had tried to cover up the murder of a 15-year-old girl. The crowds torched a police station, ransacked government buildings, and
overturned police cars. Chinese media disclosed shortly after the unrest that the
number of such “mass incidents” had reached 90,000 in 2006—the highest number
ever reported.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders faced greater than usual difficulties in 2008 as the government
strove to present a picture of “harmony” to the world ahead of the
Olympics. Police warned defenders and dissidents not to talk to foreign media,
monitored their phone and internet communications, tracked their movements,
and subjected them to varying degrees of house arrest. Other independent
observers—NGO leaders, intellectuals, civil rights lawyers—were also subjected to
unprecedented surveillance and monitoring.
In the months before the Olympics, petitioners trying to come to the capital to
seek redress for local abuses were systematically rounded up and sent back to
their home province by police and agents paid by provincial authorities, often
after having been fined or detained without legal process. As a result, many
activists chose to postpone or suspend their work until the games were over.
Several of those who did not were jailed.
China’s leading human rights activist, Hu Jia, was sentenced on April 3, 2008, to
three-and-a-half years in prison after having been found guilty of “inciting subversion
of state power.” In August 2007, Hu was one of 42 Chinese intellectuals and
activists who co-signed an open letter calling for greater attention to human
rights in China. In September 2007, Hu and lawyer Teng Biao published another
open letter, “The Real China and the Olympics,” assessing specific human rights
concerns in China in the context of the Beijing Games. On December 27, 2007, Hu
was detained prior to being formally arrested on January 30, 2008. His wife, fellow
activist Zeng Jinyan, remains under police surveillance in Beijing. Zeng Jinyan
was detained in a hotel in Dalian in Liaoning province during the Olympics to prevent
her from speaking with journalists.
Huang Qi, a Chinese internet pioneer and founder of a website through which he
investigates and publicizes human rights abuses of the “nameless and powerless” was also arrested in 2008. After the May 12, 2008, earthquake in Sichuan
province, Huang published reports about the efforts of parents of schoolchildren
who had been killed to hold local authorities accountable for constructing substandard
schools. Huang was detained by authorities on June 10 and formally
arrested on July 18 for “illegal possession of state secrets.”
Labor Rights
On January 1, 2008, the Chinese government unveiled a new Labor Contract Law,
which aims to eliminate the widespread problem of employers denying workers
labor contracts or failing to provide workers with copies of contracts after they
have been signed. The success of the law will hinge on whether authorities
enforce relevant worker protection regulations and punish employers who flout
them.
A ban on independent trade unions leaves the Party-controlled All-China
Federation of Trade Unions (ACFTU) as the sole legal entity dedicated to workers’
rights protection. Although the ACFTU plans to extend membership rights to the
estimated 150 million internal migrants who labor in Chinese towns and cities,
that status is unlikely to protect them all from rampant wage exploitation, dangerous
work environments, and lack of medical and accident insurance.
China’s official household registration system, or hukou, continues to deny internal
migrants public benefits including medical care and children’s education. The
Chinese government has introduced temporary household registration certificates
specifically for such workers, but only a small percentage of migrants obtain the
documents.
Women’s Rights
Chinese women, particularly in rural areas, continue to be victims of violence,
gender-based discrimination, and unequal access to services and employment. In
March, the official Xinhua News Agency called domestic violence the most serious
problem facing women in China. In July 2008 a Sichuan provincial court delivered
China’s first-ever sexual harassment conviction, sentencing a man to five months’
imprisonment for harassing a female colleague.
HIV/AIDS
China’s HIV/AIDS policies continue to be both pragmatic and punitive. On January
1, 2008, the government took an important step in controlling the spread of
HIV/AIDS and other blood-borne disease by implementing compulsory screening
of all blood products. Yet overall prevention efforts were undercut by intensified
repression of HIV/AIDS activists and grassroots organizations as part of a wider
crackdown on “embarrassing” issues ahead of the Beijing Olympics and by abusive
policies towards injecting drug users.
While the government has increased some services to injecting drug users, antinarcotics
policies continue to emphasize detention without due process in detoxification
and “Re-education through Labor” centers. Drug users in such centers
often have minimal access to health care or drug dependency treatment, are subject
to forced labor, and are exposed to TB and HIV. In June 2008 a new anti-narcotics
law went into effect which gives police broader authority to conduct searches.
Freedom of Religion
China’s constitution guarantees freedom of religion, but the government restricts
spiritual expression to government-registered temples, monasteries, mosques,
and churches. The government vets religious personnel, seminary applications,
and religious publications, and periodically audits religious institutions’ activities,
financial records, membership, and employees. The Chinese government
considers all unregistered religious organizations, including Protestant “house
churches,” illegal; members risk fines and criminal prosecution. It also continues
to designate certain groups as “evil cults,” including the Falun Gong, and regularly
cracks down on followers.
Official repression of religious activists continued during the Beijing Olympics. On
August 10, police detained veteran house church leader Hua Huiqi as he was en
route to a church in Beijing where US President George W. Bush was scheduled to
attend religious services. Hua was confined to a makeshift detention center for
several hours until he managed to escape.
Tibet
The situation in Tibetan areas sharply deteriorated in 2008. Against a backdrop of
ever-more intrusive controls over religious and cultural activities, accelerated
state-led economic development, and large-scale compulsory resettlement of
farmers and nomads, major protests against Chinese rule erupted on March 10 in
Lhasa and spread across the Tibetan plateau.
That date marked the anniversary of the failed 1959 uprising against Chinese
rule. Over the next four days, hundreds of monks from Drepung, Sera, and
Ganden temples peacefully protested in different locations and encountered varying
degrees of police obstruction, including arrest. On March 14 near Romoche
temple, members of the public started protesting police preventing monks from
leaving the compound; some protesters turned violent and burned several police
cars. The police retreated and then inexplicably disappeared from Lhasa for much
of the rest of the day. Rioters burned Chinese shops and government buildings
and attacked Chinese-looking passersby.
Chinese authorities claim that troops never opened fire but numerous witnesses
say there was widespread shooting by security forces over a 36-hour period.
Authorities say that 11 Chinese civilians and a Tibetan were burned to death after
hiding in shops set on fire by the rioters, and that a policeman and six other civilians
died from beatings of unknown causes. The Tibetan government-in-exile
claims that over 80 Tibetans were killed in the police crackdown.
As protests spread throughout Tibetan areas, the government blanketed the
entire plateau with military, armed police, and public security forces, and progressively
expelled all foreign media. It also launched an aggressive propaganda
offensive that covered only the March 14 violence and blamed the Dalai Lama for
conspiring to “sabotage the Olympics Games.” Several thousand alleged protesters
were arrested, and although the government has announced that it subsequently
released most of them, the whereabouts of several hundred remain
unknown. Police and Party authorities arbitrarily arrested, detained, or fined
Tibetans suspected of passing information abroad through relatives, friends, or
foreigners. Two groups of foreign journalists later permitted to visit Lhasa were told by monks of a massive “patriotic education campaign” launched by the government
in monasteries and places of worship.
In response to international condemnation, the government permitted 15 foreign
diplomats to visit Lhasa in late March, but severely restricted their ability to speak
freely to Tibetans, visit those in detention, or otherwise investigate aspects of the
protests. In early April, a request from Louise Arbour, the then-UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights, to visit Tibet was declined on grounds that it
was “inconvenient.” A separate appeal issued jointly by six UN Special
Rapporteurs was similarly declined. The Olympic Torch, however, passed through
Lhasa on June 21.
Xinjiang
Tensions worsened in 2008 in the Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region. Beijing
identified Uighur separatism as one of “the top three security threats for the
games,” and launched a year-long security campaign focusing on “the three evil
forces”—“terrorism, religious extremism, and separatism”—which resulted in
even more drastic restrictions on religious, cultural, and political rights. Many
Uighurs feel increasingly marginalized by rapid economic development but the
government continues to prohibit domestic discussion of or reporting on human
rights issues concerning Xinjiang.
The government prohibited employees and students from fasting during
Ramadan, tightened control over religious personnel and mosques, reinforced
civil militias, and deployed army and police patrols to prevent protests. Police
also continued to confiscate Muslims’ passports in an apparent bid to prevent
them from making non-state-approved pilgrimages to Mecca. In February new regulations
were published prohibiting “23 types of illegal religious activities,”
including praying in public or at wedding ceremonies. In March the authorities
put down a large, peaceful demonstration in the town of Khotan.
At several points in 2008 police authorities in Xinjiang and Beijing announced
that they had foiled “terrorist plots” and arrested “terrorist gangs” seeking to
carry attacks during the games, but without releasing information sufficient to dispel concerns that Beijing was using counterterrorism concerns, which were
legitimate—as cover for a crackdown on peaceful political opposition.
The government alleged terrorist involvement in two serious incidents. On August
4 in Kashgar two men rammed a truck in a patrol of soldiers, killing 16, and on
August 10, attackers detonated a series of small home-made bombs against government
buildings and Chinese shops before dawn, killing one or two people.
These incidents, which the government says demonstrate that it is facing a serious
armed separatist threat in Xinjiang, have deepened the polarization between
Han Chinese and Uighurs.
Hong Kong
Following a December 2007 decision by China’s National People’s Congress
Standing Committee, Hong Kong authorities repeatedly stated that the government
had a “clear timetable” to move toward election by universal suffrage of the
chief executive in 2017 and of all members of the Legislative Council in 2020.
Immigration authorities’ refusal to allow several visitors critical of China’s human
rights record into Hong Kong ahead of the Olympics raised concerns that the territory’s
autonomy was being eroded.
Key International Actors
International criticism of China’s rights record remained muted in 2008. Many of
the abuses taking place in conjunction with the Olympics were enabled by neartotal
silence from other governments, the International Olympic Committee, and
the corporate sponsors of the games, many of which had justified their support
for the games by claiming the event would improve human rights.
Formal human rights dialogues with the Chinese government—conducted by the
United States and others—failed to produce any measurable improvements. In
October 2008 the European Parliament awarded the Sakharov Prize to Chinese
activist Hu Jia. China is due to be reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism of
the UN Human Rights Council in February 2009.