China
In late 2004, the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party
(CCP) called for political reform within the Party in order to strengthen
the Party’s ability to lead the nation. Party leaders made clear that
China is to remain a one-party state, but one based increasingly on the
rule of law. While China has made progress in some areas in recent
years—strengthening its legal system, allowing more independent news
reporting, and sometimes tailoring public policy more closely to public
opinion—it remains a highly repressive state.
The Party’s 2004 promise to uphold the rule of law has been compromised
by continuing widespread official corruption, Party interference
in the justice system, and a culture of impunity for officials and their
families. Authorities continue to censor news media. Civil society is also
constrained and most NGOs are government-controlled. China prohibits
independent domestic human rights organizations and bars entry
to international human rights organizations. Chinese citizens who contact
international rights groups risk imprisonment.
In late October and early November 2004, major riots by tens of thousands
of people roiled Henan and Sichuan provinces. The riots were
widely separated geographically and the issues precipitating them were
different, but the riots, and the state response to them, highlighted
growing rural unrest and Chinese leaders’ preoccupation with social stability.
Leaders continue to isolate areas of discontent, and aim to prevent
information about social problems from spreading.
Fifteenth Anniversary of the Tiananmen Square Crackdown
June 4, 2004, marked the fifteenth anniversary of the massacre in
Beijing, when China’s leaders ordered the military to fire on civilians
who were trying to prevent troops from entering the city and reaching
protesters in Tiananmen Square. Fifteen years later, the government still forbids any public commemoration of the event. Police harass and
detain those dedicated to securing rehabilitation of victims, payment of
compensation, or reconsideration of the official verdict.
During the sensitive 2004 anniversary period, officials again held wellknown
activists, including Ding Zilin, leader of the Tiananmen Mothers
advocacy group, under house arrest. State Security officers subjected
Dr. Jiang Yanyong to six weeks of intense thought reform. The seventytwo-
year-old military doctor had gained international renown for
exposing the official cover-up of the SARS epidemic in Beijing. He also
had attended to victims the night of June 4, 1989, and, in February
2004, suggested in a private letter to the government that it should “settle
the mistakes it committed” in 1989. Dr. Jiang was released on July
19, 2004, but remained under house arrest at this writing.
China’s Legal System
In March 2004, China amended its constitution to include a promise to
ensure human rights. Although the constitution is not directly enforceable
in China, the amendment signals a growing acknowledgement of
human rights.
Despite efforts to strengthen the rule of law in China, the legal system
itself remains a major source of rights violations. Many laws are vaguely
worded, inviting politically motivated application by prosecutors and
judges. The judiciary lacks independence: Party and government officials
routinely intervene at every level of the judicial system in favor of
friends and allies. Trial procedures favor the prosecution, and despite
the public prosecution of a large number of judges, corruption remains
a widespread problem. The criminal justice system relies heavily on
confessions for evidence, creating institutional pressures on the police
to extort confessions through beatings and torture. According to
Chinese experts, legal aid services meet only one-quarter of the demand nationwide. Defense lawyers may face disbarment and imprisonment for
advocating their clients’ rights too vigorously.
On a more positive note, China recently has begun to hold qualifying
examinations for judges and has signaled its intent to amend laws to
better protect suspects in detention. However, administrative detention,
a common practice in China, still occurs without judicial process.
Persons detained on suspicion of “minor crimes” such as drug use are
sent to “reeducation through labor” camps for months or years without
ever coming before a judge.
Restrictions on Freedom of Expression
The growing dynamism of the Chinese-language Internet and domestic
media in China led to some efforts to impose tighter controls in 2004.
Officials expanded the list of topics subject to censorship and introduced
improved methods for enforcing compliance. In October 2004,
the state also banned all reporting on rural land seizures by the government.
In September, New York Times research assistant and author Zhao Yan
was arrested on charges of passing state secrets to foreigners, apparently
for his work uncovering leadership changes in the Communist Party. In
early 2004, authorities banned a best-selling non-fiction book,
Investigation of Chinese Peasants, which documented cases of official corruption,
excessive taxation, and police brutality in rural Anhui province.
Numerous newspapers tested the limits of the possible in 2004, and
some came under attack. Staff of the parent group of the Southern
Metropolis Daily received long prison sentences on charges of corruption;
the former editor-in-chief was fired. The charges were widely
viewed as politically motivated, as the newspaper had been the first to
report on several stories of national significance.
The tension between promoting Internet use and controlling content
escalated in 2004, with Chinese authorities employing increasingly
sophisticated technology to limit public and private expression. Despite
the restrictions, the Internet is emerging as a powerful tool for the sharing
of information and mobilization of social activism in China.
HIV/AIDS
China faces what could be one of the largest AIDS epidemics in the
world. According to official statistics, 840,000 men, women, and children
are living with HIV/AIDS, but the real number could be much
higher. Many Chinese citizens lack basic information about AIDS, and
some AIDS activists face state harassment and detention.
Chinese authorities have taken steps to address the AIDS crisis. In late
2003, national authorities promised to provide antiretroviral (ARV)
treatment to all impoverished HIV-positive persons. The State Council,
China’s highest executive body, issued a circular in May 2004 ordering
local officials to implement a range of AIDS prevention and control
measures. A revised national law on the protection and control of infectious
diseases, passed in August 2004, prohibits discrimination against
persons with infectious diseases. But as documented in a September
2003 Human Rights Watch report, Locked Doors, lack of basic rights and
abuses by local authorities have hampered efforts to help HIV-positive
Chinese citizens.
At this writing, there still had not been an investigation of the government’s
role in the transmission of HIV to villagers in Henan and other
provinces through unsanitary but highly profitable blood collection centers.
No official has been held accountable; some who were involved in
the scandal have been promoted. Henan authorities regularly detain
HIV-positive activists in advance of visits by international dignitaries,
and have recently built a prison to segregate detainees with HIV. They
also continue to impede the activities of some NGOs that provide services to people with AIDS: in 2004, Henan officials closed three NGOrun
orphanages for AIDS-affected children, and briefly detained staff of
the Dongzhen Orphans School. People living with HIV/AIDS in
Henan continue to allege corruption and abuses in the government’s
distribution of ARV treatment.
Labor Rights
Chinese workers have yet to reap the benefits of the country’s rapid
economic development. Employers routinely ignore minimum wage
requirements and fail to implement required health and safety measures.
Many former employees of state-owned enterprises lost their pensions
when their companies were privatized or went bankrupt. Millions of citizens
who have left the countryside to seek work in cities face serious
problems. Without official residence permits, these migrant workers
lack access to basic services and are vulnerable to police abuse.
Workers are limited in their capacity to seek redress by the government’s
ban on independent trade unions. The only union permitted is
the government-controlled All China Federation of Trade Unions.
Some NGOs in the Pearl River Delta educate workers about their legal
rights and assist them with lawsuits against employers, but they too are
forbidden to discuss, let alone organize, independent trade unions.
Many regions have witnessed massive labor protests. In May 2003, after
trials lacking basic procedural safeguards, Liaoning province labor
activists Yao Fuxin and Xiao Yunliang were given seven and four-year
sentences respectively. Family members report that both men are seriously
ill. In October 2004, after flawed trials, five workers were sentenced
to terms of between two and three-and-a-half years for destroying
company property at a shoe factory in Guangdong during a massive
protest. 
Forced Evictions
A March 2004 Human Rights Watch report, Demolished, discussed how
local authorities and developers are forcibly evicting hundreds of thousands
of residents in order to build new developments. With little legal
recourse, those evicted have taken to the streets in protest, only to meet
severe police repression, detention, and imprisonment. Ye Guozhu, a
prominent advocate, was arrested after he applied for formal permission
to hold a protest march. A Shanghai court sentenced lawyer Zheng
Enchong, who had defended many evicted residents, to three years in
prison for “circulating state secrets” after he faxed information about his
activities to an international human rights organization.
Legal experts and some government-controlled news media have openly
criticized the government’s failure to protect housing rights. The government
has responded with some policy and constitutional reforms,
but widespread corruption and a weak judicial system obstruct implementation.
Hong Kong
In April 2004, the Chinese government unilaterally ruled out universal
suffrage for Hong Kong until 2012-13 at the earliest. Through a reinterpretation
of the Basic Law, Hong Kong’s mini-constitution, Beijing
went a step further, reserving for itself the power to void any proposal
for electoral change. Even the power to initiate reform, formerly in the
hands of Hong Kong’s Legislative Council (LegCo), was ceded to Hong
Kong’s chief executive, chosen by an election committee composed
largely of Beijing appointees. China’s legislature, the Standing
Committee of the National People’s Congress which is responsible for
the changes to the Basic Law, has ignored repeated requests for consultation
by representatives of Hong Kong’s electorate.
At the time of Hong Kong’s 1997 incorporation into the People
Republic of China as a Special Autonomous Region (SAR) under the
principle of “one country, two systems,” Hong Kong was promised a
“high degree of autonomy.” As a result of Beijing’s newly self-arrogated
powers, there is concern in Hong Kong, expressed in massive protest
marches on July 1, 2003, and on January and July 1, 2004, that China
will continue to erode basic human rights protections.
LegCo elections in September 2004 were marred by political interference
from Beijing and intimidation of several prominent critics.
Xinjiang and the “War on Terror”
China used its support for the U.S.-led “war against terrorism” to leverage
international support for, or at least acquiescence in, its own crackdown
on Uighurs, a Turkic-speaking Muslim population in China’s
northwestern Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region. Some Uighur
groups press peacefully for genuine political autonomy or for independence;
others resort to violence. Chinese authorities do not distinguish
between peaceful and violent dissent, or between separatism and international
terrorism.
The crackdown in Xinjiang has been characterized by systematic human
rights violations including arbitrary arrests, closed trials, and extensive
use of the death penalty. In September 2004, the region’s Communist
Party leader reported that during the first eight months of the year fifty
people were sentenced to death and twenty-two groups targeted for
separatist and terrorist activities. Official sources subsequently clarified
that none of the fifty were executed, but have provided no additional
information on their fate.
Cultural survival for Uighurs, along with other ethnic groups on
China’s borders, is a constant struggle. Officials have curbed observation
of traditional holidays and use of the Uighur language, and closely control religious education and expression. Controls include a prohibition
against those under eighteen entering mosques or receiving religious
instruction at home; political vetting and mandatory patriotic
education for all imams; restrictions on public calls to prayer; and
instructions aimed at making Koranic interpretation consistent with
Communist ideology.
Tibet
For China, the term “Tibet” is reserved for the Tibetan Autonomous
Region. However, many Tibetans speak of a “greater Tibet,” including
Tibetan areas in Qinghai, Yunnan, Gansu, and Sichuan. More than 50
percent of ethnic Tibetans under Chinese authority live in these
regions.
The Chinese leadership continues to limit Tibetan religious and cultural
expression and seeks to curtail the Dalai Lama’s political and religious
influence in all Tibetan areas. Severely repressive measures limit any
display of support for an independent Tibet.
In 2002 a Sichuan provincial court sentenced Tenzin Delek Rinpoche, a
locally prominent lama, to death with a two-year suspended sentence on
what appear to have been trumped up charges of “causing explosions
[and] inciting the separation of the state.” His alleged co-conspirator,
Lobsang Dondrup, was executed in January 2003.
Tenzin Delek’s arrest and conviction represent the culmination of a
decade-long effort by Chinese authorities to curb his efforts to foster
Tibetan Buddhism and develop Tibetan social institutions. His case,
documented in a March 2004 Human Rights Watch report, Trials of a
Tibetan Monk, remains a focal point for Tibetans struggling to retain
their cultural identity. Several of Tenzin Delek’s associates remain in
prison. Close to a hundred others were detained for periods ranging
from days to months, most for attempting to bring information about 
the crackdown to the attention of the foreign community. Credible
sources report that many of those held were subject to severe ill-treatment
and torture.
Religious Belief and Expression
Although religious practice is tolerated, official Communist Party doctrine
holds that religion, as a belief structure and an organizational
arrangement, will eventually wither and die. Until such time, the
Chinese government believes religion must be strictly controlled to prevent
it from becoming a political force or an institution capable of competing
with the state for the loyalty of China’s citizens. The state’s policy
is to avoid alienating believers or driving them underground, but
rather to harness their energies toward China’s development along the
lines envisioned by the Party.
Chinese officials curb the growth of religious belief and its expression in
practice through a series of laws and regulations. To be legal, religious
groups must register with and submit to close monitoring by the appropriate
authorities, and even that option is limited to the five officially
recognized belief systems: Buddhism, Daoism, Islam, Catholicism, and
Protestantism. Registration brings monitoring and vetting of religious
personnel, congregant activities, finances, and publications. In spite of
the law, unregistered religious activity continues to flourish.
Religious groups not recognized by Chinese authorities are subject to
stringent penalties under China’s criminal law. Claims by Falungong
spokespeople that practitioners face continuing mass incarceration and
ill-treatment are difficult to assess because of lack of independent confirmation,
but there is no doubt that authorities have targeted practitioners
for imprisonment, “reeducation through labor,” and abuse.
During 2004, evidence began to accumulate that the same laws and regulations
used against Falungong practitioners were being used to rein in so-called house churches—evangelical Protestant groups that refuse to
register with the government.
The Rights of Women and Girls
Women continue to be underrepresented in China’s political leadership
and in senior positions in business. A cultural preference for boy children,
combined with state population control policies, has resulted in a
shortage of women and girls in rural areas, creating a lucrative market
for traffickers. While the state has cracked down on some trafficking
rings, many Chinese women and girls, especially those from rural and
ethnic communities, are kidnapped and either sold as wives or trafficked
into the sex industry. During 2004, major stories in the domestic press
also highlighted police brutality against suspected sex workers.
Key International Actors
China played an increasingly prominent international role in 2004. In
the United Nations Security Council, China helped block renewal of a
U.S.-backed resolution seeking immunity from international war crimes
prosecution at the International Criminal Court (ICC) for troops from
non-ICC states serving in any U.N. force. However, China was in part
responsible for the Security Council’s failure to impose sanctions on
Sudan for its complicity in violence in the Darfur region. China has
major oil interests in Sudan.
At the 2004 annual meeting of the Commission on Human Rights,
China again blocked consideration of a resolution condemning its
human rights record by calling for a “no-action” motion. In 2004, as it
had in the past, China suspended its dialogue with the U.S. in retaliation
for the American sponsorship of a resolution. During talks in
Beijing in October and November, both countries agreed to discuss
resuming regular dialogues. Human Rights Watch has called on all of
China’s bilateral dialogue partners to implement rights benchmarks and establish a timetable for meeting those benchmarks, and ensure transparency
about the process.
China’s cooperation with U.N. human rights mechanisms has been
thorny. After almost a decade of discussion, China extended an invitation
to the U.N. special rapporteur on torture, but two weeks before
the June 2004 visit was to take place, the government postponed it
indefinitely. China has been unwilling to agree to the standard U.N.
terms for such a visit, which include unannounced visits to prisons and
confidential interviews with prisoners. The U.N. Working Group on
Arbitrary Detentions (WGAD) visited China in September 2004. As it
had after its previous mission in 1997, the WGAD urged China to
bring national laws into compliance with international human rights
standards. Although the WGAD noted more cooperation in 2004 than
during 1997, it cut short its visit to Tibet’s Drapchi prison after the
state refused requests to meet with prisoners who were severely injured
during and after the 1997 visit.
China has ratified a number of international human rights treaties
including the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, the Convention against Torture, and the Convention on the
Rights of the Child. It has signed but not ratified the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. China is due for its first review
by the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in April-
May 2005.
The U.S. increasingly cooperates with China on counter-terrorism and
anti-drug trafficking efforts and the U.S. Federal Bureau of
Investigations maintains an office in Beijing. However, the U.S. in 2004
refused to hand over to Chinese authorities a group of Uighurs detained
at Guantanamo Bay for fear they would face torture or execution.
The European Union is weighing whether to rescind an arms embargo
imposed after the 1989 Beijing massacre. Human Rights Watch opposes lifting the embargo until China addresses issues of accountability, reparations
for victims, and trials for those responsible.