Côte d’Ivoire
The March 2007 signature of a new peace accord, the Ouagadougou Agreement,
has brought a palpable decrease in political tensions in Côte d’Ivoire, and
prospects for resolution of the five-year political and military stalemate look
brighter than a year ago. At the same time, the prevailing culture of impunity
threatens long-term stability and the prospects for peaceful elections in the
future.
Compared to previous years, 2007 saw fewer politically motivated attacks on journalists,
northerners, and others perceived to be associated with the political
opposition or the rebellion. Politically motivated hate speech also decreased. In
September Radhika Coomaraswamy, United Nations special representative for
children and armed conflict, announced that recruitment of child soldiers had not
been detected in the past year. But other chronic human rights abuses persist
and go unaddressed: most notably, government security forces and New Forces
rebels continue to engage in widespread extortion at checkpoints and, on a more
limited scale than in previous years, sexual violence against girls and women.
Meanwhile, underlying problems that have fomented and sustained the Ivorian
conflict—the question of citizenship eligibility for some three million immigrant
residents, harassment by security forces of residents living without national identity
papers, and competition for land resources between “indigenous” and immigrant
communities in the volatile western region—remain largely unresolved.
Efforts to End the Political-Military Stalemate
Since the crisis erupted, France, the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the African Union, and the United Nations have all spearheaded initiatives
to end the political-military stalemate in Côte d’Ivoire.
Following a series of unfulfilled peace agreements and the October 2005 expiry of
the five-year constitutional mandate of President Laurent Gbagbo, the UN Security
Council postponed elections for one year under Resolution 1633 (2005). Then-
Prime Minister Charles Konan Banny’s efforts to implement a “roadmap” to elections
soon deadlocked, however, making elections before October 2006 impossible. In response, the Security Council adopted resolution 1721 (2006) extending
the mandates of President Gbagbo and Prime Minister Banny for a further 12
months, and granting sweeping powers to the prime minister. Soon after its
adoption, however, President Gbagbo made clear that he would not accept key
provisions of resolution 1721.
In March 2007 Gbagbo and rebel leader Guillaume Soro signed a peace accord
negotiated with the help of Burkina Faso President Blaise Compaoré. The
Ouagadougou Agreement is the first to have been directly negotiated by the country’s
main belligerents on their own initiative and resulted in the appointment of
Guillaume Soro as prime minister in a unity government. Implementation efforts
following signature resulted in important, if thus far largely symbolic milestones
in the peace process. A buffer zone between north and south Côte d’Ivoire, formerly
patrolled by French and UN troops, was dismantled and President Gbagbo
visited the rebel capital Bouaké for the first time since the conflict erupted.
The Ouagadougou Agreement sets forth an ambitious 10-month timetable, which,
if followed, would lead to citizen identification, voter registration, disarmament,
and presidential elections by early 2008. For many observers the Agreement is
the nation’s best hope yet of resolving the crisis. However, since signature, target
dates for the completion of disarmament and the identification process have
been pushed further and further back. In September 2007 the head of the
Independent Electoral Commission (CEI) projected that presidential elections will
not likely take place before October 2008, three years beyond the expiry of
President Gbagbo’s constitutional mandate.
Extortion and Racketeering
In the government-controlled south, members of the police, gendarmerie, army,
customs, and the Security Operations Command Center (CECOS) continue to
engage in systematic and widespread extortion, racketeering, intimidation, and
even physical assault at hundreds of roadside checkpoints. Although few residents
are fully spared such abuses, the problem is particularly acute for travelers
with names from northern ethnic groups and for West African immigrants. In the
north, New Forces rebels regularly extort money from civilians in areas under their
control, most commonly at the hundreds of roadblocks they maintain.
Sexual Abuse
Although the scale of abuse has diminished since its peak during the armed conflict
of 2002-2003, members of government security forces and New Forces rebels
continue to sexually abuse women and girls with impunity. The problem is most
acute at checkpoints manned by these groups, where women and girls are subject
to invasive body searches and rape. Specialist medical and psychological
services for victims are all but non-existent, and courts often fail to enforce laws
relating to sexual violence.
In July the UN suspended a Moroccan peacekeeping unit following an internal
investigation into allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse, including of
minors of both sexes, by some of its soldiers.
Impunity for Crimes Committed by Pro-Government Groups
In May members of the Students’ Federation of Côte d’Ivoire (FESCI), a violent
pro-government student union, ransacked the headquarters of two prominent
Ivorian human rights groups they suspected of supporting a teachers’ strike. One
of these attacks took place in the presence of police officers who failed to intervene.
FESCI members regularly rob and extort merchants and taxi drivers in the
vicinity of university campuses and dormitories, often in plain view of security
forces.
Rule of Law
In the government-controlled south, striking deficiencies in the judicial system,
including lack of independence of the judicial branch from the executive and
widespread corruption, constitute a significant impediment to victims seeking
justice and to rebuilding respect for the rule of law. Those unable to bribe judges
and other officials are routinely denied justice. Some of these bribes take the
form of sexual favors. In the north, where most judicial infrastructure was
destroyed during the armed conflict of 2002-2003, many individuals accused of
common crimes are arbitrarily held in prisons and informal detention centers for
extended periods. There are also credible reports that New Forces officials increasingly use torture to extract confessions from those accused of common
crimes.
Internal Displacement
Some 750,000 people have been displaced since the crisis began in 2002.
Although many were able to return home in 2007, they continue to suffer dire economic
hardship. In the west, resettlement of some groups, particularly Burkinabe,
is sometimes accomplished through signature of locally administered reconciliation
agreements in which “indigenous” inhabitants impose discriminatory conditions
on displaced immigrant groups as a condition of return. For example, some
formerly displaced immigrants are now prohibited from residing outside of what
is deemed to be their “host” village, despite the fact that the areas where they
lived and earned their livelihood before the crisis began are tens of kilometers
away.
Accountability
Throughout 2007 neither the government nor the rebel leadership took significant
steps to discipline, investigate, or hold accountable those responsible for recent
crimes, much less atrocities committed during the 2002-2003 civil war. In April
2007 President Gbagbo signed an ordinance granting amnesty to soldiers who
deserted to join the rebels in 2002, among others. Though the ordinance has several
ambiguous provisions, Gbagbo has publicly stated that the amnesty does not
apply to “crimes against human kind,” reinforcing that the ordinance does not
extend to serious crimes under international law, for which amnesties are in any
event not permissible.
The UN Security Council has still not made public or discussed the findings of the
UN Commission of Inquiry report into serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law since September 2002, which was handed to the UN
secretary-general in November 2004.
In September 2003 the Ivorian government accepted the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court over serious crimes. However, in 2006 and 2007 it consistently undermined a planned ICC mission to assess the possibility of opening
an investigation into such crimes.
Key International Actors
In 2007 efforts of regional actors to resolve the Ivorian crisis, most notably those
of President Compaoré of Burkina Faso in his capacity as ECOWAS chairman, took
center stage. At the same time, President Gbagbo used the success of the
Ouagadougou Agreement to press for a reduction in the prominence of the role
played by the UN. For example, in early 2007 Gbagbo successfully pressed for the
departure of Pierre Schori as special representative for the UN secretary-general
in Côte d’Ivoire. In addition, Gbagbo demanded the removal of the UN high representative
for elections, and in July Security Council resolution 1765 (2007) terminated
the post.
The signature of the Ouagadougou Agreement was soon followed by the withdrawal
of 500 out of some 3,500 French peacekeepers. They back up approximately
8,000 UN peacekeepers.