Côte d’Ivoire
The eighteen-month-ceasefire between the government of Côte
d’Ivoire and northern-based rebels and the peace process initiated at the
same time were shattered in early November 2004 when Ivorian government
aircraft launched bombing raids on the main rebel-held cities
of Bouaké and Korhogo. The killing of nine French soldiers in a government
air raid on a French base a few days later provoked a deepening
of the human rights and diplomatic crisis. The French retaliated by
largely destroying Côte d’Ivoire’s air force, which in turn sparked a brutal
wave of attacks by pro-government militias against French and other
civilians in the commercial capital Abidjan and western cacao-growing
region. The use of xenophobic hate speech by Ivorian state media during
the November crisis incited the pro-government militias to commit
serious crimes against foreigners, including rape.
In response to the crisis, the United Nations Security Council passed
resolution 1572 which imposed a thirteen-month arms embargo on
Côte d’Ivoire and threatened economic and travel sanctions if the parties
failed to implement their commitments under the preexisting peace
accords. At years end, the Ivorian government is politically isolated by
the international community. However, neither the embargo nor the
threat of further sanctions have deterred it from threatening to pursue a
military solution to the conflict. The prospect of a renewed government
offensive against the rebels raises serious human rights concerns, particularly
given the more prominent use of the ill disciplined militias and
the government’s use of hate media to incite violence against perceived
opponents. The renewed conflict in Côte d’Ivoire threatens to further
draw in roving combatants from neighboring countries and jeopardize
the precarious stability within the region.
The north and most of the west of the country remain under the control
of the rebel forces known as the Forces Nouvelles (FN), while the
government retains control of the south. Some four thousand French troops monitor the ceasefire line. Neither the faltering peace process
nor the six thousand-strong United Nations peacekeeping mission, the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI), established in
April 2004, have been able to facilitate respect for human rights.
The 1999-2000 military junta, 2002-2003 internal armed conflict
between the government and rebels, and the political unrest that followed
have all been characterized by a serious disintegration of the rule
of law, often with fatal consequences. The issues at the heart of the
Ivorian conflict—the exploitation of ethnicity for political gain, competition
over land and natural resources, and corruption—continue
unabated. From 1999 serious atrocities have been perpetrated by both
sides, including numerous massacres, sexual abuse, and the widespread
use of child soldiers. Neither the Ivorian government nor the rebel
leadership has taken concrete steps to investigate and hold accountable
those most responsible for these crimes. Perpetrators have therefore
been emboldened by the current climate of impunity that allows grave
abuses to go unpunished.
Impunity of State Security Forces
State Security Forces continue to act with impunity while the Ivorian
government demonstrates little political will to hold accountable perpetrators
within the government or security forces.
From March 25-27, 2004, pro-government forces participated in a
deadly crackdown against opposition groups who planned to protest the
lack of progress in implementing the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement.
During the violence, members of the Ivorian security forces, including
pro-government militias and Front Populaire Ivoirien party militants
responded aggressively by using unnecessary and deadly means that
were disproportionate to the supposed threat the march posed. Instead
of dispersing demonstrators with non-lethal means as they assembled,
the security forces shot at and detained them in their communities as they prepared to gather, fired upon them as they attempted to flee, and
executed many after being detained. During the violence at least 105
civilians were killed, 290 were wounded, and some twenty individuals
“disappeared” after being taken into custody by members of the Ivorian
security forces and pro-government militias, many on the basis of their
nationality, ethnicity, or religion.
From September 2004, security forces have been involved in a number
of incidents, including the disappearance of people close to leaders of
opposition party Rally of Republicans (Rassemblement de Republicains,
RDR), raids by security forces on mosques and market places, and
increased racketeering and extortion—particularly of northern Ivorians,
supporters or perceived RDR supporters, and West African immigrants.
In late September, the Ivorian Army raided several mosques in
Yamoussoukro and detained some 250 people, most of whom were West
African immigrants. On September 29, Ivorian gendarmes raided a market
in the Abidjan suburb of Adjamé, and detained 380 mostly northerners
or West Africa immigrants, scores of whom were beaten and
forced to pay money for their release. On October 5, a gardener and
three security guards were abducted by the Republican Guard from the
Abidjan residence of opposition leader Allasane Ouattara. The bruised
body of the gardener was found a few days later floating in a lagoon in
Abidjan.
Attacks on Journalists and Press Freedom by Pro-government
Forces
National and international journalists have on numerous occasions been
threatened and harassed by pro-government forces. In April 2004, Guy-
Andre Kieffer, a French-Canadian journalist who wrote about corruption
in the cacao industry, disappeared in Abidjan and is believed to be
dead. A relative of the president has been charged with complicity in
the kidnapping and murder, though no further arrests have been made.
French prosecutors, who have opened a separate investigation, have accused the government of blocking their investigations. The resumption
of attacks on rebel-held positions was accompanied by attacks on
four private opposition newspapers—Le Patriote, 24 Heures, Le Nouveau
Réveil and Le Libéral Nouvea—which were on November 4 ransacked,
looted or burned by hundreds of pro-government militias.
The Use of Hate Speech
State owned and private pro-government press continue to play a crucial
role in exacerbating tensions in Ivorian society not only through
unbalanced and sometimes provocative coverage of events, but also by
direct incitation of hatred, intolerance and violence against groups perceived
to oppose the government. The most dramatic example of this
occurred in November 2004 when high-level government officials and
militia leaders speaking on state radio and television, disseminated continual
messages which incited pro-government militias to attack French
civilians. There was at least one instance in which a broadcaster’s incitement
of an attack included the number plate of a vehicle said to be driven
by French nationals.
The government’s widespread use of hate speech and incitement of violence
against French and other Europeans has provoked concerns about
future attacks against the governments more familiar targets: Muslims,
northerners and West African immigrants. The use of hate speech provoked
widespread condemnation by the international community,
including a warning from the United Nations adviser on the prevention
of genocide and an obligation under U.N. S.C. resolution 1572 for the
peacekeeping mission to strengthen its monitoring role of broadcasts
that incite or provide directions for violence. However, the U.N. has
not indicated if the peacekeeping mission is prepared to block the hate
speech transmissions through technical or other means. Impunity of Pro-government Militant Groups and Civilian
Militias
Political developments were throughout the year accompanied by acts
of harassment, intimidation and violence by the pro-government militant
groups and civilian militias. Since 2000, the government has
increasingly relied on pro-government militias for both law enforcement
and, since 2002, to combat the rebellion. From September 2004,
pro-government militia members have reportedly been undergoing military
training in Abidjan. Throughout the year members of the political
opposition, UNOCI personnel, French soldiers, journalists and foreigners
were most often the targets. For example, on March 10, scores of
youth from the “Young Patriots,” stormed the Ministry of Justice in
Abidjan to protest appointments made by the justice minister, who is
also the president of one of the key opposition parties. As deadlines for
rebels to begin disarming passed in June and October, hundreds of
“Young Patriots” attacked United Nations and French personnel. After
a small rebel attack on the town of Gohitafla was repelled by French
troops in July, militant youths destroyed tens of UNOCI vehicles in
Abidjan and San Pedro. In November, the mobs attacked, looted and
burned French and other European owned homes, businesses and
schools, provoking a massive evacuation of at least five thousand foreign
nationals. French government sources said at least three of its citizens
were raped and scores of others wounded during the attacks.
Abuses by the Forces Nouvelles
Within rebel-held areas – thought to be at least 50 percent of the
national territory – there are no legally constituted courts, nor has the
rebel leadership established a legitimate judicial authority or shown any
political will to try serious crimes in which their commanders or combatants
were involved. Within FN-controlled areas there were frequent
reports of extortion, looting of civilian property, armed robbery, rape,
arbitrary taxation, abduction, extra-judicial execution of suspected government informants, and attacks against United Nations peacekeepers
and French soldiers.
The most serious incident occurred on June 20-21, 2004, during clashes
between rival rebel factions in the northern city of Korhogo which led
to the deaths of some one hundred people, including civilians.
According to a fact-finding mission by the UNOCI human rights section,
many of those found in three mass graves had been executed or
suffocated after being held in a make-shift prison. Many others were
tortured and subjected to inhuman and degrading treatment.
Inter-communal Conflict Over Land
Longstanding tension over access and ownership of land between
indigenous Ivorians, some of whom have formed into civilian based
militias, and West African immigrant farmers, the majority from
Burkina Faso, continues to claim numerous lives during 2004. The tension,
exacerbated by political rhetoric during the 2002-2003, has forced
thousands from lands they farmed in the west and southwest of the
country. In late December 2003 and January 2004, French soldiers
found the bodies of thirty five people thought to be mostly West
African immigrants in several villages around Bangolo in the west. At
around the same time hundreds of people of Burkinabe origin were
forced by local militias from the Bete ethnic group to leave their homes
around Gagnoa. In March and April 2004, at least twelve people were
killed near Gagnoa and elsewhere in the southwestern part of the county.
Since June 2004, foreign communities around Guiglo and Duekoue
were targeted by an unidentified armed group, resulting in the deaths of
at least seven and displacement of thousands. In November communal
violence between the Bete and Dioula ethnic groups in Gagnoa resulted
in at least five deaths. Reform of the land ownership law was among the
package of legal reforms slated for review under the peace accord, however
the government has yet to undertake action to end the violence
and implement needed reforms. Key International Actors
Throughout most of 2004, the impasse in implementation of the
January 2003 Linas-Marcousses Agreement and fears that it would lead
to a fresh outbreak of violence resulted in a flurry of diplomatic efforts
to resolve the crisis by the United Nations, the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), the African Union (AU) and the
French government. The Ivorian government’s resumption of hostilities
in the face of these efforts resulted in widespread condemnation and
international isolation. It also provoked a crisis in Franco-Ivorian relations.
In February 2004 the Security Council expanded the mandate of the
United Nations mission in Côte d’Ivoire to become a full peacekeeping
operation, including the deployment of some six thousand peacekeepers
and two hundred military observers. A high level summit in July aimed
at jump-starting the peace-process resulted in the signing of the Accra
III agreement which committed the government to adopt several key
legal reforms by the end of August 2004, including one on citizenship
for West African immigrants, one which would define eligibility to contest
presidential elections, and another which would change rights to
land tenure. The agreement also set October 15, 2004 as the starting
date for disarmament. At year’s end, none of the key reforms have been
passed by the Ivorian government.
Throughout 2004 the U.N., the European Union (E.U.), and the
United States made repeated calls to both sides to end human rights
abuses, including the incitement of violence through hate speech, and
implement the peace accords. The United Nations, including the
Secretary-General, Security Council and Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) have taken a proactive
role in denouncing and investigating serious international crimes
committed in Côte d’Ivoire, and indeed on numerous occasions have
called for perpetrators to be held accountable. Since 2000 the OHCHR dispatched three independent commissions of inquiry into the grave
human rights situation in Côte d’Ivoire; the first following the election
violence of October 2000; the second following the violent crackdown
of an opposition demonstration in March 2004; and the third, following
a request by all parties to the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement to investigate
all serious violations of human rights and humanitarian law perpetrated
in Côte d’Ivoire since September 19, 2002.