Côte d’Ivoire
Modest progress in implementing a March 2007 peace accord between the government
and northern-based New Forces rebels resulted in minimal improvement
in respect for human rights in Côte d’Ivoire in 2009. The ongoing political stalemate,
further delays in election preparations and the disarmament of combatants,
and ongoing conflicts over land and citizenship rights continued to threaten
long-term stability.
The redeployment of judicial officials and the handover of power from rebel
authorities to civil administrators in the north offered some hope but few concrete
gains in respect for the rule of law. Government forces and New Forces
rebels continue to engage in predatory and abusive behavior, including widespread
extortion at checkpoints and sexual violence against girls and women,
with near-total impunity. The judicial system remains plagued by corruption, a
lack of independence, and insufficient resources.
Côte d’Ivoire’s key partners, including the United Nations, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and France, increasingly criticized
the Ivorian government for delays in organizing a presidential election (postponed
a fourth time and now likely to be held by early 2010), but remained reluctant
to criticize the country’s human rights record.
Political-Military Stalemate
Throughout 2009 the government of President Laurent Gbagbo missed important
deadlines for the full restoration of state authority to the rebel-held north and for
the disarmament and reintegration of former combatants, as set forth in the
December 2008 supplementary agreement to the March 2007 Ouagadougou
Agreement (the first to have been directly negotiated by the country’s belligerents).
While the Ivorian government announced in May that an oft-postponed
presidential election would take place on November 29, 2009, continued delays
in completing the voter identification and registration process and publishing the
voter list resulted in another postponement to early 2010. More than four years
after the October 2005 expiry of President Gbagbo’s mandate, Ivorians were still
denied the right to freely elect their representatives.
After months-long delays, the redeployment of civil authorities throughout the
country in May—including judicial, police, and financial administrators—remained
incomplete, and was seriously undermined by rebel commanders who continued
to exercise near-complete control over economic, security, and, to a lesser extent,
judicial affairs within their zones.
Meanwhile, the widespread presence of arms due to largely unsuccessful demobilization
and disarmament efforts through 2009 led to concern about the ability
of citizens to exercise their right to campaign and vote free of intimidation and
violence. At this writing, more than 18,000 rebels and 25,000 pro-government
militia members have yet to be disarmed or demobilized. Some 12,000 rebels
participated in demobilization programs as of October 2009, but only one
weapon per an estimated 200-300 “disarmed” combatants was collected. In
addition, the UN Group of Experts monitoring sanctions against Côte d’Ivoire
reported in October that the government and northern rebel commanders are
importing additional arms, in violation of a 2004 UN arms embargo.
Rule of Law and Land Rights
While the redeployment of a number of judges and prosecutors to the north in
January 2009, after an absence of seven years, was a crucial first step toward
restoring the rule of law, inadequate financial support and persistent delays in
the redeployment of police, corrections officers, and magistrates left many courts
in the north ineffective. The judicial system countrywide, but particularly in the
south, remained fraught with corruption and a lack of independence that served
to further entrench a culture of impunity.
Violent conflicts over land rights, particularly in the north and west, were exacerbated
by the chronic failure of the judicial system to resolve disputes, and persistent
xenophobia toward those perceived as non-Ivorian nationals. In the west,
perpetrators of violence often targeted non-indigenous internally displaced persons
returning to their land.
Extortion and Racketeering
The government took no meaningful steps in 2009 to address the problem of
widespread extortion and racketeering by government security forces—including
the police, gendarmerie, military, and customs officials—as well as by government
militia and New Forces rebels. Individuals who refused to pay bribes to corrupt
officials were often beaten or arbitrarily detained. Although checkpoints
remained throughout the country, extortion was most severe in the north, where
New Forces rebels continued to exert almost complete economic control, extorting
the equivalent of millions of US dollars annually at checkpoints and through other
rackets.
Political Violence
Politically motivated violence by pro-government groups, such as the Young
Patriots and the Student Federation of Côte d’Ivoire (FESCI), declined compared to
previous years, but continued impunity for violent crimes fuels fears of unrestrained
intimidation and violence at the time of elections. The voter registration
process was on several occasions disrupted by attacks, particularly in the west, in
which armed men intimidated those standing in line at registration centers, or
confiscated briefcases of registration papers.
Members of FESCI and other pro-government groups continue to enjoy impunity
for common acts of racketeering, vandalism, and intimidation of perceived opponents.
Dozens of armed FESCI members gathered in January to launch an assault
on a rival student union, and in August several hundred FESCI members caused
property damage and threatened the mayor of an Abidjan suburb.
Media outlets allied to either the government or rebel forces on occasion published
provocations to intolerance and violence, but the overall prevalence of
hate speech was significantly lower than during the worst years of the crisis.
Sexual Violence
As in previous years, there were frequent incidents of sexual violence against
women and girls, particularly in the north and west, and incidents of harassment and rape persisted at checkpoints run by government security forces and rebels.
Survivors’ access to health and legal services is extremely limited. Efforts at
investigating and prosecuting cases of sexual violence are hampered by a lack of
political will among police and court officials, and aggravated by severe deficiencies
in the justice system, particularly in the north.
Early in 2009 a New Forces action plan, developed in cooperation with the UN
Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, to combat sexual
violence committed by its troops and in its region showed some promise.
However, the New Forces failed to implement it. The Ivorian government, for its
part, failed to adopt a similar national action plan to combat sexual violence in
government-held areas, despite pressure from the UN and other actors.
Child Labor
The Ivorian government only recently acknowledged the longstanding problem of
child labor in its cocoa industry and has slowly begun implementing, often in
partnership with nongovernmental organizations, programs to help children
return to school. Few are currently benefiting from these programs, however, and
many children continue to perform child labor, including the worst forms of child
labor, in violation of Côte d’Ivoire’s commitments under international law.
Accountability for Past Abuses
Although they were handed to the UN secretary-general in November 2004, the
UN Security Council has still not made public the findings of the UN Commission
of Inquiry into serious violations of human rights and international humanitarian
law in Côte d’Ivoire since September 2002. In 2003 the Ivorian government
accepted the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court over serious crimes.
While ICC officials visited the country in July 2009 at the invitation of civil society,
as in previous years the government was not forthcoming in helping the ICC mission
assess the existence or prospects of genuine national efforts at seeking
accountability for such crimes.
The National Human Rights Commission, which began work in July 2008, submitted
its first annual report in June 2009, but its capacity to fully investigate and report on serious abuses was limited by inadequate funding and support from
the government.
April marked the fifth anniversary of the disappearance of Guy-André Kieffer, a
journalist of dual French-Canadian nationality who was researching alleged illicit
practices involving Ivorian government officials and the cocoa industry. French
investigations into Kieffer’s disappearance have been consistently stymied by a
lack of cooperation from high-level Ivorian authorities.
Key International Actors
Many of Côte d’Ivoire’s key partners, including the UN, ECOWAS, and France,
remained reluctant to publicly criticize the government for its human rights record
or to push for those responsible for war crimes or political violence to be held
accountable, but they increasingly expressed frustrations at the lack of political
will within the government and rebel leadership to organize free and fair elections.
In January 2009 the UN Security Council demanded that Ivorian leaders set
a realistic timeline and, after numerous delays, threatened in September to
impose targeted sanctions against individuals who obstructed election preparations.
The UN Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) remained engaged to monitor the
human rights situation, focusing on child protection and sexual violence, along
with 8,400 military and police personnel to assist with security in the run-up to
elections. France continued its drawdown of troops in Côte d’Ivoire that support
UNOCI, reducing its total to 900 by the end of the year from a high of more than
4,000 in 2006.
The Security Council extended through October 31, 2010, a sanctions regime that
included an arms embargo and a ban on the importation of Ivorian diamonds, as
well as a travel ban and assets freeze on three individuals—two of whom were
implicated in attacks against UN personnel in 2006.
The UN Human Rights Council reviewed Côte d’Ivoire under its Universal Periodic
Review mechanism in December 2009.