Côte d’Ivoire
At the end of 2008, hopes that a March 2007 peace accord would end the six-year
political and military stalemate between government forces and northern-based
rebels were dampened by insufficient progress in disarmament, elections preparations,
and restoration of state authority in the north; an increase in criminal and
political violence; and yet another postponement of the presidential election that
was planned for November 2008.
Government forces and New Forces rebels continue to engage in predatory and
abusive behavior, including widespread extortion at checkpoints and sexual violence
against girls and women, with near-complete impunity. The increasingly
entrenched culture of impunity led to serious concerns about prospects for peaceful
elections and long-term stability.
Côte d’Ivoire’s key partners, notably the United Nations, the European Union,
France, and the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), were
reluctant to bring public pressure to bear on either the government or the rebels
for the slow pace of election preparations, much less for the country’s worrying
human rights situation.
Efforts to End the Political-Military Stalemate
Since the crisis erupted, the UN, France, ECOWAS, and the African Union have all
spearheaded initiatives to end the political-military stalemate in Côte d’Ivoire.
Following a series of unfulfilled peace agreements and the October 2005 expiry of
the five-year constitutional mandate of President Laurent Gbagbo, the UN Security
Council postponed elections for one year under resolution 1633 (2005). Thenprime
minister Charles Konan Banny’s efforts to implement a “roadmap” to elections
soon deadlocked. In response, the Security Council adopted resolution 1721
(2006) extending the mandates of both Gbagbo and Banny for 12 more months,
and granting sweeping powers to the prime minister. Soon after its adoption,
however, President Gbagbo made clear that he would not accept key provisions of
the resolution.
In March 2007 Gbagbo and rebel leader Guillaume Soro signed a peace accord
negotiated with the help of Burkina Faso President Blaise Compaoré. The
Ouagadougou Agreement, the first to have been directly negotiated by the country’s
belligerents, resulted in the appointment of Soro as prime minister in a unity
government and set forth an ambitious 10-month timetable, which, if followed,
would have led to a presidential election by early 2008.
Implementation of the Ouagadougou Agreement
Throughout the year target dates for completion of key provisions of the
Ouagadougou Agreement—disarmament and reintegration of combatants, reunification
of defense and security forces, restoration of state authority in the north,
and voter registration—were missed and pushed further and further back.
At this writing, only 11,364 of some 35,000 rebels and 1,000 of approximately
24,000 militiamen have disarmed. Shockingly, only 10 serviceable weapons have
been collected during the exercise. Observers blamed the delay on the lack of
political will by both sides, disagreement over the number of high-ranking rebels
to be integrated into the national army, and inadequate funding for reintegration
programs. Meanwhile, violent demonstrations by disgruntled ex-combatants and
militiamen caused instability in the north and west. Inadequate progress in disarmament
in turn effectively stalled plans to reintegrate several thousand rebels
into the national army and police force.
Attempts by the government to restore its authority throughout the north were
largely unsuccessful. While some mayors and health and education workers managed
to return, the redeployment of police, judicial, and corrections personnel
was effectively blocked by rebel authorities.
The citizen identification process that ended in September 2008 resulted in the
delivery of approximately 750,000 substitute birth certificates. However, the voter
registration process that commenced on September 15 was interrupted several
times due to attacks on registration offices by pro-government youth groups.
Politically Motivated Violence
There were several incidents of politically motivated violence by pro-government
groups against real or perceived members of the political opposition. In western
Côte d’Ivoire several citizens were prevented from attending citizenship hearings
due to the presence of armed militiamen. In August 2008 pro-government youths
stormed the hotel in which the secretary-general of the opposition Rally of
Republicans (RDR) party was staying. And in October and November there were
numerous attacks on voter registration centers in the commercial capital Abidjan
and in the west during which youths harassed and threatened election workers
and those standing in line, and stole computers and other registration materials.
The attacks disrupted the process and, on one occasion, provoked a temporary
suspension of voter registration.
However, with few exceptions, political leaders from all parties travelled the country
unimpeded. In May President Gbagbo publicly called on a notorious pro-government
student group implicated in committing violent acts in favor of the ruling
party to refrain from such acts.
There were few instances of the vitriolic and xenophobic rhetoric that prevailed at
the height of the crisis in 2002-2003. In August the National Assembly passed a
law criminalizing racism, xenophobia, and tribalism, providing for sentences of
up to 20 years if the infraction is committed in the media, during a political gathering,
or by a government functionary. Critics noted that certain provisions of the
law are written so broadly that they threaten freedom of expression.
Extortion and Racketeering
Countrywide, both rebels and members of the police, gendarmerie, army, and
customs engaged in frequent acts of extortion, racketeering, intimidation, and
physical assault at roadside checkpoints. Government efforts—including an open
acknowledgment of and a parliamentary inquiry into the problem, sting operations,
and limited efforts to prosecute alleged perpetrators—had at year’s end
failed to considerably reduce the level of these crimes. Racketeering was blamed
for elevating already high food prices. UN efforts to dismantle numerous checkpoints
were usually followed by the mounting of fresh barricades.
Criminality and the Rule of Law
Throughout the year, ordinary Ivorians were subjected to frequent acts of violent
crime, including armed robbery, highway banditry, murder, torture, and sexual
abuse, for which the perpetrators enjoyed near-total impunity. These incidents
most frequently occurred in the west, in the rebel-held north, and within a buffer
zone formerly occupied by international peacekeepers. Throughout 2008 neither
the government nor the rebel leadership took significant steps to investigate or
hold accountable those responsible.
In the government-controlled south, deficiencies in the judicial system, such as
widespread corruption and lack of independence from the executive branch, pose
a significant impediment to victims seeking justice and to rebuilding respect for
the rule of law. Those unable to bribe judges and other officials are routinely
denied justice.
Rebel leaders in the north appear to lack both capacity and will to hold accountable
members of their increasingly fractured forces. Internecine struggles
between commanders led to numerous acts of arbitrary detention, torture, forced
disappearance, and murder by feuding rebel bands. Limited efforts at justice are
meted out arbitrarily by zone commanders in complete disregard for even most
basic due process. Extended pretrial detention is commonplace, including for
those accused of petty crimes, and there are credible reports that members of the
New Forces use beatings and torture to extract confessions.
The UN conducted numerous training sessions with police, judicial, and corrections
personnel, and together with the EU rehabilitated court buildings and corrections
facilities in the north that were destroyed during the 2002-2003 hostilities.
Inter-communal clashes over land rights in the west resulted in numerous deaths
and other abuses and slowed the return of tens of thousands of people displaced
during the 2002-2003 armed conflict.
Sexual Violence
There were frequent incidents of sexual violence against women and girls, including
those committed during assaults by armed robbers on public transportation
vehicles, and to a lesser extent at checkpoints manned by New Forces rebels and
government security forces. In some cases, particularly in western Côte d’Ivoire,
victims of sexual violence are targeted on the basis of their nationality or ethnic
group. Survivors’ access to health and legal services is extremely limited. Efforts
to prosecute cases are hampered by deficiencies in the judicial system, particularly
in the north, and the regular dismissal of cases due to out-of-court settlements
between families of the victims and perpetrators.
Accountability for Past Abuses
The UN Security Council has still not made public the findings of the UN
Commission of Inquiry into serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law since September 2002, which was handed to the UN secretarygeneral
in November 2004. In September 2003 the Ivorian government accepted
the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court (ICC) over serious crimes.
However, as in previous years, the government consistently undermined a
planned ICC mission to assess the possibility of opening an investigation into
such crimes.
Key International Actors
Since 2004 the ruling party has effectively employed intimidation and political
pressure to neutralize the criticism and minimize the influence of the UN, EU, and
France. Throughout 2008 these key partners and ECOWAS remained reluctant to
publicly criticize Ivorian actors for the slow implementation of the Ouagadougou
Agreement, much less for their role in perpetuating serious human rights problems.
Since 2004 the UN has maintained a peacekeeping mission, the UN Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI), which at year’s end had 8,000 peacekeepers deployed
countrywide, supported by some 1,800 French troops. In 2008 the UN Peacebuilding Fund and Support Office approved $5 million to support reintegration
programs for ex-combatants and other programs.