Côte d’Ivoire
A long-delayed presidential vote on October 31 left President Laurent Gbagbo and
former prime minister Alassane Ouattara in a run-off scheduled for November 28.
Optimism among Ivorians and international partners that the country was moving
toward reunification after a calm first round was tempered by the ethnic-regional
split among voters, as well as concerns that incendiary rhetoric by the candidates’
supporters could lead to incidents of communal and political violence. A successful
election would signal an end to the political uncertainty that has beleaguered
the country for more than five years.
Meanwhile the almost singular focus on elections by the Ivorian government and
its international partners resulted in grossly insufficient efforts to address disarmament,
human rights abuses, and deficiencies within rule of law institutions.
Ivorians continue to suffer high levels of sexual violence, banditry, and land conflict
with little recourse in a justice system plagued by corruption, lack of independence,
and insufficient resources. The state institutions mandated to protect
the population and investigate and hold accountable perpetrators of serious
crimes continue to engage in unprofessional and predatory conduct, including
the open extortion of citizens at checkpoints throughout the country.
Elections and a Continuing Political-Military Stalemate
In the first round of presidential elections, almost 80 percent of eligible Ivorians
cast their votes in a process that international observers deemed to be free and
fair. However, none of the candidates received 50 percent of the vote, resulting in
a run-off between Gbagbo and Ouattara. Votes were cast sharply along ethnic and
regional lines during the first round, with Gbagbo controlling the south and west
and Ouattara the north. There were widespread concerns that a contested second
round would fail to end the country’s long-term political uncertainty.
Ivorian authorities made minimal effort to disarm former combatants in 2010,
allowing for the continued abundance of arms, particularly in the rebel-held north
and the formerly pro-government militia stronghold in the far west of the country.
As of August the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) had collected
only 715 arms during their disarmament programs for rebel and militia forces combined, despite the government’s census of 70,000 combatants and claims
that around 30,000 combatants had already been demobilized. Rebel forces were
increasingly unwilling to cooperate with inspectors from the UN Group of Experts
tasked with monitoring compliance of a 2004 arms embargo. The government’s
Republican Guard has refused outright to cooperate since the embargo was
imposed.
Rule of Law
The judicial system remains marked by corruption and lack of independence. The
planned redeployment of judicial officials to the north progressed slowly in 2010,
although several tribunals and correctional facilities were able to reopen after
being in rebel hands for seven years. However, Forces Nouvelles rebels’ refusal to
relinquish de facto control of much of the north, including prisons and security,
hampered the judiciary’s ability to be effective and independent.
Land Rights
Violent conflicts over land rights remain a persistent problem in southern and
western Côte d’Ivoire, exacerbated by the chronic failure of the judicial system to
resolve disputes. Many such conflicts pit indigenous populations against immigrant
communities. In May at least 10 people were killed in a clash around Mont
Peko, one of many protected forest regions where land is illegally sold and turned
into cocoa fields, while more than 20 people were seriously injured during a
September confrontation in Fresco. In the far west, almost 900 ethnic Burkinabé
internally displaced persons remain within a camp outside Guiglo due to fear of
retribution from the indigenous population should they return to their land.
Extortion and Racketeering
As in past years the government took no meaningful steps to address widespread
extortion and racketeering by government security forces and rebels. In the government-
controlled south, police, gendarmes, and customs officials routinely
demand bribes at checkpoints. Individuals who refuse to pay bribes to corrupt
officials are refused passage, intimidated, and often beaten or arbitrarily detained. Immigrant populations and other perceived outsiders are targeted for
particularly severe treatment.
Extortion remains even more problematic in the north, where Forces Nouvelles
rebels continue to exert almost complete economic control over the population.
The rebels reap the equivalent of hundreds of millions of dollars annually at
checkpoints and through rackets on businesses, particularly the lucrative cocoa
and timber trade. In late August rebel leaders promised that forces would stay in
their barracks during the two months preceding the elections. However, at this
writing, many are still illegally manning checkpoints.
Political Violence
The first round of presidential voting occurred with few reported incidents of violence
or intimidation. However, in the prelude to the run-off between Gbagbo and
Ouattara, inflammatory rhetoric by party media organs and incidents of intimidation
by party youth wings intensified. At this writing there were increasing fears
that intimidation and violence might mar the second round and the announcement
of results.
Tensions flared in early February as a result of disputes over the voter list.
Following reports that judicial authorities were controversially removing names
from the voter list, protests turned violent in several towns across Côte d’Ivoire,
leaving several persons dead or seriously injured. Government buildings were
sacked in Man, Bouaké, and Vavoua. President Gbagbo dissolved the government
and electoral commission on February 12, citing the protests and accusations that
the electoral commission’s head committed fraud, leading to additional protests
throughout the country. Law enforcement officials fired on demonstrators in
Gagnoa on February 19, killing five. An investigation by UNOCI’s human rights
division found that Ivorian security and defense forces committed serious violations
in suppressing these protests and riots, including extrajudicial killings,
physical violence, and illegal arrests and detentions.
Sexual Violence
Sexual violence remained pervasive throughout the country. Problems are particularly
acute in the far west of Côte d’Ivoire, where armed men sexually assault
women and girls in their homes, as they tend to their fields, as they walk to or
from the market, and after hauling them from transport vehicles. Victims are typically
attacked during a robbery. The attacks are especially common during the
cocoa harvest and on market days. Victims’ access to health and legal services
remains extremely limited. Attempts to investigate and prosecute cases of sexual
violence are hampered by lack of political will among police and court officials,
and aggravated by severe deficiencies in the justice system, particularly in the
north and west.
Accountability for Past Abuses
Impunity for serious crimes committed in Côte d’Ivoire remains a major concern.
The UN Security Council has still not made public the findings of the UN
Commission of Inquiry into serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law since September 2002, delivered to the UN secretary-general in
November 2004. In 2003 the Ivorian government accepted the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court over serious crimes committed in violation of international
law. However, it has since repeatedly failed to facilitate ICC initiatives to
assess national efforts on accountability for such crimes, including to determine
whether the ICC should open an investigation there.
The National Human Rights Commission, which began work in July 2008, submitted
its second annual report in August 2010. The commission still failed to meet
the standards laid out in the Paris Principles because it remained politicized, not
effectively independent from the executive, and inadequately funded.
Key International Actors
Côte d’Ivoire’s key partners – including the UN, the Economic Community of West
African States, the European Union, and France – grew increasingly frustrated
with election delays, and throughout the year exerted considerable pressure on
the Ivorian government to hold elections in 2010. They also provided significant financial support for election preparations. However, these international partners
remained reluctant to publicly criticize the government for its human rights
record, or to push for accountability for those responsible for war crimes, political
violence, or rampant crime.
With the notable exception of the August report on human rights violations during
the February demonstrations, UNOCI continued to fail to make its statistics and
reporting on human rights abuses in the country publicly available.
UN Security Council Resolution 1933, adopted in June, extended UNOCI’s mandate
through December, authorizing over 8,400 military and police personnel. In
advance of elections the Security Council agreed to deploy 500 additional peacekeeping
troops, and UNOCI was given a clearer mandate regarding the protection
of civilians. However, proactive efforts to stem rampant violence, including sexual
violence, remained nominal. France maintained 900 troops in Côte d’Ivoire to
support UNOCI.
The Security Council extended a sanctions regime through April 30, 2011, including
an arms embargo, a ban on the import of Ivorian diamonds, and travel bans
and asset freezes on three individuals, two of whom were implicated in attacks
against UN personnel in 2006. In its August report, UNOCI recommended an
exception allowing the Ivorian government to import anti-riot equipment, citing
the lack of such equipment as a contributing factor to the February abuses by
security forces.
In January 2010 the UN Human Rights Council published a report on Côte d’Ivoire
under its Universal Periodic Review mechanism. Côte d’Ivoire committed to implement
recommendations on the rule of law and to end impunity for sexual violence
by bringing perpetrators to justice. However, virtually no efforts were made during
the year to achieve these goals.