Cte dIvoire
During 2013, the government of President Alassane Ouattara made progress in
creating the legislative framework for greater respect for human rights and in
ensuring better discipline within the security forces. Inadequate headway was
made in strengthening the judiciarys independence, ensuring accountability
for crimes committed during the 2010-2011 post-election crisis, and addressing
root causes of the countrys decade of violencenotably impunity, corruption,
land conflict, and the proliferation of small arms.
Security force abuses decreased from 2012, in part due to government efforts.
However, members of the security forces continued to engage in numerous
human rights violations and acts of criminality, including arbitrary arrests, cruel
and inhuman treatment of detainees, and extortion at checkpoints.
One-sided justice for the post-election crisis undermined reconciliation and,
together with ongoing weaknesses within the judiciary, hindered progress in
establishing the rule of law. While Ivorian authorities have investigated and
charged numerous supporters of former President Laurent Gbagbo for their role
in the post-election violence, there has been a near complete absence of
accountability for serious crimes committed by President Ouattaras forces. The
government made some efforts to improve access to justice for other crimes,
including by opening a new tribunal in western Cte dIvoire, but corruption and
the judiciarys lack of independence remain a general concern.
The countrys security situation improved, though land conflict simmered in
western Cte dIvoire with ineffective government response, contributing to several
cross-border attacks from Liberia and small-scale inter-communal violence.
As disarmament proceeded slowly, the country remained awash in guns, often
in the hands of disgruntled former combatants.
Some of Cte dIvoires partners, notably the United Nations and the United
States, showed more willingness to criticize the lack of accountability for past
crimes, while others, particularly France, remained largely silent. The
International Criminal Court continued investigations, though many Ivorians
criticized the lack of progress in the investigation of crimes by pro-Ouattara
forces. 
National Justice for Post-Election Violence
The Ouattara government has failed to deliver on its promise to render fair and
impartial justice for crimes committed during the 2010-2011 post-election crisis.
This crisis was the culmination of a decade of politico-ethnic conflict in which
security forces, rebel forces, and allied militia groups regularly committed serious
crimes with complete impunity.
On the Gbagbo side, Ivorian authorities have charged more than 150 civilian
and military leaders, including at least 55 with serious violent crimes. However,
they have failed to charge a single member of the pro-Ouattara Republican
Forces for the serious crimes they committed during the crisis. Ongoing investigations
also appear one-sided. A national commission of inquiry reported in
August 2012 that both sides had committed hundreds of summary executions,
yet the UN reported that, as of July 2013, only three of the 207 investigations
subsequently opened relate to perpetrators from pro-Ouattara forces.
Military trials against several key military leaders under Gbagbo were set to
start in late November. At this writing, civilian courts had yet to begin trials for
post-election crimes, meaning that most pro-Gbagbo defendants have languished
in pre-trial detention for two and a half years, violating their right to a
trial within a reasonable time. Ivorian authorities did provisionally release 14
pro-Gbagbo defendants in early August.
International Criminal Court
On September 30, the International Criminal Court (ICC) unsealed an arrest warrant
against, Charles Bl Goud, the youth minister under Gbagbo, for four
counts of crimes against humanity, following the unsealing in 2012 of arrest
warrants against Laurent and Simone Gbagbo. Many Ivorians grew disenchanted
with the lack of progress in the investigation of crimes by pro-Ouattara
forces, although the Office of the Prosecutor stressed that its investigations
would ultimately target both sides.
On February 15, Cte dIvoire ratified the Rome Statute, taking a positive step in
the fight against impunity. In October, 18 months after the ICC issued an arrest
warrant against Simone Gbagbo, the Ivorian government filed an admissibility
challenge contesting her transfer on the grounds that national proceedings are ongoing for substantially the same crimes. The government has yet to respond
to the warrant against Bl Goud, raising further concerns about its intent to
cooperate fully with the ICC.
In June, the ICCs Pre-Trial Chamber asked the prosecutor to consider providing
additional evidence in the case against Laurent Gbagbo, as it decides whether
or not to confirm charges for four counts of crimes against humanity.
Security Force Abuses
The government and military prioritized human rights training for the armed
forces, perhaps contributing to fewer abuses. However, members of the security
forces continued to carry out arbitrary arrests and detentions; cruel and inhuman
treatment of detainees; and frequent acts of extortion and theft at road
checkpoints. The government took occasional action to reduce checkpoint
extortion, including arresting some soldiers involved, though the problem
remained widespread.
Authorities made little progress towards accountability for serious security
force abuses committed since Ouattara took office, including the July 2012
attack on the Nahibly internally displaced persons camp, which left at least 12
dead; and the widespread arbitrary detention, cruel and inhuman treatment,
and torture by soldiers that occurred in August and September 2012 following
several attacks on military installations.
There have been no prosecutions for these crimes, although authorities have
started investigations into the Nahibly case. The military prosecutor did investigate
and prosecute some soldiers in other, less politically sensitive cases,
including for murder and theft. While these prosecutions were significant, they
also suggest that the failure to prosecute in more sensitive cases stems from
lack of political will.
Land Rights
During the post-election crisis, violence displaced hundreds of thousands of
people, either as refugees or internally within Cte dIvoire. Many people have
returned to find their land illegally taken over through illegal sales or, in some cases, hostile occupationsviolating their property rights and rights as returning
refugees.
In August, the government passed reforms to land tenure and nationality laws,
rightly recognizing their link to recent politico-military violence. However, it
failed to adequately support local administrative and judicial mechanisms
involved in resolving land conflicts, leaving many people unable to access their
land more than two years after the crisis. Several attacks in March 2013 on
Ivorian villages near the Liberian border were related to land dispossession,
showing the potential for future violence if the government does not ensure the
fair resolution of land disputes.
Disarmament and Security Sector Reform
The Ivorian government made slow progress in security sector reform and in
disarming tens of thousands of former combatants who fought during the crisis.
According to the UN, the government had by June 2013 disarmed and demobilized
around 6,000 former combatants. Some armed former combatants
engaged in violent criminality, while others staged demonstrations in several
towns protesting the slow progress of reintegration programs.
There was improvement in 2013 in returning basic security functions from the
military to the police and gendarmerie, but the military maintained a presence
at road checkpoints and in leading the response to internal security threats.
Although less visibly present than in 2011 and 2012, many youth who fought
with pro-Ouattara forces during the crisis continued to perform security duties
under military commanders. Several military commanders implicated in serious
human rights abuses remain in key positions.
Sexual Violence
Sexual violence remained a major problem. The UN reported at least 100 cases
of sexual violence in the first half of 2013, including many against children.
Although not required by law, Ivorian authorities often refuse to undertake
investigations unless the victim presents a medical certificate, for which she
must pay. Accountability for sexual violence is further undermined by the dysfunctional
state of the cour dassises, the Ivorian courts mandated to try such
cases. Authorities often have to downgrade rape to indecent assault, which can
be prosecuted in other courts but carries significantly less penalties.
With assistance from the UN, the Ivorian government is finalizing a national
strategy to combat sexual violence. The government and military have also prioritized
reducing sexual violence by the security forces. While these represent
important steps forward, deficiencies among law enforcement and the judicial
system continued to hinder investigations and prosecutions of most sexual violence
cases. In addition, victims access to health and psychosocial services
remains limited, particularly outside Abidjan.
Corruption
The UN Group of Experts, appointed by the Security Council to monitor the
sanctions regime in Cte dIvoire, reported in April that former rebel warlords
now commanders in the Ivorian militaryare plundering millions of dollars from
the Ivorian economy through smuggling and a parallel tax system on cocoa,
timber, and other export goods. Such corrupt practices could potentially undermine
efforts to improve access to health and education, among other rights.
In November, 14 former cocoa sector officials, originally charged in 2008, were
convicted for embezzling hundreds of millions of dollars between 2002 and
2008. Authorities have yet to credibly investigate the role of high-level political
officials also believed to have been implicated and to have used the embezzled
funds, in part, to purchase arms.
Key International Actors
Many of Cte dIvoires international partners, including France, remained largely
silent on the lack of accountability for past crimes, failing to learn from Cte
dIvoires own history the dangerous costs of impunity.
The European Union, France, and the United States supported justice and security
sector reform, along with the UN mission in Cte dIvoire (UNOCI), which
also monitored human rights abuses and helped implement human rights training
for the security forces.
The UN Human Rights Councils (HRC) independent expert on human rights in
Cte dIvoire published reports in January and June, highlighting, among other
things, concerns about the one-sided nature of justice for post-election crimes
and its impact on reconciliation.