Civilian Protection and
Middle East Armed Groups:
In Search of Authoritative Local Voices
By Joe Stork
The Middle East has over many years been wracked by political violence and
armed conflicts in which governments and armed groups alike have shown a pernicious
disregard for the lives of civilians. When they do so during armed conflict,
they violate the core principle of international humanitarian law—civilian immunity—
which requires a warring party to distinguish between the civilian population
and military targets, and to direct attacks only against military targets. Outside of
armed conflicts, such attacks on civilians may amount to crimes against
humanity.
Many of the armed groups in the Middle East responsible for breaching this core
principal by deliberately or indiscriminately killing civilians assert an Islamic identity,
and some justify their decision to take up arms in Islamic terms. Exception to
the principle of civilian immunity is invoked on political and sometimes religious
grounds.
It would be hard to exaggerate the impact of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the
evolution of popular views of political violence and armed conflict in the region,
including attitudes toward civilian protection. And owing in large measure to the
prominent international dimension of the conflict, human rights proponents as
well as governments and groups resistant to human rights criticism have scrutinized
the stance of outside actors, particularly the United States, for evidence of
partisanship and double standards in monitoring and protesting violations of
international law.
Against this backdrop, what prospects exist for identifying authoritative voices in
majority Muslim countries of the Middle East who can advance civilian protection,
by discussing these issues openly and in ways that demonstrate the shared prohibition
in Islamic ethics and international humanitarian law against targeting
persons not participating in armed hostilities?
Civilian Protection in Human Rights and Humanitarian Law
International humanitarian law (IHL), or the laws of war, does not address
whether a decision to take up arms is legal or justified. Instead, it is concerned
with the methods and means of military operations and the treatment of noncombatants
(civilians, prisoners-of-war, wounded fighters, etc). A critical feature
of IHL is that it applies to all parties to an armed conflict, that is, both states and
non-state armed groups. Were the laws of war to apply to only one side to an
armed conflict, be it the military aggressor or only a recognized state, then compliance
would quickly fall apart. Likewise, violations by one side’s forces do not
permit or justify violations by their adversary.
The principle of civilian immunity prohibits attacks that target civilians, as well as
attacks that indiscriminately harm civilians—that is, in which the attacking party
does not or cannot distinguish between civilians and military objectives. States
and non-state armed groups responsible for such attacks are committing violations
of IHL. War crimes are serious violations of IHL committed with criminal
intent—that is, deliberately or recklessly—by individuals. Crimes against humanity
are serious criminal acts committed during peacetime or armed conflict that
are part of a widespread or systematic attack against a specific civilian population.
In the Middle East, the disregard for civilian immunity has resulted in war
crimes and crimes against humanity by members of both national armed forces
and opposition armed groups.
Attitudes toward Civilian Harm
For some Middle Eastern governments, the path to power was exceedingly violent.
The conduct of liberation wars such as Algeria’s in the 1950s in turn helped
to shape the guerrilla movements that developed in the Middle East, particularly
among Palestinians.1 With such legacies, habits of unrestrained assault on adversaries
and their populations were ingrained in the conduct of thoroughly secular
parties to various conflicts. When in the 1980s and 1990s new political movements
claiming Islamic legitimacy emerged, the armed groups they spawned—in
Egypt and Algeria, for example—soon adopted similarly unbounded tactics in
their conduct of armed violence, initially directed at the often-brutal security
apparatuses of the states they were fighting, but soon also at “soft” civilian targets. Although these groups invoked to varying degrees a discourse they claimed
to be grounded in religious doctrine, the violence they perpetrated against civilians
and other non-combatants reflected and extended the illegal and murderous
practices of secular actors.
Since the Palestinian Islamist groups Hamas and Islamic Jihad initiated suicide
bombing attacks against Israeli civilians in 1995-96, Middle East human rights
activists and society until recently had little to say on the issue, reflecting a general
perception in the Middle East that illegal Israeli occupation practices, for the
most part enjoying international tolerance if not support, made such violence
unavoidable and even legitimate.2 To be sure, human rights proponents did not
endorse suicide bombings against civilians, but neither did they criticize them,
either because they shared the approving sentiments of opinion-shapers in those
countries or because they did not feel secure enough to challenge those sentiments.
One discussion of the issue in the late 1990s, called “The Operations of Hamas
from a Human Rights Perspective,” appeared as part of a booklet produced by the
Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies.3 In his introductory remarks, institute
director Bahey el-Din Hassan observed that the Hamas bombings had stirred up
considerable controversy within Egyptian human rights circles and “particularly in
the human rights movement in Palestine.” While a number of participants were
critical of the bombings, only the comments of political analyst Muhammad al-
Sayed Sa`id showed awareness of international humanitarian law and the core
principle of respecting civilian immunity. One of the few human rights activists
recorded as participating in the discussion endorsed the view that because of
Israel’s illegal occupation “there is no such thing as ‘an Israeli civilian.’” Political
analyst Usama al-Ghazali Harb was sharply critical of Hamas’s attacks but on a
strictly instrumentalist basis: the question of whether the attacks violate human
rights, he said, “does not interest me.... Did these operations advance
[Palestinian] interests?” Because they do not, “I say that—regardless of the issue
of human rights— they are operations worthy of condemnation.”
In late 2000, after already limited Palestinian-Israeli negotiations collapsed and
the Al Aqsa intifada erupted, Hamas and Islamic Jihad initiated suicide bombings
against civilians in Israel in January 2001, joined by the Fatah-affiliated Al Aqsa Martyrs Brigade in late 2001.4 The number of attacks and number of victims
spiked in 2002, but attacks and civilian deaths continued through early 2007.
Palestinian criticism of suicide bombings targeting civilians surfaced publicly at
the end of 2001. Critics argued that these actions were ineffective and counterproductive.
In one public intervention, Birzeit University professors Rema
Hammami and Musa Budeiri wrote that the bombings were “isolated from a
strategic reading of Israeli society’s reaction to and understanding of the uprising
and of Palestinian resistance in general.”5 That criticism grew considerably when
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon ordered the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) to reoccupy
the West Bank after a Hamas suicide bombing at a Passover celebration in
Netanya killed 29 Israelis. On June 19, 2002, and on several subsequent days, the
daily Al-Quds carried a full-page petition initially signed by 55 academics, writers,
and prominent figures, which called on the armed groups to cease “military operations
targeting civilians in Israel” on the grounds that they deepen hatred
between Palestinians and Israelis while strengthening “the enemies of peace on
the Israeli side” and “pushing the area toward an existential war” between
Israelis and Palestinians.6
Signatories to the petition included human rights activists Iyad al-Sarraj and
Khader Shrikat, but Arab and Palestinian human rights groups as such largely
remained silent, reflecting the extent of division among members on the issue.
One element in this was a tendency to conflate the question of armed resistance
against legitimate military targets and attacks against Israeli civilians, as well as
frustration with the persistent failure of Israel’s supporters internationally to hold
Israeli leaders accountable for numerous killings of Palestinian civilians in the
West Bank and Gaza Strip by the Israeli military. The silence may also have
reflected uneasiness among human rights activists about their sometimes thin
support in society and among political elites, and wariness about testing that
support with a public stance that would surely attract public criticism from the
armed groups and their partisans. Palestinian rights activist Fateh Azzam, reviewing
the record of the leading Palestinian human rights group, Al-Haq, wrote in
2004 that “a serious gap” in its “honorable human rights record” was its “failure
to take a clear public position on the problem of armed attacks against civilian
targets inside Israel during the first three years of the current intifada.”7 Human Rights Watch, when it released a highly critical investigative report on
Palestinian suicide bombings against Israeli civilians in November 2002, encountered
condemnations from some human rights activists in the region. There were
indications, however, that this initial hostility moderated in the following period.
The Gaza-based Palestinian independent legislator (and briefly Minister of
Foreign Affairs in a Palestinian Authority unity government) Ziad Abu Amr said
that the report “helped define the public debate, allowing people to speak critically
about these attacks,” although in his view the perpetrator groups remained
“trapped by their own past positions and rhetoric.”8 Palestinian journalists in the
West Bank agreed that the report “helped raise questions about the [suicide]
bombings.”9
Arab human rights groups, for their part, did move on the issue as well, initially in
a collective fashion. The “Rabat Declaration” from a meeting of Arab civil society
NGOs in December 2004 criticized “the silence or the collaboration of the majority
of Arab governments with a religious discourse and fatwa justifying terrorism
issued by [Islamic] jurists, some of them working for religious institutions subject
to the state.” The declaration also spoke against “terrorist groups in Iraq” that
“bombarded civil institutions, abducted and murdered police officers as well as
Iraqi and non-Iraqi civilians.” Most significantly, with regard to the Palestine-
Israel conflict, “The conference condemns targeting and terrorizing civilians on
both sides.”10 In 2006 several human rights organizations in the region did make
public statements critical of armed attacks against Israeli civilians by Palestinian
and Lebanese armed groups. In July Al-Haq issued a public appeal stating that
the armed groups “may not resort to reciprocity as a legal justification” for violations
of humanitarian law.11
Over the past several years, I and colleagues from Human Rights Watch met in
various Arab countries with civil society activists, editors, and religious leaders to
discuss attacks against civilians as serious human rights abuses and violations of
humanitarian law.12 With what we called the Civilian Protection Initiative, Human
Rights Watch sought to engage with activists and opinion-shapers across the
region on the question of attacks targeting civilians, and to encourage them to
criticize publicly such attacks when they occur, even when the perpetrators
espouse a cause that enjoys widespread popular support, such as ending Israel’s
military occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Our previous experience investigating and reporting on such violence in the Occupied Palestinian
Territories, Iraq, and Egypt suggested that greater engagement around these
issues by local human rights activists and sympathizers would be essential in any
effort to persuade the perpetrators to cease such attacks.13 The views of our
interlocutors provide a complicated portrait of the state of elite opinion regarding
civilian protection.
First, virtually every interlocutor stressed the need to appreciate the context of
military occupation in terms of killings in Israel and Iraq. For some, this context
was everything: end the occupation and the violence will end. “Stop the injustice
that makes me tolerate [attacks against Israeli civilians]” was how one former
high-ranking Jordanian official put it. “We are fighting an occupation that violates
[international humanitarian] law every day,” said a West Bank leader of the
reformist wing of Fatah. International humanitarian law, however, obliges all parties
to an armed conflict to respect civilian immunity, including in resisting military
occupation.14
Second, almost all interlocutors made a point of distinguishing between the
attacks on civilians in Iraq, which they condemned, and attacks by Palestinians
against Israeli civilians. “Denunciations of Iraqi attacks have been clear, no one
justifies them,” said a Dubai-based Islamist lawyer and human rights activist,
“but Palestine remains outside of such a critique.” Perhaps the most common
refrain in these discussions is the notion that the Palestine/Israel conflict is
“unique”: for persons who agreed with the basic principle that civilians should be
immune from attack, Palestine is the “but” that almost invariably follows. On this
point, there is no discernible difference between Islamists or Islamic leaders, on
the one hand, and secularists and leftists, on the other. This Palestine exceptionalism
takes several forms. A common one is the assertion that Israeli society is
militarized to the point that “there are no civilians there.” Another is that the disparity
of arms between Israel and Palestinian armed groups gives the latter leeway
to use whatever means they can devise. Neither of these rationales can justify
targeting civilians.15
The greatest readiness to criticize Palestinian attacks against Israeli civilians, perhaps
not surprisingly, was among Palestinians themselves. Journalists and writers
in the West Bank appeared to have no problem accepting that targeting civilians was wrong in all circumstances. They indicated interest in being part of a public
service campaign to promote awareness of this humanitarian principle, its history,
and what it means in the Palestinian context—although they were emphatically
not proposing to initiate such an effort. Several spoke of a “culture of fear” of
running afoul of the armed groups and their partisans.
This vulnerability is even more pronounced in nearby countries where solidarity
with Palestinians has taken on a doctrinaire quality, notably Egypt and Jordan. An
Egyptian political activist from an Islamist background and well disposed toward
human rights concerns said he condemned Palestinian attacks against civilians,
but “I can’t convince other intellectuals to join me, and the broader public is more
difficult yet. We need a package solution. In our environment I or others can easily
be isolated as a traitor or agent. We need to emphasize abuses by the superior
power.”16
In the view of many with whom we spoke, Western human rights groups also
betray elements of double standards. Human Rights Watch, they said, criticizes
Israeli violations, to be sure, but in their view the language tends to be more
restrained than when discussing Palestinian violations. “We don’t feel justice in
the way international human rights organizations view conflict in our region,” one
Egyptian activist said.17
Probably the most difficult challenge to efforts to promote public criticism of
Palestinian attacks on Israeli civilians was what many interlocutors argued was
Israeli impunity in the face of its considerably more extensive (and in their view
more egregious) violations of international humanitarian law, and the failure of
those states that proclaim their fidelity to human rights to hold Israel—or, in the
case of Iraq, the United States—accountable. “Show me that international
humanitarian law matters” was their bottom line. In the words of a West Bank
Hamas spokesperson, “We will follow [IHL] if we have a guarantee” that Israel will
also abide. At present, he said, Israel left Palestinians with few options.18
The intense international attention focused recently on the report of the United
Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict (“the Goldstone report”), with
its findings of serious laws of war violations by Israel and Palestinian armed
groups and its call for their referral to international justice mechanisms if they do not mount credible domestic investigations, has highlighted in an unprecedented
way the importance of accountability for war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Much will hinge on whether and to what extent the international community uses
this opportunity to promote respect for international humanitarian law principles
by addressing the important element of accountability. As discussed below, the
laws of war prohibition against targeting civilians is absolute, and does not rest
on compliance by an adversary.19
Human rights organizations in the region put forth one further argument for
remaining silent on this issue. Their focus is on abuses committed by their own
governments, which are all too ready to pounce on any opportunity to discredit
these groups. Those governments and their cronies dominate the media. If, say,
the Tunisian League for Human Rights were to condemn Palestinian armed groups
for attacks on Israeli civilians, the Tunisian government-controlled media would
depict their action as proof of their “Zionist” or at least pro-Western agenda and
their betrayal of the Palestinian cause. If the Tunisian media were free, a group
like the League might be able to fight back, but it is not. In this situation, these
organizations are protective of their credibility and carefully monitor their political
capital so that they can continue to monitor abuses by their own governments,
and they would find the risks too high in coming out with statements criticizing
Hamas or other Palestinian groups.
Our meetings also involved conversations with groups perpetrating violations.
Members of groups that have carried out attacks against Israeli civilians knew
basic IHL standards and claimed to have no quarrel with them. Sometimes they
excuse the harm to civilians as unavoidable, in terms not that different from IHL
notions of “collateral damage.” But in reality these groups have a major quarrel
with those standards, particularly regarding non-reciprocity—the principle that
violations by one party to a conflict do not permit or justify violations by the
other. The groups are familiar with the prohibition against indiscriminate attacks
or those that target civilians, but they made clear that they were willing to spare
civilians only to the extent that their adversary—Israel—did so as well. “Targeting
civilians is utterly unacceptable,” a Hezbollah leader told us in early July 2006.
But in the same conversation, this spokesman acknowledged that Hezbollah did
carry out such attacks as reprisals for Israeli attacks that killed Lebanese civilians.
“How can you counter Israeli targeting of your civilians? You have to punish [them],” he said.20 Discussing Iraq, however, he was unequivocal: “What we consider
resistance there targets only military occupiers,” he said. “Those who target
civilians are terrorists.” A week after this interview, the war in Lebanon erupted
and Hezbollah and Israel systematically traded indiscriminate attacks that killed
and wounded civilians on the other side.
Some Hamas leaders have been more blunt in asserting that it is permissible to
target an adversary’s civilians in reprisal. Under IHL, a belligerent reprisal is an
otherwise unlawful action permitted in exceptional circumstances as an enforcement
measure against unlawful acts by an adversary. Reprisals against civilians
are broadly if not universally condemned by states. As a matter of customary IHL,
reprisals are never permitted in non-international armed conflicts—those not
between states.21
“It’s not targeting civilians,” Ismail Abu Shanab told Human Rights Watch. “It is
saying if you attack mine I’ll attack yours.” Abu Shanab continued: “If you ask us
to comply [with IHL], that is not difficult. Islamic teachings support the Geneva
Conventions. They are accepted. When it comes to the other side, if they don’t
abide, we cannot be obliged to them, except insofar as we can achieve something.”
22 In Beirut, Human Rights Watch also met with Usama Hamdan, who represents
Hamas in Lebanon. His comments demonstrated that the policy of
reprisal went hand in hand with a tendency to erase the operative distinctions
between civilian and combatant in the case of Israel: “Israel is a democratic state
and popular pressure on this issue could change policies, but those civilians are
supporting [IDF] attacks on our civilians.”23 In addition to justifying attacks
against civilians, which international humanitarian law absolutely prohibits, this
is a recipe for collective punishment, which is also a serious violation of the laws
of war.
Myths and Realities of Islamist Motivation
Few of those we have met with to discuss these issues, including Islamists and
Islamic scholars or representatives of Islamist groups that have been responsible
for targeting civilians, suggested that Islamic law differed significantly from international
humanitarian law when it comes to prohibiting attacks on civilians.
Typical was the comment of an Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood leader. “One crime does not justify another,” he said. “Muslims are being diverted from Islam,
including the rules of war.”24
This is not to argue that religion, religious history, and religious symbols play no
role in facilitating attitudes of disregard for humanitarian principles. Invocations
of religious doctrine are important in recruitment of fighters (or “martyrs”) and
enlisting them in attacks against civilians. But we encountered little or no effort
on the part of our interlocutors, even those who were Islamist activists or religious
leaders, to justify violations of the principle of civilian immunity from attack
on grounds that such attacks are permitted, or not prohibited, under Islamic law.
In an investigation into Hezbollah’s firing of rockets into civilian areas in Israel,
Human Rights Watch encountered no instance in which Hezbollah leaders cited
religious justifications for those attacks.25 But at the same time, in an environment
of Islamist revivalism, the imprimatur of Islamic authority is important.
Thus, Khalid Mishal, the head of Hamas’s political bureau, claimed that “martyrdom
operations [are] one of the many forms of resistance, indeed it is the highest
and noblest form of resistance and one that is most effective. Most of the scholars
in our Islamic nations have ruled that it is permissible and, indeed, one of the
best forms of jihad and resistance.”26 It would appear from the videotaped messages
that suicide bombers typically leave, as well as other statements, that this
Islamic legitimation is an important factor in their recruitment and motivation.
The role of Islamic doctrine and Islamist ideology is much more pronounced in
the other main category of movements that have taken up arms and employed
violence against ordinary people as well as agents of the state, namely political
movements that aim to overthrow or radically alter an existing government that
itself claims Islamic legitimacy. The Gama`a Islamiyya and Islamic Jihad movements
in Egypt in the 1980s and 1990s, influenced by the writings of Sayyid Qutb,
and the jihadist salafiyya movement in Saudi Arabia, led by veterans of the anti-
Soviet campaign of the 1980s in Afghanistan, illustrate this.27
Such insurgencies raise serious legitimacy issues: Muslim polities, like others, do
not look kindly on armed insurgencies and would-be usurpers, and this resistance
to rebellion is encoded in the opposition to fitna, or disorder. In Islamic
terms, it is essential for a rebel or insurgent movement to make a credible claim
that the government in question is not, and in some versions never was, genuinely or sufficiently Islamic in its practices, or has betrayed Islam in some serious
manner. In the eyes of the insurgents, such governments are no longer Muslim
and must be fought as apostates and non-believers (kufar). This can be self-evident
where the ruling party is foreign and non-Muslim. With regard to existing
Arab governments, rebels and insurgents justify in Islamic terms their recourse to
armed violence by declaring the leaders of the state in question, and those who
support those leaders, to be kufar.
Although the Egyptian government ruthlessly suppressed the Islamist insurgency
in the 1990s, an element of its defeat (at least as significant in the opinion of
many Egyptian observers as the repressive capacity of the state) was the political
isolation that Gama`a Islamiyya had brought on itself by its tactic of attacks that
indiscriminately killed civilians, many of them directed at the tourist industry, an
important source of income for many citizens as well as for the government. In
the aftermath of this defeat, many leaders of the Gama`a Islamiyya renounced the
use of violence. However, in the view of Hugh Roberts, who wrote an exceptionally
lucid series of analytical pieces on contemporary Islamism for the International
Crisis Group, the “recantations” written by Karam Zuhdi and others disavowing
the group’s recourse to violence “left unanswered the critical question of whether
Egyptian Islamic radicalism has genuinely and comprehensively come to terms
with the bankruptcy of its jihadi strategy and settled its intellectual accounts with
the thinking that inspired it.”28 Islamic Jihad responded to the defeat of the
insurgency in Egypt by reorienting itself to the international arena, joining with al
Qaeda in the late 1990s. Only in late 2007 did one of the group’s founders and
chief ideologues, Sayid Imam Sharif, issue a similar “reinterpretation” of jihad,
specifically ruling out the denunciation and condemnation of persons as kufar in
order to justify harming them, as well as the killing of non-Muslims in Muslim
countries or Muslims belonging to other sects, such as Shia.29
The targeting of civilians by Islamist armed groups became particularly controversial
among Islamist militants themselves in the context of the bloodbath in Iraq in
the years after the US invasion. Some, with impeccable militant credentials, have
condemned such attacks in no uncertain terms. The Palestinian-Jordanian
Islamist ideologue Abu Muhammad al-Maqdisi unreservedly denounced as kufar
governments that do not institute rule based on Sharia (Islamic law), and dismissed
democracy as tantamount to changing one’s religion—that is, committing
apostasy.30 In 2005, however, he criticized his former comrade Abu Musab al Zarqawi for his brutal campaign of attacks targeting civilians in Iraq’s Shia communities.
“My project is not to blow up a bar, my project is not to blow up a cinema,”
al-Maqdisi told an Al Jazeera interviewer in July 2005:
My project is to bring back to the Islamic Nation its glories and to
establish the Islamic state that provides refuge to every Muslim, and
this is a grand and large project that does not come by small vengeful
acts.... Since when did we speak of killing women and children?
Since when did we speak of killing the laymen of the Shia?
The Iraq experience, with its multiplicity of actors and unrelenting reign of terror
against civilians, often solely on the basis of their being Sunni or Shia, in some
ways reprises the massacres of civilians that characterized the Algerian civil war
in the mid-1990s. In both cases the insurgent forces included at the leadership
level Arab veterans of the war in Afghanistan who, among other things, put great
store in imposing what they regarded as “correct” Islamic practices.
The armed insurgents in Saudi Arabia appear to present a case of Islamist political
violence most directly and unambiguously rooted in doctrine and religious
ideology. In part this probably reflects the near-total hegemony of religious discourse
in Saudi Arabian discussions of political and social issues, fostered by the
free hand Saudi rulers have given to Islamist ideologues along with their systematic
silencing of dissenting liberal views. Many of the perpetrators of political violence
in Saudi Arabia are the political and ideological heirs of those whom the
Saudi state had encouraged and enabled (with fulsome support from
Washington) to fight against the former Soviet-supported government in
Afghanistan. Their shift of focus to Saudi Arabia and the Western presence there
seems to be doctrinally inspired. In Nasir al-Fahd’s pamphlet “Revealing the
Blasphemy of Those Who Help Americans” it would be difficult to find a more succinct
statement of the rationale for insurgent violence directed not just at
Americans and other Westerners in the kingdom, but against the indigenous (and
religiously-sanctioned) political authority. Al-Fahd’s pamphlet, according to Saudi
scholar Madawi al-Rasheed, describes a “legitimizing narrative of violence” that
draws on the Quran and Hadith (sayings of the Prophet Mohammed), with “its
own religious codes, meanings, politics and poetics.”31
Human Rights Watch had the opportunity to raise these issues with Saudi dissidents
during a visit to the country in December 2006.32 There seemed to be full
agreement on two points. First, public support for violent opposition groups, or at
least reluctance to condemn such violence, is motivated primarily by the close
Saudi government relationship with the United States, without regard for what
they consider to be Washington’s unacceptable policies in Iraq and the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. Second, they argued, the Saudi government must end its systematic
suppression of basic civil and political rights, especially freedom of
expression, to allow peaceful challenges to the status quo. To the extent that
these views are representative, the basis for whatever popular support exists for
the armed attacks against civilians is grounded in politics rather than religion.
There was also widespread agreement, though not consensus, on a third point,
which underscores a religious dimension to the violence: that the Saudi ruling
family’s accommodation of a religious establishment whose intolerance toward
non-Muslims and Muslims who do not subscribe to the official Wahhabi interpretation
of Islam has also contributed to support for attacks against foreigners, and
any successful political liberalization requires religious reform as well.
Our interlocutors largely agreed, as noted, that “behind the violence is oppression,
injustice, and occupation,” referring to conditions in the Arab world. With
regard to Saudi Arabia itself, they stressed as well the “zero framework for civil
society and no independent judiciary,” in the words of Matrook al-Faleh, a political
science professor at King Saud University who has been jailed for his reformist
activism and remains banned from traveling. The state, he and others said, was
just as hostile to their peaceful criticisms as to the challenge of the violent
groups. “A nine-year prison term for suggesting a constitution!” said Abdullah al-
Hamid, a former professor of literature and reform activist, referring to prison
terms handed down to himself, al-Faleh, and another activist.33 “Proponents of
violence point to that and say, see what your peaceful petitions get you.”
A Way Ahead?
The concept of jihad, or struggle, is integral to Islamic doctrine and tradition, but,
in addition to incorporating many different meanings of struggle, it has been
quintessentially rule-bound, particularly as it applies to combat and use of
force.34 Rules, of course, are part of the field of contestation, not just in terms of
legal or juridical understandings but ethical imperatives as well. The questions at stake now include who can speak with authority regarding core elements of
Islamic tradition, at a time when authority is contested and fragmented.
More important than identifying authoritative voices, who are likely to be contested
in any event, is the need for opinion-shapers in majority Muslim countries of
the Middle East to discuss these issues in ways that incorporate the shared
parameters of Islamic ethics and international humanitarian law principles. The
underlying element in both systems is the understanding that, in warfare, there
are limits as to the means and methods that warring parties may employ.35 The
limits spelled out in the Islamic tradition include prohibitions against treachery
and mutilation, and specify categories of enemy persons who are immune from
attack, including children, slaves, women, and the lame and blind.36 This
requires attention to areas of divergence as well, but with the purpose of building
a broad and encompassing framework for identifying the most effective ways of
ensuring respect for those shared principles. Humanitarian law principles address
not whether states or non-state groups should take up arms in a particular struggle,
but how they deploy and use those arms in the conduct of a particular conflict.
In Islamic terms, the issue is not whether jihad is permissible, compulsory,
or prohibited (though these are certainly important questions about which
Islamic law and more generally international law have much to say), but how that
struggle is conducted when it assumes an armed dimension.
Whether religious or political in character, groups perpetrating attacks that target
or indiscriminately harm civilians frequently justify those attacks as reprisal for
attacks by an adversary that harms their civilians—a justification that is not permitted
under international humanitarian law, but also not an impulse limited to
Muslims. The reprisal argument, while not acceptable, does point to a factor that
proponents of international humanitarian law must address in any effort to get
traction for their advocacy in Muslim societies today—namely, the apparent
absence of political will internationally to address such killings by all parties,
including powerful states. From their perspective, IHL is a legal regime that favors
states: states can afford precision weapons and appear respectful of IHL even
when their attacks kill many civilians, but insurgent groups often only have
access to weapons that are crude and inaccurate. (States, for their part, argue
that IHL favors insurgent groups by making it easy for their fighters to blend in
with the civilian population, increasing civilian casualties that are blamed on
state armed forces.) Here one cannot overstate the place of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, and the deep and widespread sympathy that most Muslims share
towards Palestinian goals and grievances.
This, rather than any fundamental incompatibility of humanitarian law principles
with Islamic ethics and law, constitutes a major obstacle to constructing a viable
and effective body of public opinion ready to speak out against such attacks by
groups with whose goals they sympathize. When it comes to the most serious violations
of international humanitarian law, such as targeting civilians, the prohibitions
are not contingent on reciprocal behavior by one’s adversary. However, if
the more powerful adversary encounters no consequences for its own serious violations,
it is more difficult to persuade others that it is in the interest of all parties
to uphold and respect international humanitarian law.
In the process of promoting respect for core international humanitarian law principles
and effective accountability mechanisms in Arab societies, there is clearly a
role for persons who are able to articulate those principles in language that will
persuade other Muslims, including Islamists and nationalists who use primarily
Islamic idioms and doctrinal references. There is a need in particular for persons
who have credibility and who are not merely religious authorities speaking on
behalf of the government, particularly if that government’s own compliance with
these principles is questionable.
Human Rights Watch’s effort to promote this conversation in the region, with its
Civilian Protection Initiative, has had resonance among human rights and other
civil society activists in the region, and it is no longer unusual to find columns
and editorials in Arab media criticizing attacks against civilians by armed groups
in the Arab region or in other Muslim contexts. Eliciting broader commitment to
the core principle of civilian immunity from opinion-shapers, not to mention society
more broadly, will require further initiatives from regional as well as international
activists. This is why it is critical for political and religious leaders and influential
media, as well as human rights and other social movement activists, to
speak out forcefully against such atrocities, even when—indeed, especially
when—they are perpetrated by a government in their name or a movement whose
goals they broadly support.
Joe Stork is deputy director of the Middle East and North Africa Division
at Human Rights Watch.
1 On the Palestinians, see Yezid Sayigh, Armed Struggle and the Search for State
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997); on atrocities by all parties in the Algerian war of
independence, see Alistair Horne, A Savage War of Peace: Algeria 1954-1962 (New York:
Viking Press, 1977)
2 In this essay I use the term “Islamist” to refer to politically engaged persons or groups
who assert and promote policies and political programs that they believe are consistent
with Islamic traditions and teachings and advance what they consider to be Islamic
interests. There are many different Islamist organizations and tendencies that share this
orientation, though their own understandings of what those traditions, teachings, and
interests may be vary considerably. Here I am mainly concerned with that subset of
Islamist groups that use or promote the use of armed violence.
3 The Peace Process: Implications for Democracy and Human Rights Ibn Rushd Booklets
Series, 3 (1997), pp. 75 - 128.
4 Ariel Sharon’s provocative visit to the site of the Al Aqsa mosque in East Jerusalem on
September 29, 2000, and the response of Israeli security forces to Palestinian protestors,
led to sustained clashes involving Israeli forces and armed Palestinians in what
became known as the Al Aqsa intifada, or uprising. For details on Palestinian suicide
bombings through late 2002, and analysis of such attacks from a human rights perspective,
see Human Rights Watch, Erased in a Moment: Suicide Bombing Attacks against
Israeli Civilians (New York, Human Rights Watch, 2002),
http://www.hrw.org/legacy/reports/2002/isrl-pa/.
5 Cited in Lori Allen, “Palestinians Debate ‘Polite’ Resistance to Occupation,” in Joel
Beinin and Rebecca Stein, The Struggle for Sovereignty: Palestine and Israel 2003-2005
(Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2006), p. 289.
6 Ibid., pp. 301-02.
7 “Al-Haq in 2004: A Twenty-five Year Retrospective,” in Waiting for Justice: Al-Haq
Annual Report 2004 (Ramallah, 2005), pp. 12-13. Azzam worked with Al-Haq from 1987
to 1995.
8 Human Rights Watch interview with Ziad Abu Amr, Washington, DC, June 2006.
9 Human Rights Watch discussion with Palestinian journalists in Ramallah, August 2005.
10 “Rabat Declaration: Towards an Equal Partnership for Democracy, Human Rights, Fair
Peace and Economic and Social Development,” Statement of the Civil Society NGOs and
Actors to the Forum for the Future[summit meeting of G-8 and Arab foreign ministers],
December 8-9, 2004. The NGO assembly was sponsored by the Euro-Mediterranean
Human Rights Network, the Moroccan Organization for Human Rights, the Cairo Institute
for Human Rights Studies, and the International Federation for Human Rights.
11 “Al-Haq’s Appeal to Palestinian Political Parties and Armed Factions,” Al-Haq Press
Release REF: 21.2006E, 3 July 2006). A year earlier, in August 2005, Al-Haq activists told
Human Rights Watch that the group had drafted talking points to use in a Beirut meeting
on armed groups sponsored by Amnesty International, but then decided not to participate
in the meeting before getting full agreement of the group’s staff and board.
“We need to be courageous, but it’s difficult,” one person said, noting that many of
those who had signed the public petitions had been “harassed by the community.”
12 These meetings took place in Cairo, Ramallah, Bethlehem, Amman, Rabat, Tunis,
Kuwait, Dubai, Riyadh, Beirut, and Bahrain.
13 On Palestinian attacks, see Human Rights Watch, Erased in a Moment,
http://www.hrw.org/legacy/reports/2002/isrl-pa/; on Iraqi attacks, see A Face and a
Name: Civilian Victims of Insurgent Groups in Iraq, vol, 17, no. 9(E), October 2005,
http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2005/10/02/face-and-name-0; on Egypt see Egypt:
Mass Arrests and Torture in Sinai, vol. 17, no. 3(E), February 2005,
http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2005/02/21/egypt-mass-arrests-and-torture-sinai-0.
14 For instance, the First Additional Protocol of 1977 to the Geneva Conventions
(Protocol I), which prohibits attacks against civilians, expressly covers “armed conflicts
in which people are fighting against colonial domination and alien occupation and racist
regimes in the exercise of their right of self determination….” Protocol I, article 1(4).
15 Under IHL, anyone who is not a combatant is a civilian, and civilians lose their immunity
only when and for such time as they directly participate in hostilities. Under IHL,
reserve soldiers, when they are not subject to the integrated disciplinary command of
the armed forces, are considered civilians. Most wars are between forces of unequal
means, and an exception to IHL on these grounds would completely undermine the
principle of civilian immunity.
16 Human Rights Watch interview, Cairo, April 9, 2006.
17 The comment was made at a roundtable in Cairo co-hosted by Human Rights Watch
and the Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies, June 26, 2005.
18 Human Rights Watch interview, Ramallah, August 2005.
19 See, e.g. article 51(6) of Protocol I, which states: “Attacks against the civilian
population or civilians by way of reprisals are prohibited.”
20 Human Rights Watch interview, Beirut, July 1, 2006.
21 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), Customary International
Humanitarian Law, pp. 513-29.
22 Human Rights Watch, Erased in a Moment,
http://www.hrw.org/legacy/reports/2002/isrl-pa/, p. 52.
23 Human Rights Watch interview, Beirut, July 2, 2006.
24 Human Rights Watch interview, Cairo, April 9, 2006.
25 Human Rights Watch, Civilians Under Assault: Hizbollah’s Rocket Attacks on Israel in
the 2006 War, vol. 19, no. 3(E), August 2007, at http://hrw.org/reports/2007/iopt0807/.
26 Cited in Mohamed M. Hafez, “Rationality, Culture, and Structure in the Making of
Suicide Bombers: A Preliminary Theoretical Synthesis and Illustrative Case Study,”
Studies in Conflict & Terrorism 29, pp. 165-185.
27 The Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood activist Sayyid Qutb spent 10 years in prison for his
alleged involvement in a coup against President Gamal Abdel Nasser, where he was
subjected to torture. Released in 1964, he was jailed again in 1965 in connection with
another alleged plot and hanged in August 1966. His Signposts on the Road (Ma`alim
fi’l-tariq), in the view of Malise Ruthven, “more than any other text, articulates both the
rage and revolutionary energy underpinning the Islamist movement.” Malise Ruthven,
A Fury for God (London: Granta Books, 2002), p.85.
28 Hugh Roberts, “Islam in North Africa II: Egypt’s Opportunity,” International Crisis
Group Middle East and North Africa Briefing, April 20, 2004, p. 9.
29 Imam Sharif, also known as Dr. Fadl, was the author of Basic Principles in Making
Preparations for Jihad (Al-umda fi e’dad al-udda). His revision, entitled “Rationalizing
Jihad in Egypt and the World,” appeared as a series of articles in November 2007 in the
Egyptian daily, Masri al-Yom. See Jailan Halawi, “Bidding Violence Farewell,” Al-Ahram
Weekly, November 22-28, 2007, and Marc Lynch’s commentary in his Abu Aardvark blog
of November 27, 2007, available at http://abuaardvark.typepad.com/abuaardvark/
2007/11/dr-fadls-review.html.
30 Nibras Kazimi, “A Virulent Ideology in Mutation: Zarqawi Upstages Maqdisi,”
in Hillel Fradkin, et al., eds., Current Trends in Islamist Ideology (Washington: The
Hudson Institute, 2005), also available at
http://www.futureofmuslimworld.com/research/pubID.24/pub_detail.asp. (accessed
March 22, 2007).
31 The interview, dated July 5, 2005, is cited in Kazimi. Al-Maqdisi, who in the late 1990s
had been imprisoned with al-Zarqawi, was detained again on terrorism-related charges
in 2000 but released after a Jordanian State Security Court found him innocent of the
charges on December 28, 2004. He was rearrested the day after the Al Jazeera interview,
apparently for not denouncing al-Zarqawi more forcefully. The case of al-Maqdisi is one
of those discussed in Human Rights Watch, Suspicious Sweeps: The General Intelligence
Department and Jordan’s Rule of Law Problem (New York, September 2006), available at
http://hrw.org/reports/2006/jordan0906/.
32 Madawi al-Rasheed, Contesting the Saudi State: Islamic Voices from a New
Generation (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2007), pp. 135-36.
33 Joe Stork, “Violence and Political Change in Saudi Arabia,” ISIM Review 19,
Spring 2007, pp. 54- 55, http://www.isim.nl/files/Review_19/Review_19-54.pdf.
34 Al-Faleh, al-Hamid, and writer Ali al-Dumaini were detained in March 2004 after they
refused to sign a pledge to cease all public criticism of the government. Following an
unfair trial a court sentenced them in May 2005 to six, seven, and nine years respectively.
In August 2005 King Abdullah pardoned them but they still are banned from travel
and from access to Saudi media.
35 For an illuminating analysis of the evolution of the concept of jihad in Islam’s first
centuries, see Roy Parviz Mottahedeh and Ridwan al-Sayyid, “The Idea of the Jihad in
Islam before the Crusades,” in Angeliki E. Laiou and Roy Parviz Mottahedeh,
The Crusades from the Perspective of Byzantium and the Muslim World
(Washington, D.C.: Dumbarton Oaks Research Library and Collection, 2001),
available at www.doaks.org/etexts.html.
36 Sohail Hashemi, who notes that “jus in bello issues receive very little attention” in
contemporary Muslim discourses on war, cites the Quranic injunction to “not transgress
limits” in the course of fighting “God’s cause,” and enumerates restraints based in the
sunna (practices) of the Prophet Muhammad and his earliest (“rightly guided”) successors
as leaders of the Muslim community. See his “Interpreting the Islamic Ethics of War
and Peace,” in Sohail H. Hashmi, ed., Islamic Political Ethics: Civil Society, Pluralism,
and Conflict (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2002).
37 John Kelsay, Arguing the Just War in Islam (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
2007), especially chapter 3: “Politics, Ethics, and War in Premodern Islam.” There Kelsay
writes: “The point is not simply that the Prophet identified, women, children and others
as protected groups. Rather, these persons are listed because, as a general matter, they
‘do not fight’” (p. 114).