Democratic Republic of Congo
After eighteen months in power, the transitional government of the
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) remains fragile, far from its
goals of peace and effective administration of this huge central African
nation. Installed after five years of civil war, the uneasy coalition of former
belligerents is plagued by mistrust, dissatisfaction among troops not
yet fully integrated in a new national army—including an aborted rebellion
by some of them, and challenges from armed groups outside the
peace process. It also faces continued interference from neighboring
countries, in particular Uganda and Rwanda.
In eastern Congo, soldiers of the national army and combatants of
armed groups continue to target civilians, killing, raping, and otherwise
injuring them, carrying out arbitrary arrests and torture, and destroying
or pillaging their property. Tens of thousands of persons have fled their
homes, several thousand of them across international borders. After the
attempted rebellion and a massacre of Congolese refugees in neighboring
Burundi, ethnically-based fear and hatred have risen sharply, emotions
that are amplified and manipulated by politicians and some civil
society leaders.
An over-stretched United Nations peacekeeping force, the U.N.
Organization Mission in Congo (MONUC), contributes little to protecting
civilians outside of a few urban areas and itself has come increasingly
under attack.
With a weak coalition in Kinshasa, divisions in the army, and growing
ethnic tensions in the east, the DRC is ill-prepared to address the complex
political and logistical obstacles to elections that are now set for
mid-2005. Failure to address these fundamental problems increases the
likelihood of more conflict, potentially destabilizing the entire region.
Continuing Violence against Civilians
During 2004 government soldiers and armed combatants engaged in
numerous skirmishes for control over local areas in eastern DRC. In
many of these incidents they committed grave violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law, particularly in Ituri, North and
South Kivu, Maniema, and Northern Katanga. In the northeastern district
of Ituri, known for high levels of violence in prior years, MONUC
soldiers limit abuses in Bunia, the main town, but fail to curb abuses by
armed groups organized on an ethnic basis in the countryside. Further
to the northeast, combatants attacked civilians at the village of Gobu in
January 2004, killing at least one hundred of them. In September,
another fourteen civilians were slain at Lengabo, only a short distance
from Bunia. Women and girls suffer systematic sexual violence in many
zones of conflict and in the Mongbwalu area, some eighty Hema
women accused of being traitors to local communities were summarily
executed.
In May and June 2004 dissident soldiers rebelled and captured the
South Kivu town of Bukavu from government forces. Members of both
forces committed war crimes, killing and raping civilians, some of
whom were targeted on an ethnic basis. Thousands of government
troops arrived to defeat the rebels, many of whom were Tutsi or
Banyamulenge, an ethnic group related to Tutsi. Some of the rebels
then fled to Rwanda while others retreated to North Kivu. Following
the rebellion, thousands of Banyamulenge civilians and others associated
with them in South Kivu feared reprisals and fled to Rwanda or
Burundi. Over 150 of those refugees were massacred in mid-August at
Gatumba refugee camp just inside the Burundian border. Most of the
attackers were Burundian rebels, but some spoke Congolese languages
and may have come from DRC.
Increasing Ethnic Hostility
The Bukavu revolt and the Gatumba massacre sharply increased fear
and hatred between Tutsi and Banyamulenge peoples and other ethnic
groups in eastern DRC. In some places animosity against Tutsi and
Banyamulenge is generalized to all Rwandaphones, people linguistically
or culturally linked to Rwanda. After Banyamulenge civilians were killed
in Bukavu, some Banyamulenge and Tutsi leaders charged that government
soldiers and people of other ethnic groups were committing genocide
against them. In June 2004, Rwandan government authorities—
many of them Tutsi—threatened to invade Congo to defend Tutsi and
Banyamulenge. After the Gatumba massacre, they repeated the threat,
backed by Burundian Tutsi military officers. Many Congolese who had
suffered under Rwandan occupation from 1996 to 2002 fear another
Rwandan attack and charge that Banyamulenge and Congolese Tutsi
intend to help the Rwandans, as some of them have done in the past.
When Banyamulenge refugees tried to return from Burundi in October,
crowds in the town of Uvira stoned them and attacked the MONUC
troops protecting them. Political, military, and civil society leaders
manipulated tension between ethnic groups, even producing fake documents
meant to prove that others planned attacks against them.
Questions of land use and ownership and of citizenship underlie many
of the conflicts among ethnic communities in eastern Congo; they are
complicated by laws that are poorly written or inconsistently applied.
The government is trying to address these issues through the necessary
reform legislation.
Illegal Exploitation of Resources
In 2003 an independent panel of experts established by the U.N.
Security Council documented links between the illegal exploitation of
resources and conflicts in the DRC but since the publication of its
report only Belgium has launched investigations into possible breaches of international business norms by corporations registered in its territory.
The DRC government, committed to reviewing unfavorable contracts
signed during the five years of war, has made little progress in
doing so. Local organizations as well as international observers report
growing corruption and fraud by officials.
Meanwhile leaders of armed groups in the DRC continue to profit from
the illegal exploitation of resources and to fight for control of lucrative
border posts or strategic mining areas. In 2004 such groups fought for
access to resources like gold, cassiterite, and cobalt in North Kivu,
South Kivu, Ituri and parts of Katanga. In July the Security Council
renewed an arms embargo on eastern Congo and the mandate of a
panel investigating its enforcement, but it limited the scope and hence
the effectiveness of the investigations by not authorizing inquiry into
the financing of weapons purchases.
Civil and Political Rights
Local and national officials continue to harass, arbitrarily arrest, or beat
journalists, civil society activists, and ordinary citizens. Combatants of
armed groups, including those officially integrated into the national
army, continue to prey upon civilian populations, collecting illegal
“taxes” and extorting money through illegal detention or torture.
Making Justice Work
The pervasive culture of impunity is one of the greatest obstacles to
lasting peace as well as to ensuring civil and political rights in the DRC.
Despite national and international proclamations about the importance
of accountability for past crimes, numerous persons suspected of violations
of international human rights and humanitarian law continue to
occupy posts of national or local responsibility, including key positions
in the newly integrated army. Integrating abusive commanders into a new army may buy their compliance with the transitional process in the
short term, but only prepares the way for future instability.
Delivering justice in the DRC will require enormous human and material
resources. The European Union, assisted by MONUC, has supported
a pilot program for rebuilding justice in Ituri that offers the
potential for replication elsewhere. After the Lengabo killings mentioned
above, MONUC also helped arrest dozens of suspects. At the
invitation of the DRC government, the prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) has begun investigating war crimes and crimes
against humanity, an effort that may eventually bring some major perpetrators
to justice. But no progress has been made on finding mechanisms
to deliver justice for the massive crimes committed before July
2002 when the jurisdiction of the ICC begins. Several women’s groups
are seeking ways to encourage the prosecution of sexual violence, committed
so widely in the DRC.
Key International Actors
In October 2004, the Security Council increased MONUC troops to
16,700 and strengthened its Chapter VII mandate to protect civilians.
Although the increase fell far short of the 23,900 troops requested by
the U.N. Secretary General, it will give MONUC improved capacity to
deal with recurrent threats to civilians. There have been allegations of
sexual violence and exploitation of women and girls by MONUC forces
themselves. Although the U.N. has announced a zero-tolerance policy
with regard to sexual exploitation by members of peacekeeping forces,
to date there have been no criminal charges brought against any peacekeepers.
An internal U.N. investigation has been initiated to look into
the allegations.
Although Rwanda supposedly withdrew its military forces from DRC in
2002, U.N. sources reported the presence of Rwandan troops in DRC
in 2004. In addition, U.N. experts concluded that Rwanda supported the Bukavu revolt against the transitional government. Meanwhile
Ugandan President Museveni attempted to put pressure on the ICC
prosecutor not to investigate crimes by leaders of armed groups supported
by Uganda.
The U.K., South Africa, Belgium and the European Union intervened
at critical moments in 2004 to prevent breakdowns in the transitional
process. The U.K. also twice dissuaded Rwanda from increased interference
in the DRC by suspending or threatening to suspend aid. In at
least one case South Africa also brought pressure to bear successfully on
Rwanda to create no obstacles to the transition.