Democratic Republic of Congo
Attacks on civilians and other human rights abuses continued with disturbing frequency
in 2010. The Congolese army sustained its military campaigns against foreign
and national armed groups in the east and north, and launched a new campaign
in the west to quell a local insurgency. As in the past, all sides targeted
civilians, who were killed, raped, arbitrarily arrested, pressed into forced labor,
and looted. The ongoing violence left nearly 2 million people displaced and a further
145,000 as refugees in neighboring countries.
The United Nations peacekeeping mission was renamed the UN Organization
Stabilization Mission in Congo (MONUSCO) following calls for its withdrawal by
the Congolese government, which was eager to claim security improvements
ahead of the 50th anniversary of Congo’s independence. The new name made little
difference in the struggle to protect civilians. Some perpetrators were arrested
on war crimes charges, but many others remained in positions of power, most
notably Bosco Ntaganda, a general sought on an arrest warrant from the
International Criminal Court (ICC). Violent attacks on journalists and human rights
defenders increased.
Attacks by the Lord’s Resistance Army in Northern Congo
Attacks against civilians were the most severe in northern Congo, where the
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), a Ugandan rebel group, continued its brutal campaign.
A further 604 people were killed and 473 abducted, bringing the death toll
in Congo to over 2,000 and the number of abducted to 2,600 since the LRA began
its latest campaign of violence in 2008. The LRA also attacked civilians across the
border in the Central African Republic and Southern Sudan. The largest attack in
Congo was in the remote Makombo area of Haut Uele District, where in December
2009 LRA combatants clubbed to death at least 345 civilians and abducted 250
others. The attack was one of the worst ever perpetrated by the rebel group in its
bloody 24-year history. The LRA also carried out widespread abductions in Bas
Uele District, deliberately targeting children whom the group forced to serve as
soldiers.
The Ugandan army—in coordination with the Congolese, Central African, and
Southern Sudanese armed forces—continued its military campaign against the
LRA. The operation had some success in weakening the rebel group, but the LRA’s
ability to attack civilians remained undiminished. No progress was made on
apprehending three of the LRA’s top leaders sought by the ICC for crimes committed
in northern Uganda. Congolese army and MONUSCO efforts to protect civilians
in LRA-affected areas remained inadequate, with limited resources directed
to address the threat.
Military Operations in the East and West
The Congolese army continued military operations in North and South Kivu
provinces of eastern Congo against the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of
Rwanda (FDLR), a predominantly Rwandan Hutu rebel group, some of whose leaders
participated in the 1994 genocide. At the same time the army sought to integrate
nearly two dozen former armed groups into its ranks, a condition of the
peace accords signed in March 2009. The integration process was fraught with
problems. A number of the armed groups dropped out, angry that their enemies
received higher ranks or more lucrative posts. Other groups, such as the National
Congress for the Defense of the People (CNDP), conducted their own military
operations under the guise of the Congolese army, but without approval from the
military hierarchy. The confusion affected chains of command and control of the
troops.
Attacks on civilians by the army and armed groups were rampant. Hundreds were
killed and raped as each warring party accused local populations of supporting
its enemies. For example, at least 105 civilians were killed in western Masisi territory
when former CNDP troops newly integrated into the army conducted unilateral
operations against the FDLR and their allies. In another incident in Walikale territory
in early August, FDLR combatants and a local armed group, the Mai Mai
Cheka, systematically gang raped at least 303 civilians in 13 villages. The attackers
accused their victims of supporting the Congolese army.
As in 2009, UN peacekeepers provided logistical and operational support to the
Congolese military operations against the FDLR. Following earlier criticisms that
peacekeepers had failed to put in place adequate conditions to ensure respect for human rights, MONUSCO strengthened its conditionality policy and sought to
support only battalions it had previously screened. But the confused chains of
command made the policy’s application exceedingly difficult. Many officers with a
known track record of human rights abuses remained in command positions. The
most blatant example was General Bosco Ntaganda, sought on an arrest warrant
from the ICC, who continued to play the de facto role as deputy commander of the
joint military operations. Ntaganda also continued to perpetrate human rights
abuses and was implicated in assassinations and arbitrary arrests of individuals
opposed to him.
In addition to problems in the east, the Congolese army also deployed to western
Equateur Province to counter an insurgency led by the Enyele ethnic group, after a
local fishing dispute spun out of control. The insurgents attacked opponents from
other ethnic groups, as well as policemen and soldiers. While quelling the insurgency,
Congolese security forces were themselves responsible for numerous
human rights violations. The UN estimated that 100 civilians were killed in the
clashes.
Sexual Violence and Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
The level of sexual violence in Congo continued at an alarming rate. Over 15,000
cases of sexual violence were reported in 2009. In 2010 there were no signs that
the trend was decreasing. For the first six months of the year 7,685 cases were
reported. More than half of the victims were under 18 years of age.
In October a private member’s bill was introduced in the National Assembly proposing
a punishment of three to five years’ imprisonment for “homosexual relations”
and to outlaw all publications and films that highlight “sexual practices
against nature.” The bill also seeks to criminalize members and financers of associations
that promote or defend “sexual relations against nature” with six months
to one year in prison.
Threats to Journalists and Human Rights Defenders
Congolese human rights defenders and journalists were increasingly targeted in
2010. A prominent human rights defender, Floribert Chebeya Bahizire, executive director of Voice of the Voiceless, was found dead on June 1, following a visit to
police headquarters in Kinshasa, the capital. His driver, Fidele Bazana Edadi,
remains missing at the time of writing. The national police chief was suspended
and other senior police officers were detained following the murder, though none
was charged at the time of writing. In eastern Congo, on June 30, a human rights
defender working for Le Bon Samaritain was killed by armed men in uniform near
Beni, North Kivu. Sylvestre Bwira Kyahi, civil society president of Masisi territory,
was abducted by army soldiers on August 24 and held for a week in an underground
prison, where he was repeatedly beaten for writing a public letter
denouncing abuses by soldiers under Ntaganda’s command and calling for his
arrest.
Freelance cameraman Patient Chebeya Bankome was shot dead by soldiers outside
his home in Beni on April 5. Radio France Internationale (RFI) began broadcasting
again in Congo on October 12, after being off the air since June 2009.
Other radio stations, including in Bandundu and Kisangani, were shut down or
interrupted by authorities when they criticized government policy.
Justice and Accountability
The vast majority of crimes committed in Congo have gone unpunished and, in
many cases, perpetrators are rewarded rather than brought to justice.
Despite the somber trend, there were some positive developments. On November
17, 2009, the FDLR president, Ignace Murwanashyaka, and his deputy, Straton
Musoni, were arrested in Germany by the German police for war crimes and
crimes against humanity committed by FDLR troops under their command in eastern
Congo. Another FDLR leader, Callixte Mbarushimana, was arrested in France
by French police on October 11, 2010, under an arrest warrant issued by the ICC
for similar crimes.
In Congo the government increased military prosecutions against soldiers
accused of human rights violations, including crimes of sexual violence, although
the majority of those prosecuted held junior ranks. In one notable exception, following
pressure from the UN Security Council and human rights organizations,
judicial authorities in Kinshasa arrested General Jerome Kakwavu in April 2010 on war crimes charges for rape and torture. Kakwavu is the first general arrested on
rape charges in Congo’s history.
In another important landmark, the Office of the UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights published on October 1 its report of a human rights mapping exercise
in Congo, which documented 617 incidents of serious violations of international
humanitarian law between 1993 and 2003. The report described the role of
the main Congolese and foreign parties responsible—including military or armed
groups from Rwanda, Uganda, Burundi, and Angola—and suggested options to
pursue justice for the crimes, including the proposed establishment of a mixed
chamber in Congo with Congolese and international judges. Rwanda and Uganda,
among others, rejected the report. In an important statement, the Congolese government
welcomed it and said it would support the option of a mixed chamber.
Key International Actors
At the insistence of the government, the UN withdrew some 1,500 peacekeepers
and pledged to conduct a joint security assessment with the government to determine
future drawdown.
Following the mass rape in Walikale, the UN dispatched its assistant secretarygeneral
for peacekeeping operations, Atul Khare, to Congo to assess the challenges
for protecting civilians and recommend improvements. The UN secretarygeneral’s
special representative on sexual violence in conflict, Margot Wallström,
also visited Congo twice to strengthen UN action to address sexual violence and
hold perpetrators accountable.
On May 24 United States President Barack Obama signed legislation committing
the US to developing a comprehensive strategy to protect civilians from LRA
attacks and to end the group’s violence.