Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC)
Violence and brutal human rights abuses increased in the Democratic Republic of
Congo throughout 2009. Two military campaigns by the Congolese army, in the
east and north, resulted in a dramatic increase in violence against civilians by
both rebel and government forces. At least 2,500 civilians were slaughtered, over
7,000 women and girls were raped, and more than 1 million people were forced to
flee their homes. This pushed the total number of displaced people to over 2 million,
the vast majority with limited or no access to humanitarian assistance, often
forcing them to return to insecure areas to find food. United Nations peacekeepers
supported Congolese army military operations and struggled to give meaning
to their mandate to protect civilians.
Impunity, already endemic, was further entrenched with the promotion of Bosco
Ntaganda to the rank of general, despite a warrant for his arrest from the
International Criminal Court. In July the government announced a policy of “zero
tolerance” for human rights abuses committed by its soldiers, but only made a
handful of arrests. Violent attacks against human rights defenders and journalists
continued throughout the country.
Violence in Eastern and Northern Congo
In January 2009 the political landscape changed dramatically in eastern Congo.
Congolese President Joseph Kabila and Rwandan President Paul Kagame struck a
deal to rid each other of their enemies. Rwanda put a stop to the rebellion of the
Congolese Tutsi-led National Congress for the Defense of the People (CNDP) by
arresting its leader, Laurent Nkunda, and forcing its fighters to integrate into the
Congolese army. In exchange, the Congolese government agreed that Rwandan
soldiers could enter eastern Congo for five weeks of joint military operations
against the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda (FDLR), a Rwandan
Hutu rebel group, some of whose leaders had participated in the 1994 genocide.
Following the brief operation, both governments pressed UN peacekeepers to
support a second phase of military operations to finish the job. Under pressure
and believing they could better protect civilians by being part of the operations,
the UN agreed.
The military operations were disastrous for civilians. The FDLR launched deliberate
and targeted retaliatory attacks on civilians, killing and raping to punish the
population for their government’s change in policy toward them. In the worst single
incident, the FDLR massacred at least 96 civilians in the village of Busurungi
in North Kivu province on the night of May 9-10 by chopping them with machetes
or burning them to death. The Congolese army failed to protect its own citizens
from such attacks and itself targeted civilians who it perceived as FDLR collaborators,
as well as Rwandan Hutu refugees. In one incident between April 27 and 30,
Congolese army soldiers attacked camps in the Shalio Hill area and deliberately
killed at least 129 refugees. Many of the victims were clubbed to death.
MONUC, the UN peacekeeping force in Congo, struggled to balance its mandate
for civilian protection with its support to the Congolese military operations.
Although the peacekeepers made some notable efforts to protect civilians, which
undoubtedly saved lives, in many cases they arrived too late or not at all.
By October 2009 the military operations had succeeded in demobilizing 1,100
combatants from the ranks of the FDLR’s estimated strength of 6,000. But it came
at a high price: between January and September over 1,300 civilians had been
slaughtered in North and South Kivu, the majority of them women, children, and
the elderly; thousands of civilians were abducted and pressed into forced labor;
and more than 900,000 people fled for their lives. The FDLR and Congolese soldiers
pillaged their belongings and then burned an estimated 7,000 homes to the
ground. Already poor, civilians were left with nothing.
Attacks in northern Congo by the Ugandan rebel group Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA) also caused immense harm to Congolese civilians. When the Ugandan army
scaled back military operations in Congo against the LRA in March 2009, civilian
protection was largely left to the Congolese army and UN peacekeepers. LRA
killings and abductions of civilians continued, leading to the displacement of over
200,000 people throughout the worst affected areas of Haut and Bas Uele districts
of Orientale province. (See also Uganda chapter.)
Sexual Violence
The military operations in eastern Congo were accompanied by brutal rape. In a
region already labeled “the worst place in the world to be a woman,” the situation
deteriorated further. An estimated 7,000 cases of sexual violence against
women and girls were registered at health centers across North and South Kivu in
the first seven months of 2009, nearly double the number of cases in 2008. In
April 2009 the Congolese government and MONUC adopted a strategy to combat
sexual violence, but it did not halt the increase in rape.
Sexual violence cases tried at military courts did increase during 2009, although
only four officers were held to account. Funds aimed at efforts to protect women
from rape remained shockingly low. In May UN Security Council ambassadors on
mission to Congo handed the government a list of five senior officers they said
were responsible for rape, including a general, Jerome Kakwavu, and demanded
the officers be held to account. By October two had been arrested.
Threats to Journalists and Human Rights Defenders
On August 23, 2009, Bruno Koko Chirambiza, a journalist for Radio Star, was murdered
by a group of eight armed men some 150 meters from a police post in
Bukavu, eastern Congo. He was the third journalist killed in the city since 2007.
Three female journalists in Bukavu received death threats in September 2009,
prompting MONUC to publicly call on the Congolese authorities to take action to
guarantee the safety of journalists.
On July 26 the Congolese government suspended Radio France International (RFI)
after it broadcast a program detailing problems within the Congolese army. The
minister of communications and the media said RFI was inciting soldiers to revolt.
In August three local radio stations were threatened with closure if they continued
to retransmit RFI’s programming.
In May armed men threatened to kill Anicette Kabala, the executive secretary of
Parliament of the Young Girl (PAJEF), a women’s organization in Kalemie, if she
did not drop cases of girls who had filed rape complaints. Her brother was shot
and killed when he tried to intervene. On October 1, armed men raided the home of another female human rights defender in Bunia and threatened to rape and kill
her and her daughter for their role in trials taking place at the ICC.
In July Golden Misabiko, the Katanga provincial president of the National
Association for Human Rights (ASADHO), was arrested by the National
Intelligence Agency (ANR) after publishing a report about illegal exploitation at a
uranium mine. He was tried and sentenced for spreading false information and
threatening state security. He fled into exile. Four of his colleagues received death
threats. Robert Ilunga Numbi, the president of the Friends of Nelson Mandela for
the Defence of Human Rights (ANMDH) was also arrested by ANR agents in
Kinshasa on August 31. He was detained incommunicado for nine days before
being charged with disseminating false information, for a press conference he
gave denouncing abuses of workers’ rights.
Justice and Accountability
The fight against impunity was seriously undermined by the promotion of Bosco
Ntaganda to the rank of general, despite an ICC arrest warrant for war crimes he
committed in Ituri between 2002 and 2004. Other known human rights abusers
were also integrated into the army, including Jean-Pierre Biyoyo, who previously
had been convicted by a military court for the recruitment of child soldiers but
had escaped from custody soon afterwards. The government justified its failure to
make arrests of senior army officers by claiming it prioritized peace over justice.
Local and international human rights groups protested the policy.
A few crucial cases helped to buck this somber trend. On March 5, 2009, the Mai
Mai commander Gedeon Kyungu Mutanga, along with 20 co-accused, was convicted
by a military court in Katanga for crimes against humanity and other
charges. Also in March, 11 soldiers in Walikale, North Kivu, were convicted of rape
as a crime against humanity. On July 27, in a rare case against an officer, Col.
Ndayanbaje Kipanga was sentenced in absentia to life imprisonment for crimes
against humanity relating to rape charges. He escaped custody before the trial.
On January 26, 2009, the ICC began its first-ever trial. Former Congolese warlord
Thomas Lubanga Dyilo faced charges of war crimes for his use of child soldiers in
the conflict in Ituri. The opening day’s proceedings were broadcast across Congo.
The trial of two other Ituri warlords, Germain Katanga and Mathieu Ngudjolo Chui,
commenced on November 24.
Key International Actors
Encouraged by the historic rapprochement between Congo and Rwanda, governments
and international donors were reluctant to raise concerns that might upset
the new relationship. Some privately raised concerns about Ntaganda’s promotion,
but few pressed effectively for his arrest. A number of diplomats, notably
United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and UN Secretary-General Ban Kimoon,
visited eastern Congo and raised human rights concerns, especially on
sexual violence. But they all stopped short of putting pressure on the Congolese
government or MONUC to suspend military operations until measures for civilian
protection were in place. In October, following a mission to Congo, the UN special
rapporteur on extrajudicial executions became a rare voice loudly raising concerns
about abuses committed during the military operations. In November the
US special envoy for the African Great Lakes region marked a change of approach
by calling the human cost of the military operations “unacceptable.”
MONUC provided logistical and operational support to Congolese military operations.
But contrary to the UN’s own legal advice and its mandate from the Security
Council, it did not put in place conditions to ensure respect for human rights
before operations began. In November 2009 MONUC suspended its support to
one army unit in North Kivu that it said had committed serious violations, but
continued its support to other units. MONUC’s ongoing support to the military
operations raised serious questions about its implication in the abuses.