Democratic Republic of Congo
The Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) held historic elections in 2006 bringing
to power Joseph Kabila as the country’s first democratically elected president in
over 40 years. The electoral process marked the end of a three-year transitional
government that followed five years of war. But both government soldiers and
armed groups continued killing, raping, and otherwise injuring civilians, particularly
in the east. Officials harassed, beat, and arrested journalists and members
of civil society and the political opposition. Officials and a growing number of
Congolese soldiers profited from the illegal exploitation of national resources,
often in conjunction with foreign interests. The judicial system failed to keep up
with recent cases and made little effort to address thousands of violations of
international law stemming from the war. More than a dozen militia leaders credibly
accused of war crimes were granted high rank in the national army.
Elections and Civil and Political Rights in the Pre-Election
Period
Voting went relatively smoothly in presidential and legislative elections in July
and in the presidential run-off vote in October 2006, but in the months before,
security forces used excessive force against peaceful demonstrators of the political
opposition and attacked journalists and human rights defenders. In July, when
results were to be announced of the presidential contest, the Presidential Guard
of incumbent President Joseph Kabila skirmished for three days with the security
forces of Vice-President and presidential contender Jean-Pierre Bemba, leaving
dozens dead and wounded.
The Haute Autorite des Medias, a government agency tasked with enforcing
responsible journalistic behavior, denounced what it saw as a dangerous political
environment and accused presidential candidates of using the media to demonize
their opponents. It temporarily suspended political programs broadcast by
numerous media outlets. Civil society groups reported an increase in ethnic hate
speech, including against the Tutsi community and others thought to be linked to
Rwanda.
Police officers used excessive force against members of the political opposition,
including supporters of the Union for Democracy and Social Progress (UDPS) and
other political parties. On March 10, for example, police broke up a peaceful
UDPS demonstration in Kinshasa, beating demonstrators and briefly detaining 15
of them.
In April and May 2006 at least seven journalists were threatened or beaten in the
course of their work. Another two were detained by security forces, and three others
were arrested a few months earlier on charges of criminal defamation, an
accusation frequently invoked by officials to restrict legitimate freedom of expression.
On October 12 armed men destroyed essential broadcasting equipment at
the office of Vice-President Bemba’s private media station in Lubumbashi. On
May 22, agents of the special police in plainclothes seized and destroyed broadcasting
equipment of the Christian television station Radio Tele Message de Vie,
which had broadcast a speech by Pastor Fernando Kutino critical of the political
process.
On November 2, 2005, four armed men murdered journalist Franck Ngyke of the
newspaper La Reference Plus, who was investigating a story potentially damaging
to leading politicians, and his wife Hélène Mpaka. Two leading members of the
nongovernmental organization Journaliste En Danger received death threats in
January 2006 when they published results of their investigation into the murder.
Impunity continues for the July 2005 murder of human rights defender Pascal
Kabungulu. In one of the rare prosecutions of an attack on a human rights
activist, men accused of the murder were brought to trial, but the proceeding
stalled in 2006 following interference from political and military authorities.
Government Soldiers Attack Civilians
Government soldiers killed, raped, and tortured civilians in the provinces of
Katanga, Ituri, and North and South Kivu. In central Katanga in late 2005 and
early 2006 soldiers seeking to quell an insurgency rounded up hundreds of civilians
suspected of being involved, and killed or tortured to death dozens of them.
They gang raped scores of women alleged to have supported the rebel militia.
More than 150,000 residents fled their homes in the zone of military operations,
an area that became known as “the triangle of death.” In a similar operation against an insurgent militia group in Ituri in the first months of 2006, Congolese
army soldiers deliberately killed more than 60 civilians accused of supporting the
militia, raped women and girls, and burned homes, churches, schools, and
health centers in communities suspected of harboring insurgents. In one incident
on January 23, government soldiers fired into a church in the village of Nyata,
killing seven people, including two babies.
Congolese government soldiers, including those from the old national army and
combatants from disbanded rebel groups, are inadequately trained and disciplined.
Paid little and sometimes at infrequent intervals, they subsist by exploiting
the population.
Local and Foreign Armed Groups
Local armed groups opposed to the government continue to operate in eastern
DRC killing, raping, and looting from civilians. In Ituri in 2006 combatants of the
Revolutionary Movement of Congo (MRC) killed scores of civilians and arbitrarily
detained and tortured others they believed opposed them. In Katanga, a local
armed group known as the Mai Mai, commanded by Gédéon Kyungu Mutanga,
killed, raped, and abused civilians. In some cases the Mai Mai publicly tortured
victims before killing and cannibalizing them in ceremonies intended to terrorize
the local population. In May Gédéon surrendered to United Nations peacekeepers
in central Katanga. He was handed over to Congolese officials who have kept him
in detention but not charged him with any crime.
Foreign armed groups from Rwanda and Uganda still account for pockets of insecurity,
although they have been weakened by military operations against them
over the past three years. Notably, remnants of Rwandan combatants from the
Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda (FDLR) remain in Congo, though
internal splits have contributed to weakening them militarily. They often prey
upon civilians, using force to extort goods or money. In September 2005 combatants
from the Ugandan rebel group the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), moved
across the border into Congo, heightening tensions between Uganda and the
DRC. Following negotiations in September 2006 between the LRA and the
Ugandan government many LRA combatants left Congo for assembly points in
Sudan, though some of the leaders may have remained in Congo.
Delivering Justice
Despite national and international proclamations about the importance of
accountability for past crimes, many persons suspected of violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law continue in posts or were named to
posts of national or local responsibility, including in the newly integrated army.
For example, in July 2006 former MRC combatant Peter Karim, who in the previous
month had killed a UN peacekeeper and taken seven others hostage, was named
colonel in the Congolese army in an attempt to broker a peace deal.
In March the prosecutor of the International Criminal Court made his first arrest
and initiated proceedings against Thomas Lubanga, a militia leader accused of
ethnic massacres, torture, and rape in Ituri. The ICC charged Lubanga only with
enlisting, conscripting, and using children as soldiers in armed conflict. No other
militia leaders or soldiers from the Congolese, Ugandan, or Rwandan armies have
been charged with any crimes despite their role in human rights abuses in Ituri,
and there has been no action against those who armed and supported militia
groups, which may extend to senior officials in Kinshasa, Kampala, and Kigali.
Congolese courts had some success in addressing a very few cases of war crimes.
While such cases were few, they brought some hope to victims that perpetrators
could be condemned for their crimes. In April 2006 a military court in Mbandaka
found seven army officers guilty of mass rape of more than 100 women at Songo
Mboyo in 2003, the first time rape was tried as a crime against humanity in
Congo. In August 2006 militia leader Kahwa Mandro was found guilty by a military
court in Ituri and sentenced to 20 years’ imprisonment for war crimes committed
in Ituri.
Illegal Exploitation of Resources
Armed groups, government officials and, increasingly, military officers continue to
profit from the illegal exploitation of Congo’s vast mineral wealth. At the Bavi
mine in Ituri in late 2005 government soldiers used villagers as slave labor, forcing
them under threat of death to dig for gold.
A Congolese parliamentary commission investigating contracts for the exploitation
of resources signed during the war years reported many irregularities and recommended ending or renegotiating dozens of contracts. The commission’s findings,
which named senior Congolese politicians, were published in an unauthorized
version on the internet in 2006. Hundreds of copies of the report destined
for members of parliament disappeared and the report was not debated in parliament.
Commission members received death threats. Some diplomats urged that
the report’s findings not be discussed before the elections because debate might
trouble the electoral process.
Key International Actors
United Nations peacekeepers attempted to control sporadic violence in Kinshasa
and parts of eastern Congo throughout 2006 and were reinforced briefly by troops
from the UN peacekeeping mission in Burundi and others from the European
Union. In September the UN Security Council extended the UN peacekeeping mission
until February 2007.
Key international governments including the United States, France, the United
Kingdom, and South Africa focused primarily on keeping the electoral process on
track and largely ignored concerns about corruption, human rights abuses, or the
need to disarm private militias.