Democratic Republic of Congo
Crippled by continuing conflict among its four main component parties, the
transitional government of the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) ended
two years in power with much of the eastern region still not under its control.
Faced with overwhelming logistical problems, the transitional government
postponed elections scheduled for June 30, 2005 and will likely hold
them in the first half of 2006. Security services committed election-related
abuses throughout 2005, including the January shooting in Kinshasa of
dozens of demonstrators protesting elections delays and the later detention of
political activists for months without charge elsewhere in the country.
Focused on assuring elections, few Congolese or outsiders worked effectively
to curb ongoing violence against civilians or to address crucial post-conflict
challenges, such as delivering justice for the many grave violations of international
humanitarian law committed in Congo in the last decade.
Unconvinced that elections will bring results they favor, some belligerents to
the war that officially ended in 2002 have kept their troops from being integrated
into the new national army, as stipulated in the final peace accords. In
late 2004 and in 2005 troops from the former Congolese Rally for
Democracy-Goma (RCD-Goma) refused integration and fought the national
army in several clashes in the eastern DRC. Armed groups which remained
outside the peace process also fought each other, the national army and the
U.N. peacekeeping force known as MONUC. Representatives of one such
group, opponents of the Rwandan government known as the Democratic
Force for the Liberation of Rwanda (FDLR), announced that they would disarm
and return to Rwanda, but only a few hundred did so in 2005.
In 2005, combatants from armed groups as well as government soldiers deliberately
killed, raped, and abducted civilians and destroyed or looted their
property in repeated attacks, particularly in eastern Congo. A feeble justice
system failed to prosecute these recent crimes and did nothing to end
impunity for war crimes and crimes against humanity committed during the
previous two wars. The September 2005 discovery of mass graves from 1996 in the eastern region of Rutshuru served as a reminder of the unpunished
mass slaughter of civilians in Congo in the last decade.
Government Soldiers and Armed Groups Target Civilians
The government failure to integrate troops of former belligerent groups into
the national army and to properly train and pay its soldiers underlay some
military abuses. Military abuses such as those that occurred in December
2004 in North Kivu where government soldiers and combatants refusing
integration fought and killed at least one hundred civilians, many of them
targeted on an ethnic basis, were repeated elsewhere in 2005. In Walungu,
South Kivu, government soldiers raped civilians and looted property during
operations against the FDLR in late 2004 and early 2005. In Equateur, poorly
paid and undisciplined troops went on a rampage in July 2005, killing, raping,
and stealing from civilians.
As government soldiers tried to take control of Ituri and parts of North and
South Kivu, Maniema and Katanga in late 2004 and 2005, both they and the
combatants fighting them committed grave violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. In Ituri, which experienced widespread
violence against civilians in previous years, more than fifteen thousand members
of armed groups agreed to lay down their weapons, but others who
refused to disarm increased attacks on MONUC peacekeepers and government
soldiers. In February 2005 nine peacekeepers were killed in an ambush
north of Bunia, the main town. Combatants refusing disarmament took control
of areas near the towns of Boga and Kilo in August and September 2005,
forcing thousands of civilians to flee their homes.
In North Kivu, where authorities illegally distributed hundreds of firearms to
civilians in late 2004, there was little progress in 2005 in recuperating the
weapons, some of which were used by civilians to harm, rob, or intimidate
others.
Foreign Armed Groups
The continuing presence of Ugandan and Rwandan rebel combatants in eastern
Congo threatens regional stability by providing a pretext for intervention
by the Rwandan or Ugandan governments. In mid-2005 the Ugandan government
facilitated a meeting of Ituri combatants who forged a new alliance
to fight the Congolese government and MONUC. Under pressure from the
international community, the Ugandan government later expelled these ‘warlords’
from Uganda, but took no action to arrest them. In September 2005
Uganda threatened to invade Congo after some rebel Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA) troops, opposed to the Ugandan government, briefly crossed into the
Congo.
In March 2005, under pressure from their former backers in the Congolese
transitional government, FDLR rebels said they would give up military
struggle and return to Rwanda. Most FDLR combatants stayed in Congo but
split into several factions. One such group, calling itself the “Rastas,” killed,
kidnapped for ransom, and raped civilians around Walungu, South Kivu. The
African Union proposed sending a force to disarm the FDLR but by late
2005 had not put any troops in the area.
Civil and Political Rights
In January and June 2005, security forces killed dozens of men, women, and
children protesting electoral delays in Kinshasa, Mbuyi Mayi, Goma and
other towns. In May 2005, the national security service arrested over one
hundred people, primarily from southern Katanga, supposedly suspected of
planning a Katangan secession attempt. They detained some for months
without charge. In hundreds of cases throughout the country, police and
other agents of security services arbitrarily detained and tortured citizens
with the intent of extorting payment from them. Authorities arrested and
closed the operations of journalists who criticized those in power, such as a
television station of Vice President Jean-Pierre Bemba, who is likely a chief
challenger of President Kabila in the up-coming elections. In another case
the Information Ministry in January 2005 ordered certain broadcasters to
discontinue political programming and live phone-in programs. In July, authorities arrested a Kinshasa editor after his newspaper reported that a
government minister had misappropriated U.S. $300,000.
Illegal Exploitation of Resources
As in the past armed groups profited from the illegal exploitation of
resources and fought to control rich mining areas and lucrative border posts.
In gold-rich Ituri, for example, armed groups fought over mines at Kilo and
Bambu in September 2005. Local organizations as well as international
observers report growing corruption and fraud by officials linked to the
exploitation of resources. Multinational companies sought to sign new mining
deals or revitalize old ones, further complicating efforts to ensure effective
national control over resources. A Congolese parliamentary commission
investigating contracts signed during the war years for the exploitation of
minerals and other resources reported many irregularities and recommended
ending or renegotiating the contracts, a measure awaiting action by parliament.
Threats to Human Rights Groups
Congolese human rights activists face significant intimidation and violence,
abuses that are rarely punished. After Pascal Kabungulu, a prominent activist,
was assassinated in Bukavu in July 2005, two soldiers were arrested in connection
with the killing, but their commander forced authorities to release
them. In June 2005, the national security service arrested a well-known
activist in Lubumbashi, saying he was linked to the May secession attempt in
Katanga. When other activists protested his arrest, six of them were arrested
and mistreated while in detention. Activists and members of civil society in
North Kivu received anonymous threats and visits by armed men to their
homes in January 2005, after they denounced war crimes committed by local
troops and the distribution of weapons to civilians by provincial authorities.
Four felt so threatened that they fled the country.
Delivering Justice
Despite national and international proclamations about the importance of
accountability for past crimes, numerous persons suspected of violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law continue to occupy posts of
national or local responsibility, including in the newly integrated army. In
exceptional cases, authorities responded to international pressure by arresting
several armed group leaders from Ituri in early 2005 and by issuing arrest
warrants for other military figures who resist government control. The prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) is investigating war crimes
and crimes against humanity in Congo, an effort that may eventually bring
some major perpetrators to justice.
Key International Actors
MONUC peacekeepers were posted outside of urban areas in early 2005,
helping to deter human rights violations in some places. But MONUC
troops are still too few to protect civilians throughout the country. In
September 2005, the Security Council authorized deployment of an additional
841 MONUC police during elections and provided a further three hundred
peacekeepers.
The United States, the United Kingdom, and South Africa are working to
keep the peace process from collapse, helping resolve disagreements among
partners in the national government and seeking a solution to disarming the
FDLR. Focused on making elections happen, donors have not yet addressed
how to assure political space or deliver justice after elections.