Democratic Republic of Congo
Armed conflict continued in eastern Democratic Republic of Congo, with
Congolese security forces and non-state armed groups responsible for serious
abuses against civilians. The Rwandan-backed M23 armed group committed
widespread war crimes, including summary executions, rapes, and forced
recruitment of children. As the military focused attention on defeating the M23,
many other armed groups also attacked civilians.
In the capital, Kinshasa, and elsewhere, government authorities have sought to
silence dissent with threats, violence, and arbitrary arrests against human
rights activists, journalists, and opposition political party leaders and supporters
who were critical of government officials or participated in anti-government
demonstrations.
In March, M23 leader and former Congolese military commander Bosco
Ntaganda surrendered to the United States embassy in Rwanda. He is awaiting
trial at the International Criminal Court (ICC) on charges of war crimes and
crimes against humanity committed in northeastern Congo in 2002 and 2003.
One of the regions most brutal warlords, Ntaganda commanded forces that terrorized
civilians for the past decade.
Abuses by the Security Forces
When government soldiers fled the M23s advance on the eastern city of Goma
in late November 2012, they went on a rampage and raped at least 76 women
and girls in and around the town of Minova, South Kivu. In Kitchanga, North
Kivu, soldiers from the 812th Regiment, allied with a Tutsi militia they had
armed, clashed with a primarily ethnic Hunde armed group in late February
through early March. At least 25 civilians died in the fighting. Many of the civilians
killed were Hunde who appear to have been targeted by soldiers because
of their ethnicity. Security forces also deliberately killed civilians during operations
against Mai Mai fighters in Katanga province.
Military and intelligence officials detained many former M23 fighters and
alleged collaborators for several weeks without bringing them before a court,
often incommunicado and in harsh conditions.
War Crimes by M23 Rebels
During their occupation of Goma and nearby areas in late November 2012, M23
fighters summarily executed at least 24 people, raped at least 36 women and
girls, looted hundreds of homes, offices, and vehicles, and forcibly recruited
soldiers and medical officers, police, and civilians into their ranks. The M23
withdrew from Goma on December 1 when the government agreed to start
peace talks in Kampala, Uganda.
Following infighting between two M23 factions and Ntagandas surrender in
March, abuses by the M23 continued. Between March and July, M23 fighters
summarily executed at least 44 people and raped at least 61 women and girls.
In August, after intense fighting resumed between the M23 and the Congolese
army supported by MONUSCO, the UN peacekeeping mission in Congo, the M23
shelled populated neighborhoods in and around Goma, killing at least 7 civilians
and wounding more than 40.
Since its inception, the M23 had received significant military support from
Rwanda, including the deployment of Rwandan troops to Congo to fight alongside
it; weapons, ammunition, and other supplies; training for new M23
recruits; and the forcible recruitment of men and boys in Rwanda, who were
then sent across the border to fight for the M23.
Following public denunciations and aid suspensions to Rwanda by Western
allies, when fighting resumed in late October, the M23 did not receive the military
support from Rwanda on which it had previously relied. The rebels were
quickly defeated by the Congolese army and UN forces. On November 5, the
M23 announced an end to its armed rebellion. Many of its remaining leaders
and fighters fled to Uganda and Rwanda.
Attacks on Civilians by Other Armed Groups
Numerous other armed groups have carried out horrific attacks on civilians in
eastern Congo, including in North and South Kivu, Katanga, and Orientale
provinces. Fighters from the Nduma Defense of Congo militia group, led by
Ntabo Ntaberi Sheka, killed, raped, and mutilated scores of civilians between
May and September in Masisi and Walikale territories, North Kivu. Sheka is
sought on a Congolese arrest warrant for crimes against humanity.
Other armed groups have also carried out ethnically based attacks on civilians
in North and South Kivu. They include the Raia Mutomboki, the Nyatura, the
Mai Mai Kifuafua, and the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda
(FDLR), a largely Rwandan Hutu armed group, some of whose members participated
in the Rwandan genocide in 1994. Some groups have targeted human
rights activists who spoke out against their abuses. In September, FDLR fighters
abducted a human rights activist in Miriki, North Kivu, detained him in an
underground cell for eight days, and accused him of providing information
about FDLR abuses to UN peacekeepers.
In Beni territory, North Kivu, the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), a rebel group
led by Ugandan fighters, as well as other militia groups active in the area, kidnapped
several hundred Congolese civilians. In Orientale province, fighting
between the Patriotic Resistance Force in Ituri (FRPI) and other militia groups
and the Congolese army forced more than 80,000 people to abandon their
homes.
In Katanga, Mai Mai fighters forcibly recruited hundreds of children into their
ranks and killed, raped, and mutilated civilians. Some of these Mai Mai fighters
are led by Gdon Kyungu Mutanga, a warlord who was convicted by a military
court in 2009 for crimes against humanity but escaped from prison in
September 2011. On August 7, militia fighters in Pweto, Katanga, summarily
executed a human rights activist who had denounced abuses by the group.
The Lords Resistance Army (LRA), a Ugandan rebel group with a long record of
atrocities, continued to attack civilians in northern Congo and eastern Central
African Republic. At time of writing, the LRAs three senior leaders sought on
arrest warrants from the International Criminal Court (ICC)Joseph Kony, Odhok
Odhiambo, and Dominic Ongwenremained at large.
Few efforts have been made to curb abuses by these armed groups or to investigate,
arrest, and prosecute those responsible. Elements of the Congolese
army have in some cases collaborated with and provided support to armed
groups responsible for serious abuses, including the FDLR and Nyatura.
Freedom of Expression and Peaceful Assembly
Government and security forces have used violence, intimidation, threats, arbitrary
arrests, and judicial proceedings based on trumped-up charges to silence
dissent and prevent political leaders and activists from freely expressing their
peaceful opinions or demonstrating.
Eugne Diomi Ndongala, a former member of parliament and minister, has been
detained since April. Diomi is the president of the Christian Democrats
(Dmocratie chrtienne) opposition party and a founding member of the
Popular Presidential Majority (Majorit prsidentielle populaire)a political
alliance supporting opposition leader Etienne Tshisekedi.
Another member of parliament, Muhindo Nzangi, was sentenced to three years
in prison in August. Only two days after he made remarks on a radio program in
Goma that were viewed as critical of President Joseph Kabilas policy in eastern
Congo, Nzangi was tried and convicted for endangering internal state security.
On August 20, police forcibly disrupted a peaceful sit-in by Nzangis supporters
outside the North Kivu governors office in Goma. They beat several protesters,
arrested five, and threatened t0 charge them with rebellion.
Security forces also threatened, beat, or detained journalists and human rights
activists. On March 10, police and Republican Guard soldiers beat or threatened
four journalists for covering Tshisekedis return to Kinshasa from South
Africa. In July, a human rights activist was accused of being a spy; soldiers beat
him after he conducted a research mission to document M23 abuses.
Justice and Accountability
The vast majority of human rights abuses committed in Congo have gone
unpunished. However, there have been some positive developments. On March
18, Bosco Ntaganda turned himself in to the US embassy in Kigali, Rwanda, and
was flown to The Hague, where he faces charges of war crimes and crimes
against humanity at the ICC. The Congolese government issued arrest warrants
for several M23 leaders, and government officials have stated clearly that they
will neither provide an amnesty nor integrate into the army those allegedly
responsible for war crimes.
In November, the trial began in North Kivus military operational court in Goma
for 39 soldiers and officers allegedly involved in the mass rape and pillaging in
and around Minova a year earlier.
In December 2012, the ICC acquitted and released Mathieu Ngudjolo Chui, who
had been charged with crimes against humanity and war crimes allegedly committed
in northeastern Congo in 2003. The trial of Ngudjolos co-accused,
Germain Katanga, continues. Sylvestre Mudacumura, the FDLRs military commander
sought on an arrest warrant from the ICC for war crimes, remained at
large at the time of writing.
Key International Actors
In February, 11 African countries signed the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of Congo and the Region in Addis
Ababa, under the auspices of the UN secretary-general. The signatories agreed
not to tolerate or provide support of any kind to armed groups; neither to harbor
nor provide protection of any kind to anyone accused of war crimes or
crimes against humanity, or anyone who is listed under the UN sanctions
regime; and to cooperate with regional justice initiatives. The former president
of Ireland, Mary Robinson, was appointed UN special envoy for the Great Lakes
region to support implementation of the agreement.
In March, the UN Security Council authorized the deployment of an Intervention
Brigade. This 3,000-member force within MONUSCO, made up of African troops,
is mandated to carry out offensive operations to neutralize armed groups operating
in eastern Congo.