D<DF:I8K@: R<GL9C@: F= CFE>F
The human rights situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) remained
grave. All sides in the country’s ongoing armed conflicts continued to attack
civilians and commit other serious human rights abuses. Military operations
against foreign and domestic armed groups in the east and north were on a
smaller scale than in previous years. Efforts to integrate armed groups into the
national army were hampered by former rebel leaders, such as Bosco
Ntaganda, who flouted orders from the army’s central command and pursued
their own interests. Ntaganda is facing an International Criminal Court (ICC)
arrest warrant but remains in charge of military operations in eastern Congo.
Preparations for elections preoccupied Congolese authorities and international
partners for much of the year. The months before the elections were marked by
threats and physical attacks against opposition members, media, and human
rights defenders. The United Nations peacekeeping mission in Congo (MONUSCO)
continued to implement its civilian protection mandate and supported
logistics for the elections, but was hampered by a serious shortage of helicopters,
which impeded its mobility and effectiveness.
Presidential and Legislative Elections
Much attention was focused on preparing for elections set for late 2011 as
President Joseph Kabila sought a second term. In January Kabila’s government
pushed a hasty constitutional change altering the voting system for presidential
elections from a two-round to a single-round poll. A month later a close Kabila
ally, Pastor Daniel Mulunda Ngoy, was sworn in as head of the National
Independent Electoral Commission (CENI). Opposition groups protested the
changes, which they said were designed to benefit Kabila.
Politically motivated human rights violations increased as elections
approached. UN investigators reported 188 cases before the official campaign
began in October. Violence perpetrated by police and other state security services
included restrictions on political activities, unnecessary force against
demonstrators, and arbitrary arrests primarily directed toward opposition parties,
their supporters, and journalists. For example, on October 6 the police violently crushed a demonstration by the Union pour la Democratie et le Progres
Social (UDPS) opposition party in Kinshasa, using teargas and firing live rounds
in the air. One person was killed and at least 10 others were wounded. Some
candidates and their supporters also used inflammatory language and hate
speech, inciting youth groups and others to use violence against their opponents.
Attacks on Civilians
The east and the north of the country remained volatile and were marked by frequent
attacks on civilians, particularly sexual violence against women and girls.
Nearly 1.7 million people are displaced, including the newly displaced, and a
further 476,000 are refugees in neighboring countries.
In the east, the army continued military operations against the Democratic
Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda (FDLR), a predominately Rwandan Hutu
rebel group, and the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), a Ugandan rebel group,
though on a reduced scale from previous years. The government opened secret
negotiations with the FDLR to encourage the group to disarm and resettle in
another part of Congo, but the talks failed.
As in the past, government soldiers frequently killed and raped civilians and
pressed them into forced labor or looted their belongings. In one case, on the
night of January 1 soldiers raped at least 67 women and girls and arbitrarily
detained and tortured dozens of other civilians in Fizi, South Kivu. Also in
January soldiers raped at least 47 women and girls in Bushani, North Kivu, and
looted and burned some 100 homes.
Government soldiers also attacked civilians while fighting in the north against
the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), a Ugandan rebel group with a long record of
atrocities. The worst attacks were against the Mbororo nomadic cattle herders
who frequently traverse the border between Congo and the Central African
Republic (CAR). At least 35 Mbororo women and girls were raped. Some women
were taken to army camps where they were held and repeatedly raped. Soldiers
also beat and arbitrarily detained Mbororo men and pillaged their cattle. The army claimed the Mbororo were aligned with the LRA, but provided no evidence
to support the claim.
Armed groups also attacked civilians. In the east, the FDLR and Congolese
armed groups occupied areas vacated by government soldiers when they were
temporarily recalled for training, attacking civilians who resided there. For
example, in May FDLR combatants attacked numerous villages in Masisi territory,
killing six civilians, raping two women, and abducting at least 48 people
whose whereabouts remain unknown. In Bwale, South Kivu, in January and
February at least 65 women and girls were raped by FDLR combatants during
four attacks.
In the north the LRA carried out at least 250 attacks against civilians and continued
to abduct children and adults, although deadly attacks were less frequent
than in previous years. In LRA-affected areas in Congo, CAR, and South
Sudan, 2,400 people were killed and 3,400 were abducted by the LRA since
September 2008. The Ugandan army, in coalition with armed forces from neighboring
countries, continued its military operations against the LRA. No progress
was made in apprehending three of the LRA’s top leaders sought by the ICC for
war crimes committed in northern Uganda, and relations between the coalition
partners began to deteriorate. Congolese army and MONUSCO efforts to protect
civilians in LRA-affected areas remained inadequate, though some efforts were
made to avert attacks around the 2010 Christmas period, a time of previous LRA
violence.
Abuses by Bosco Ntaganda
The Congolese army’s attempts to restructure and integrate former armed
groups into its ranks continued to be fraught with problems. The creation of
new regiments mixing government soldiers with former rebels caused confusion
and weakened command and control. It further permitted former rebel leader
Bosco Ntaganda to increase his power base by expanding his parallel command
over parts of the army and local administration.
Ntaganda continued his brutal campaign against perceived opponents, both
military and civilian, by ordering assassinations, arbitrary arrests, and other forms of intimidation. Troops under his command were implicated in attacks on
civilians. He continued to recruit children and thwarted efforts to demobilize
them. He blocked judicial investigations into abuses committed by his loyalists,
violated a government export ban on minerals from eastern Congo, and
used his influence in the military to confiscate land and expand his business
interests.
Despite the flagrant abuses, the government did not enforce the ICC arrest warrant
against Ntaganda. Officials said they feared his arrest could disrupt the
integration of former rebel groups into the army and harm diplomatic relations
with Congo’s neighbor, Rwanda, which supports Ntaganda. Failure to arrest
Ntaganda further harmed peace and stabilization efforts.
Journalists and Human Rights Defenders
Congolese human rights defenders and journalists continued to be targeted in
2011. On June 21 Witness-Patchelly Kambale Musonia—a journalist and talk
show host at Radio Paysanne, a community radio station in Kirumba, North
Kivu—was shot dead by unidentified armed men following a broadcast about
the trafficking of weapons. On March 24, government soldiers in Baraka, South
Kivu, threatened a human rights defender from Federation des Femmes pour la
Paix for her activities in defense of rape victims.
Threats increased as elections approached. On September 6, unidentified
armed men threw tear gas, gasoline, and incendiary grenades into the studio of
Radio Lisanga Télévision (RTLV), a private television station favorable to opposition
candidate Etienne Tshisekedi. In June armed men attacked and injured
an RTLV presenter. In Fungurume, Katanga province, Dédé Ilunga, a journalist
with Radio Océan, was arbitrarily arrested and detained by police for 17 days in
September following a broadcast criticizing President Kabila’s development
program. He was released without charge.
Journalists covering demonstrations and political rallies were also repeatedly
targeted. In August security guards at a ruling party congress at a Kinshasa stadium
attacked cameraman Serge Kembila of Radio Télévision Groupe l’Avenir
(RTGA) for filming empty seats and confiscated his footage.
Congolese authorities have largely failed to investigate and prosecute those
responsible for the attacks. In one exception, a military court in Kinshasa found
five senior police officers guilty of murdering Floribert Chebeya Bahizire, the
executive director of Voice of the Voiceless, and his driver, Fidèle Bazana, in
June 2010. At this writing three of the five remained at large. Congolese human
rights groups criticized the trial for failing to take into account the role of the
national police chief in the murder.
Justice and Accountability
There was mixed progress in the government’s efforts to hold perpetrators of
serious violations to account.
Congo’s judicial officials had some notable successes in prosecuting sexual
violence and other crimes. Following the January mass rape in Fizi, South Kivu,
a military court found 10 soldiers and their commanding officer guilty of crimes
against humanity. In March another military court sentenced 11 soldiers, including
three officers, for crimes against humanity committed in Katasomwa in
September 2009. On March 25 the High Military Court in Kinshasa began the
trial of Gen. Jérôme Kakwavu, on war crimes charges for rape and torture.
Kakwavu is the first general in Congo’s history to be arrested on rape charges.
No progress was made in apprehending the perpetrators of a mass rape of 387
women, men, and children, committed by a coalition of armed groups in
Walikale territory, North Kivu, in July and August 2010. One of those facing an
arrest warrant for the crime against humanity of rape, Ntabo Ntaberi Sheka, ran
as a candidate for the National Assembly. Efforts to combat impunity also suffered
a serious blow with the promotion and growing power of Ntaganda, living
openly in Goma, and the escape from prison of Gedeon Kyungu Mutanda and
many of his co-perpetrators, who had been found guilty of crimes against
humanity in 2009. Authorities had ignored many earlier requests from civil society
to incarcerate Mutanda at a maximum security prison.
The Congolese government took action in response to the 2010 human rights
“mapping report” published by the UN Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR), which documented 617 incidents of serious violations of international humanitarian law between 1993 and 2003. In August the government
presented a draft law to parliament to establish a specialized mixed
court with national and international judicial staff to try those responsible for
the most serious crimes. Congolese civil society groups strongly supported the
draft legislation, but the Senate rejected it and asked the government to harmonize
its proposal with other draft laws to combat serious human rights violations.
International trials against those responsible for crimes continued. In Germany
two FDLR leaders stood trial for war crimes and crimes against humanity. At the
ICC three former Congolese armed group leaders were tried for similar crimes
and judges deliberated whether the case of a Rwandan FDLR leader would
move forward to trial.
Key International Actors
International actors focused their attention on the elections. The UN Security
Council renewed MONUSCO’s mandate with a continued focus on protecting
civilians, though UN member states failed to provide it with the logistical capabilities
it required.
OHCHR took few steps to follow-up on its “mapping report.” Few diplomats and
UN officials raised public concerns about the government’s failure to arrest
Ntaganda, though some said they raised it privately.
United States President Barack Obama announced in October that the US
would send 100 military advisors to central Africa to help regional forces apprehend
LRA leaders and end the group’s violence. The US also said it would withhold
US$1.3 million in foreign military financing until the Congolese government
takes concrete steps to end its use of child soldiers.