Colombia
Colombia’s forty-year internal armed conflict continues to be accompanied
by widespread violations of human rights and international humanitarian
law. All actors in the conflict—guerrillas, paramilitary groups,
and the armed forces—commit serious violations, such as massacres,
assassinations, and kidnappings.
In 2004, while pursuing an aggressive military offensive against guerrilla
groups, the government engaged in peace negotiations with paramilitary
groups. The negotiations may result in the demobilization of several
thousand individuals who claim to have been members of paramilitary
groups. At the same time, however, paramilitaries have been flouting
the OAS-monitored ceasefire they agreed to at the start of negotiations,
while consolidating their control over vast areas of the country. And the
demobilization process continues to lack sufficient safeguards to ensure
that paramilitaries responsible for the commission of atrocities are
brought to justice.
The government has yet to take credible action to break ties between
the military and paramilitary groups. Impunity, particularly with respect
to high-level military officials, remains the norm.
Negotiations with Paramilitary Groups
The Colombian government has been negotiating the demobilization of
paramilitary groups since early 2003. The negotiations have been mired
in controversy: an initial demobilization of several hundred individuals
in late 2003 is now widely viewed as a failure because many of those
who demobilized were in fact criminals posing as paramilitaries, and
because of reports that, of those who were not impostors, many have
continued to engage in paramilitary activities. In addition, the paramilitaries
have not adhered to the ceasefire agreement that they initially
announced in November of 2002. A report by Colombia’s Public Advocate released in October 2004 stated that in the first eight months
of the year it had received complaints involving 342 apparent paramilitary
breaches of the ceasefire, including kidnappings, forced displacement,
extortion, targeted homicides, and massacres.
A significant obstacle to a full and effective paramilitary demobilization
is the lack of a legal framework to govern the demobilization process
and the benefits to be provided to those who demobilize. A draft bill
initially proposed by the administration of President Alvaro Uribe in
2003 would have allowed cooperative paramilitary leaders responsible
for atrocities to go virtually unpunished. After an international and
domestic outcry, the proposed law was modified. However, a new version
of the bill circulated in April 2004 still contains serious flaws—a
failure to provide for thorough investigations of paramilitary crimes and
illegal assets, and a loophole allowing those convicted of atrocities to
entirely avoid incarceration—that make the effective demobilization and
dismantling of paramilitary structures unlikely.
In November 2004, the government announced a schedule for the
demobilization of three to four thousand paramilitary troops by the end
of the year, applying similar procedures to those that were used in the
Cacique Nutibara demobilization.
Military-Paramilitary Ties
Paramilitary groups maintain close ties with a number of Colombian
military units. The Uribe administration has yet to take effective action
to break these ties by investigating and prosecuting high-ranking members
of the armed forces credibly alleged to have collaborated with paramilitary
groups.
Credible reports indicate that some of the territories from which the
military has ejected the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia
(Fuerzas Armadas Revolutionarias de Colombia, FARC) are now under the control of paramilitary groups, which continue to carry out indiscriminate
attacks on the civilian population.
Impunity
The Attorney General’s Office continues to make little progress in
prosecuting commanding military officers against whom there are credible
allegations of human rights violations. Prosecutors appear to lack
the political will necessary to take on such high-ranking and well-connected
suspects.
In 2004, for example, Attorney General Luis Camilo Osorio announced
that he would not file charges against General Rito Alejo del Río. Del
Río had been under investigation for allegedly supporting paramilitaries
who had attacked villages, executed local civic leaders, and provoked
mass displacement and severe hardship for thousands of people in
northern Colombia between 1995 and 1997. The evidence against Del
Rio was compelling enough to prompt then-President Andrés Pastrana
to dismiss Del Río in 1998. The U.S. government cancelled his visa to
the United States in July 1999, on the ground that there was credible
evidence that implicated him in “international terrorism,” among other
crimes.
Anti-terrorism Measures
Colombia’s Constitutional Court struck down on procedural grounds a
constitutional reform, proposed by the Uribe administration and
approved by Congress in 2003, that would have allowed the military to
perform arrests and searches, and intercept private communications,
without a warrant or any prior judicial review. The government is widely
expected to reenact the reform in 2005, this time following the requisite
legal procedures.
The government continues to carry out mass arrests of individuals suspected
of collaborating with guerrilla groups, a tactic that has resulted
in abuses by security forces and judicial authorities. Authorities have
frequently based both individual and mass arrests on inadequate or
unreliable information, in some cases obtained solely from secret
informants or demobilized individuals in contexts in which authorities
know or should know that the information is unreliable. Such arrests,
even if wrongful, can turn individuals into targets for attack after their
release. For example, university professor Alfredo Correa de Andreis
was assassinated by unknown assailants shortly after being formally
cleared of charges, based on allegations by a secret informant, that he
was a FARC ideologue.
Human Rights Monitors and Other Vulnerable Groups
Colombia is an extremely dangerous place for human rights monitors,
who have for years been threatened and attacked because of their work.
The problem has recently been exacerbated by statements from government
officials, who in 2003 and again in 2004 publicly accused human
rights organizations as well as individual human rights monitors of
being guerrilla collaborators or apologists for terrorism. After sustained
international criticism, President Uribe and other government officials
have started to conduct meetings with representatives of domestic and
international human rights organizations.
Other particularly vulnerable groups include journalists, academics,
labor union leaders, and members of indigenous groups. In August
2004, for example, three labor union leaders in Arauca were apparently
killed by members of the armed forces.
The Kankuamo, like many other indigenous communities, has been
repeatedly targeted by guerrilla and paramilitary groups who are fighting
for control of traditional Kankuamo lands in Colombia’s Sierra
Nevada mountains. Assassinations and massacres have resulted in hundreds of Kankuamo deaths and the decimation of entire towns. In July
2004, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights told Colombia to
adopt measures to protect the community. But the continued killing of
Kankuamo leaders raises doubts about the government’s willingness to
comply with this decision.
Violations by Guerrilla Groups
While in retreat in some parts of the country, guerrillas continue to
commit frequent and serious violations of international humanitarian
law. Abuses include massacres, extrajudicial executions, and kidnappings
for financial or political gain.
The Uribe administration expressed willingness in 2004 to negotiate the
release of FARC members not convicted of committing atrocities, in
exchange for the release of hostages held by the FARC. The FARC has
refused this exchange, however, stating that the government should first
establish a demilitarized zone where the exchange could occur.
Child Recruitment
At least one of every four irregular combatants in Colombia is under
eighteen years of age. Of these, several thousand are under the age of
fifteen, the minimum recruitment age permitted under the Geneva
Conventions. Eighty percent of the children under arms belong to one
of two guerrilla groups, the FARC or the National Liberation Army
(Ejército de Liberation Nacional, ELN). The remainder fights for paramilitaries.
Many children join up for food or physical protection, to escape domestic
violence, or because of promises of money. A few join under coercion
or out of fear. Others are street children with nowhere to go.
Children as young as thirteen are trained to use assault rifles, grenades,
and mortars. 
Key International Actors
The United States remains the most influential foreign actor in
Colombia. In 2004 it provided more than U.S.$700 million to the government,
mostly in military aid. Although 25 percent of the security
assistance included in this package is formally subject to human rights
conditions, the conditions have not been enforced: the full amount of
aid continues to flow to Colombia even though the government has
failed to break ties between the military and abusive paramilitary
groups.
The U.S. Congress has approved a doubling of U.S. troops and an
increase in U.S. private contractors in Colombia for 2005. The troops
and contractors are to provide logistical support and training to the
Colombian military in counter-narcotics and counter-insurgency operations.
In February 2004, the Organization of American States (OAS) authorized
the establishment of an OAS Mission in Colombia to “provide
technical support to the verification of the ceasefire and cessation of
hostilities, demobilization, disarmament, and reintegration initiatives.”
The Mission has faced numerous obstacles, including lack of funding
and refusal by paramilitary leaders to concentrate their forces in the
demilitarized zone, which renders it impossible for the mission to perform
its verification function. However, the OAS Mission has also been
the subject of controversy, with critics charging that the Mission is
becoming overly involved in the negotiations, improperly lending the
OAS’s legitimacy to a flawed process.
The Office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights is active
in Colombia, with a presence in Bogotá, Medellín, and Cali.
Nonetheless, its relations with the government are difficult due to
Colombia’s repeated failure to implement the office’s human rights recommendations.