Colombia
Colombia remains mired in a decades-long internal armed conflict, which continues
to result in widespread abuses by irregular armed groups, including both
guerrillas and paramilitaries, as well as by the Colombian armed forces.
Civilians suffer the brunt of the conflict, as every year thousands become displaced
by the violence, losing their homes and livelihoods. Forced disappearances,
extrajudicial executions, targeted assassinations, threats, and kidnappings
remain commonplace. The vast majority of abuses remain unaddressed.
Both paramilitary groups and guerrillas continue to be well-financed through
resources from the drug business. Paramilitaries have also become increasingly
involved in large-scale corruption schemes, infiltrating national governmental
institutions, controlling local politicians, and diverting funds from state agencies.
Demobilization of Paramilitary Groups
The Colombian government claimed in 2006 that it had successfully completed
the demobilization of more than 30,000 supposed paramilitaries, but serious
questions remain as to the effectiveness of the demobilization process in dismantling
paramilitaries’ complex criminal and financial structures, and ensuring
truth, justice, and reparation.
Paramilitary commanders have not taken significant steps to give up their massive
illegally acquired wealth, return stolen land, or show that they have ceased
their lucrative criminal activities. Disturbing indicators of their persistent influence
in 2006 included: reports of paramilitary infiltration of the Intelligence
Service; increasing threats against academics, union leaders, human rights
defenders, and journalists; and the formation of new paramilitary groups, as
reported by the Organization of American States’ (OAS) Mission to Support the
Peace Process.
In May 2006, the Colombian Constitutional Court ruled on the constitutionality of
the government’s controversial “Justice and Peace Law,” which offers dramatically
reduced sentences to paramilitaries responsible for atrocities and other serious crimes. The court approved the reduced sentences, but through interpretation,
made several important improvements to the law, ruling that paramilitaries would
have to confess and pay reparations out of their legal and illegal assets, and that
if they lied or committed new crimes, they could risk losing their reduced sentences.
It also held that prosecutors would have to fully investigate all confessed
crimes.
In September, the government issued a decree that partially implemented the
court ruling, but that also conferred upon the paramilitary leadership even greater
benefits by allowing them to avoid prison altogether by serving their reduced sentences
on farms or at home instead.
A number of commanders turned themselves in for voluntary confinement in a
retreat house in the state of Antioquia, but many others remain at large.
New paramilitary abuses, including killings and forced disappearances, continued
to be reported throughout the year. In October, the Attorney General’s office
revealed that a confiscated computer owned by an associate of the paramilitary
leader known as “Jorge 40” had turned up evidence of over 500 assassinations
committed in just one Colombian state between 2003 and 2005. The computer
also pointed to continuing plans by the paramilitaries’ Northern Block to expand
their political power and territorial control.
Talks with Guerrillas
Throughout 2006, the Colombian government engaged in preliminary talks with
the National Liberation Army (ELN) guerrillas, to set the terms for eventual peace
negotiations. President Uribe announced that he would seek to obtain resources
to support the ELN during peace talks and replace the revenue this group would
otherwise obtain from kidnappings and extortion.
Meanwhile, the largest guerrilla group in Colombia, the Revolutionary Armed
Forces of Colombia (FARC), expressed interest in discussing an exchange of its
hostages for imprisoned guerrilla members. Talks on this issue were cancelled
after a bombing in October 2006 for which the government charged the FARC was
responsible.
The government persisted in its decision to offer demobilization benefits to FARC
members who had already been convicted and were in prison for gross violations
of international humanitarian law, such as kidnappings and killings.
Both the FARC and ELN continued to engage in abuses against civilians, which in
2006 included kidnappings, killings, and indiscriminate bombings. Guerrilla
groups are responsible for most reported cases of the use of anti-personnel landmines,
which result in hundreds of civilian injuries and deaths every year.
Guerrillas are also responsible for most recruitment of child soldiers in Colombia.
At least 80 percent of the children under arms in Colombia belong to the FARC or
ELN. At least one of every four irregular combatants in Colombia is under 18 years
of age. Of these, several thousand are under the age of 15, the minimum recruitment
age permitted under the Geneva Conventions.
Impunity and Military-Paramilitary Links
Colombia’s long-running failure to effectively investigate, prosecute, and punish
human rights abuses has created an environment in which abusers correctly
assume that they will never be held accountable for their crimes.
The problem is particularly acute in cases of military abuses, including cases
involving credible allegations of military-paramilitary links. Low-ranking officers
are sometimes held accountable in these cases, but rarely is a commanding officer
prosecuted.
Early in 2006, scores of allegations were made public that units of the army had
executed civilians and dressed the corpses as guerrillas so that they could record
them as killed in combat. In another case, 21 military recruits were allegedly tortured
by their supervisors during training, subjected to beatings, burning, and
sexual abuse.
In May 2006, an army unit shot and killed 10 elite anti-narcotics police officers
who had been trained by the US Drug Enforcement Administration. Prosecutors
labeled the killings intentional, not accidental. Investigation of the case, however,
was initially hampered by the fact that the civilian judge charged with the case
refused to review it. As of this writing, prosecutions were ongoing.
In one encouraging development, prosecutors announced that they had obtained
new evidence in a case involving the “disappearances” of 10 people in the 1985
retaking by security forces of Colombia’s Palace of Justice (which housed the
Supreme Court), after its invasion by the M-19 guerrilla group.
Internal Displacement
With a cumulative total of more than 3.7 million displaced persons, Colombia continues
to have the world’s largest internal displacement crisis after Sudan, and
incidents of forced displacement rose from 2003 to 2005, according to the nongovernmental
Consultancy for Human Rights and the Displaced (Consultoria para
los Derechos Humanos y el Desplazamiento, CODHES). While government data for
these years are lower, they reflect the same trend. (At this writing, data for 2006
were not available.)
Those who are internally displaced are generally worse off than the poorest members
of their host communities, with two-thirds living in inadequate housing with
no access to basic sanitation, according to studies by the International
Committee of the Red Cross, the Catholic Church, and the University of the Andes.
Only one in five displaced persons receives medical care, and some 300,000 displaced
children do not have access to education, the Geneva-based Internal
Displacement Monitoring Centre reported in June 2006.
The Colombian government quietly has backed away from its earlier policy, roundly
criticized by local and international observers, which had promoted return to
home communities as its principal response to displacement. But the central government
refuses in some instances to extend recognition to groups thought to be
taking a “political stance” against the government. As a practical matter, the
denial of recognition means that most displaced individuals return to their home
communities even though the security situation does not enable a safe and dignified
return.
In response to a 2004 Constitutional Court finding that the government’s system
for assisting displaced persons was unconstitutional, the Colombian government
substantially increased its budget for protection and humanitarian assistance for displaced persons, committing more than US$2 billion dollars for the five-year
period ending in 2010.
A major assistance program funded by the US Agency for International
Development and managed by the International Organization for Migration and
the Pan-American Development Foundation had a slow start in 2006.
Access to Legal Abortion
In May 2006 Colombia’s constitutional court declared that the country’s blanket
criminalization of abortion violated women’s constitutional rights, a landmark
decision for the region. The court declared that neither women nor doctors can be
penalized for procuring or providing abortions where one of three conditions is
met: 1) the pregnancy constitutes a grave danger to the pregnant woman’s life or
health; 2) the fetus has serious genetic malformations; and 3) the pregnancy is
the result of rape or incest.
Human Rights Monitors and Other Vulnerable Groups
Human rights monitors, as well as labor leaders, journalists, and other vulnerable
groups continue to be the subjects of frequent threats, harassment, and attacks
for their legitimate work. Investigations of these cases rarely result in prosecutions
or convictions.
President Uribe once again made statements attacking the media for its coverage
of public issues, singling out individual journalists and papers, and accusing
them of being dishonest, malicious, and harmful to democratic institutions.
The Ministry of Interior has a protection program, established with US funding, to
offer protection to threatened persons. Nonetheless, a number of individuals
have complained about feeling intimidated by the armed escorts—who have
often been agents of the intelligence service—assigned to them.
Key International Actors
The United States remains the most influential foreign actor in Colombia. In 2006
it provided close to US$800 million to the Colombian government, mostly in military
aid. Twenty-five percent of US security assistance is formally subject to
human rights conditions, but the conditions have not been consistently enforced.
In 2006 the United States also started providing financial support for the paramilitary
demobilization process, certifying Colombia’s compliance with related conditions
in US law.
The OAS Mission to Support the Peace Process in Colombia, which is charged
with verifying the demobilization process, began offering more critical analyses in
2006 after having endorsed the process uncritically in the past. Nonetheless, the
mission’s effectiveness continues to be limited by its failure to scrutinize judicial
proceedings against the paramilitaries and monitor the progress of Colombian
authorities in dismantling their complex financial and criminal networks.
Several European governments, including those of Sweden and the Netherlands,
continue to provide substantial funding to the OAS Mission.
The Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights is active in Colombia,
with a presence in Bogota, Medellin, and Cali. Despite the office’s high quality
and professional work, the Colombian government repeatedly criticized it in
2006. After protracted negotiations lasting much of the year, the Colombian government
extended the office’s mandate by one additional year. However, government
officials, including Vice President Francisco Santos, stated that they
planned to continue negotiating “adjustments” to the scope of the office’s mandate.