Colombia
Colombia’s internal armed conflict continues to result in widespread abuses by
irregular armed groups and government forces. The Colombian government dealt
serious blows to the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerrillas in
2008. But guerrillas continued to engage in kidnappings, use of antipersonnel
landmines, recruitment of child combatants, and other abuses. Successor groups
to paramilitaries, which never fully demobilized, appeared increasingly active,
threatening and killing civilians, including trade unionists and human rights
defenders. Reports of extrajudicial executions of civilians by the military remain
frequent. Internal displacement of civilians has been steadily rising in recent
years— in 2008 the number of people affected may have reached its highest level
in decades.
Colombia’s justice institutions have in recent years begun to make some progress
in uncovering the truth about paramilitary abuses and accomplices. But in 2008
the administration of President Álvaro Uribe repeatedly took steps that could
hamper the investigations.
Progress and Threats to Accountability for Paramilitaries’
Accomplices
Colombia’s paramilitaries are responsible for crimes against humanity and thousands
of other atrocities. They have also amassed enormous wealth and influence,
in part through mafia-style alliances with members of the military, politicians,
and businesspeople.
Colombia’s institutions of justice have recently started to uncover some of the
truth about paramilitaries’ abuses and accomplices. The Supreme Court has
made unprecedented progress in investigating accusations against members of
the Colombian Congress for collaborating with the paramilitaries. More than 60
members—nearly all from President Uribe’s coalition—have come under investigation.
And, in confessions to prosecutors from the Attorney General’s Office pursuant
to the “Justice and Peace Law,” which offers them reduced sentences subject
to full and truthful confessions and other conditions, paramilitary commanders have started to disclose details of some of their atrocities and to name
accomplices.
However, the Uribe administration has repeatedly taken actions that could sabotage
the investigations. Administration officials have issued public personal
attacks on the Supreme Court and its members, in some cases making accusations
that have turned out to be baseless, in what increasingly looks like a campaign
to discredit the court. In mid-2008 the administration proposed a series of
constitutional amendments that would have removed what are known as the
“parapolitics” investigations from the Supreme Court’s jurisdiction, but it withdrew
the proposal in November. The administration also blocked what is known
as the “empty chair” bill, which would have reformed the Congress to sanction
parties that had backed politicians linked to paramilitaries.
Extraditions of Paramilitary Leaders
In May 2008 Colombia extradited most of the paramilitary leadership to the
United States. The extraditions are positive in that they may help to break the
groups’ chains of command, and increase the likelihood that these commanders
will serve lengthy prison terms for their drug crimes.
Yet the extraditions may prove fatal to obtaining justice for paramilitaries’ human
rights crimes. The extraditions happened at a time when several of the commanders
were coming under pressure from Colombian prosecutors and courts to
answer difficult questions about their abuses and accomplices. The sudden extraditions
have interrupted the process of confessions and interrogation in Colombia
and eliminated commanders’ incentives to cooperate with the Colombian investigations.
In October two of the extradited individuals, known as “Cuco Vanoy” and
“Gordolindo,” received prison sentences of over 20 years each for their drug trafficking
crimes, pursuant to plea bargains. They have ceased providing information
to Colombian authorities about their human rights crimes, and it is unclear
whether their plea bargains require that they cooperate in that regard.
New Armed Groups
The Uribe administration claims that paramilitaries no longer exist. While more
than 30,000 individuals supposedly demobilized, Colombian prosecutors have
turned up evidence that many of them were not paramilitaries at all, but rather,
civilians recruited to pose as paramilitaries. Law enforcement authorities never
investigated most of them.
Meanwhile, new armed groups often led by mid-level paramilitary commanders
have cropped up all over the country. The Organization of American States (OAS)
Mission verifying the demobilizations has identified 22 such groups, totaling
thousands of members. The groups are actively recruiting new troops, and are
committing widespread abuses, including extortion, threats, killings, and forced
displacement. In Medellín, for example, after a steady decline in official indicators
of violence, there has been a surge in homicides, apparently committed by
these groups.
Guerrilla Abuses
Both the FARC and the National Liberation Army (ELN) continue to engage in
abuses against civilians.
Government forces dealt serious blows to the FARC, including through the arrest
or killing of several commanders. In June security forces rescued 15 hostages held
by the FARC, including three US citizens and former Colombian presidential candidate
Ingrid Betancourt. No lives were lost in the operation, but it was later
revealed that members of the military who participated in the operation displayed
the emblem of the International Committee of the Red Cross, in violation of the
Geneva Conventions, jeopardizing the ability of humanitarian workers to fulfill
their role of protecting civilians. The FARC continue to regularly engage in kidnappings,
and still hold hundreds of hostages.
In August government authorities accused the FARC of planting a bomb on a
crowded street in the town of Ituango that resulted in the deaths of seven people
and injured more than 50 others.
The FARC and ELN continue to frequently use antipersonnel landmines. The Vice-
President’s Observatory for Human Rights reported 153 civilian victims of antipersonnel
mines from January through September 2008.
Internal Displacement
Colombia is estimated to have more than 3 million internally displaced persons,
according to the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees. Displacement
has steadily increased in Colombia in recent years. According to the Committee
on Human Rights and Displacement (CODHES), a nongovernmental organization
monitoring displacement, the first half of 2008 marked the highest rate of displacement
in Colombia in 23 years, with more than 270,000 people displaced in
six months (a 41 percent increase compared to the first six months of 2007).
Official numbers for this period are lower, but are increasing as the period the victims
have to report their displacement to the government is still open.
A 2004 Constitutional Court decision found that women are particularly vulnerable
in situations of internal displacement and ruled that the government’s failure
to protect women’s vulnerability constituted a violation of their rights. In 2008
the government began to comply with the Court’s ruling by establishing programs
to protect internally displaced women.
Military Abuses and Impunity
In recent years there has been a substantial rise in the number of extrajudicial
killings of civilians attributed to the Colombian Army. Under pressure to demonstrate
results, army members apparently take civilians from their homes or workplaces,
kill them, and then dress them up to claim they were combatants killed in
action.
The Attorney General’s Office is currently investigating cases involving more than
a thousand victims dating back to mid-2003. The Defense Ministry has issued
directives indicating that such killings are impermissible. But such directives
have been regularly undermined by statements from high government officials,
including President Uribe, who for years publicly denied the problem existed, and accused human rights defenders reporting these killings of colluding with the
guerrillas in an orchestrated campaign to discredit the military.
In September 2008 a scandal broke over the disappearance of 11 young men from
Soacha, a low-income neighborhood of Bogota. Their bodies were found in the
distant northeastern state of Norte de Santander, and the military—initially
backed by President Uribe—claimed they were combat deaths. Attorney General
Mario Iguaran disputed that claim. In October the Uribe government announced it
was dismissing 27 soldiers, including three generals, in connection with the
killings.
Army commander Mario Montoya, who had been the subject of allegations linking
him to abuses and paramilitaries, resigned in November 2008.
Violence against Trade Unionists
For years, Colombia has led the world in killings of trade unionists, with more
than 2,600 reported killings since 1986, according to the National Labor School,
Colombia’s leading NGO monitoring labor rights. The bulk of the killings are
attributed to paramilitary groups, which have deliberately targeted unionists.
Though the number of killings annually has dropped from its peak in the 1990s,
when the paramilitaries were in the midst of their violent expansion, more than
400 trade unionists have been killed during the Uribe government. In 2008 the
number of killings went up again, to 41 as of October, according to the National
Labor School. Unionists working in the education sector comprise a high proportion
of the victims.
Impunity in the killing of trade unionists is widespread: in about 97 percent of
cases there has been no conviction and the killers remain free. The rate of convictions
for unionist killings under the Uribe administration was consistently low
until 2007, when the number of convictions jumped to 43. As of October the
Attorney General’s Office reported there had been 53 convictions in 2008. This
sudden increase is primarily due to pressure from the US Congress.
Threats against Human Rights Defenders, Journalists, and
Victims of Paramilitaries
Human rights defenders, journalists, local community leaders, and victims of
paramilitary groups, as well as trade unionists, are frequently the targets of
threats.
A March 6 demonstration against paramilitary violence drew public accusations
against the organizers from presidential advisor José Obdulio Gaviria, and shortly
before and after the march, scores of human rights defenders and trade unionists
reported being threatened and attacked. Some demonstration organizers and
participants were killed. In addition to national human rights groups, the threats
targeted the international organization, Peace Brigades International’s Colombia
Project, the news magazine Semana, the Workers’ Central Union, indigenous
organizations, and opposition politicians. In most cases, the threats were issued
in the name of a group calling itself the Black Eagles.
The Ministry of Interior has a protection program for journalists and trade unionists,
and during 2008 it established a separate program for victims presenting
claims in the context of the paramilitary demobilization process. In May the
Constitutional Court demanded a thorough review of this program, which many
victims’ groups consider ineffective.
High-ranking government officials continued to make public statements accusing
human rights groups and defenders of collaborating with guerrillas. Such statements
create an environment of intimidation that makes it difficult for human
rights defenders to carry out their legitimate work.
Key International Actors
The United States remains the most influential foreign actor in Colombia. In 2008
it provided approximately US$650 million to the Colombian government, somewhat
less than in past years. The bulk of the assistance continues to consist of
military and police aid, though in 2008 a larger share of aid was directed toward
social and economic assistance. Thirty percent of US military assistance is formally
subject to human rights conditions, though the US Department of State has not consistently enforced these conditions. The United States also provides financial
support for the paramilitary demobilization process, subject to Colombia’s compliance
with related conditions in US law.
The Democratic leadership in the US Congress has pledged to delay consideration
of the US-Colombia Free Trade Agreement until there is “concrete evidence of sustained
results on the ground” with regard to impunity for violence against trade
unionists and the role of paramilitaries.
The United Kingdom provides military assistance to Colombia, though the full
amount is publicly unknown. The European Union provides social and economic
assistance, and has provided some aid to the government’s paramilitary demobilization
programs.
The OAS Mission to Support the Peace Process in Colombia, which is charged
with verifying the paramilitary demobilizations, issued reports in 2008 that continued
to express concern over the activities of new, rearmed, or never demobilized
groups.
The Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights is active in Colombia,
with a presence in Bogotá, Medellín, and Cali. Colombia was reviewed under the
Universal Periodic Review mechanism of the UN Human Rights Council in
December 2008.