Colombia
Colombia presents the most serious human rights and humanitarian situation
in the region. Battered by an internal armed conflict involving government
forces, guerrilla groups, and paramilitaries, the country has one of the largest
populations of internally displaced persons in the world.
Colombia’s irregular armed groups, both guerrillas and paramilitaries, are
responsible for the bulk of the human rights violations, which in 2005 included
massacres, killings, forced disappearances, kidnappings, torture, and extortion.
Despite ongoing negotiations with the government, paramilitary groups
repeatedly committed abuses in breach of their cease-fire declaration.
Members of the armed forces have at times been implicated in abuses, independently
or in collaboration with paramilitaries. Impunity for such crimes,
particularly when they involve high-ranking military officers, remains a serious
problem. Ties between military units and paramilitary groups persist, and
the government has yet to take credible action to break them.
Demobilization of Paramilitary Groups
2005 was marked by the passage of Law 975, a controversial package for the
demobilization of armed groups that the government called the “Justice and
Peace Law.” The law offers reduced sentences to members of these groups
responsible for serious crimes, if they participate in a demobilization process.
Drafted in the context of extended negotiations with paramilitaries, the law
fails to include effective mechanisms to dismantle the country’s mafia-like
armed groups, which are largely financed through drug trafficking. It also
utterly fails to satisfy international standards on truth, justice, and reparation
for victims.
Although Colombian President Alvaro Uribe signed the demobilization law
in July 2005, the government has not begun applying it. The law faced several
constitutional challenges, which were still pending at this writing in late
November 2005.
Even before the demobilization law was passed, the government sponsored
large-scale demobilization ceremonies in which thousands of paramilitaries
handed over weapons. The government portrayed these demobilizations as
important steps towards peace, but there were widespread reports of continuing
abuses and illegal activity by paramilitaries around the country, including
the recruitment of new troops.
Little effort has been made to investigate the past crimes of demobilized
paramilitaries or to collect intelligence that could be used to dismantle the
groups’ structures or identify their supporters and assets. Cross-checking of
individuals’ names against prosecutors’ records resulted in only a few dozen
paramilitaries being linked to ongoing investigations, given that in most
investigations, the perpetrator is not identified by name but rather by alias or
other factors.
Many top paramilitary commanders remain in the specially designated area
of Santa Fe de Ralito, safe from arrest or prosecution. In June 2005, prosecutors
ordered the arrest of top paramilitary commander, Diego Murillo
Bejarano (also known as “Don Berna” or “Adolfo Paz”), for allegedly ordering
the assassination of a local congressman and two other people two
months before. Nonetheless, the government announced that Murillo would
be allowed to demobilize and eventually receive the benefits of Law 975. The
government also suspended extradition orders for Murillo and commander
Salvatore Mancuso, both of whom are wanted in the United States for drug
trafficking.
Impunity and Military-Paramilitary Ties
The overwhelming majority of investigations involving human rights abuses
are never resolved. The problem of impunity affects crimes committed by all
armed groups, as well as the military.
Units of the Colombian military continue to tolerate, support, and commit
abuses in collaboration with members of paramilitary groups. In 2005, there
continued to be reports of abuses by members of the Army’s 17th Brigade as
well as by members of the armed forces operating in the region of Chocó.
In February 2005, eight residents of the Peace Community of San Jose de
Apartadó, including four minors, were brutally killed. The government’s
immediate reaction to the massacre, prior to any investigation, was to blame
it on guerrillas and deny any military presence in the area. Yet members of
the community have alleged that military and possibly paramilitary groups
were involved, and there is evidence pointing to military movements near the
location of the massacre. The investigation has proceeded slowly, in part due
to the unwillingness of witnesses to come forward, apparently out of fear and
distrust of authorities.
During the tenure of Attorney General Luis Camilo Osorio, starting in 2001,
major investigations into abuses by high-ranking officers were seriously
undermined. This troubling trend continued in 2005, as the Attorney
General’s office closed its criminal investigation into Rear Admiral Rodrigo
Quiñonez’s alleged involvement in the Chengue massacre, in which paramilitaries
killed over 20 people.
In May 2005, the Attorney General’s office also closed the investigation of
General Eduardo Avila Beltran for his alleged complicity in the 1997 paramilitary
massacre of 49 civilians in the town of Mapiripán. Two separate
courts—military and civilian—had previously ordered the Attorney General’s
office to investigate Avila’s role in the massacre.
Osorio’s term ended in mid-2005. The new Attorney General, Mario
Iguarán, has expressed an interest in working more closely with human rights
groups.
Human Rights Monitors and Other Vulnerable Groups
Human rights monitors, as well as labor leaders, journalists, and other vulnerable
groups are frequently threatened and attacked for their work in
Colombia. Investigations into such threats and attacks generally move slowly
and are rarely resolved. The problem has at times been exacerbated by highlevel
government officials, who in 2005 once again made public statements
suggesting that legitimate human rights advocacy was aimed at promoting
the interests of armed groups.
In May 2005, three prominent journalists received anonymous funeral
wreaths, accompanied by notes of condolence, at their homes or offices. As
reported by the OAS special rapporteur for freedom of expression in 2005,
such threats and prevailing impunity for killings of journalists have a chilling
effect on the media.
Monica Roa, the lead attorney in a constitutional challenge to Colombia’s
almost complete ban on abortion, received numerous death threats in 2005.
Confidential case files and two computers were stolen from her office during
a break-in.
Human rights defenders from the Colectivo de Abogados Jose Alvear Restrepo
and other organizations were also threatened in 2005. Meanwhile, there was
no obvious progress in the investigation into Operación Dragon, a large
scheme allegedly involving retired members of military intelligence, to conduct
surveillance of human rights defenders, trade unionists, and politicians
in Cali..
Violations by Guerrilla Groups
After a prolonged slowdown in their armed activity, guerrillas from the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) once again increased their
level of violent activity in 2005. FARC attacks on government forces were
accompanied by numerous and serious abuses, including massacres of civilians
and targeted killings.
In April, the FARC used gas cylinder bombs in the region of Cauca, launching
them in an indiscriminate manner in the direction of residential areas.
The attacks primarily affected members of indigenous communities, resulting
in numerous deaths and the displacement of much of the population. Other
FARC attacks targeted media, including radio stations.
Both the National Liberation Army (ELN) and the FARC continue to kidnap
civilians, holding them for ransom or political gain.
Child Recruitment
At least one of every four irregular combatants in Colombia is under eighteen
years of age. Of these, several thousand are under the age of fifteen, the
minimum recruitment age permitted under the Geneva Conventions. Eighty
percent of the children under arms belong to one of two guerrilla groups, the
FARC or the ELN. The remainder fights for paramilitaries.
Internal Displacement
Colombia has the world’s largest internal displacement crisis after Sudan. In
the last three years alone, more than three million people, as much as 5 percent
of Colombia’s population, have been forcibly displaced because of the
country’s armed conflict. More than half of all displaced persons are children
under the age of eighteen. While Colombia is among a handful of countries
that have enacted legislation to protect the internally displaced, displaced
families are often denied access to education, emergency healthcare, and
humanitarian aid.
In 2004, Colombia’s Constitutional Court held that the government’s system
for assisting displaced persons was unconstitutional. In September 2005, the
Court found that the steps taken by the government to comply with its ruling
were insufficient in terms of both resources and institutional will.
Key International Actors
The United States remains the most influential foreign actor in Colombia. In
2005 it provided close to U.S. $800 million to the Colombian government,
mostly in military aid. Twenty-five percent of U.S. security assistance is formally
subject to human rights conditions, but the conditions have not been
consistently enforced. Certification of 12.5 percent of the assistance was
delayed in the first half of 2005 due to serious setbacks and lack of progress
in key investigations of military abuses, among other factors. Nonetheless,
the certification was ultimately granted, with the U.S. State Department citing
late progress in some specific cases.
In February 2005, the member countries of the G-24 group of international
donors to Colombia met in Cartagena to discuss continuing cooperation with
Colombia. Members of Colombia’s human rights community expressed disappointment
over the resulting Cartagena Declaration, which, while reaffirming
the terms of the preceding London Declaration, was viewed as weaker
than the earlier document on various human rights issues.
While some European and U.S. assistance to the demobilization process
seems likely, its extent and nature remained an open question as of this writing
in late November 2005. The U.S. Congress approved U.S. $20 million in
assistance for the demobilization process, but the aid is conditioned on full
Colombian cooperation with U.S. extradition requests and on specific measures
to ensure accountability and the dismantlement of paramilitary structures.
The E.U. Council of Ministers stated that Law 975 could, if effectively
implemented, contribute to peace. It expressed concern, however, over the
law’s failure to adequately take into account international standards on truth,
justice, and reparation.
The OAS Mission to Support the Peace Process in Colombia, which is
charged with verifying the demobilization process, was widely criticized by
victims and human rights groups. Not only has it failed to adequately monitor
paramilitaries’ cease-fire declaration, it has also failed to follow up on
complaints of abuses, and it shows little or no independence from the government.
As of November 2005, the OAS Secretary General reportedly was
considering possible reforms to the Mission’s structure and activities.
The Office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights is active in
Colombia, with a presence in Bogotá, Medellín, and Cali. Its relations with
the government are difficult due to Colombia’s repeated failure to implement
the office’s human rights recommendations.