Cuba
Cuba remains the one country in Latin America that represses nearly all forms of
political dissent. President Fidel Castro, during his 47 years in power, has shown
no willingness to consider even minor reforms. Instead, the Cuban government
continues to enforce political conformity using criminal prosecutions, long- and
short-term detentions, mob harassment, police warnings, surveillance, house
arrests, travel restrictions, and politically-motivated dismissals from employment.
The end result is that Cubans are systematically denied basic rights to free
expression, association, assembly, privacy, movement, and due process of law.
Castro’s decision in early August to temporarily cede power as a result of medical
problems to his brother, Raúl Castro, has prompted intense speculation about the
possibility of reform in Cuba. As of this writing, it was unclear whether the older
Castro would be able to return to power and what his political absence might signal
for the island’s future.
Legal and Institutional Failings
Cuba’s legal and institutional structures are at the root of rights violations.
Although in theory the different branches of government have separate and
defined areas of authority, in practice the executive retains clear control over all
levers of power. The courts, which lack independence, undermine the right to fair
trial by severely restricting the right to a defense.
Cuba’s Criminal Code provides the legal basis for repression of dissent. Laws
criminalizing enemy propaganda, the spreading of “unauthorized news,” and
insult to patriotic symbols are used to restrict freedom of speech under the guise
of protecting state security. The government also imprisons or orders the surveillance
of individuals who have committed no illegal act, relying upon provisions
that penalize “dangerousness” (estado peligroso) and allow for “official warning”
(advertencia oficial).
Political Imprisonment
In early July 2006 the Cuban Commission for Human Rights and National
Reconciliation, a respected local human rights group, issued a list of 316 prisoners
who it said were incarcerated for political reasons. The list included the
names of 12 peaceful dissidents who had been arrested and detained in the first
half of 2006, of whom five were being held on charges of “dangerousness.” Of 75
political dissidents, independent journalists, and human rights advocates who
were summarily tried in April 2003, 60 remain imprisoned. Serving sentences that
average nearly 20 years, the incarcerated dissidents endure poor conditions and
punitive treatment in prison.
Travel Restrictions and Family Separations
The Cuban government forbids the country’s citizens from leaving or returning to
Cuba without first obtaining official permission, which is often denied.
Unauthorized travel can result in criminal prosecution. In May 2006 Oswaldo
Payá, the well-known Cuban human rights advocate, was awarded an honorary
doctor of laws by Columbia University in New York City in recognition of his work.
However, he was denied an exit visa by the Cuban authorities and therefore could
not receive the degree in person.
The government also frequently bars citizens engaged in authorized travel from
taking their children with them overseas, essentially holding the children hostage
to guarantee the parents’ return. Given the widespread fear of forced family separation,
these travel restrictions provide the Cuban government with a powerful
tool for punishing defectors and silencing critics.
Freedom of Expression and Assembly
The Cuban government maintains a media monopoly on the island, ensuring that
freedom of expression is virtually non-existent. Although a small number of independent
journalists manage to write articles for foreign websites or publish
underground newsletters, the risks associated with these activities are considerable.
According to Reporters Without Borders, there are currently 23 journalists
serving prison terms in Cuba, most of them charged with threatening “the national independence and economy of Cuba.” This makes the country second only to
China for the number of journalists in prison.
Access to information via the internet is also highly restricted in Cuba. In late
August 2006 the dissident and independent journalist Guillermo Fariñas ended a
seven-month hunger strike in opposition to the regime’s internet policy. He began
the strike after the Cuban authorities shut down his e-mail access, which he had
been using to send dispatches abroad describing attacks on dissidents and other
human rights abuses.
Freedom of assembly is severely restricted in Cuba, and political dissidents are
generally prohibited from meeting in large groups. This was evident in mid-
September 2006 during the 14th summit of the Non-Aligned Movement in
Havana, when the Cuban government issued a ban on all gatherings that might
damage “the image” of the city.
Prison Conditions
Prisoners are generally kept in poor and abusive conditions, often in overcrowded
cells. They typically lose weight during incarceration, and some receive inadequate
medical care. Some also endure physical and sexual abuse, typically by
other inmates and with the acquiescence of guards.
Political prisoners who denounce poor conditions of imprisonment or who otherwise
fail to observe prison rules are frequently punished with long periods spent
in punitive isolation cells, restrictions on visits, or denial of medical treatment.
Some political prisoners have carried out long hunger strikes to protest abusive
conditions and mistreatment by guards.
Death Penalty
Under Cuban law the death penalty exists for a broad range of crimes. It is difficult
to ascertain the frequency with which this penalty is employed because Cuba
does not release information regarding its use. However, as far as is known, no
executions have been carried out since April 2003.
Human Rights Defenders
Refusing to recognize human rights monitoring as a legitimate activity, the government
denies legal status to local human rights groups. Individuals who belong
to these groups face systematic harassment, with the government putting up
obstacles to impede them from documenting human rights conditions. In addition,
international human rights groups such as Human Rights Watch and
Amnesty International are barred from sending fact-finding missions to Cuba. In
fact, Cuba remains one of the few countries in the world to deny the International
Committee of the Red Cross access to its prisons.
Key International Actors
Cuba’s election to the new United Nations Human Rights Council in June 2006
was contrary to the Council’s requirement that its members “uphold the highest
standards of human rights promotion and protection.” Although the new body
was designed to replace the discredited Human Rights Commission, whose membership
often included notorious human rights violators, the election of Cuba and
other countries with poor human rights records confirmed that the Council has
not yet risen above this disturbing practice. Equally troubling was the Cuban government’s
characterization of the mandate of the High Commissioner of Human
Rights as “spurious” and its assertion that it would not cooperate with her office.
The US economic embargo on Cuba, in effect for more than four decades, continues
to impose indiscriminate hardship on the Cuban people and to block travel to
the island. An exception to the embargo that allows food sales to Cuba on a cashonly
basis, however, has led to substantial trade between the two countries.
In an effort to deprive the Cuban government of funding, the United States government
enacted new restrictions on family-related travel to Cuba in June 2004.
Under these rules, individuals are allowed to visit relatives in Cuba only once
every three years, and only if the relatives fit the US government’s narrow definition
of family—a definition that excludes aunts, uncles, cousins, and other nextof-
kin who are often integral members of Cuban families. Justified as a means of
promoting freedom in Cuba, the new travel policies undermine the freedom of movement of hundreds of thousands of Cubans and Cuban Americans, and inflict
profound harm on Cuban families.
Countries within the European Union continue to disagree with respect to the
best approach to take toward Cuba. In January 2005 the EU decided to temporarily
suspend the diplomatic sanctions that it had adopted in the wake of the Cuban
government’s 2003 crackdown against dissidents. In June 2006 the EU decided to
maintain the sanctions freeze for an additional year, although it also issued a
statement lamenting the “further deterioration of the human rights situation in
Cuba” and “several dozen acts of violent harassment and intimidation” over the
past year. The Czech Republic was the member country most strongly in favor of a
tougher stance towards Cuba.