Cuba
Cuba remains the one country in Latin America that represses nearly all forms of
political dissent. There have been no significant policy changes since Fidel Castro
relinquished direct control of the government to his brother Raul Castro in August
2006. The government continues to enforce political conformity using criminal
prosecutions, long-term and short-term detentions, mob harassment, police
warnings, surveillance, house arrests, travel restrictions, and politically-motivated
dismissals from employment. The end result is that Cubans are systematically
denied basic rights to free expression, association, assembly, privacy, movement,
and due process of law.
Legal and Institutional Failings
Cubas legal and institutional structures are at the root of rights violations.
Although in theory the different branches of government have separate and
defined areas of authority, in practice the executive retains control over all levers
of power. The courts, which lack independence, undermine the right to fair trial by
severely restricting the right to a defense.
Cubas Criminal Code provides the legal basis for repression of dissent. Laws
criminalizing enemy propaganda, the spreading of unauthorized news, and
insult to patriotic symbols are used to restrict freedom of speech under the guise
of protecting state security. The government also imprisons or orders the surveillance
of individuals who have committed no illegal act, relying upon provisions
that penalize dangerousness (estado peligroso) and allow for official warning
(advertencia oficial).
Political Imprisonment
In July 2007 the Cuban Commission for Human Rights and National
Reconciliation, a respected local human rights group, issued a list of 240 prisoners
who it said were incarcerated for political reasons. The list included the
names of 12 peaceful dissidents who had been arrested and detained in the first
half of 2006, five of whom were being held on charges of dangerousness. Of 75 political dissidents, independent journalists, and human rights advocates who
were summarily tried in April 2003, 59 remain imprisoned. Serving sentences that
average nearly 20 years, the incarcerated dissidents endure poor conditions and
punitive treatment in prison.
While the number of political prisoners has decreased in the last year, this
decrease cannot be attributed to leniency or policy change on the part of the government.
The political prisoners who were released had already served out their
full sentences. In September 2007, approximately 30 activists were arrested and
held for 24 hours. According to one of the released prisoners, Jorge Luis Garcia
Perezwho was released from prison in May 2007 after serving out a 17-year sentence
the prisoners endured beatings, strip searches, and threats of future
arrest.
Travel Restrictions and Family Separations
The Cuban government forbids the countrys citizens from leaving or returning to
Cuba without first obtaining official permission, which is often denied.
Unauthorized travel can result in criminal prosecution. In May 2006 Oswaldo
Pay, the well known Cuban human rights advocate, was awarded an honorary
doctor of laws by Columbia University in New York City in recognition of his work.
However, he was denied an exit visa by the Cuban authorities and could not
receive the degree in person.
The government also frequently bars citizens engaged in authorized travel from
taking their children with them overseas, essentially holding the children hostage
to guarantee the parents return. Given the widespread fear of forced family separation,
these travel restrictions provide the Cuban government with a powerful
tool for punishing defectors and silencing critics.
Freedom of Expression and Assembly
The Cuban government maintains a media monopoly on the island, ensuring that
freedom of expression is virtually nonexistent. Although a small number of independent
journalists manage to write articles for foreign websites or publish
underground newsletters, the risks associated with these activities are considerable. According to Reporters Without Borders, 25 journalists were serving prison
terms in Cuba as of July 2007, most of them charged with threatening the national
independence and economy of Cuba. This makes the country second only to
China for the number of journalists in prison.
Access to information via the internet is also highly restricted in Cuba. In late
August 2006 the dissident and independent journalist Guillermo Farias ended a
seven-month hunger strike in opposition to the regimes internet policy. He began
the strike after the Cuban authorities shut down his email access, which he had
been using to send dispatches abroad describing attacks on dissidents and other
human rights abuses.
Freedom of assembly is severely restricted in Cuba and political dissidents are
generally prohibited from meeting in large groups. This was evident in mid-
September 2006 during the 14th summit of the Non-Aligned Movement in
Havana, when the Cuban government issued a ban on all gatherings that might
damage the image of the city.
Prison Conditions
Prisoners are generally kept in poor and abusive conditions, often in overcrowded
cells. They typically lose weight during incarceration, and some receive inadequate
medical care. Some also endure physical and sexual abuse, typically by
other inmates and with the acquiescence of guards.
Political prisoners who denounce poor conditions of imprisonment or who otherwise
fail to observe prison rules are frequently punished with long periods in
punitive isolation cells, restrictions on visits, or denial of medical treatment. In
October 2006, Juan Carlos Herrera Acosta, who was sentenced to 20 years in
prison following the governments 2003 crackdown on dissidents, was beaten
and placed in a cell infested with rats and insects after demanding the right to
telephone his family. Some political prisoners have carried out long hunger
strikes to protest abusive conditions and mistreatment by guards.
Death Penalty
Under Cuban law the death penalty exists for a broad range of crimes. It is difficult
to ascertain the frequency with which this penalty is employed because Cuba
does not release information regarding its use. However, as far as is known, no
executions have been carried out since April 2003.
Human Rights Defenders
Refusing to recognize human rights monitoring as a legitimate activity, the government
denies legal status to local human rights groups. Individuals who belong
to these groups face systematic harassment, with the government impeding their
efforts to document human rights conditions. In addition, international human
rights groups such as Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International are barred
from sending fact-finding missions to Cuba. Cuba remains one of the few countries
in the world to deny the International Committee of the Red Cross access to
its prisons.
Key International Actors
In June 2007, bowing to political pressure, the UN Human Rights Council terminated
the mandate of the UN expert charged with reporting on human rights conditions
in Cuba.
The US economic embargo on Cuba, in effect for more than four decades, continues
to impose indiscriminate hardship on the Cuban people and to block travel to
the island. An exception to the embargo that allows food sales to Cuba on a cashonly
basis, however, has led to substantial trade between the two countries.
In an effort to deprive the Cuban government of funding, the United States government
enacted new restrictions on family-related travel to Cuba in June 2004.
Under these rules, individuals are allowed to visit relatives in Cuba only once
every three years, and only if the relatives fit the US governments narrow definition
of familya definition that excludes aunts, uncles, cousins, and other nextof-
kin who are often integral members of Cuban families. Justified as a means of
promoting freedom in Cuba, the new travel policies undermine the freedom of movement of hundreds of thousands of Cubans and Cuban-Americans, and inflict
profound harm on Cuban families.
In January 2005 the European Union decided to temporarily suspend the diplomatic
sanctions that it had adopted in the wake of the Cuban governments 2003
crackdown against dissidents. In June 2006, and again in June 2007, the EU
decided to renew the suspensions, but not lift the sanctions outright. It offered to
resume discussions with the Castro government, stipulating that if it were to
accept the invitation, the Cuban government must be willing to discuss human
rights, political prisoners, and democracy. In response, the Cuban foreign ministry
indicated that Cuba would not participate in talks unless the sanctions were
fully dropped. Nevertheless, representatives of the EU and Cuba held informal,
exploratory talks at the United Nations in September 2007 and agreed to meet
again in early 2008.