Cuba
In 2010 and 2011, Cuba’s government released dozens of political prisoners on
condition they accept exile in exchange for freedom. Since then, it has relied
less on long-term prison sentences to punish dissent and has relaxed draconian
travel restrictions that divided families and prevented its critics from leaving
and returning to the island.
Nevertheless, the Cuban government continues to repress individuals and
groups who criticize the government or call for basic human rights. Officials
employ a range of tactics to punish dissent and instill fear in the public, including
beatings, public acts of shaming, termination of employment, and threats of
long-term imprisonment. Short-term arbitrary arrests have increased dramatically
in recent years and routinely prevent human rights defenders, independent
journalists, and others from gathering or moving about freely.
Arbitrary Detentions and Short-Term Imprisonment
The government continues to rely on arbitrary detention to harass and intimidate
individuals who exercise their fundamental rights. The Cuban Commission
for Human Rights and National Reconciliation—an independent human rights
group the government views as illegal—received over 3,600 reports of arbitrary
detentions from January through September 2013, compared to approximately
2,100 in 2010.
The detentions are often used preemptively to prevent individuals from participating
in events viewed as critical of the government, such as peaceful marches
or meetings to discuss politics. Many dissidents are beaten and threatened
when detained, even if they do not try to resist.
Security officers virtually never present arrest orders to justify detentions and
threaten detainees with criminal sentences if they continue to participate in
“counterrevolutionary” activities. In some cases, detainees receive official
warnings, which prosecutors may later use in criminal trials to show a pattern
of delinquent behavior. Dissidents said these warnings aim to discourage them
from participating in activities seen as critical of the government.
Victims of such arrests may be held incommunicado for several hours to several
days. Some are held at police stations, while others are driven to remote areas
far from their homes where they are interrogated, threatened, and abandoned.
On August 25, 2013, more than 30 women from the Damas de Blanco (Ladies in
White)—a group founded by the wives, mothers, and daughters of political prisoners
and which the government considers illegal—were detained after attending
Sunday mass at a church in Santiago, beaten, forced onto a bus, and left at
various isolated locations on the city’s outskirts. The same day, eight members
of the group in Havana and seven more in Holguín were arbitrarily detained as
they marched peacefully to attend mass.
Political Prisoners
Cubans who criticize the government may face criminal prosecution. They do
not benefit from due process guarantees, such as the right to fair and public
hearings by a competent and impartial tribunal. In practice, courts are “subordinated”
to the executive and legislative branches, denying meaningful judicial
independence. Political prisoners are routinely denied parole after completing
the minimum required sentence as punishment for refusing to participate in
ideological activities, such as “reeducation” classes.
The death of political prisoner Orlando Zapata Tamayo in 2010 after his 85-day
hunger strike and the subsequent hunger strike by dissident Guillermo Fariñas
pressured the government to release the remaining political prisoners from the
“group of 75” (75 dissidents sentenced to long prison terms in a 2003 crackdown).
Yet most were forced to choose between ongoing prison sentences and
forced exile. The overwhelming majority accepted relocation to Spain in
exchange for their freedom.
Dozens of political prisoners remain in Cuban prisons according to local human
rights groups, which estimate that there are more political prisoners whose
cases they cannot document because the government prevents independent
national or international human rights groups from accessing its prisons.
Luis Enrique Labrador Diaz was one of four people detained in January 2011 for
distributing leaflets in Havana with slogans such as “Down with the Castros” and was subsequently convicted in May 2011 for contempt and public disorder
in a closed, summary trial. He was still in prison at time of writing.
Freedom of Expression
The government controls all media outlets in Cuba and tightly restricts access
to outside information, severely limiting the right to freedom of expression.
Only a tiny fraction of Cubans are able to read independent websites and blogs
because of the high cost of and limited access to the Internet. A May 2013 government
decree directed at expanding Internet access stipulates that it cannot
be used for activities that undermine “public security, the integrity, the economy,
independence, and national security” of Cuba—broad conditions that could
be used to impede access to government critics.
A small number of independent journalists and bloggers manage to write articles
for websites or blogs, or publish tweets. Yet those who publish information
considered critical of the government are sometimes subject to smear campaigns,
attacks, and arbitrary arrests, as are artists and academics who
demand greater freedoms.
After jazz musician Roberto Carcasses called for direct elections and freedom of
information in a nationally televised concert in Havana in September 2013, officials
told him that his words benefitted “the enemy” and that he would be
barred from performing in state-run venues. The government lifted the ban—
widely reported in the international press—a week later. In May, the director of
the government-run Casa de las Americas cultural institute, Roberto Zurbano,
published an article in the New York Times highlighting persistent inequality
and prejudice affecting Afro-Cubans. He was subsequently attacked in the government-
controlled press and demoted to a lesser job at the institute.
Human Rights Defenders
The Cuban government refuses to recognize human rights monitoring as a legitimate
activity and denies legal status to local human rights groups. Meanwhile,
government authorities harass, assault, and imprison human rights defenders
who attempt to document abuses.
Travel Restrictions and Family Separation
Reforms to travel regulations that went into effect in January 2013 eliminate the
need for an exit visa to leave the island, which had previously been used to
deny the right to travel to people critical of the government and their families.
Nearly 183,000 people traveled abroad from January to September 2013,
according to the government. These included human rights defenders, journalists,
and bloggers who previously had been denied permission to leave the
island despite repeated requests, such as blogger Yoani Sanchez.
Nonetheless, the reform establishes that the government may restrict the right
to travel on the vague grounds of “defense and national security” or “other reasons
of public interest,” which could allow the authorities to deny people who
express dissent the ability to leave Cuba. The government also continues to
arbitrarily deny Cubans living abroad the right to visit the island. In August, the
Cuban government denied Blanca Reyes, a Damas de Blanco member living in
exile in Spain, permission to travel to Cuba to visit her ailing 93-year-old father,
who died in October before she could visit him.
The government restricts the movement of citizens within Cuba through a 1997
law known as Decree 217. Designed to limit migration to Havana, the decree
requires that Cubans obtain government permission before moving to the country’s
capital. It is often used to prevent dissidents traveling there to attend
meetings and to harass dissidents from other parts of Cuba who live in the capital.
Prison Conditions
Prisons are overcrowded, unhygienic, and unhealthy, leading to extensive malnutrition
and illness. More than 57,000 Cubans are in prisons or work camps,
according to a May 2012 article in an official government newspaper. Prisoners
who criticize the government or engage in hunger strikes and other forms of
protest are subjected to extended solitary confinement, beatings, restrictions
on family visits, and denial of medical care. Prisoners have no effective complaint
mechanism to seek redress.
While the government allowed select members of the foreign press to conduct
controlled visits to a handful of prisons in April, it continued to deny international human rights groups and independent Cuban organizations access to its
prisons.
Key International Actors
The United States’ economic embargo of Cuba, in place for more than half a
century, continues to impose indiscriminate hardship on the Cuban people and
has done nothing to improve the country’s human rights. At the United Nations
General Assembly in October, 188 of the 192 member countries voted for a resolution
condemning the US embargo.
In 2009, President Barack Obama enacted reforms to eliminate restrictions on
travel and remittances by Cuban Americans to Cuba put in place during the
administration of President George W. Bush in 2004. In 2011, Obama used his
executive powers to ease “people-to-people” travel restrictions, allowing religious,
educational, and cultural groups from the US to travel to Cuba.
The European Union continues to retain its “Common Position” on Cuba, adopted
in 1996, which conditions full economic cooperation with Cuba on the country’s
transition to a pluralist democracy and respect for human rights.
Former US Agency for International Development contractor Alan Gross
remained in prison despite a UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention report in
November 2012 that called for his immediate release. Gross was detained in
Cuba in December 2009 and later sentenced to 15 years in prison for distributing
telecommunications equipment to religious groups. The working group said
Gross’s detention was arbitrary and that Cuba’s government had failed to provide
sufficient evidence of the charges against him.
In May, Cuba underwent its second Universal Periodic Review at the UN Human
Rights Council. Several countries expressed concern with repression of human
rights defenders, increased arbitrary detentions, and lack of freedom of expression.
Cuba rejected many of these recommendations on the grounds that they
were “politically biased and built on false premises, resulting from efforts to
discredit Cuba on the part of those who, with their hegemonic ambitions, refuse
to accept the diversity and the right to freedom of determination of the Cuban
people.”
In November, Cuba was re-elected to a seat on the UN Human Rights Council,
defeating Uruguay for a regional position despite its poor human rights record
and consistent efforts to undermine the council’s work to respond to human
rights violators.