Darfur: Whose Responsibility to Protect?
by Michael Clough
In early 2004, mounting evidence of massive human rights abuses in the
Darfur region of Sudan tested anew the international community’s will
and capacity to halt ethnic cleansing and protect civilians. The United
Nations and member states responded with a flurry of missions, humanitarian
assistance, calls for negotiations, demands for action by the government
of Sudan, veiled threats of sanctions, support for African
Union (A.U.) peacekeepers, and a commission of inquiry. By year’s end,
however, the pallid steps taken by the U.N. Security Council at a special
session on Sudan held in Nairobi, Kenya, had called into question the
commitment of Security Council members to follow through on their
earlier resolutions—and no end to the catastrophic suffering of the people
of Darfur was in sight.
The final act in the tragedy of Darfur is yet to be written. But enough
of the story has already unfolded to conclude that the world’s political
leaders have failed to deliver on the promises made in the wake of the
genocide in Rwanda in 1994 that they would “never again” dither in the
face of a possible genocide.
In the decade after Hutu genocidaires slaughtered eight hundred thousand
in Rwanda, the United Nations, governments, think tanks, and
other groups around the world undertook a host of initiatives such as
the International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty to
identify ways to prevent armed conflict, strengthen U.N. peacekeeping,
and protect civilians, especially children. The result has been a plethora
of new principles, U.N. resolutions, recommendations, proposals, commitments,
and the development of the “human security agenda.” In
December 2004, the U.N. Secretary-General’s High Level Panel on
Threats, Challenges and Change (High Level Panel on Threats)
acknowledged the failure of the U.N. to prevent atrocities against civilians and recommended reforms to enhance the U.N.’s capacity to carry
out its collective security mandate. The High Level Panel also strongly
endorsed the emerging norm that there is an international responsibility
to protect civilians in situations where governments are powerless or
unwilling to do so. So far, however, these initiatives have afforded no
protection to the people of Darfur.
Between early 2003 and late 2004, the Sudanese government and government-
backed Arab militias destroyed hundreds of African villages,
killed and raped thousands of their inhabitants, and displaced more than
a million and a half others. By December 2004, more than 70,000 people
had died directly or indirectly as a result of the government’s military
campaign, hundreds of thousands more were at risk of death from
starvation and disease, and security conditions throughout the countryside
were still deteriorating.
To understand and learn from the still unfolding tragedy of Darfur, the
international community must go beyond “never again” rhetoric and
ask hard questions about why the U.N. has been unable to translate its
post-Rwanda commitments into effective practice. International policymakers
must confront the assumptions and interests that hobble the
Security Council’s ability to respond quickly and decisively to human
rights crises in Africa and elsewhere. The United Nations must find
ways to deter potential human rights abusers and act on early warning
signs to protect civilians before the death toll begins to mount. Security
Council members must address the yawning gap that exists between the
peacekeeping challenge that they are asking the African Union to
assume in Darfur and the capacity of that nascent organization to meet
that challenge.
The Harrowing of Darfur
Public understanding of Darfur has been muddied by the understandable
tendency of those who do not know Sudan to view this territory in the west of the country through the lens of the much more publicized
civil war in the south. But unlike the decades-long struggle between
successive Arab regimes in Khartoum and rebels drawn from predominately
non-Muslim African communities in the south, the fighting in
Darfur is of more recent origin—and all of the combatants and their
victims are followers of Islam.
At first glance, the fighting in Greater Darfur, which includes the three
states of North, South, and West Darfur, appears to be an ethnic clash.
It pits an Arab-dominated government in Khartoum, aligned with ethnic
militias drawn from some Arab nomadic groups that have long
roamed freely across Darfur’s forbidding desert and fertile farmland,
against rebel groups drawn largely from three main African groups, two
of which are traditionally settled agriculturalists or semi-pastoralists.
But the reality is more complex. Until the mid-1980s, Arab herders and
African farmers occasionally clashed, but mostly co-existed peacefully.
In fact, despite the ethnic polarization that now exists, there has been
considerable ethnic fluidity and intermarriage.
The seeds of the conflict in Darfur were sown by decades of government
exploitation, manipulation, and neglect; recurrent episodes of
drought and increasing desertification leading to competition for everdiminishing
resources; a flow of arms and people caused by earlier wars
in Chad; and the failure of the international community to hold the
government of Sudan accountable for the human rights abuses committed
over two decades in other regions of the country. Paradoxically,
however, the immediate spark may have been progress in negotiations
to end the twenty-one-year-long north-south conflict, which created
fears among Darfurians that they might be excluded from the powerand
wealth-sharing formula being negotiated by the government and
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A), the rebel
group that has waged a civil war in the south since 1983. 
In February 2003, the Darfur rebels of the Sudan Liberation Army
shocked Khartoum by successfully assaulting government military forces
in Fashir, the capital of North Darfur, and achieving a string of military
successes. In response, the Bashir government launched a vicious counter-
insurgency campaign in Darfur, patterned after earlier campaigns it
had conducted in southern Sudan and the Nuba Mountains, using a
proxy militia force, the so-called Janjaweed, made up of members of
nomadic Arab tribes.
The first loud warnings of an impending human rights catastrophe
came in October-November 2003, when U.N. agencies reported that
villages had been burned and Amnesty International reported that
Sudanese refugees in camps in Chad were describing “how militias
armed with Kalashnikovs and other weapons . . . often dressed in green
army uniforms, raided villages, burnt houses and crops and killed people
and cattle.” Shortly thereafter, Jan Egeland, United Nations under-secretary
for humanitarian affairs and emergency relief, warned that the
humanitarian situation in Darfur had become “one of the worst in the
world.” In December 2003, as Khartoum imposed tight restrictions on
access to the region and launched a new offensive, U.N. Secretary-
General Kofi Annan echoed Egeland’s concern.
In April 2004, reporting by U.N. agencies, humanitarian nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs), human rights groups, and the media
started to reveal the enormity and nature of what was happening—and,
on April 7, Kofi Annan, addressing the Commission on Human Rights
on the 10th anniversary of the Rwanda genocide, called attention to the
human rights abuses and growing humanitarian crisis in Darfur and
called on the international community to be prepared to take swift and
appropriate action.
Based on its investigations in Darfur and refugee camps in Chad at that
time, Human Rights Watch found “credible evidence that the government
of Sudan has purposefully sought to remove by violent means the Masalit and Fur population from large parts of Darfur in operations
that amount to ethnic cleansing.” As a result of the mounting evidence
that massive human rights abuses and crimes against humanity were
being committed, the Security Council began—slowly and hesitantly—
to pay attention to Darfur.
The United Nations and Darfur
For more than a year, from early 2003 until mid-2004, while the conflict
in Darfur was escalating, the U.N. Security Council’s priority in
Sudan was negotiations in Naivasha, Kenya to end the north-south civil
war. Initially, false optimism that those negotiations would lead to a
quick settlement that would change the overall political situation in
Sudan may have caused some member states to discount the warning
signs of a growing crisis in Darfur. Later, as it became increasingly
impossible to ignore the evidence of serious violence and human rights
abuse, the Security Council may have tried to keep Darfur off of its
agenda out of fear that a discussion of Darfur would cause the government
in Khartoum to pull out of the Naivasha talks. As a result, even in
June 2004, when the Security Council passed Resolution 1547, which
established a U.N. mission in Sudan to prepare to monitor implementation
of a final agreement between the government of Sudan and the
SPLM/A, Darfur was barely mentioned.
Before late July 2004, the Security Council’s only action on Darfur was
a May 25, 2004 statement by the Council president calling on the government
of Sudan to disarm the Janjaweed militias. This statement
came after the council was briefed on the findings of two U.N. missions
of massive human rights violations and grave humanitarian need, and
after months of insisting that Darfur was not “on its agenda.” Two
months later, after repeated appeals by a growing number of humanitarian
and human rights groups, and visits to Darfur by Secretary-General
Annan and many foreign ministers from Europe and the United States,
the U.N. Security Council passed Resolution 1556, which demanded that the Sudanese government disarm the Janjaweed and bring to justice
those leaders who had incited and carried out human rights abuses. The
Security Council threatened to consider further sanctions if the government
failed to comply. It also endorsed the deployment of an African
Union force to monitor the April 2004 ceasefire agreement between the
government and the rebels, which was already underway; and imposed a
ban on the sale of arms to all “non-governmental entities and individuals”
in Darfur—in other words the rebels and the Janjaweed militias,
but not the government that organizes, finances, directs, and supplies
the Janjaweed. Resolution 1556 was approved by a 13-0 vote, with
China and Pakistan abstaining.
For the Security Council, Resolution 1556, despite its obvious weaknesses,
was a significant step forward. In the eyes of most observers,
however, it was yet another example of the council’s abrogation of its
responsibilities. By the time the resolution was passed, the gravity of the
human rights abuses then still occurring in Darfur was already widely
acknowledged. In late June, for example, Secretary-General Annan told
reporters, “We all agree that serious crimes are being committed.”
Moreover, there were also already numerous, well documented reports
of direct Sudanese government involvement in the perpetration of massive
human rights violations in Darfur, including eyewitness accounts of
joint ground attacks on civilians by government troops and the
Janjaweed, and official documents containing orders for additional
recruitment and military supply of ethnic militia groups. By July 2004,
stronger measures directed at the government were justified and necessary,
but they weren’t adopted because at least one permanent member—
China—and possibly another—Russia—presumably would have
vetoed any resolution that included sanctions against the government or
authorized direct U.N. intervention.
On September 18, 2004, after nearly two more months in which security
and humanitarian conditions worsened and the government failed to
protect civilians or fulfill its commitment to disarm the Janjaweed and prosecute perpetrators, the Security Council passed Resolution 1564.
Declaring its “grave concern” that the government of Sudan had not
fully met its obligations, the Security Council reiterated its call for the
government “to end the climate of impunity in Darfur” by identifying
and bringing to justice those responsible for the widespread human
rights abuses. In addition, it called for an expansion of the African
Union monitoring mission in Darfur and established a commission of
inquiry to investigate reports of violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law and to determine also whether or not acts of
genocide had occurred. Finally, it threatened, if the government failed
to comply with this resolution and Resolution 1556, additional measures,
“such as actions to affect Sudan’s petroleum sector and the
Government of Sudan or individual members of the Government of
Sudan.” Resolution 1564 passed by an 11-0 vote, with Algeria, China,
Pakistan, and Russia abstaining. Thus, five months after receiving substantial
evidence of government commission of massive human rights
abuses, Security Council action was still largely limited to entreaties,
investigations, veiled threats, and support for an A.U. force.
On November 18-19, 2004 the United Nations Security Council held a
special session on Sudan in Nairobi, Kenya. The main purpose of the
session was to put pressure on the government of Sudan and the
SPLA/M to finalize the Naivasha agreement. In the process of trying to
promote a north-south settlement, the Security Council watered down
its earlier commitment to end the suffering of civilians in Darfur.
Resolution 1574, which passed unanimously, failed to include any specific
criticism of the government of Sudan for failing to meet the
demands to disarm and bring to justice the Janjaweed, which were in
the Resolution 1556 and 1564, and it replaced the mild threats of sanctions
in those resolutions with a vague warning that, in the future, it
might consider taking “appropriate action against any party failing to
fulfill its commitments.” In addition, it called on the U.N. and the
World Bank to provide development aid, including debt relief to a government which, just months earlier, had been labeled genocidal by the
United States and others.
Despite enormous developments in the institutions, standards, and policies
that set out to protect civilians in conflict, the United Nations is
still an association of sovereign states committed to traditional principles
of international order and constrained by the ability of the five permanent
members of the Security Council to veto collective action. As
the Security Council reaffirmed in all three of the resolutions on
Darfur, the U.N. is committed to preserving the sovereignty, unity,
independence, and territorial unity of its member states. In fact, for the
majority of U.N. members, when there is a conflict, the principle of
state sovereignty still trumps all other principles and norms. The continuing
force of this traditional principle was affirmed by the recent
report of the High Level Panel on Threats, which declared that the
starting point for any “new security consensus” must be an understanding
“that the front-line actors in dealing with all the threats we face,
new and old, continue to be individual sovereign States, whose role and
responsibilities, and right to be respected, are fully recognized in the
Charter of the United Nations.”
The norm of non-intervention in the “internal affairs” of a sovereign
state flows directly from the principle of state sovereignty—and few
norms are more fiercely defended by most U.N. member states than
this norm. Many governments, especially those in Africa, Asia, and
Latin America, understandably regard it as one of their few defenses
against threats and pressures from wealthier and more powerful international
actors seeking to promote their own economic and political interests.
But the non-interference norm has also been used by barely legitimate
governments to block international efforts to end gross abuses of
their citizenry. That is what happened in the case of Darfur: Khartoum
used sovereignty, first, as a veil to hide its brutal campaign against
African villagers; and, later, as a shield to fend off calls for international
action to protect its victims.
In addition, the veto power of the permanent members of the Security
Council gives those five countries—the United States, Russia, the
United Kingdom, France, and China—a unique power to protect and
promote their national interests at the expense of global interests. In the
case of Darfur, the main impediment to stronger action by the Security
Council has been China, which owns a 40 percent share of Sudan’s main
oil producing field. At the council’s special November 2004 session in
Nairobi, China, and possibly Russia, which is thought to be the main
arms supplier to the Sudanese government, used the threat of a veto to
pressure other members to water down Resolution 1574. But, as discussed
below, even without the threat of a Chinese veto, it is doubtful
that the council would have passed a resolution containing a serious
threat of sanctions against Khartoum.
Thus even in the shadow of Rwanda, the Security Council in 2004
failed to muster the collective will necessary to act quickly and decisively
to end the humanitarian catastrophe in Darfur and hold accountable
those who are responsible for creating it. This is not likely to change
unless and until the United Nations accepts the principle, as recommended
by the International Commission on Intervention and State
Sovereignty and the High Level Panel on Threats, that all states have a
“responsibility to protect” civilians faced with avoidable catastrophes,
including mass murder and rape, ethnic cleansing by forcible expulsion
and terror, and deliberate starvation and exposure to disease.
Recognizing the responsibility to protect would provide the Security
Council with the basis it needs to act in the face of a determined refusal
by a sovereign state to protect its own citizens.
The United States and Darfur
In 1994, the Clinton administration initially used fine semantic distinctions
to avoid calling the genocide in Rwanda by its true name—and it
led the Security Council coalition against intervention. In 2004, the
Bush Administration was the first and only Security Council member to declare that the abuses committed in Darfur constituted genocide—and
it initially led the push for the Security Council to act. But U.S. leadership
on Darfur was a mixed blessing.
In 2001-2002, the Bush administration had made ending the Sudanese
civil war one of its top foreign policy priorities in Africa. Correctly or
not, many observers believe it did so mainly because of pressure from
conservative religious activists who have long campaigned against
Khartoum’s Islamist government for its gross human rights abuses in
the non-Muslim south. When the rebel attacks and government counter-
offensive began in Darfur, Washington was among those governments
that were reluctant to criticize Khartoum for fear that doing so
might derail the North-South peace initiative. On April 7, 2004, however,
with a bipartisan handful of U.S. Congressmen calling for sanctions,
President Bush condemned the “atrocities” in Sudan. In midsummer,
Secretary of State Colin Powell traveled to Darfur. Then, on
September 9, 2004, Secretary Powell told the U.S. Congress that the
State Department had concluded that genocide had been committed
and that the Sudanese government and the Janjaweed bore responsibility.
However, the fact that the Bush administration was waging a globally
unpopular war in Iraq without a U.N. mandate, inevitably affected how
other U.N. member states responded, particularly once the graphic
images of U.S. soldiers abusing Iraqi prisoners in Abu Ghraib were
broadcast around the world. Khartoum seized the opportunity by portraying
U.S. accusations on Darfur as part of a global American assault
on Islam and Arabs. But the most disturbing aspect of U.S. policy
toward Darfur is the striking inconsistency between Secretary of State
Powell’s finding in September 2004 that the government of Sudan and
the Janjaweed had committed genocide and the administration’s apparent
decision in November 2004 to return to its earlier policy of trying
to use carrots to induce Khartoum to sign the Naivasha accords. It was
that shift, and not just the threat of a Chinese veto, that was responsible for the Security Council’s failure to even debate the need to take
stronger action to halt continuing human rights abuses in Darfur.
The African Union and Darfur
The idea of African solutions for African conflicts is an old one.
Unfortunately, policymakers in the United States and other major powers
have often used it as an excuse for their own inaction. In Darfur, the
U.N. has sought to place most of the burden of carrying out the goals
contained in Security Council resolutions 1556 and 1564 on the shoulders
of the nascent African Union. Initially, the A.U. role was limited to
providing a small force of military observers to monitor the April 2004
ceasefire agreement between the Sudanese government and two
Darfurian rebel groups. In October, the A.U. agreed to expand its force
to include more than 3,500 monitors, peacekeepers, and civilian police.
Despite its limited mandate, much of the world is looking to the A.U.
to provide the means to halt the human rights abuses in Darfur and
restore security.
The decision to rely on A.U. monitors, peacekeepers, and police had
broad support. Officials in the United States and Europe saw it as a way
to avoid the risk that their military forces would become embroiled in
another Mogadishu-like disaster, where U.S. forces acting under a U.N.
mandate were drawn into a deadly conflict with local warlords. African
leaders viewed it as an opportunity to establish the A.U.’s bona fides as
the dominant political-military institution in Africa. And the Sudanese
government apparently decided that the A.U. force was the best alternative
to avoid the possibility of sanctions or U.S. or European intervention.
The ability of the A.U. force to help bring security and justice to
Darfur will depend largely on the commitment of the United States and
Europe to ensure that the A.U. force has the equipment, training, and
logistical support necessary to carry out its mission. But it will also depend on the commitment of the A.U. Peace and Security Council.
Most crucially, the A.U. needs a clear mandate to protect civilians from
attacks. Without such a mandate, the A.U. force could be put in the
position of watching helplessly while civilians are slaughtered.
The A.U. experiment in Darfur is a critical test of Africa’s ability to
assume responsibility for regional crises. If it succeeds, it could substantially
enhance the international community’s ability to halt future
human rights catastrophes in Africa. If it fails, it could set the stage for a
long series of bitter and divisive debates over the necessity for and legitimacy
of international humanitarian intervention on the continent.
Preventing Future Darfurs
Over the past two decades, countless reports and studies have declared
the need to develop more effective early warning and conflict prevention
mechanisms. The International Commission on Intervention and
State Sovereignty, for example, recently declared that “prevention is the
single most important dimension of the duty to protect.” Yet, while the
last decade has seen many initiatives in this area, the atrocities in Darfur
provide stark evidence that the international community has not yet
found a way to translate theories of preventive action into effective
practices.
Justice is the most powerful deterrent to future injustice. Justice
requires holding the perpetrators of human rights abuses accountable
and ensuring that the effects of their injustice are reversed.
In the case of Darfur, the Sudanese government’s brutal counterinsurgency
tactics—including promoting ethnic militias, scorched earth warfare,
aerial bombardment, massive forced displacement, and the blocking
of humanitarian aid to the victims—are the same tactics it used to
combat rebels in other parts of the country. If the international community
had held Sudanese government officials and the militia leaders it backed in its other counterinsurgency wars accountable for the abuses
they committed in those earlier campaigns, Khartoum might have been
deterred from unleashing the Janjaweed in Darfur. But the gross abuses
in southern Sudan’s twenty-one year war never made it onto the
Security Council agenda. These abuses are almost entirely ignored in
the draft North-South peace accords. Similarly, if the international
community had taken steps to ensure that previous exercises in ethnic
cleansing were reversed, Khartoum would have had less reason to
believe that it would succeed in using force to effect lasting changes in
the map of Darfur.
It is for these reasons that the results of the U.N. commission of
inquiry’s investigations will be very important. By documenting the
crimes that have been committed, identifying perpetrators, and recommending
the best means to ensure that the perpetrators are prosecuted,
the commission of inquiry can help not just to bring justice to Darfur,
but also to deter future Darfurs. But it will be equally important for the
international community to ensure that the victims’ of Khartoum’s ethnic
cleansing strategy are returned to their lands and provided help to
re-establish their lives. Their villages must be restored. Their cattle and
property must be returned or replaced. And they must be compensated
for their loss of family members.
Early action to protect civilian populations against emerging threats is
an equally important international imperative. As the Commission on
International Intervention and State Sovereignty noted, preventing conflicts
from escalating and endangering civilian populations requires
three things: early warning, a preventive action toolbox, and political
will. In the case of Darfur, all three were lacking, but especially the last
two.
There were early warning signs in Darfur. But mere warnings, even if
combined with reports of scattered attacks on civilian populations, are
rarely enough to prompt the international community to act. The problem is two-fold. Global policymakers are reluctant to intervene in
“internal matters” unless and until localized conflicts escalate beyond
some indeterminable magic threshold that makes them obviously legitimate
matters of international concern; and the global public seldom
begins to demand action until it is presented with graphic evidence of
large-scale suffering. Therefore, even if the ravaging of a few villages by
government forces and ethnic militias is recognized as an early warning
sign, it is almost never sufficient to set in motion early preventive
actions.
The real key to preventing future Darfurs, as noted above, is legitimizing
the idea of early action to protect civilian populations, and then creating
the tools necessary to provide protection. That will require efforts
by both the international institutions and national governments.
Paradoxically, inviting and facilitating early small-scale civilian protection
efforts is the best option a government has to avoid the possibility
of later, much more threatening, calls for international sanctions and
intervention. If, for example, instead of attacking African villages in
Darfur, the government of Sudan had quickly engaged the international
community in efforts to protect villagers from the effects of fighting
between the government and rebels, it would have almost certainly
gained substantial international credibility. This would have obviated
the need for international recriminations and threats against the government—
and, at the same time, it would have almost certainly
enhanced Khartoum’s bargaining position in negotiations with the
Darfur rebels.
The continuing failure of national governments facing the prospect of
deadly domestic conflicts to accept the need for early action to protect
civilian populations presents the international community with a difficult
choice. When conflicts begin to unfold, it can continue, as in
Darfur, to wait for civilian suffering to become so widespread and evident
that global outrage makes international action unavoidable.
Alternatively, it can embrace the idea of an international responsibility to protect—and begin to develop the means necessary to act on that
responsibility before its only options are after-the-fact sanctions and
military intervention.
Conclusion
The failure to prevent atrocities in Darfur is almost certain to lead to
more international hand-wringing. But the victims of massive human
rights abuse do not need another chorus of “never again” or new
rhetorical commitments by the U.N. Security Council. Instead, they
need a determined effort by the United Nations and its member states
to confront the underlying reasons for their failure to deliver on the
commitments they have already made to prevent armed conflict, protect
civilians, and ensure justice.
Michael Clough is currently serving as Africa advocacy director at Human
Rights Watch. Africa Division colleagues Georgette Gagnon, Leslie Lefkow,
and Jemera Rone contributed to the preparation of this essay, as did Iain
Levine, program director at Human Rights Watch.