Darfur and Abu Ghraib
by Kenneth Roth
Among the myriad human rights challenges of 2004, two pose fundamental
threats to human rights: the ethnic cleansing in Darfur and the
torture of detainees at Abu Ghraib. No one would equate the two, yet
each, in its own way, has had an insidious effect. One involves indifference
in the face of the worst imaginable atrocities, the other is emblematic
of a powerful government flouting a most basic prohibition. One
presents a crisis that threatens many lives, the other a case of exceptionalism
that threatens the most fundamental rules. The vitality of the
global defense of human rights depends on a firm response to each—on
stopping the Sudanese government’s slaughter in Darfur and on changing
the policy decisions behind the U.S. government’s torture and mistreatment
of detainees.
In Darfur, the western region of Sudan, massive ethnic cleansing has
sparked much international hand-wringing and denunciation but little
effective action. The systematic violence against civilians by Sudanese
government forces and government-backed militia constitutes crimes
against humanity and has even been described by some as genocide, yet
the international response has been little more than to condemn the
atrocities, feed the victims, and send a handful of poorly equipped
African forces to try, largely in vain, to stop the slaughter. No serious
pressure has been put on the Sudanese government to halt its murderous
campaign. No meaningful protective force has been deployed.
Coming a decade after the Rwandan genocide, the mass murder in
Darfur mocks the vows of “never again.” How can governments honestly
mouth those words when their actions fall so shamefully short?
Immediate action is needed to save the people of Darfur. The U.N.
Security Council—or, failing action by that body, any responsible group
of governments—must deploy a large force capable of protecting the civilian population, prosecute the killers and their commanders, disband
and disarm the Sudanese government’s militia, and create secure conditions
so displaced people can return home safely. Continued inaction
risks undermining a fundamental human rights principle—that the
nations of the world will never let sovereignty stand in the way of their
responsibility to protect people from mass atrocities.
The U.S. government’s use of torture at Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq
poses a different kind of challenge: not because the scale of the abuse is
as large as Darfur, but because the abuser is so powerful. When most
governments breach international human rights and humanitarian law,
they commit a violation. The breach is condemned or prosecuted, but
the rule remains firm. Yet when a government as dominant and influential
as the United States openly defies that law and seeks to justify its
defiance, it also undermines the law itself and invites others to do the
same. The U.S. government’s deliberate and continuing use of “coercive
interrogation”—its acceptance and deployment of torture and other
cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment—has had this insidious effect,
well beyond the consequences of an ordinary abuser. That unlawful
conduct has also undermined Washington’s much-needed credibility as
a proponent of human rights and a leader of the campaign against terrorism.
In the midst of a seeming epidemic of suicide bombings,
beheadings, and other attacks on civilians and noncombatants—all
affronts to the most basic human rights values—Washington’s weakened
moral authority is felt acutely.
As the Bush administration begins its second term, its challenge is to
make human rights a guiding force for U.S. conduct and to establish
America’s credibility as a defender of human rights. As a first step,
President Bush and the U.S. Congress should establish a fully independent
investigative commission—similar to the one created to examine
the attacks of September 11, 2001—to determine what went wrong
in the administration’s interrogation practices and to prescribe remedial
steps. Washington should also acknowledge and reverse the policy decisions behind its torture and mistreatment of detainees, hold accountable
those responsible at all levels of government for the mistreatment of
detainees, and publicly commit to ending all forms of coercive interrogation.
Darfur
Many reasons can be cited for the world’s callous disregard for the
death of an estimated 70,000 people and the displacement of some 1.6
million more in Darfur. The second essay of this volume describes several
of these reasons. None, however, justifies this cruel indifference.
Once more, the U.N. Security Council has been hampered by its permanent
members’ threatened parochial use of their veto—a veto that, as
recommended by the U.N.’s high-level panel on global threats, should
never be exercised “in cases of genocide and large-scale human rights
abuses.” This time, China has been the primary problem, demonstrating
more concern for preserving its lucrative oil contracts in Sudan than
for saving thousands of lives. Russia, protecting its own valuable arms
sales to Khartoum, has seconded this cold-hearted unresponsiveness.
The non-permanent members also share culpability. Algeria and
Pakistan have been models of Islamic solidarity, so long as that is
defined as fealty to an Islamic government rather than commitment to
the lives of Muslim victims. Other African members of the council,
Angola and Benin, placed a premium on loyalty to a fellow African government.
In the U.N. General Assembly, scores of governments, hostile
to any human rights criticism because of their own poor records,
opposed even discussing Sudan’s murderous campaign, let alone condemning
it.
Even the champions of human rights in Darfur—Washington foremost
among them— have seemed more focused on limiting their obligation
to the people of Darfur than on ending the killing. A large U.N.-
authorized military force is clearly needed to protect Darfur residents and to create conditions of security that might allow them to return
home safely. But the United States and its Western allies have handed
the problem to the African Union, a new institution with few resources
and no experience with military operations of the scale needed. The situation
cries out for involvement by the major military powers, but they
have chosen to be unavailable. The United States, the United Kingdom,
and Australia are bogged down in Iraq, with the United States going so
far as to say that “no new action is dictated” by its determination that
the killing in Darfur amounts to genocide; France is committed elsewhere
in Africa; Canada, despite promoting the “responsibility to protect,”
is cutting back its peacekeeping commitments; NATO is preoccupied
in Afghanistan; the European Union is deploying forces in Bosnia.
Everyone has something more important to do than to save the people
of Darfur from inhuman brutality at the hands of the Sudanese government
and its militia.
Another key step for ending the ethnic cleansing is to ensure that those
responsible for murder, rape, and other atrocities—and their commanders—
face their day in court. The Sudanese government has done nothing
real to see justice done. International prosecution is needed to
silence the smug denials of responsibility emanating from Khartoum
and to signal to the people of Darfur that the world no longer considers
their demise and dislocation acceptable. Just as impunity invited
Khartoum to extend its murderous ways from the killing fields of southern
Sudan to Darfur, so prosecution would demonstrate a refusal to tolerate
in Darfur the kinds of government-sponsored atrocities that have
plagued southern Sudan for over two decades.
To its credit, the Security Council established an international commission
of inquiry for Darfur—a possible prelude to prosecution. When
the commission reports back at the end of January, the council will have
to decide whether to refer the situation to the International Criminal
Court. Will China see past its oil contracts to allow the referral to go
forward? Will the United States overcome its antipathy for the court to allow prosecution of crimes it calls genocide? Or, as the people of
Darfur suffer and die, will it insist on wasting time setting up a separate
tribunal? The Security Council’s many professions of concern will ring
hollow if its answer to the desperate pleas from Darfur is, through delay
or inaction, to let impunity reign.
Darfur today stands as testament to a profound failure of will to prevent
and redress the most heinous human rights crimes. Despite countless
denunciations and endless professions of concern, little has been done
to protect the people of Darfur. A failure of this magnitude challenges
the fundamental human rights principle that the governments of the
world will not turn their backs on people facing mass atrocities. For if
the nations of the world cannot act here, when will they act? How, ten
years after the Rwandan genocide, can the gap between concern and
action remain so wide? How, when the worst of human cruelty is on
display, can the world remain so indifferent? As the death toll rises and
the charade of feigned protection becomes painfully obvious to all, we
must insist that the nations of the world finally rescue the people of
Darfur. Either that or vow “never again” to say “never again.”
Coercive Interrogation
The U.S. government’s systematic and continuing use of coercive interrogation
jeopardizes a pillar of international human rights law—a centuries-
old proscription, reaffirmed unconditionally in numerous widely
ratified human rights treaties, that governments should never subject
detainees to torture or other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment.
Yet in fighting terrorism, the U.S. government has treated this cornerstone
obligation as merely hortatory—a matter of choice, not duty.
This disdain for so fundamental a principle has done enormous damage
to the global system for protecting human rights. Broad public condemnation
has certainly greeted the U.S. government’s use of torture and
other abusive techniques. To some extent that outrage has reinforced the rules that Washington violated—but not enough. Washington’s lawless
example is so powerful, its influence so singular, that its deliberate
breach threatens to overshadow the condemnations and leave human
rights law significantly weakened. If even so basic a rule as the ban on
torture can be flouted, other rights are inevitably undermined as well.
To make matters worse, the Bush administration has developed outrageous
legal theories to try to justify many of its coercive techniques.
Whether defining torture so narrowly as to render its prohibition
meaningless, suggesting bogus legal defenses for torturers, or claiming
that the president has inherent power to order torture, the administration
and its lawyers have directly challenged the absolute ban on abusing
detainees.
The problem is compounded by the weakening of one of the most
important governmental voices for human rights. Washington’s record
of promoting human rights has always been mixed. For every offender
that it berated for human rights transgressions, there was another whose
abuses it ignored, excused, or even supported. Yet despite this inconsistency,
the United States historically has played a key role in defending
human rights. Its embrace of coercive interrogation—part of a broader
betrayal of human rights principles in the name of combating terrorism—
has significantly impaired its ability to mount that defense.
Governments facing human rights pressure from the United States now
find it increasingly easy to turn the tables, to challenge Washington’s
standing to uphold principles that it violates itself. Whether it is Egypt
defending renewal of its emergency law by reference to U.S. anti-terror
legislation, Malaysia justifying administrative detention by invoking
Guantánamo, Russia citing Abu Ghraib to blame abuses in Chechnya
solely on low-level soldiers, or Cuba claiming the Bush administration
had “no moral authority to accuse” it of human rights violations, repressive
governments find it easier to deflect U.S. pressure because of
Washington’s own sorry post-September 11 record on human rights.
Indeed, when asked by Human Rights Watch to protest administrative
detention in Malaysia and prolonged incommunicado detention in
Uganda, State Department officials demurred, explaining, in the words
of one, “with what we are doing in Guantánamo, we’re on thin ice to
push this.”
Similarly, many human rights defenders, particularly in the Middle East
and North Africa, now cringe when the United States comes to their
defense. They may crave a powerful ally, but identifying too closely
with a government that so brazenly ignores international law, whether
in Iraq, Israel and the occupied territories, or the campaign against terrorism,
has become a sure route to disrepute. To his credit, President
Bush, in a November 2003 speech, deplored “sixty years of Western
nations excusing and accommodating the lack of freedom” in the Arab
world. Recalling U.S. efforts to roll back Communist dictatorships in
Eastern Europe, President Bush committed the United States to a new
“forward strategy of freedom.” Yet because of animosity toward
Washington’s policies, the close collaboration with civil society that
characterized U.S. pro-democracy efforts in Eastern Europe is now
more difficult in the Middle East and North Africa. This animosity is
not anti-Americanism, as it is often misconstrued in an effort to dismiss
it, but anti-American policyism.
Washington’s loss of credibility has not been for lack of rhetorical support
for concepts that are closely related to human rights, but the
embrace of explicit human rights language seems to have been calculatedly
rare. The Bush administration speaks often of its devotion to “freedom,”
its opposition to “tyranny” and “terrorism,” but rarely its commitment
to human rights. The distinction has enormous significance. It
is one thing to pronounce oneself on the side of the “free,” quite another
to be bound by the full array of human rights standards that are the
foundation of freedom. It is one thing to declare oneself opposed to terrorism,
quite another to embrace the body of international human
rights and humanitarian law that enshrines the values that reject terrorism. This linguistic sleight of hand—this refusal to accept the legal obligations
embraced by rights-respecting states—has facilitated
Washington’s use of coercive interrogation.
What has been particularly frustrating about Washington’s disregard for
international standards is how senseless, even counterproductive, it has
been—especially in the Middle East and North Africa, where counterterrorism
efforts have focused. Open and responsive political systems are
the best way to encourage people to pursue their grievances peacefully.
But when the most vocal governmental advocate of democracy deliberately
violates human rights, it undermines democratically inclined
reformers and strengthens the appeal of those who preach more radical
visions.
Moreover, because deliberately attacking civilians is an affront to the
most basic human rights values, an effective defense against terrorism
requires not only traditional security measures but also reinforcement of
a human rights culture. The communities that are most influential with
potential terrorists must themselves be persuaded that violence against
civilians is never justified, regardless of the cause. But when the United
States disregards human rights, it undermines that human rights culture
and thus sabotages one of the most important tools for dissuading
potential terrorists. Instead, U.S. abuses have provided a new rallying
cry for terrorist recruiters, and the pictures from Abu Ghraib have
become the recruiting posters for Terrorism, Inc. Many militants need
no additional incentive to attack civilians, but if a weakened human
rights culture eases even only a few fence-sitters toward the path of violence,
the consequences can be dire.
And for what? To vent frustration, to exact revenge—perhaps, but not
because torture and mistreatment are needed for protection. Respect for
the Geneva Conventions does not preclude vigorously interrogating
detainees about a limitless range of topics. The U.S. Army’s interrogation
manual makes clear that abuse undermines the quest for reliable information. The U.S. military command in Iraq says that Iraqi
detainees are providing more useful intelligence when they are not subjected
to coercion. In the words of Craig Murray, the United Kingdom’s
former ambassador to Uzbekistan who was speaking of the U.K.’s
reliance on torture-extracted testimony, “We are selling our souls for
dross.”
None of this is to say that the United States is the worst human rights
abuser. Perusal of this year’s annual Human Rights Watch World
Report will show many more serious contenders for that notorious title.
But the sad truth is that Washington’s unmatched influence has made its
contribution to the degradation of human rights standards unique.
It is not enough to argue, as its defenders undoubtedly will, that the
Bush administration is well intentioned—that it is the “good guy,” in
the words of the Wall Street Journal. A society ordered on intentions
rather than law is a lawless society. Nor does it excuse the administration’s
human rights record, as its defenders have tried to do, to note that
it removed two tyrannical governments—the Taliban in Afghanistan and
the Ba’ath Party in Iraq. Attacks on repressive regimes cannot justify
attacks on the body of principles that makes their repression illegal.
To redeem its credibility as a proponent of human rights and an effective
leader of the campaign against terrorism, the Bush administration
needs urgently to reaffirm its commitment to human rights. For reasons
of principle and pragmatism, it must, as noted, allow an independent,
September 11-style investigative commission to examine completely its
interrogation practices. The administration must then acknowledge the
wrongfulness of its conduct, hold accountable all those responsible (not
just a small group of privates and sergeants), and publicly commit itself
to ending all forms of coercive interrogation. 
Cover-up and Self-investigation
When the photos from Abu Ghraib became public, the Bush administration
reacted like many abusive governments that are caught redhanded:
it went into damage-control mode. It agreed that the torture
and abuse featured in the photographs were wrong, but sought to minimize
the problem. The abusers, it claimed, were a handful of errant soldiers,
a few “bad apples” at the bottom of the barrel. The problem, it
argued, was contained, both geographically (one section of Abu Ghraib
prison) and structurally (only low-level soldiers, not more senior commanders).
The abuse photographed at Abu Ghraib and broadcast
around the world, it maintained, had nothing to do with the decisions
and policies of more senior officials. President Bush vowed that
“wrongdoers will be brought to justice,” but as of early December 2004,
no one above the rank of sergeant is facing prosecution.
Key to this damage control was a series of carefully limited investigations—
ten so far. Most of the investigations, such as those conducted by
Maj. Gen. George Fay and Lt. Gen. Anthony Jones, involved uniformed
military officials examining the conduct of their subordinates;
these officers lacked the authority to scrutinize senior Pentagon officials.
The one investigation with the theoretical capacity to examine the
conduct of Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld and his top aides—the
inquiry led by former Defense Secretary James Schlesinger—was
appointed by Rumsfeld himself and seemed to go out of its way to distance
him from the problem. (At the press conference releasing the
investigative report, Schlesinger said that Rumsfeld’s resignation “would
be a boon to all America’s enemies.”) The Schlesinger investigation
lacked the independence of, for example, the September 11
Commission, which was established with the active involvement of the
U.S. Congress. As for the Central Intelligence Agency—the branch of
the U.S. government believed to hold the most important terrorist suspects—
it has apparently escaped scrutiny by anyone other than its own inspector general. Meanwhile, no one seems to be looking at the role of
President Bush and other senior administration officials.
When an unidentified government official retaliated against a critic of
the Bush administration by revealing his wife to be a CIA agent—a serious
crime because it could endanger her—the administration agreed,
under pressure, to appoint a special prosecutor who has been promised
independence from administration direction. Yet the administration has
refused to appoint a special prosecutor to determine whether senior
officials authorized torture and other forms of coercive interrogation – a
far more serious and systematic offense. As a result, no criminal inquiry
that the administration itself does not control is being conducted into
the U.S. government’s abusive interrogation methods. The flurry of
self-investigations cannot obscure the lack of any genuinely independent
one.
The Policies behind Abu Ghraib
The abuses of Abu Ghraib did not erupt spontaneously at the lowest
levels of the military chain of command. They were not merely a “management”
failure, as the Schlesinger investigation suggested. They were
the direct product of an environment of lawlessness, an environment
created by policy decisions taken at the highest levels of the Bush
administration, many long before the start of the Iraq war. They reflect
a determination to fight terrorism unconstrained by fundamental principles
of international human rights and humanitarian law—even though
the United States and governments around the world have committed
to respect those principles even in time of war and severe security
threats. The Bush administration’s decisions received important support
in the United States from a chorus of partisan pundits and academics
who, claiming that an unprecedented security threat justified unprecedented
measures, were all too eager to abandon the fundamental principles
on which their nation had been founded. Those decisions included: 
• The decision not to apply the Geneva Conventions to detainees
in U.S. custody at Guantánamo, even though the conventions
apply to all people picked up on the battlefield of Afghanistan.
Senior Bush officials vowed that all detainees would be treated
“humanely,” but that vow seems never to have been seriously
implemented and at times was qualified by a self-created exception
for “military necessity.” Meanwhile, the effective shredding
of the Geneva Conventions sent U.S. interrogators the signal
that, in the words of one leading counterterrorist official, “the
gloves came off.”
• The decision not to clarify for nearly two years that, regardless of
the applicability of the Geneva Conventions, all detainees in U.S.
custody were protected by the parallel requirements of the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment. Even when, at the urging
of human rights groups, a senior Pentagon official belatedly reaffirmed,
in June 2003, that the convention prohibited not only torture
but also other forms of ill treatment, that announcement was
communicated to interrogators, if at all, in a way that had no discernible
impact on their behavior.
• The decision to interpret the prohibition of cruel, inhuman, or
degrading treatment narrowly, to permit certain forms of coercive
interrogation—that is, certain efforts to ratchet up a suspect’s
pain, suffering, and humiliation to make him talk. Not surprisingly,
those methods became more coercive as they “migrated,” in
the words of two Pentagon inquiries, from the controlled setting
of Guantánamo to the battlefields of Afghanistan and Iraq.
• The decision to hold some suspects—eleven known and probably
many more— in unacknowledged incommunicado detention,
beyond the reach of even the International Committee of the Red
Cross. Victims of such “disappearances” are at the greatest risk of torture and other mistreatment. For example, U.S. forces continue
to maintain closed detention sites in Afghanistan, where beatings,
threats, and sexual humiliation are still reported. Since late
2001, six persons arrested by U.S. forces in Afghanistan have died
in custody—one as recently as September 2004.
• The refusal for over two years to prosecute soldiers implicated in
the deaths of two suspects in U.S. custody in Afghanistan in
December 2002, deaths ruled “homicides” by U.S. Army pathologists.
Instead, the interrogators were reportedly sent to Iraq,
where some were allegedly involved in more abuse.
• The approval by Defense Secretary Rumsfeld of some interrogation
methods for Guantánamo that violated, at the very least, the
prohibition of cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment and possibly
the ban on torture. These techniques included placing
detainees in painful stress positions, hooding them, stripping
them of their clothes, and scaring them with guard dogs. That
approval was later rescinded, but it contributed to the environment
in which America’s legal obligations were seen as dispensable.
• The reported approval by an unidentified senior Bush administration
official, and use, of “water boarding”—known as the “submarine”
in Latin America—a torture technique in which the victim
is made to believe he will drown, and in practice sometimes does.
• The sending of suspects to governments such as Syria,
Uzbekistan, and Egypt that practice systematic torture.
Sometimes diplomatic assurances have been sought that the suspects
would not be mistreated, but if, as in these cases, the receiving
government routinely flouts its legal obligation under the
Convention against Torture, it was wrong to expect better compliance
with the non-binding word of a diplomat.
• The decision (adopted from the Bush administration’s earliest
days) to oppose and undermine the International Criminal Court,
in part out of fear that it might compel the United States to prosecute
U.S. personnel implicated in war crimes or other comparable
offenses that the administration would prefer to ignore. That
signaled a determination to protect U.S. personnel from external
accountability for human rights offenses that the U.S. government
might authorize.
• The decision by the Justice Department, the Defense
Department, and the White House counsel to concoct dubious
legal theories to justify torture. Despite objections from the State
Department and professional military attorneys, these government
departments, under the direction of politically appointed
lawyers, offered such absurd interpretations of the law as that
President Bush has “commander-in-chief authority” to order torture.
By that theory, Slobodan Milosevic and Saddam Hussein
may as well be given the keys to their jail cells, since they, too,
presumably would have had “commander-in-chief authority” to
authorize the atrocities they directed.
These policy decisions, taken not by low-level soldiers but by senior
officials of the Bush administration, created an “anything goes” atmosphere,
an environment in which the ends were assumed to justify the
means. Sometimes the mistreatment of detainees was merely tolerated,
other times it was actively encouraged or even ordered. In those circumstances,
when the demand came from on high for “actionable intelligence”—
intelligence that would help respond to the steady stream of
U.S. casualties at the hands of extraordinarily brutal Iraqi insurgents—it
was hardly surprising that interrogators saw no obstacle in the legal
prohibition of torture and mistreatment.
To this day, the Bush administration has failed to repudiate many of
these decisions. It continues to refuse to apply the Geneva Conventions to any of the more than five hundred detainees held at Guantánamo
(despite a U.S. court ruling rejecting its position) and to many others
detained in Iraq and Afghanistan. It continues to “disappear” detainees,
despite ample proof that these “ghost detainees” are extraordinarily vulnerable
to torture. It refuses to disown the practice of “rendering” suspects
to governments that torture. It continues its vendetta against the
International Criminal Court. It refuses to reject in anything but vague
and general terms the many specious arguments for torture contained in
the administration lawyers’ notorious “torture memos.” And it still
refuses to disavow all forms of coercive interrogation or to adopt a clear
policy forbidding it. Indeed, it reportedly continued as late as June
2004—long after the Abu Ghraib mistreatment became public—to subject
Guantánamo detainees to beatings, prolonged isolation, sexual
humiliation, extreme temperatures, and painful stress positioning –
practices the International Committee of the Red Cross reportedly
called “tantamount to torture.”
As the Bush administration assembles its cabinet for a second presidential
term, President Bush seems to have ruled out even informal
accountability. Secretary of State Colin Powell, the cabinet official who
most forcefully opposed the administration’s disavowal of the Geneva
Conventions, is leaving. Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, who
ordered abusive interrogation techniques in violation of international
law, is staying. White House Counsel Alberto Gonzales, who sought
production of the memos justifying torture and who himself wrote that
the fight against terrorism renders “obsolete” and “quaint” the Geneva
Conventions’ limitations on interrogation and the treatment of prisoners,
has been rewarded with nomination as Attorney General. As for the
broader Bush administration, the November elections seem to have
reinforced its traditional disinclination to serious self-examination.
Apparently seeing the election results as a complete vindication, it
refuses to admit its role in Abu Ghraib and other interrogation abuses.
The Twisted Logic of Torture
A warped and dangerous logic lies behind the Bush administration’s
refusal to reject coercive interrogation. Many American security officials
seem to believe that coercive interrogation is necessary to protect
Americans and their allies from a catastrophic terrorist attack. Torture
and inhumane treatment may be wrong, they contend, but mass murder
is worse, so the lesser evil must be tolerated to prevent the greater one.
Yet, aware of how fundamental the prohibition of torture is to modern
civilization, even proponents of a hard-line approach to counter-terrorism
are reluctant to prescribe systematic torture. Instead, they purport
to create a rare exception to the rule against torture by invoking the
“ticking bomb” scenario, a situation in which interrogators are said to
learn that a terrorist suspect in custody knows where a ticking bomb has
been planted and must force that information from him to save lives.
The ticking bomb scenario makes for great philosophical discussion, but
it rarely arises in real life—at least not in a way that avoids opening the
door to pervasive torture. In fact, interrogators hardly ever learn that a
suspect in custody knows of a particular, imminent terrorist bombing.
Intelligence is rarely if ever good enough to provide such specific,
advance warning. Instead, the ticking bomb scenario is a dangerously
expansive metaphor capable of embracing anyone who might have
knowledge of unspecified future terrorist attacks. After all, why are the
victims of only an imminent terrorist attack deserving of protection by
torture? Why not also use torture to prevent a terrorist attack tomorrow
or next week or next year? And once the taboo against torture is
broken, why stop with the alleged terrorists themselves? Why not also
torture their families or associates—anyone who might provide life-saving
information? The slope is very slippery.
Israel provides an instructive example of how dangerously elastic the
ticking-bomb rationale can become. In 1987, the Landau Commission
in Israel authorized the use of “moderate physical pressure” in tickingbomb situations. A practice initially justified as rare and exceptional,
taken only when necessary to save lives, gradually became standard procedure.
Soon, some 80 to 90 percent of Palestinian security detainees
were being tortured—until, in 1999, the Israeli Supreme Court curtailed
the practice.
Other schemes have also been suggested to allow only exceptional torture.
Judges might be asked to approve torture. Consent of the highest
levels of the executive branch might be required. Yet in the end, any
effort to regulate torture ends up legitimizing it and inviting its repetition.
“Never” cannot be redeemed if allowed to be read as “sometimes.”
Regulation too easily becomes license.
The Bush administration tried to allow just limited coercion through
close regulation, but that, predictably, led to more expansive use. Once
a government allows interrogators to ratchet up the level of pain, suffering,
and humiliation, severe abuse will not be far behind. That’s because
a hardened terrorist is unlikely to be moved by minor discomfort or
modest levels of pain. Once coercion is permitted, interrogators will be
tempted to intensify the mistreatment until the suspect cracks. And so,
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment gives way to torture.
As most professional interrogators explain, and as the U.S. army’s interrogation
manual confirms, coercive interrogation is far less likely to
produce reliable information than the time-tested methods of careful
questioning, probing, cross-checking, and gaining the confidence of the
detainee. A person facing severe pain is likely to say whatever he thinks
will stop the torture. But a skilled interrogator can often extract accurate
information from the toughest suspect without resorting to coercion.
Moreover, once the norm against torture is breached, it is difficult to
limit the consequences. Those who face increased risk of torture are not
only “terrorist suspects” but anyone who finds himself in custody anywhere in the world—including, of course, Americans. After all, how can
the United States protest others’ mistreatment of its troops when their
jailors do no more than what Washington does to its own detainees?
In addition, a compromised prohibition of torture undermines other
human rights. That endangers us all, in part because of the dangerous
implications for the campaign against terrorism. Why, after all, is it
acceptable to breach the fundamental prohibition of torture but not
acceptable to breach the fundamental prohibition against attacking civilians?
The torturer may justify his conduct by appeal to a higher good,
but so do most terrorists. In neither case should the end be allowed to
justify the means.
The European Union
As U.S. credibility on human rights wanes, there is an urgent need for
others to assume the mantle of leadership. The European Union is an
obvious candidate, but its performance has been inconsistent at best. At
a formal level, the E.U. has embraced a rules-based order by holding
that “establishing the rule of law and protecting human rights are the
best means of strengthening the international order.” It has also repeatedly
affirmed that all measures against terrorism must comply fully with
international human rights and humanitarian law. And it has been a firm
supporter of the emerging international system of justice.
Yet European governments themselves have been willing to violate basic
human rights standards—even those involving torture. Sweden, for
example, sent two terrorist suspects to Egypt, a government with an
established record of systematic torture. Stockholm tried to hide behind
the fig leaf of diplomatic assurances from Cairo that the men would not
be mistreated, but those assurances were predictably ignored. Germany,
the Netherlands, Austria, and the United Kingdom have also returned
or attempted to return terrorist or security suspects to places where
they were at risk of torture. The United Kingdom refuses to rule out using information extracted from torture in court proceedings; its fig
leaf is that it does not commission the torture itself, but merely passively
receives its fruits, even though its ongoing relationship with intelligence
partners ends up encouraging more torture.
A similar erosion of human rights standards governing the fight against
terrorism can be found in certain E.U. members’ detention practices.
The U.K. government suspended core human rights obligations to
allow it to detain indefinitely without charge or trial foreign nationals
who were suspected of terrorist activity. In Spain, terrorism suspects can
be held virtually incommunicado for up to thirteen days, with no ability
to confer in private with an attorney. France asserts the right to detain
for up to three years without charge the French nationals released from
Guantánamo.
These abusive practices compromise the European Union’s ability to fill
the leadership void left by Washington’s embrace of coercive interrogation.
At a moment that calls for distance from misguided American
practices, the European Union seems to be opting for emulation. A
clear recommitment to human rights principle is immediately needed if
the European Union is to serve as an effective counterweight to
Washington’s insidious influence on human rights standards.
The Way Forward
The strength of governments’ commitment to human rights will be
measured in large part by the response to two current challenges. Faced
with Sudanese government-sponsored atrocities in Darfur, will the
world continue to watch ethnic cleansing unfold, or will it respond
meaningfully to end the murder, rape, arson, and forced displacement,
and to force the Sudanese government to create secure conditions so
the displaced can return home safely? The answer will determine
whether the world can credibly argue that there are limits to the horrors
it will allow a government to visit upon its people.
Faced with substantial evidence showing that the abuses at Abu Ghraib
and elsewhere were caused in large part by official government policies,
will the United States continue to treat the torture of detainees as the
spontaneous misconduct of a few low-level soldiers, or will it permit a
fully independent, September 11-style investigative commission—the
first step toward acknowledging the policy dimensions of the problem,
punishing those responsible, and committing the United States to ending
all coercive interrogation? These steps are necessary to reaffirm the
prohibition of torture and ill-treatment, to redeem Washington’s voice
as a credible proponent of human rights, and to restore the effectiveness
of a U.S.-led campaign against terrorism.
In neither case will the proper response be easy. Saving the people of
Darfur will require a significant commitment of international forces and
resources. Acknowledging the depth of the problem at Abu Ghraib will
be politically embarrassing. Yet both steps are necessary. It is time to
look beyond the convenient excuses and rationalizations to reaffirm
what should be the guiding human rights principles for every nation.
Kenneth Roth is executive director of Human Rights Watch.