Despots Masquerading as Democrats
By Kenneth Roth
Rarely has democracy been so acclaimed yet so breached, so promoted yet so
disrespected, so important yet so disappointing. Today, democracy has become
the sine qua non of legitimacy. Few governments want to be seen as undemocratic.
Yet the credentials of the claimants have not kept pace with democracy’s growing
popularity. These days, even overt dictators aspire to the status conferred by
the democracy label. Determined not to let mere facts stand in the way, these
rulers have mastered the art of democratic rhetoric that bears little relationship to
their practice of governing.
Why else would as ruthless a leader as Uzbekistan’s President Islam Karimov
choose to stage elections? Why bother? Karimov heads a government that has
imprisoned some 7,000 people for political and religious reasons, routinely tortures
detainees, and as recently as 2005 massacred hundreds of protesters in
Andijan. He is hardly a democrat, and he faces no real opponents in December
2007 elections because no one dares mount a serious challenge to his rule. Even
a constitutional prohibition against a third seven-year presidential term has not
stood in his way.
Yet this brutal president finds utility in holding electoral charades to legitimize his
reign. So do, among others, Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe, Pervez Musharraf of
Pakistan, Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, Meles Zenawi of Ethiopia, and Vladimir Putin
of Russia.
Even China has gotten into the game. In an October 2007 speech to the
Communist Party Congress, President Hu Jintao used the word “democracy” more
than 60 times in calling for more of it within the party. Yet that has not stopped
him from barring independent political parties, blocking legal efforts to uphold
basic rights, and shutting down countless civil society organizations, media outlets,
and websites. And there are no national elections. So what did he have in
mind? The party allowed 221 candidates to contest 204 seats for its Central
Committee.
The techniques used by such autocrats to tame the nettlesome unpredictability of
democracy are nothing if not creative. The challenge they face is to appear to
embrace democratic principles while avoiding any risk of succumbing to popular
preferences. Electoral fraud, political violence, press censorship, repression of
civil society, even military rule have all been used to curtail the prospect that the
proclaimed process of democratization might actually lead to a popular say in
government.
Part of the reason that dictators can hope to get away with such subterfuge is
that, unlike human rights, “democracy” has no legally established definition. The
concept of democracy reflects the powerful vision that the best way to select a
government and guide its course is to entrust ultimate authority to those who are
subject to its rule. It is far from a perfect political system, with its risk of majoritarian
indifference to minorities and its susceptibility to excessive influence by powerful
elements, but as famously the “least bad” form of government, in the words
of Winston Churchill, it is an important part of the human rights ideal. Yet there is
no International Convention on Democracy, no widely ratified treaty affirming how
a government must behave to earn the democracy label. The meaning of democracy
lies too much in the eye of the beholder.
By contrast, international human rights law grants all citizens the right to “take
part in the conduct of public affairs, directly or through freely chosen representatives”
and to “vote” in “genuine periodic elections” with “universal and equal
suffrage” and “secret ballot” so as to “guarantee[] the free expression of the will
of the electors.” It also grants a range of related rights that should be seen as
essential to democracy in any robust and meaningful form, including rights protecting
a diverse and vigorous civil society and a free and vibrant press, rights
defending the interests of minorities, and rights ensuring that government officials
are subject to the rule of law. The specificity and legally binding nature of
human rights are their great strength. But when autocrats manage to deflect criticism
for violating these rights by pretending to be democrats, when they can
enjoy the benefits of admission to the club of democracies without paying the
admission fee of respect for basic rights, the global defense of human rights is
put in jeopardy. Why bother complying with so intrusive a set of rules as international
human rights law when, with a bit of maneuvering, any tyrant can pass
himself off as a “democrat”?
The misuse of the democratic name is not entirely new. The one-time German
Democratic Republic (the name of the now-defunct one-party Communist state in
East Germany) or today’s Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (the improbable,
official name of North Korea) are prime examples. But few gave any credence to
these Orwellian claims. The sad new development is how easy it has become for
today’s autocrats to get away with mounting a democratic facade.
It is not that pseudo-democratic leaders gain much legitimacy at home. The local
population knows all too bitterly what a farce the elections really are. At best,
these leaders gain the benefit of feigned compliance with local laws requiring
elections. Rather, a good part of the motivation today behind this democratic
veneer stems from the international legitimacy that an electoral exercise, however
empty, can win for even the most hardened dictator. Because of other interests—
energy, commerce, counterterrorism—the world’s more established democracies
too often find it convenient to appear credulous of these sham democrats.
Foremost has been the United States under President George W. Bush. In a troubling
parallel to abusive governments around the world, the US government has
embraced democracy promotion as a softer and fuzzier alternative to defending
human rights. Democracy is a metric by which the United States still measures up
fairly well, but human rights are a standard by which the record of the Bush
administration is deeply troubling. Talk of human rights leads to Guantanamo,
secret CIA prisons, waterboarding, rendition, military commissions, and the suspension
of habeas corpus. Despite the 2000 presidential elections, discussion of
democracy takes place on a more comfortable terrain.
Such divorcing of democracy from the international standards that give it meaning
helps to convince autocrats that mere elections, regardless of the circumstances,
are sufficient to warrant the democrat label. Bush’s response to then-
General Musharraf’s November 2007 declaration of “emergency rule” illustrates
the problem. Even after Musharraf’s effective coup and his detention of thousands
of political opponents, Bush said that Musharraf had somehow not
“crossed the line.” Bush could hardly trumpet Musharraf’s human rights record,
so he declared that Musharraf is “somebody who believes in democracy” and
that Pakistan was “on the road to democracy.” But if, unlike human rights law,
“the road to democracy” permits locking up political opponents, dismissing independent judges, and silencing the independent press, it is easy to see why
tyrants the world over are tempted to believe that they, too, might be eligible. As
such unworthy claimants as the leaders of Egypt, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, and
Nigeria wrap themselves in the democracy mantle with scant international objection,
the concept of democracy gets cheapened, its human rights component cast
aside.
To make matters worse, the Bush administration’s efforts to rationalize the invasion
of Iraq in terms of democracy promotion has made it easier for autocrats to
equate pressure on them to democratize with an imperial, militarist agenda.
Sadly, that cynical ploy often works, because much of the world today views any
Washington-led campaign for democracy as a pretext for military invasion or
regime change, if not also as a recipe for chaos. Dictators have learned that conjuring
up visions of Iraq can be a useful way to blunt pressure to democratize.
And governments that might have defended a more robust vision of democracy
are reluctant to do so for fear of being seen as joining the Bush agenda.
Other governments, too, have treated empty elections as an excuse to re-start
business as usual with dictatorships that merit denunciation, not partnership. A
prime example is the treatment of Kazakhstan by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), a body that comprises 56 governments from
Europe and Central Asia as well as the United States and Canada. In August 2007,
President Nursultan Nazarbaev staged parliamentary elections in which the OSCE
found vote-counting flaws in 40 percent of the polling stations it visited. The predictable
result: Nazarbaev’s party won all the seats in the lower house of parliament
with a declared 88 percent of the vote, and no opposition party was said to
have surpassed the 7 percent threshold needed for parliamentary representation.
This fraud occurred against a backdrop of continuing, widespread human rights
violations: government loyalists dominate the broadcast media, independent
journalists are threatened and harassed for criticizing the president or the government,
libel continues to be used as a criminal offense, and opposition activists
risk imprisonment, such as Alibek Zhumbaev, currently serving a five-year prison
term for insulting Nazarbaev.
But the OSCE, in evidence-be-damned fashion, claimed that the elections had
“moved Kazakhstan forward in its evolution towards a democratic country.” This wishful thinking was apparently designed to avoid keeping Kazakhstan from its
long-sought goal of becoming the first former Soviet republic to chair the OSCE.
Preoccupied by energy concerns, Germany joined Russia in supporting this inappropriate
candidacy. Although the US and British governments led the opposition,
they, too, ultimately wavered. In November 2007, OSCE states by consensus
granted Kazakhstan the chairmanship in 2010. Kazakhstan, rather than having to
demonstrate respect in fact for the democracy and human rights standards that
are at the heart of the OSCE, had only to pledge to undertake media and electoral
reform and to stop trying to undermine the OSCE’s human rights mandate.
Dumbing down democracy in this form, with little protest from the governments
that are best placed to serve as its guardians, has made it easier for authoritarian
leaders like Nazarbaev to masquerade as democrats and deflect pressure for
more meaningful human rights reform.
Of course, insisting on real democracy is not the only test of the international
community’s commitment to human rights. Also of fundamental importance is its
response to mass atrocities in places such as eastern Chad, Colombia, eastern
Congo, the Ogaden region of Ethiopia, Iraq, Somalia, Sri Lanka, and the Darfur
region of Sudan, as well as to closed societies or severe repression in countries
such as Burma, China, Cuba, Eritrea, Libya, North Korea, Saudi Arabia and
Vietnam. These urgent situations are addressed in detail within this volume. But
the human rights cause must be concerned not only with these severe cases but
also with governments that may be slightly more open but still use repressive
means to prevent any challenge to their rule. Their task is eased when mere gestures
toward democracy are allowed to displace respect for the full panoply of
human rights.
To avoid this shell game, to prevent the appeal of “democracy” from being
abused as a poor surrogate for more exacting rights standards, there is an urgent
need to reclaim the full meaning of the democratic ideal. That does not mean
advocating a narrowly defined form of governance. Democracy legitimately comes
in many varieties, including systems based on proportional representation and
first-past-the-post models, those featuring a strong president and those centered
around a powerful prime minister, those that entrust authority primarily to the
executive branch and those that prefer a stronger legislature. But all democracies
worthy of the name have certain common characteristics, including periodic competitive elections that are freely held as well as transparently and accurately tabulated,
a meaningful array of political parties, independent media outlets, civil
society organizations that give citizens—including minorities—a broad range of
opportunities to band together with others to make their voices heard, and a legal
system that ensures that no one—and especially no government official—is above
the law.
In 2007, democracy showed continuing vitality in, for example, Sierra Leone,
Jamaica, Poland, and Australia—all countries where power alternated and opposition
parties took office after elections that were widely considered free and fair. In
Turkey, when the military launched a so-called email coup in an effort to block the
democratically elected, moderate Islamic government from appointing one of its
officials, Abdullah Gül, as president, the government called an early general election,
received an overwhelming reaffirmation of its mandate, and proceeded to
appoint Gül anyway. The Turkish people’s desire for democracy proved strong.
Still, many dictators are eager to legitimize themselves on the cheap. If they can
get away with a sham election, they will. Their ability to do so depends in large
part on the vigilance of established democracies in insisting on democracy in all
its dimensions, including respect for a broad array of human rights and the rule of
law. A principled commitment to democracy is not easy. It may mean putting pressure
on dictatorial friends or promoting rights that even some established democracies
would prefer not to highlight. But a principled commitment is needed if the
promotion of democracy is to serve as a source of real pressure to respect human
rights rather than a new tool to bypass international standards in favor of a feelgood,
empty alternative.
To recapture the powerful ideal of democracy, so central to the human rights
cause yet so at risk of being manipulated as a false but beguiling substitute,
requires heightened attention to the clever subterfuges of its detractors. What follows
is a summary of recent trends as governments violate human rights to subvert
democracy or trumpet democracy to avoid discussion of human rights.
Upholding democracy also requires avoiding some of the pitfalls that have undermined
recent efforts to defend it. As described below, many established democracies
have fallen victim to the tendencies to bank on the “democrat” rather than democratic principles, to accept the false dichotomy that the only alternative to
the despot one knows is the despot one fears, to claim that democracy could
flourish even if divorced from the human rights that give it meaning, or to modulate
demands for genuine democracy according to the strategic value of the
democracy pretender. These tendencies must be resisted if democracy promotion
is to reach its potential as a positive force for human rights.
Rhetorical Games
Authoritarian leaders’ evasive use of democracy often begins with word games
and rhetorical sleights of hand suggesting that restrictions undermining democracy
are really necessary to save it. In Pakistan, for example, Musharraf imposed
“emergency rule” to prevent the then-independent Supreme Court from ruling illegal
his election as president while he remained the head of the military. Despite
this very personal motivation, he claimed the coup was necessary to “preserve
the democratic transition.” Similarly in Bangladesh, an army-appointed caretaker
government banned all political and trade union activities and limited press freedoms,
all in the name of preparing credible national elections.
Many repressive leaders have tried to redefine democracy by introducing a devastating
qualifier or an antithetical adjective. President Vladimir Putin, as he cripples
democracy by shutting down all competing centers of influence in Russia,
has become a proponent of “sovereign democracy,” meaning in effect that
democracy is whatever the sovereign wants it to mean. As the Burmese junta
rounded up protesting monks and violently suppressed dissent, it spoke of the
need for “disciplined democracy.” China has long promoted “socialist democracy,”
by which it means a top-down centralism that eliminates minority views.
Musharraf in Pakistan justified “emergency rule” as “genuine democracy,”
explaining: “We want democracy, we want human rights, we want civil liberties
but we will do it our own way.” Libya’s Mu`ammar al-Qadhafi uses the term “participatory
democracy” to justify abolishing independent political parties on the
grounds that the population does not need them as intermediaries because it
participates directly in governance through government-staged assemblies. In the
Cuban version of the same concept, candidates must be pre-approved by mass organizations controlled by the government, and the constitution severely limits
any political organization other than the Communist Party.
Electoral Fraud
Ordinary electoral fraud is one of the most common strategies to circumvent the
uncertainties of democracy. In addition to the case of Kazakhstan, cited above,
Nigeria and Chad are recent examples.
In Nigeria, facing the first transfer of power from one civilian leader to another
since the country’s independence in 1960, the ruling People’s Democratic Party
resorted to massive fraud to ensure that its candidate, Umaru Yar’Adua, succeeded
Olusegun Obasanjo as president in April 2007 elections. In an effort to redeem
some legitimacy, Yar’Adua, to his credit, has launched an electoral reform
process, has allowed the courts to overturn several of his party’s fraudulent statelevel
victories, and continues to face judicial review of his own tainted election.
But no one has been prosecuted for the blatant ballot-stuffing, vote-buying, and
political intimidation that were central to his “election,” so the Nigerian people
are losing confidence that he will translate his reformist rhetoric into a new democratic
reality.
In Chad, President Idriss Déby, who seized power in 1990, has given his rule the
imprimatur of democracy by holding three sham presidential elections. In 2005,
he did away with a provision barring him from seeking a third five-year term by
amending the constitution in a referendum plagued by irregularities. Anticipating
fraud, opposition groups refused to field candidates for the 2006 presidential
elections, leaving Déby to prevail easily over four weak challengers including two
government ministers. The United States and European Union declined to send
observers, while the balloting was marred by low voter participation, underage
voting, and multiple voting.
Controlling the Electoral Machinery
Fair elections depend on the independence of the people running them, so it
should come as no surprise that one favorite way for rulers to manipulate elections
is to stack electoral machinery with their supporters. In Azerbaijan, where electoral fraud has been a persistent problem, the ruling party of President Ilham
Aliev names the chairperson and maintains a majority on the election commission.
In Zimbabwe, opposition parties are excluded from the Electoral
Commission. In Thailand, the new military-sponsored constitution allows members
of the National Election Commission to be selected by the Senate, which
was once elected but is now appointed.
The case of Malaysia illustrates why governments seek control of the electoral
machinery. Its government-dominated Election Commission rejected opposition
efforts to remove alleged phantom voters from the electoral rolls, eliminate the
widespread use of absentee ballots by government workers, and permit access to
state-controlled media by all political parties. Similarly, Cambodia has made an
art of holding elections staged by a National Election Commission controlled by
the ruling Cambodian People’s Party, which then simply ignores claims of violence,
fraud, or intimidation by independent monitors or opposition parties.
Because of such failings, national electoral monitoring mechanisms are often
supplemented by international institutions. But these, too, have been targeted by
those seeking to manage elections. The Kremlin effectively prevented observers
from the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, the main election
monitoring body of the OSCE, from reviewing Russia’s December 2007 parliamentary
elections by delaying visas, limiting the number of international monitors to
be admitted, and threatening to prevent the OSCE from offering its assessment
until long after Russia’s government-controlled media had shaped public perceptions
of the balloting.
Blocking and Discouraging Opposition Candidates
One obvious way to fix an election is to prevent opposition candidates from running.
Iran has perfected this method, with its Council of Guardians having rejected
some half of the candidates for the 2004 parliamentary elections, most of
whom it apparently deemed too reform-minded. In Cuba, the Communist Partycontrolled
National Assembly has the authority to reject any prospective candidate
for public office. Tunisia refuses to legalize most genuine opposition parties.
In Thailand, the military government’s election commission adopted stringent
new rules permitting disqualification of candidates for such trivial offenses as playing music at rallies or having posters not of an approved size—evidently with
the goal of eliminating candidates of the People’s Power Party, the successor to
ousted Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra’s Thai Rak Thai party.
In several cases, more punitive measures were used. In 2005, just months before
Uganda’s first multiparty parliamentary and presidential elections in 26 years, the
government jailed the leading opposition presidential challenger, Kizza Besigye,
on politically-motivated charges of treason and rape. He was later released, but
the detention significantly impaired his ability to contest elections a few months
later, which he lost to President Yoweri Museveni. In Zimbabwe, the government
sent a similar message of discouragement to would-be challengers in March 2007
by dispatching police to severely beat opposition leader Morgan Tsvangirai and to
arrest scores of other opposition members.
Turkmenistan had the chance to finally give its people a real choice after the
December 2006 death of Saparmurat Niazov, the tyrant who ruled the country for
21 years and laid waste to its social welfare system. Instead, the chair of parliament,
who was the constitutionally designated successor to Niazov as interim
president, was imprisoned on charges of driving a relative to attempt suicide,
paving the way for Gurbanguly Berdymukhamedov to take over. Five low-ranking
“alternative” candidates, all representing the country’s sole political party, ran
unsuccessfully against Berdymukhamedov. No opposition leader was allowed to
return from exile to stand as a candidate.
Sometimes, opposition candidates are permitted to run for office but then are
punished for having done so, discouraging such challenges in the future. Under
President Alexander Lukashenko of Belarus, the government detained both opposition
candidates who challenged him in the March 2006 presidential election.
One of them is serving a five-and-a-half-year prison term on “hooliganism”
charges.
Similarly, in 2005, at a time when Egyptian President Mubarak was still facing
pressure from the US government to democratize, he allowed other candidates to
run against him. Ayman Nour, his most energetic and popular opponent, won an
officially reported 7 percent of the vote. But to ensure that Nour’s candidacy
would not encourage more formidable future challengers, the Egyptian government convicted him after an unfair trial on politically-motivated charges of forgery
and sentenced him to five years in prison.
Again following the powerful showing in the 2005 parliamentary elections of the
Muslim Brotherhood, the country’s largest opposition group, the Egyptian government
detained more than a thousand of its members, holding some for up to
eight months. The government has prohibited political activity with a religious
basis, eliminating the possibility that the Muslim Brotherhood could become a
legally recognized political party. The government has also discussed preventing
candidates from running as independents, which is how Muslim Brotherhood
members have managed so far to participate in elections.
Israel took this process to a new level by detaining candidates even after they
had won an election. Dismayed that Hamas won parliamentary elections in 2006,
Israel arrested Hamas legislators so that the party could not obtain a quorum in
parliament.
Political Violence
Violence is a tool commonly used to tame democracy. In Lebanon, unidentified
assailants have assassinated a series of figures from the parliamentary majority,
which has been engaged in an ongoing political struggle with Syria and its allies
in Lebanon. In Chechnya, Ramzan Kadyrov—the president installed by the
Kremlin—uses security forces known as the “Kadyrovtsy” to brutally enforce his
rule. Cambodia’s Hun Sen, prime minister since 1985, has used violence in election
after election to muffle dissent, including numerous assassinations of opposition
party members, independent journalists, human rights defenders, and
trade union leaders. Ethiopian authorities reacted to unexpected opposition wins
in the 2005 elections by violently dispersing peaceful demonstrations and detaining
most of the opposition leadership.
In Zimbabwe, which has scheduled presidential and parliamentary elections for
March 2008, the government has let loose youth militia and “war veterans” to
beat, torture and rape opposition figures, and the police have used excessive
force, sometimes lethal, to break up opposition demonstrations. In the
Democratic Republic of Congo, soldiers and police used excessive force, killing more than 100 civilians in the course of crushing sometimes-violent protests
against electoral corruption in January-February 2007. In Nigeria, the ruling party
recruited gang-like “cults” to curb opposition in advance of April 2007 elections.
In Egypt’s 2005 parliamentary elections, as return polls showed an increasing
number of candidates affiliated with the Muslim Brotherhood winning seats, the
Egyptian security forces physically blocked voters from reaching polling stations
in Muslim Brotherhood strongholds, and in the ensuing violence killed 11 people
trying to vote.
Silencing the Media
A meaningful election requires a free press—to highlight issues demanding governmental
attention and to permit public scrutiny of candidates’ competing political
visions. The media is also essential for conveying popular concerns between
elections—necessary input because a single vote cast every few years is a crude
and insufficient method to make popular concerns known. It is thus no surprise
that governments trying to control the democratic process seek to silence the
press.
One of the first targets of Russian President Putin was the independent media.
Today, all major television and radio stations and most major newspapers are in
the hands of Kremlin loyalists. This controlled media landscape was one of
Putin’s most important tools for ensuring that the opposition had no chance to
threaten his political dominance, whether in the parliamentary elections of
December 2007 or the planned presidential elections of March 2008.
Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez, making arbitrary use of a regulatory process,
refused to renew the license of RCTV, one of the country’s four leading private television
stations and the only one with national coverage that had dared to maintain
an anti-Chávez editorial line. Under Zimbabwe’s repressive media laws, the
only independent daily newspaper, the Daily News, was shut down in 2003.
Egypt imprisoned journalists and bloggers for such offenses as criticizing
Mubarak, “undermin[ing] the dignity of the country,” and publishing “false news
… likely to disturb public order.” Azerbaijan imprisoned at least 10 journalists on
a range of trumped-up charges to prevent criticism of President Aliev and his government. It also shut down the leading independent newspaper. Kazakhstan
closed a television station and weekly newspaper owned by the president’s
estranged son-in-law, now a political opponent. Like Azerbaijan, it also uses criminal
libel laws to jail critics for such charges as “insulting the honor and dignity”
of the president. At least six journalists have died in suspicious “accidents” in
Kazakhstan since 2002.
Preventing Opposition Rallies
One way for candidates to speak to supporters and to demonstrate political
strength is to organize public rallies. Yet because large opposition rallies can
show the emptiness of a government’s claim to broad popular support, these
demonstrations are another favorite target of repression.
In Malaysia, for example, which bans public gatherings of more than five people
without a permit, the police used chemical-laced water and tear gas to break up
an orderly and peaceful march of protesters demanding electoral reforms ahead
of planned elections expected in early 2008. In Russia the authorities beat,
detained, and harassed participants in peaceful political protests, including, in
November 2007, the former chess champion and current opposition leader Garry
Kasparov.
In Zimbabwe, armed riot police violently disrupted political rallies in February
2007, firing tear gas at opposition supporters and arresting more than 70 of them
in the cities of Harare and Bulawayo before imposing a three-month ban on
all political rallies and demonstrations in Harare, the capital. Authorities also violently
broke up rallies in Egypt and the Democratic Republic of Congo.
Shutting Down Civil Society
In addition to political parties, a vibrant democracy requires a variety of associations
and organizations so that people can mobilize support for their policy preferences
and make their voices heard. These civil society organizations thus are
another common target of autocratic rulers.
In Russia, for example, a 2006 law regulating nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) has served as a pretext for growing harassment. The law requires groups
to submit annual reports on their activities and their use of foreign funds on pain
of liquidation—a sanction that already has been used. Meanwhile, organizations
have been subject to intrusive inspections, and a 2007 law allowing any politically
or ideologically-motivated crime to be designated “extremist” and subject to
harsh punishment raises concerns that the law will be used to silence dissent.
In Turkmenistan, severe legal restrictions on NGOs include the need to register
every grant with the government, inform the government of every meeting, and
allow a government representative to participate. Just three independent NGOs
have been registered since 2003, only one of which has anything to do with
human rights or public accountability. In Uzbekistan since the 2005 Andijan massacre,
at least 17 human rights defenders have been imprisoned on politicallymotivated
charges, dozens have had to stop their human rights work or flee the
country altogether, and numerous international organizations have been forced
out. The United Arab Emirates bans most civil society organizations, and in
August 2007 the Palestinian Authority announced that it would shut down 103
civil society organizations on a variety of technical grounds.
In countries where domestic funders of critical NGOs risk governmental wrath, a
limitation on external sources of funding is a serious impediment to organized
independent voices. Yet Egypt shut down a local human rights group engaged in
vigorous anti-torture advocacy by reviving a years-old complaint against it for
using funds from a foreign donor without government permission. Jordan and
Bahrain have proposed similar legislation requiring government permission to
use funds from abroad. Iran and Syria have already enacted this requirement and
exercise complete control over the day-to-day operations of civil society. The
Tunisian government has blocked European Union grants to the Tunisian Human
Rights League and other independent organizations.
Undermining the Rule of Law
Much of the repression and manipulation outlined above is illegal. Governments
seeking to use it thus must avoid independent legal oversight. Sometimes, this
can be accomplished by beating and arresting lawyers, as in Zimbabwe or China Other times it occurs by way of amnesties for any crimes committed. Pakistan’s
Musharraf and the military rulers in Thailand, for example, pushed through constitutional
changes granting them impunity for actions taken during their respective
coups. Musharraf also dismissed the Supreme Court judges who threatened
to rule against the legitimacy of his selection as president, replacing them with
pliant loyalists who promptly validated the choice.
The Weak International Response
The use of these techniques to trivialize democracy does not occur in a political
vacuum. Abusive governments may want to legitimize themselves on the cheap,
but it takes their peers to let them do so. To a significant degree, half-baked
democrats succeed in passing themselves off as the real thing because they are
beneficiaries of diminished expectations from the more established democracies.
In part the problem is one of competing interests. Would-be defenders of a more
meaningful vision of democracy are too ready to allow commercial opportunities,
access to resources, or the perceived requirements of fighting terrorism to override
concern with a government’s democratic credentials. In part, though, the
problem is one of hypocrisy avoidance. Even seemingly flourishing democracies
can, as noted, find it inconvenient to embrace all the rights that constitute genuine
democracy lest the subject lead to their own violations.
The problem is compounded by inconsistency in promoting democracy—a longstanding
problem. These days, for example, the US government’s vigorous criticism
of democratic shortcomings tends to be reserved mainly for long-time adversaries
or pariahs, such as Syria, Burma or Cuba. Washington has largely exempted
such allies as Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, or Ethiopia, while its short-lived pressure
on others, such as Egypt or Jordan, has waned. Indeed, the US government is
often a major funder of these allied governments despite their repressive practices.
This obvious double standard makes the promotion of democracy seem like
an act of political convenience rather than a commitment of principle, weakening
the pressure for real democratic change.
Ethiopia has been an illustrative beneficiary of this double standard. The government
of Prime Minister Meles Zenawi arrested thousands of demonstrators protesting against fraud in the 2005 elections and charged 18 journalists with
treason. These arrests were part of a broader pattern of repression, including the
use of torture, detention, and intimidation of people perceived as political opponents
and, more recently, extraordinary brutality in suppressing an insurgency in
the Ogaden region and fighting Islamic forces in neighboring Somalia. The US
government has expressed dismay about the post-election crackdown, but
Ethiopia, a key counterterrorism partner, remains Washington’s biggest aid beneficiary
in sub-Saharan Africa.
Ethiopia is also among the top African recipients of European Union aid. After the
2005 election violence, the EU, along with the World Bank and the United
Kingdom, suspended portions of their direct budget support to Ethiopia, but the
UK has since increased its aid.
Jordan has also benefited from diminished democratic expectations, due largely
to the US government’s fear that Islamists in the country might replicate Hamas’s
victory in the Occupied Palestinian Territories, but also to Washington’s apparent
gratitude for Jordan’s assistance in fighting terrorism by providing secret detention
centers where US-delivered suspects could be tortured. Jordan’s municipal
elections in July 2007 were reportedly tainted by massive fraud, including soldiers
bussed to opposition strongholds to vote for the government, multiple voting,
and manipulated voter rolls. Yet both the US ambassador and Congress congratulated
Jordanians on the exercise of their democratic rights. Some of these faults
were allegedly replicated in parliamentary elections in November, but the US
State Department “commend[ed]” the Jordanian government for “ensuring another
step has been taken on the country’s path of political development.” The State
Department praised in particular the use of “independent national observers”
without noting that, as mentioned, the government had reneged on its promise to
allow them to enter polling places, forcing them to try to observe the proceedings
from outside.
The European Union’s reaction to the Jordanian elections was no more principled.
It issued no known public protest, even though Jordan, as a member of the
European Neighborhood Policy (ENP), has signed an Association Agreement with
the EU, of which respect for democratic principles and fundamental human rights
is supposed to constitute an “essential element.” This failing reflects broader problems with the ENP, since unlike the successful Copenhagen criteria for accession
to the EU, there are no benchmarks or timelines associated with it, and it is
becoming increasingly focused on issues such as cooperation for border management
and migration control.
Such unprincipled endorsements suggest that Washington and often the
European Union will accept an electoral facade so long as the “victor” is a strategic
or commercial ally. The fairness of the vote and the openness of campaign
conditions seem to matter less than the political orientation of the democracy
pretender.
A False Dichotomy: The Tyrant You Know or the Tyrant You Fear
The weak international response to the manipulation of democracy is founded in
part on fear that an autocrat might be replaced by someone or something worse.
Beginning with the FIS parliamentary victory in Algeria in 1991, the rise of political
Islam has made that fear especially acute. Savvy dictators have learned to use a
me-or-them logic to justify continued rule, but the dichotomy is often a false one.
For example, Egypt’s Mubarak has profited from Western concern that Islamists
will win any fair election in the country. As evidence, Mubarak can point to the
parliamentary elections of 2005, when candidates backed by the Muslim
Brotherhood captured a majority of the seats they contested. There is no doubt
that the Muslim Brotherhood is genuinely popular, but some of that popularity is
a product of limited choice. In thirty years, the Egyptian government has refused
to register more than 60 political parties while accepting only two, one of which it
later suspended. Many of these parties could have served as a rallying point for a
secular opposition.
The Muslim Brotherhood, as noted, is also banned as a political party, but it has
been able to build a following by providing social services and developing a reputation
as above corruption. So, today, if an Egyptian seeks an alternative to
Mubarak and his ruling National Democratic Party, the Muslim Brotherhood
appears to be the only real game in town. That serves Mubarak well, because
Western acquiescence in his electoral manipulations is more likely in light of this false political choice. US pressure for democratization largely ended with the
strong Muslim Brotherhood showing of 2005.
Pakistan’s Musharraf has played a similar game. He justified “emergency rule” as
the only alternative to rule by al Qaeda and Islamic extremists. The West accepted
and even embraced Musharraf’s manipulation of the political landscape as a form
of “moderation” and a step on the road to “democracy.” Never mind that
Pakistanis historically have voted for centrist political parties (corrupt and inept
as they often were), that Islamist political parties never gained more than 11 percent
of the vote in a competitive national election, that Musharraf’s attacks on
the moderate center have forced him to seek alliance with and, in turn, bolster
the Islamists, and that the lack of opportunity under a military government for
peaceful political change is a powerful recruiting force for the Islamists.
The Bush administration’s inconsistent response to Musharraf’s declaration of
emergency rule was illustrative. On the one hand, Deputy Secretary of State John
Negroponte flew to Islamabad to ask Musharraf to lift emergency rule and to
release the thousands of political prisoners who had been detained. He even
said, appropriately, that “[e]mergency rule is not compatible with free, fair and
credible elections.” Even Bush urged Musharraf to “take off your uniform.”
But at this writing, the US government has never asked Musharraf to reinstate the
independent Supreme Court judges whom he had dismissed in favor of the pliant
allies who blessed his selection as president while still military chief. Nor has
Washington suspended any of its massive military assistance. The message sent
was that rather than risking the tenure of its counterterrorism ally, Washington
would divorce democracy from the rule of law. Washington also seemed to want
to stop the courts from continuing to free suspects who had disappeared into the
custody of Pakistan’s abusive Directorate for Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), a
detention and interrogation service that the US government has had occasion to
avail itself of.
Fear of rising Islamic militancy seems also to lie behind a mixed international
response to Bangladesh. At first, the international community promoted a more
principled vision of democracy. The United Nations and the European Union
found elections planned for January 2007 to be too compromised to warrant sending observers, thus contributing to their postponement. However, the caretaker
government brought in ostensibly to ensure free and fair elections has
instead declared a “state of emergency” and become a vehicle for de facto military
rule, presiding over large numbers of arbitrary arrests, cases of torture, and
custodial killings by security forces acting with impunity. The US, UK, and Indian
governments have expressed concern about the slow pace of election preparations
but not the country’s poor human rights record. Nor have they called on the
army to return full powers to a civilian government. However, the EU has been
more outspoken and is providing financial assistance for governance and human
rights.
Such complicity in dictatorial rule is sometimes rationalized with patronizing
claims that the people in question—often Muslim, frequently Arab—are not
“ready” for democracy, that the risks in these societies are simply too great to
afford them the same rights of freedom and self-governance that people everywhere
else aspire to. Put another way, Western governments sometimes complain
that there is no opposition worthy of support. But that supposed lack of readiness,
the lack of political alternatives, is no more than the warped political conditions
that, with Western acquiescence, these countries’ leadership has
bequeathed them. The entire point of the pseudo-democrats’ repression is to
cripple the emergence of an effective opposition. Indeed, in the case of Saudi
Arabia, lack of readiness is an excuse that the government itself has used to
avoid elections. Pakistan’s Musharraf made similar excuses, charging that the
West has an “unrealistic obsession with your form of democracy, your human
rights and civil liberties ... which you took centuries to (evolve), but you want us
to adopt in months .... [T]his is not possible.”
To reject that logic is not to suggest that immediate, unfettered elections are the
answer, either. Just as extremism flourishes in a constrained political environment,
so it may prevail in a snap election called in such an environment. A more
sophisticated response is needed, one that would push autocrats to allow a
range of political choices before rushing to elections—that is, to prioritize respect
for an array of essential political rights over the balloting itself. Instead of accepting
a dictator’s crimped set of options as the only conceivable ones, democracy
promoters should press to transform the political landscape so that voters will face a meaningful range of political options before marking their ballot. That genuine
choice tends to be an enemy of extremism.
Banking on the “Democrat” Rather than Democratic Principles
One common failing is to support a particular proclaimed “democrat” rather than
the human rights principles that make democracy meaningful. Established
democracies seem increasingly to look for individuals—rather than institutions—
to save the day, hoping that people will equate the ascendance of a leader prone
to democratic rhetoric with the arrival of democracy itself, even though the first
lesson of democratic theory is that unrestrained power tends toward tyranny. This
failing has certainly characterized Western policy toward Pakistan’s Musharraf,
but it has also played a central role in the response to such disparate countries as
Russia, Nigeria and Georgia.
Bush famously embraced Putin in 2001 after “look[ing] into his eyes and s[eeing]
his soul.” Putin proceeded systematically to undermine nearly every competing
center of influence in Russia—the Duma, the regional governors, the press, the
NGOs, even the oligarchs. The US government ultimately did react, but it had lost
an early opportunity to build US-Russian relations around principles rather than
personal chemistry.
Germany, which traditionally plays a leading role in shaping the European Union’s
policy toward Russia, had a mixed record in 2007. German Chancellor Angela
Merkel, perhaps because she grew up in the East under Soviet domination, sees
Putin with clearer eyes than her mercantilist predecessor, Gerhard Schröder. She
has spoken out several times about the disturbing trends in Russia, and during
her first trip to Moscow in 2006, made a point of visiting human rights NGOs. That
led to hope that Germany would elevate the importance of human rights when it
assumed the EU presidency during the first half of 2007. In fact, human rights
continued to be consigned largely to low-level consultations. Merkel did raise
human rights during the EU-Russia summit in May 2007, when demonstrations
were quashed, but the next EU presidency, under the Portuguese government,
undermined that effort by equating the raising of human rights issues with “lecturing.”
The US and UK governments as well as the EU were candid about the blatant
fraud that marred Nigeria’s presidential and parliamentary elections in April 2007,
but these Western governments seemed eager to work with President Yar’Adua
because his rhetoric was reformist, even though the circumstances of his election
set a far more powerful precedent than his conciliatory words. Nor did Yar’Adua
translate his reformist message into prosecution of anyone responsible for the
fraud and parallel political violence. Again, the message seems to be that, so
long as the leader in question is friendly to the West, even fake elections will suffice
to legitimize him.
In Georgia, the 2003 Rose Revolution brought to power a government with a
strong commitment to democratic principles and a vibrant civil society. But serious
human rights problems persisted in the years that followed, particularly in
the criminal justice system. Yet international organizations and governments—the
US most prominently among them—resisted robust criticism, wishing to believe in
the good intentions of a Western-educated ally, President Mikheil Saakashvili.
The danger of embracing a person rather than democratic principles became
apparent when in November 2007 the Georgian government unleashed a violent
crackdown on protesters and imposed a nine-day state of emergency.
As noted, US policy toward Pakistan has been dominated by this tendency to
reduce democracy to favored personalities. In addition to accepting Musharraf’s
dismissal of the Supreme Court to preserve his presidency, the Bush administration
devoted enormous energy to negotiating a deal between Musharraf and its
preferred prime ministerial candidate, former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto,
paving the way for her return from exile to Pakistan. But in September, when the
Musharraf government blocked the initial attempt to return of exiled former Prime
Minister Nawaz Sharif, her chief civilian competitor, the US State Department
spokesman said, “[T]his is wholly and entirely a Pakistani issue to resolve.”
Failing Turkey
Turkey presented perhaps the most important test of the European Union’s commitment
to democracy and human rights. In principle, the EU is committed to
admitting Turkey as a member—a step of enormous importance—if Ankara meets
the Copenhagen criteria on democracy and human rights. But key European leaders—especially German Chancellor Merkel and French President Nicolas Sarkozy—
have spoken out against Turkey’s membership in the EU. As the possibility of
Turkey’s accession to the EU is perceived as more remote, the EU has lost leverage
itself and diminished the clout of those in Turkey who have cited the
prospect of EU membership as a reason for reform. Unsurprisingly, the military
has begun once more to intrude into governmental affairs, going so far as to
launch the above-mentioned email coup attempt to block the naming of Abdullah
Gül as president. The civilian government’s successful deflection of that coup
attempt owed far more to the insistence of the Turkish people than to the EU’s
fading promise of membership to a democratic, rights-respecting Turkey.
Conclusion
It is a sign of hope that even dictators have come to believe that the route to
legitimacy runs by way of democratic credentials. Broadly shared and deeply felt
values underwrite the principle that sovereignty lies with the people of a nation
and that the authority to govern is ultimately theirs. But that progress is fragile,
its meaning dependent in large part on the commitment of the world’s established
democracies. If they accept any dictator who puts on the charade of an
election, if they allow their commitment to democracy to be watered down by
their pursuit of resources, commercial opportunities, and short-sighted visions of
security, they will devalue the currency of democracy. And if dictators can get
away with calling themselves “democrats,” they will have acquired a powerful
tool for deflecting pressure to uphold human rights. It is time to stop selling
democracy on the cheap and to start substituting a broader and more meaningful
vision of the concept that incorporates all human rights.
This Report
This report is Human Rights Watch’s eighteenth annual review of human rights
practices around the globe. It summarizes key human rights issues in more than
75 countries worldwide, drawing on events through November 2007.
Each country entry identifies significant human rights issues, examines the freedom
of local human rights defenders to conduct their work, and surveys the
response of key international actors, such as the United Nations, European Union, Japan, the United States, and various regional and international organizations
and institutions.
This report reflects extensive investigative work undertaken in 2007 by the
Human Rights Watch research staff, usually in close partnership with human
rights activists in the country in question. It also reflects the work of our advocacy
team, which monitors policy developments and strives to persuade governments
and international institutions to curb abuses and promote human rights. Human
Rights Watch publications, issued throughout the year, contain more detailed
accounts of many of the issues addressed in the brief summaries collected in this
volume. They can be found on the Human Rights Watch website, www.hrw.org.
As in past years, this report does not include a chapter on every country where
Human Rights Watch works, nor does it discuss every issue of importance. The
failure to include a particular country or issue often reflects no more than staffing
limitations and should not be taken as commentary on the significance of the
problem. There are many serious human rights violations that Human Rights
Watch simply lacks the capacity to address.
The factors we considered in determining the focus of our work in 2007 (and
hence the content of this volume) include the number of people affected and the
severity of abuse, access to the country and the availability of information about
it, the susceptibility of abusive forces to influence, and the importance of
addressing certain thematic concerns and of reinforcing the work of local rights
organizations.
The World Report does not have separate chapters addressing our thematic work
but instead incorporates such material directly into the country entries. Please
consult the Human Rights Watch website for more detailed treatment of our work
on children’s rights, women’s rights, arms and military issues, business and
human rights, HIV/AIDS and human rights, international justice, terrorism and
counterterrorism, refugees and displaced people, and lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender people’s rights, and for information about our international film festivals.
Kenneth Roth is executive director of Human Rights Watch.