Algeria
Algeria continued to experience widespread human rights violations in 2010. A
state of emergency—imposed in 1992 and renewed indefinitely by decree in
1993—created a backdrop for widespread restrictions on freedom of expression,
association, and assembly. Authorities justify the measure as necessary to combat
terrorism.
Members of the security forces and armed groups continued to enjoy broad
impunity for atrocities committed during the violent internal conflict of the 1990s.
The state offered compensation to families of persons forcibly disappeared in the
1990s, but failed to provide answers about their fate. Militant groups continued
their deadly attacks, mostly targeting security forces, albeit on a lesser scale than
in previous years.
Freedom of Expression and Assembly
The state controls broadcast media, which provides live telecasts of parliamentary
sessions but airs almost no critical coverage of government policies.
Privately-owned newspapers enjoy freer scope, but repressive press laws and
dependence on revenues from public sector advertising limit their freedom to criticize
the government and the military.
Prosecutors constantly prosecute journalists and independent publications for
defaming or insulting public officials. Courts of first instance sometimes sentence
them to prison and heavy fines, which appeals courts often overturn or suspend.
Rabah Lemouchi, correspondent for the national Arabic daily Ennahar in Tebessa,
is among the journalists who have been jailed in recent years. While most have
remained provisionally free pending trial, Lemouchi was incarcerated from his
arrest until finishing his sentence six months later. A court of first instance convicted
him on July 14, 2009, of defamation and insulting state institutions, mainly
due to a personal letter he had addressed in 2006 to President Abdel Aziz
Bouteflika. Details of the case indicate that his prosecution and imprisonment
were politically motivated.
In the first half of 2010 at least two journalists received prison terms for defamation
but remained free pending appeal. On May 13 a court in the city of
Mostaganem sentenced Belkacem Belhamideche, director of the French-language
Reflexion and one of the daily’s reporters, to six months in prison for coverage of
a letter that a businessman wrote accusing a town mayor of soliciting a bribe
from him. A court in the town of Ain Boucif, in the governorate of Medea, sentenced
Saleh Souadi of el-Khabar, Algeria’s leading independent Arabic-language
daily, to six months in jail for defaming a local hospital director, even though his
articles appeared before the director assumed his post and did not name him.
A 2000 decree banning demonstrations in Algiers remained in effect in 2010.
Despite the ban, SOS Disparu(e)s– an organization comprised of relatives of persons
forcibly disappeared–has held small vigils in front of the Algiers headquarters
of the state human rights commission for most Wednesdays since 1998, in
spite of occasional police harassment. In August police dispersed the gathering
and briefly arrested the protesters, who were demanding the state provide information
regarding the fate of persons whom state security forces abducted in the
1990s and were never seen again.
Authorities require organizations to obtain authorization from the local governor
before holding indoor public meetings, and frequently ban meetings organized by
human rights organizations or rights organizations working on behalf of Algeria’s
Kabyle population. Authorities refused to allow the Algerian League for the
Defense of Human Rights (LADDH) to hold its national congress on March 25-26 at
a public venue in an Algiers suburb. The governorate of Algiers announced the
refusal on the eve of the congress, even though the LADDH had formally requested
permission a month earlier. The LADDH moved its congress to the Maison des
syndicats in Bachdjarrah, a privately owned venue; two months later, the authorities
closed that hall, one of the few in the capital where controversial civil society
organizations had been able to meet.
On July 23, police in the city of Tizi-Ouzou broke up a human rights seminar
organized by the World Amazigh Congress in collaboration with two local Amazigh
(Berber) organizations. Police entered the meeting hall, confiscated materials,
questioned attendees, and expelled two French participants from the country.
Authorities did not explain their action.
Authorities frequently deny journalists and human rights workers entry visas. On
October 2, 2010, the Algerian embassy in Washington refused visas for Human
Rights Watch to conduct general research, explaining they could visit only the
Polisario-run refugee camps near Tindouf. The authorities told Amnesty
International the same thing in 2010. Authorities expelled two journalists with the
Moroccan weekly Assahrae al-Ousbouiya on September 22.
Freedom of Religion
Algeria’s constitution defines the state religion as Islam and requires the president
to be a Muslim. Algerian laws criminalize non-Muslims proselytizing to
Muslims but not the reverse, and forbid non-Muslims from gathering to worship
except in state-approved locations. In practice, authorities rarely authorize
Algerian Protestant groups to use buildings for worship, subjecting worshippers
to possible prosecution. A court in al-Arba Nath Irathen, Tizi-Ouzou province, tried
Mahmoud Yahou and three other Christians for “practicing religious rites without
authorization.” The trial is continuing at this writing. An appeals court in Jijel on
June 22 convicted another Christian, Abdelhamid Bouamama, from Grarem in
Mila province, of trying to convert Muslims and sentenced him to one year in
prison, suspended.
Impunity for Past Abuses
Over 100,000 Algerians died during the political strife of the 1990s. Thousands
more were “disappeared” by security forces or abducted by armed groups fighting
the government and never found. The 2006 Law on Peace and National
Reconciliation provides a legal framework for the continued impunity enjoyed by
perpetrators of atrocities during this era. The law provides amnesty to security
force members for actions they took in the name of combating terrorism and to
armed group members not implicated in the most heinous acts.
The law promises compensation for families of “disappeared” persons, but simultaneously
makes it a crime to denigrate state institutions or security forces for the
manner in which they conducted themselves during the political strife.
Organizations representing the families of the “disappeared” have criticized the
state’s failure to provide a detailed account of the fate of their missing relatives.
In one case dating to the civil strife of the 1990s, Malik Mejnoun and Abdelkader
Chenoui have been in pre-trial detention since 1999 in connection with the assassination
one year earlier of Kabyle singer-activist Lounes Matoub. Both men claim
they are innocent and say they were tortured while in detention without access to
communications. Eleven years later they have yet to be brought to trial.
Algeria amended its penal code in 2004 to make torture an explicit crime. The
International Committee of the Red Cross regularly visits ordinary prisons in
Algeria, but not places of detention run by the powerful Department for
Information and Security (DRS), an intelligence agency within the military.
Algerian courts pronounced death sentences during 2010, some of them against
defendants in terrorism cases and most in absentia. Algeria has observed a de
facto moratorium on executions since 1993.
Terrorism and Counterterrorism
Militant attacks were down dramatically compared to the mid-1990s, but al
Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) continued to launch fatal attacks, directed
mostly—but not exclusively—at military and police targets. On June 25, gunmen—
whom Algerian media linked to terrorists—fired on a wedding party in the eastern
wilaya (province) of Tebessa, killing the bridegroom, a young soldier, and four
guests.
In July the United States for the first time sent home an Algerian who had been
held at Guantanamo and opposed his repatriation, fearing persecution. The US
government said Algeria had given “diplomatic assurances” that Abdul Aziz Naji
would be treated humanely. Shortly after arriving, Naji, like other Algerian
returnees from Guantanamo before him, appeared before an investigative judge
to answer accusations of membership in a terrorist group abroad and was
released pending trial, which is continuing at this writing. On November 4 an
Algiers court acquitted an earlier Guantanamo returnee, Sofiane Hadarbache, of
similar charges. Eight Algerian detainees remain in Guantanamo at this writing, of
whom at least five reportedly oppose their return.
Key International Actors
Algeria in 2010 did not extend invitations to five special procedures of the United
Nations Human Rights Council that had requested them, including the Working
Group on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances and the special rapporteurs
on torture and on human rights while countering terrorism. Algeria announced
invitations to visit during 2011 to seven other special rapporteurs, including those
on violence against women and on the right to freedom of opinion and expression.
Algeria and the European Union have an association agreement in effect since
2005. In June they signed an agreement that provides Algeria €172 million
(approximately US$234 million) in aid during 2011-2013. In 2009 the two sides
agreed to create a subcommittee of the Association Council on “Political
Dialogue, Security and Human Rights.”
According to the US government, Algeria “is a major partner in combating extremism
and terrorist networks such as Al Qa’ida and is our second-largest trading
partner in the Arab world.” The US provides almost no financial aid to Algeria, but
is the leading customer of its exports, primarily gas and oil. Other than the annual
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices, the US said almost nothing publicly
on Algeria’s human rights record. In a visit to Algeria in October, Department
of State Special Advisor Judith E. Heumann praised the government for ratifying
the UN Convention of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in December 2009.