Algeria
As the Algerian economy benefited from the worldwide surge in oil prices,
Algerians continued to suffer restrictions on civil liberties, under a state of emergency
imposed in 1992, and the government continued impunity for past and
present abuses. While political violence is down considerably since the mid-
1990s, the country confronted a new wave of bombings claimed by the al Qaeda
Organization of the Islamic Maghreb. On November 12, 2008, parliament
approved, without debate, and by a vote of 500 in favor, 21 against, and 8
abstentions, a constitutional amendment ending presidential term limits. This
allows Abdelaziz Bouteflika to run for a third five-year term in the spring of 2009.
Freedom of Expression and Assembly
The broadcast media are state-controlled and air almost no critical coverage of, or
dissent on, government policies, but they do provide live telecasts of parliamentary
sessions. Privately-owned newspapers enjoy a considerably freer scope, but
repressive press laws, dependence on revenues from public-sector advertising,
and other factors limit their freedom to criticize the government, the military, and
the powerful.
The press law imposes prison terms along with fines for defamation and for
insulting government officials and state institutions. On March 4, 2008, an
appeals court in Jijel upheld the defamation conviction of Ali Chawki Amari, a
columnist for the independent al-Watan daily, and Omar Belhouchet, its director,
for accusing a governor of buying his mistress a car with public funds. The court
imposed sentences on the pair of two months in prison and a fine of 1 million
dinars (US$15,000) each.
In June 2008 the government stripped the Agence France-Presse bureau chief and
an Algiers-based Reuters correspondent of their press credentials, accusing the
former of overstating the number of casualties caused by a terrorist bombing that
month, and the latter of reporting a bombing that never happened. As of
November, the Reuters correspondent was still without credentials and thus
unable to report for any foreign media.
Pan-Arab television stations are popular among Algerian viewers. However, since
2004 the government has banned the most popular, Al Jazeera, from operating a
news bureau inside the country.
A court in Sidi M’hamed convicted human rights lawyer Amine Sidhoum on April
13, 2008, of having, in a press interview, disparaged a court ruling and insulted
state institutions. The court sentenced the Kubba-based lawyer to six months in
prison and a fine. Sidhoum remained free pending an appeal hearing, which at
this writing had not taken place.
Authorities used state of emergency powers to ban most public demonstrations
and many gatherings. On October 5, authorities prevented a panel discussion in
Algiers from taking place, organized by the Algerian League for the Defense of
Human Rights on the riots that shook major Algerian cities in October 1988.
Religious Freedom
Religious freedom declined for Algeria’s tiny non-Muslim minority in 2008, with
increased enforcement of Ordinance 06-03. The 2006 law provides prison terms
for proselytizing by non-Muslims and forbids them from gathering to worship
except in state-approved locations. Authorities have refused numerous applications
submitted by Protestant Christian groups to use buildings for worship, putting
their members at risk of prosecution for worship in unauthorized places.
A court in the southwestern city of Tissemsilt on July 2, 2008, sentenced
Protestants Rachid Mohammed Seghir and Jammal Dahmani to six-month suspended
sentences and a fine of 100,000 dinars (US$1,500) on charges of distributing
Christian publications that “aimed to weaken the faith of Muslims.”
Authorities applied the law also against members of the long-established Roman
Catholic community. On January 30, 2008, in Maghnia, a court sentenced priest
Pierre Wallez to one year in prison for ministering to clandestine sub-Saharan
immigrants in an “unauthorized” location, a sentence that an appeals court later
reduced to a two-month term, suspended.
In September a court in Biskra sentenced six Muslim men to four years in prison
and a fine for eating during the fasting hours of Ramadan, under article 144bis (2)
of the penal code, which criminalizes acts that are offensive to Islam. An appeals
court overturned the verdict.
Impunity for Past Abuses
Over 100,000 Algerians died during the political strife of the 1990s. Thousands
more were “disappeared” by security forces or abducted by armed groups fighting
the government and have never been located, dead or alive. Perpetrators of
atrocities during this era continue to enjoy impunity. The legal framework for that
impunity is the 2006 Law on Peace and National Reconciliation, which provides
an amnesty to security force members for the actions they took in the name of
combating terrorism, and to armed group members not implicated in the most
heinous acts.
The law promises compensation for families of “disappeared” persons but at the
same time makes it a crime to denigrate state institutions or security forces for
the way they conducted themselves during the period of political strife.
Authorities have repeatedly harassed associations representing families of the
“disappeared” who protest state policies by continuing to demand justice for the
perpetrators or at least that the state provide information about the fate of their
missing relatives. For example, a Constantine court on March 26, 2008, convicted
Louisa Saker, Rabah Boulagheb, and Sofiane Mehamlia, all relatives of “disappeared,”
for their role in a demonstration related to the issue. The court convicted
Saker of participation in an unauthorized demonstration, while Boulagheb and
Mehamlia were convicted in absentia of that charge in addition to charges of violence,
theft, and undermining the authority of public officials. Their appeals trial
was in progress as of November.
Torture, Incommunicado Detention, and the Death Penalty
Algeria amended its penal code in 2004 to make torture an explicit crime.
Nevertheless, Amnesty International “continues to regularly receive reports of
incommunicado detention of suspects in unofficial places of detention and torture
by the DRS [Department for Information and Security].” The International
Committee of the Red Cross regularly visits ordinary prisons in Algeria but not
DRS-run places of detention.
The UN Committee Against Torture, in its May 2008 examination of Algeria’s
report to the committee, expressed concern about reports that the legal limit of
12 days in pre-charge detention in terrorism cases “can, in practice, be extended
repeatedly” and that “the law does not guarantee the right to counsel during the
period of remand in custody, and that the right of a person in custody to have
access to a doctor and to communicate with his or her family is not always
respected.”
Algerian courts pronounced scores of death sentences during 2008, many of
them against defendants in terrorism cases and most of them in absentia.
Despite pronouncing hundreds of death sentences in recent years, Algeria has
observed a de facto moratorium on carrying out the death penalty since 1993.
Terrorism and Counterterrorism
From January to September 2008 at least 265 people were reported killed in more
than 21 bombings claimed mostly by the al Qaida Organization of the Islamic
Maghreb. The largest of them, a car bomb outside a police academy in Issers on
August 19, reportedly killed 44 people and injured 45. On December 11, 2007, two
bombs exploded a few minutes apart in Algiers, one targeting the United Nations
office and the other going off in front of the Constitutional Council. The blasts
killed 41 and injured over 177, according to news agencies. The Algerian government
said the bombs killed 26.
Security forces, presumably the DRS, immediately took into custody two Algerians
whom the United States transferred from Guantanamo Bay in July 2008, held
them incommunicado for 12 days, and charged them with membership in a terrorist
organization and use of false travel documents. The court then granted their
pretrial release. A court filed the same charges against, and then granted pretrial
release to, two other Algerians whom the United States sent from Guantanamo in
August.
The penal code definition of terrorism is so broad that it can be used to prosecute
the nonviolent exercise of civil liberties. The definition includes, for example,
“any action that targets state security … via actions whose purpose is to … attack
the symbols of the Nation and the Republic … or obstruct the functioning of public institutions … or the application of laws and regulations.” The code also provides
up to 10 years’ imprisonment for encouraging or justifying terrorist acts.
Polisario-Run Refugee Camps in Algeria for Sahrawis
The Polisario Front has since the late 1970s governed camps in remote southwest
Algeria for Sahrawi refugees who fled from Western Sahara, just across the border.
The Polisario Front allows camp residents to criticize its management of dayto-
day issues, but marginalizes those who openly challenge its rule or general
political orientation. There were, however, no confirmed reports that the Polisario
had detained anyone for political reasons during 2007 or the first half of 2008. In
2008 refugees were largely free to leave the camps if they wished, via Mauritania.
The government of Algeria did not, to Human Rights Watch’s knowledge, explicitly
recognize its responsibility for safeguarding the human rights of Sahrawis living
in Polisario-run camps on Algerian soil.
Key International Actors
Despite serving on the UN Human Rights Council in 2006-2007, Algeria continued
during 2008 its non-compliance with longstanding requests for country visits by
the UN special rapporteurs on torture; on the promotion and protection of human
rights while countering terrorism; and on extrajudicial, summary and arbitrary
executions. Algeria was amongst the first group of countries reviewed under the
Universal Periodic Review mechanism of the UN Human Rights Council in April
2008.
The United States provides almost no financial aid to oil-rich Algeria but the two
countries have grown closer, notably as allies in counterterrorism. In the year’s
highest-level meeting between the two countries, US Secretary of State
Condoleezza Rice visited President Bouteflika in Algiers on September 6, affirming
“ties of friendship” and counterterrorism cooperation. Rice made no public
statement on human rights but on September 19, Ambassador-at-Large for
International Religious Freedom John Hanford criticized Algeria’s worsening treatment
of religious minorities when he presented the State Department’s 2008
International Religious Freedom report.