AC><I@8
President Abdelaziz Bouteflika lifted Algeria’s 19-year state of emergency in
February and announced legal and political reforms amidst increasing economic
unrest, pro-reform street protests, and worker strikes. However, at this writing
these measures had not given Algerians the freedom to exercise their rights
of expression, assembly, and association.
Security forces and armed groups continued to enjoy broad impunity for atrocities
committed during the civil war of the 1990s. The state offered compensation
to families of persons forcibly disappeared in the 1990s, but not answers
about their fate. Armed groups continued to carry out deadly attacks, mostly
targeting state security forces.
Freedom of Assembly
January 2011 saw several days of violent protests and rioting in several cities,
triggered by price hikes on basic food items. As the riots subsided, Algerians—
inspired by the stirrings in Tunisia and Egypt—on January 22 began attempting
to hold weekly peaceful pro-reform demonstrations in Algiers, the capital. Large
deployments of police were usually on hand and either prevented the protests
from getting started or confined them to small spaces. Larger-scale labor
protests also took place, including a march by thousands of communal guards
in Algiers on March 7 demanding more pay.
On February 24 President Bouteflika ended the state of emergency. The emergency
decree had given the Interior Ministry sweeping powers to administratively
detain persons deemed to endanger “public order,” close down meeting
places, and ban gatherings. However many restrictions on civil liberties
imposed during the state of emergency continued, as authorities drew on other
repressive laws and regulations. For example, an indefinite ban imposed in
2001 on demonstrations in Algiers remained in effect. Outside the capital, a
1991 decree-law required prior approval for public gatherings. While authorities
tolerated some demonstrations critical of the government outside of Algiers,
these remained more the exception than the rule.
On March 16 in the city of Mostaganem authorities arrested and held overnight
Dalila Touat of the unrecognized National Committee to Defend the Rights of
the Unemployed for handing out leaflets and charged her with violating article
100 of the criminal code, which prohibits “any direct instigation ... by distributing
written matter, of an unarmed gathering.” A court in Mostaganem acquitted
her on April 28. Authorities also subjected leaders of Algeria’s several independent
and legally unrecognized labor unions to various forms of harassment.
Freedom of Expression and Association
The state controls all domestic broadcast media, which provide live telecasts of
parliamentary sessions but air almost no critical coverage of government policies.
Privately-owned newspapers enjoy a freer scope, but repressive press
laws and dependence on revenues from public sector advertising limit their
freedom to criticize the government and the military. Authorities barred Al
Jazeera television from maintaining a bureau in the country.
In July parliament revised two articles of the press code to eliminate prison
terms—but not fines—as punishment for the offense of defaming or showing
contempt for the president, state institutions, or courts. In September the
Council of Ministers approved a draft press code that, if adopted, would eliminate
prison as a punishment for speech offenses; however prison sentences for
speech offenses remain present in the penal code.
The Council of Ministers on September 12 adopted a draft law on associations
that allows authorities to oppose the creation of an association they deem to
be contrary to “the public order” or “good morals.” It also makes it easier for
authorities to dissolve an association without a court order and harder for an
association to receive funding from abroad. Under the proposed law, administering
an “unapproved” association would remain a crime.
Authorities required organizations to obtain authorization from the local governor
before holding indoor public meetings. The government in June banned two
events organized by the Algerian League for the Defense of Human Rights: a
conference on the occasion of the Day of the Child scheduled for June 1 in the wilaya (governorate) of el-Taref and one to be held in Algiers on June 10 about
corruption in the Arab world.
Freedom of Religion
Algeria’s constitution defines the state religion as Islam and requires that the
president to be Muslim. A 2006 law criminalizes proselytizing Muslims by non-
Muslims, but not the reverse, and forbids non-Muslims from worshiping except
in state-approved locations. In practice authorities rarely authorized Algerian
Protestant groups to use buildings for worship. In May the governor of the
wilaya of Béjaia ordered the Protestant Church of Algeria (EPA) to shut seven
“unauthorized” places of worship operating in the wilaya. EPA President
Moustapha Krim said in October that the churches continued to operate while
the EPA appealed the order in the courts. On May 25 an Oran court convicted
Abdelkarim Siaghi, a convert to Christianity, of “offending” the Prophet
Muhammad under the penal code and sentenced him to five years in prison
and a fine. He was freed pending an appeal scheduled for November 2011.
Impunity for Past Abuses
Over 100,000 Algerians died during the political strife of the 1990s. Thousands
more were subjected to enforced disappearances by security forces or abducted
by armed groups fighting the government and never found. The 2006 Law on
Peace and National Reconciliation provides a legal framework for the continued
impunity enjoyed by perpetrators of atrocities during this era. The law also
makes it a crime to denigrate state institutions or security forces for the way
they conducted themselves during the political strife, thus potentially penalizing
those who allege that the security forces perpetrated human rights violations.
The law promises compensation to families of “disappeared” persons. But
organizations representing families of the “disappeared” criticized the state for
its failure to provide a detailed account of the fate of their missing relatives,
and for the pressure they said is applied to the families to accept compensation
and abandon demands to learn the truth.
Algerian courts pronounced many death sentences during 2011 but observed a
de facto moratorium on executions since 1993.
Women’s Rights
Algerian women face discrimination under the code of personal status. A man
has the right to divorce his wife without cause, but a woman can file for divorce
only on specific grounds, such as abandonment. Khul’a (a no-fault divorce) is
the only option for women who wish to file for a divorce without invoking the
accepted reasons, but in so doing they forfeit any financial claims.
Terrorism and Counterterrorism
Attacks by armed groups were down dramatically compared to the mid-1990s,
but al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) continued to launch fatal attacks,
directed mostly—but not exclusively—at military and police targets.
On February 24, the same day the president lifted the state of emergency,
President Bouteflika issued a decree authorizing the Algerian army to conduct
counterterrorism operations, a role it had played during the state of emergency.
A branch of the military, the Department of Intelligence and Security (DRS), was
implicated in some of the worst abuses perpetrated during counterterrorism
operations since the 1990s.
Also on February 24, Bouteflika promulgated article 125 bis of the code of criminal
procedure, allowing judges to place suspects in “protected residence.” The
law allows this form of custody to take place in a secret location and authorizes
prosecution for revealing its whereabouts. “Protected residence” replaced
“assigned residence,” practiced during the state of emergency against a small
number of suspected terrorists. “Assigned residence” involved removing these
individuals from the judicial system and detaining them indefinitely in an
undisclosed location, cut off from contact with families and lawyers.
After the lifting of the state of emergency the detainees who had been in
“assigned residence” were presented in court and transferred to official places
of detention. However authorities continued to prevent some from appearing at trials. For example, lawyers for accused terrorists Omar Ferrah and Yacine
Aïssani withdrew from the courtroom in protest when the court failed to produce
the accused mens’ co-defendant and alleged leader, Amar Saïfi, at several
sessions of their trial between March and June, prompting the adjournment of
the trial until November.
In one case dating to the 1990s, Malik Mejnoun and Abdelkader Chenoui were
brought to trial on July 18 for the 1999 assassination of Kabyle (Berber) singeractivist
Lounes Matoub after they had spent 12 years in pre-trial detention. Both
men claimed they were innocent and said they were tortured while in incommunicado
detention. The court convicted them and sentenced them to 12 years in
prison.
Key International Actors
Algeria and the European Union have an association agreement and signed an
agreement that provides Algeria €172 million (approximately US$234 million) in
aid between 2011 and 2013. In September there was a meeting of the subcommittee
of the bilateral Association Council on “political dialogue, security and
human rights.”
According to the United States government, Algeria “is a major partner in combating
extremism and terrorist networks such as al Qaeda and is our secondlargest
trading partner in the Arab world.” The US provides almost no financial
aid to Algeria, but is the leading customer of its exports, primarily gas and oil.
US President Barack Obama also congratulated the government on February 24
for lifting the state of emergency, noting that “we look forward to additional
steps by the government that enable the Algerian people to fully exercise their
universal rights, including freedom of expression, association and assembly.”
Algeria in 2011 continued to fail to invite five of the special procedures of the
United Nations Human Rights Council that had requested to visit the country,
including the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances and
the special rapporteurs on torture and on human rights while countering terrorism.
Algeria hosted a visit by the special rapporteur on the right to adequate
housing.