Algeria
New laws adopted in January 2012, and the announcement in 2011 of an end to
the 19-year-old state of emergency and of major constitutional and electoral
reforms, did little to give Algerians more freedom to associate, form political
parties, or express their opinions. Authorities relied on other repressive laws
and regulations to stifle dissent and human rights activities, such as the 1991
law governing assembly that requires prior authorization for public demonstrations.
May’s legislative elections gave the country’s governing coalition, the National
Liberation Front and the National Rally for Democracy, a majority of seats.
Several parties, including a coalition of Islamist parties, accused the government
of election fraud. Security forces and armed groups continued to enjoy
broad impunity for atrocities committed during the civil war of the 1990s. The
state offered compensation to families of persons forcibly disappeared in the
1990s, but provided no answers about their fates.
Freedom of Assembly
Throughout 2012, Algerian authorities continued to heavily restrict freedom of
assembly, relying on preemptive techniques including blocking access to sites
of planned demonstrations and arrests to prevent public protests even from getting
under way, especially when the purpose of the demonstration was considered
politically sensitive. For example, on April 20, police arrested 10 activists of
the Youth Action Rally (Rassemblement Action Jeunesse, RAJ), a youth movement
founded in 1992 around the themes of human rights and democratization,
in front of the central post office while they were heading to a meeting with a
French journalist, releasing them later the same day.
On April 26, police arrested several activists who were trying to demonstrate in
front of the court of Sidi Mohamed in Algiers in solidarity with Abdelkader
Kherba, a member of the National Committee to Defend the Rights of the
Unemployed (Comité national pour la défense des droits des chômeurs, CNDDC)
who had been arrested on April 18 and was on trial for direct incitement to
unarmed gathering.
Among the groups most active in attempting to stage public demonstrations are
independent professional unions, who sought better pay and work conditions.
Authorities often prevented their activities in the capital by a heavy police presence
and obtaining court injunctions.
Freedom of Association
The new Association Law, which parliament adopted on January 12, 2012, contains
many new provisions that give sweeping powers to the government to control
associations. The new law maintains the existing regime of prior approval
for associations and gives authorities wide discretionary powers to refuse to
grant legal status to new associations without first seeking a court order. They
can, for example, reject an association whose purpose or goals are deemed
“contrary to public order, public morality, and the provisions of existing laws
and regulations.” In addition, they can dissolve associations on broad grounds
such as “interfering with the internal affairs of the country,” “harming its sovereignty,”
receiving foreign funding without prior authorization, and exercising
activities outside of those provided for in their statutes. Involvement in a nonrecognized,
suspended, or dissolved association can result in imprisonment.
Freedom of Speech
The new law on information eliminated prison sentences for speech offenses
committed by journalists, including defaming or showing contempt for the president,
state institutions, or courts. However, it raised the level of the fines
imposed. It has also broadened restrictions on journalists by requiring respect
for vaguely worded objectives and providing for sanctions that can be imposed
by a professional ethics board in cases of infringements. Speech offenses continue
to pervade the penal code, which provides for up to three years prison
sentence for tracts, bulletins, or flyers that “may harm the national interest” and
up to one year for defaming or insulting the president of the Republic, the parliament,
the army, or state institutions.
The ordinance on the implementation of the Charter for Peace and National
Reconciliation, was adopted in February 2006 and offers immunity from prosecution
both for security force members and members of armed groups, with certain exceptions, for atrocities they perpetrated during the civil strife of the
1990s. The charter also seeks to muzzle continuing debate and scrutiny of the
atrocities committed during that period: it provides for up to five years in prison
for anyone who “exploits the wounds of the national tragedy, with a view to
harming Algerian institutions, harming the honor of its agents who served it
with dignity, or tarnishing the image of Algeria at the international level.” No
one is known to have been imprisoned under this provision.
Judicial Harassment
In 2012, authorities charged several human rights activists and union leaders
with various crimes for the peaceful exercise of their right to assemble or for
voicing their support for strikes or demonstrations. On April 18, authorities
arrested CNDDC member Abdelkader Kherba in front of the Sidi Mohamed courthouse
in Algiers where he had come to show solidarity with court clerks, who
had been on strike for 10 days and were staging a sit-in to demand better working
conditions for court personnel. A court convicted Kherba on charges of
“direct incitement to an unarmed gathering” and “interfering with the work of
an institution” and handed him a one year suspended prison sentence. Kherba
was arrested a second time on August 21 and charged with “insulting an official.”
He was later acquitted.
Yacine Zaid, trade unionist and president of the Laghouat section of the
Algerian League for the Defense of Human Rights (LADDH), and three other
union leaders were charged with “inciting an unarmed gathering” under article
100 of the criminal code. The police had arrested them on April 26 while they
were holding a sit-in in front the Sidi Mohamed courthouse to denounce the
prosecution of Kherba.
Accountability for Past Crimes
Khaled Nezzar, minister of defense from 1992 to 1994, was arrested by Swiss
police in October 2011, interrogated, and later released on bail. The Swiss
Federal Criminal Court (FCC) commenced investigations against him for war
crimes and crimes against humanity for his role in commanding the harsh
repression of armed resistance and civil unrest in Algeria during the 1990s. On July 31, 2012, the Swiss FCC rejected his appeal to drop the case. He remains on
bail pending the completion of the investigation and the commencement of the
trial.
Women
Algeria adopted a new law on January 12, 2012, imposing a 30 percent quota of
women on the electoral lists of parties for legislative, municipal, and communal
elections. Women won 31 percent of the seats in the parliament elected on May
10. However, the Algerian code of personal status discriminates against women
in matters of parental authority, divorce and inheritance.
Terrorism and Counterterrorism
Armed groups staged attacks far less frequently than during the 1990s.
However, Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) continued to launch fatal
attacks, directed mostly at military and police targets.
After Bouteflika lifted the state of emergency, authorities transferred suspected
terrorists who had been in “assigned residence” for several years without any
judicial review to official places of detention. However, long delays tainted their
trials as the judges refused to summon key witnesses and postponed their hearings
repeatedly. In 2012, the trials of Hassan Hattab, Amari Saifi, and Kamel
Djermane, three suspected terrorists who were held for several years under
secret detention and brought to trial after the lifting of the state of emergency,
were postponed several times.
Algeria strengthened its role as a regional player on counterterrorism, for example
hosting the inaugural meeting of the Global Counterterrorism Forum, a multilateral
group that the US created to broaden counterterrorism discussions
beyond the western, industrialized countries.
Key International Actors
François Hollande, the new president of France, issued a statement on October
17, 2012, in which he recognized the responsibility of the French republic in the
killing of scores of Algerian protesters in Paris on October 17, 1961.
The European Union, which already has an “association agreement” with
Algeria, agreed to provide Algeria with €172 million (approximately US$234 million)
in aid between 2011 and 2013. Western countries consider Algeria as a
major partner in combating terrorism. With the takeover of northern Mali in April
by Islamist radical groups, the US and European countries increased their counter-
terrorism cooperation with Algeria.
The UN special rapporteur on torture, the UN Working Groups on Enforced or
Involuntary Disappearances (WGEID) and on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD), and
the special rapporteur on summary, arbitrary or extrajudicial executions continued
to be denied access to Algeria.
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay visited Algeria on
September 18 and 19. She praised growing freedom of expression in the media
but expressed concern for the continued clampdown on freedom of assembly
and association. During the visit, the government said it would accept WGEID’s
long-standing request for a mission.