Algeria
Despite the lifting of the state of emergency in April 2011 and the adoption of
new laws on association, media, and political parties, Algeria has made little
progress on the protection of human rights. Authorities continued to restrict
freedom of assembly and association, prohibiting meetings and protests. They
clamped down on union rights, frequently resorting to arrests and prosecutions
of union leaders and activists.
Security forces and armed groups continued to enjoy impunity for atrocities
they committed during the civil war of the 1990s. Armed militants committed a
significant number of attacks against government officials, members of security
forces, and civilians, culminating in the attack against the gas facility of In
Amenas. After lifting the state of emergency back in 2011, authorities adopted
new legislation authorizing the long-established practice of holding alleged terrorists
in assigned secret residences for up to nine months.
Freedom of Assembly
Algerian authorities continue to restrict freedom of assembly, relying on preemptive
techniques, including blocking access to sites of planned demonstrations
and arresting organizers in advance to prevent public protests from even
beginning. During peaceful demonstrations in the south of the country organized
by associations of the unemployed, police arrested protesters. Courts later
sentenced several of them to fines or suspended prison terms. Police arrested
Taher Belabès, a coordinator for the National Committee for the Defense of the
Rights of the Unemployed, in the southern town of Ouargla on January 2, after
police dispersed peaceful protesters demanding jobs and the sacking of local
officials for failing to tackle unemployment. Prosecutors charged Belabès with
“obstructing the flow of traffic” and “inciting a gathering” and sentenced him
on February 3 to one month in prison and a fine of 50,000 Algerian dinars
(US$614).
Freedom of Association
On February 20, 2013, police arrested and expelled 10 non-Algerian members of
associations of unemployed workers in other Maghreb countries who had traveled to Algiers to attend the first Maghreb Forum for the Fight Against
Unemployment and Temporary Work (Forum maghrébin pour la lutte contre le
chômage et le travail précaire) that was to take place on February 20 and 21 at
the labor union center in the Bab Ezzouar neighborhood. Officials held them at
the Bab Ezzouar police station, then took them to the airport, from where they
expelled five Tunisians and three Mauritanians that same day, and two
Moroccans the following day.
Freedom of Speech
The state operates all television and radio stations, and on key issues, such as
security and foreign and economic policy, they broadcast the official line and
allow no dissident commentary or critical reporting.
The January 2012 Law on Information eliminated prison sentences but raised
fines for journalists who commit speech offenses. The offenses include defaming
or showing contempt for the president, state institutions, and courts. The
law has also broadened restrictions on journalists by requiring them to respect
vaguely worded concepts, such as national unity and identity, public order, and
national economic interests.
Other speech offenses still pervade the penal code, which provides for up to
three years in prison for tracts, bulletins, or flyers that “may harm the national
interest” and up to one year for defaming or insulting the president of the
republic, parliament, the army, or state institutions. Prosecutors haul journalists
and independent publishers into court for defaming or insulting public officials,
and first instance courts sometimes sentence them to prison and heavy
fines, only to have appeals courts overturn or convert to suspended sentences
the penalties imposed by the lower courts.
On May 19, the public prosecutor in Algiers charged Hisham Abboud, director
and owner of the private newspaper Jaridati and its French edition Mon Journal,
of compromising state security by publishing a story about President Abdelaziz
Bouteflika’s health. The Telecommunications Ministry had banned the two
newspapers from publishing a front page report on the deteriorating health of
the president, based on French medical sources and sources close to
Bouteflika.
Judicial Harassment
In 2013, authorities charged several human rights activists and union leaders
with crimes related to the peaceful exercise of their right to assemble or their
voicing of support for strikes and demonstrations. A court on May 6 sentenced
Abdelkader Kherba, a member of the National Committee to Defend the Rights
of the Unemployed (Comité national pour la défense des droits des chômeurs-
CNDDC) to two months in prison, and fined him 20,000 dinars (US$250) after
he distributed leaflets about national unemployment.
Rights of Unions
Algerian authorities in 2013 have increasingly clamped down on workers’
efforts to form independent unions and organize and participate in peaceful
protests and strikes. Authorities have blocked union demonstrations, arbitrarily
arrested trade unionists, and prosecuted some on criminal charges, when the
real motive behind their prosecution appears to have been punishment for
union activities.
Algerian authorities engage in administrative maneuvers to withhold legal status
from independent unions. The law on legalizing new unions requires these
groups only to notify the authorities that they exist, not to seek their permission
to form. But authorities sometimes refuse to issue a receipt proving they have
been notified.
The Union of Higher Education Teachers in Solidarity (Syndicat des Enseignants
du Supérieur Solidaires), for example, filed its papers on January 19, 2012. It
received no receipt at the time and has yet to receive any response from the
government, which means it cannot legally operate.
Accountability for Past Crimes
The 2006 Law on Peace and National Reconciliation provides a legal framework
for impunity for perpetrators of atrocities during the civil war. The law also
makes it a crime to denigrate state institutions or security forces for the way
they conducted themselves during the political strife, potentially penalizing
people who allege that the forces perpetrated human rights violations.
Associations of the disappeared, which continue to call for truth and justice,
face harassment.
Terrorism and Counterterrorism
On January 16, 2013, militants linked to Al-Qaeda and affiliated with a brigade
led by a man named Mokhtar Belmokhtar took more than 800 people hostage
at the Tigantourine gas facility In Amenas, near the Algeria-Libya border. The
Algerian Special Forces raided the site in an effort to free the hostages. At the
end of the episode, at least 37 foreign hostages and 29 members of the armed
group were killed.
Algeria strengthened its role as a regional player on counterterrorism, and continued
to participate in the Global Counterterrorism Forum, a multilateral group
that the US created to expand counterterrorism discussions beyond Western,
industrialized countries.
Key International Actors
The European Union, which has an “association agreement” with Algeria,
agreed to provide Algeria with €172 million (US$234 million) in aid between
2011 and 2013.
On July 2013, the government applied for candidature on the United Nations
Human Rights Council for the period of 2014 to 2016. Yet despite pledges to UN
High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay during her visit to Algeria in
September 2012, the government is still denying access to the UN special rapporteur
on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
the UN Working Groups on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances and
on Arbitrary Detention, and the special rapporteur on summary, arbitrary, or
extrajudicial executions.
In its most recent Universal Periodic Review of Algeria in 2012, the UN Human
Rights Council recommended the release of prisoners detained solely for exercising
freedom of expression, the removal of barriers to free assembly and
expression, and the ratification of several international treaties, including the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. However, to date the Algerian
authorities have implemented none of these recommendations. On November
12, 2013, the General Assembly of the UN elected Algeria as a member to the
Human Rights Council.