Ecuador
After being re-elected to a third term in February 2013, President Rafael Correa
promulgated a sweeping new Communications Law in June regulating broadcast
and print media, which undercuts press freedom. The Correa government continues
to subject members of the media to public recrimination. Prosecutors
use overly broad counterterrorism and sabotage offences against government
critics who engage in public protests.
Other ongoing problems include vaguely worded restrictions affecting civil society
organizations, and asylum application procedures that do not provide rigorous
safeguards that international standards require. Unable to obtain a legal
abortion, rape victims may resort to illegal and unsafe abortions that endanger
their life and health.
Freedom of Expression
The Communications Law that the National Assembly approved in June 2013
contains vague provisions that allow arbitrary prosecutions and censorship.
The law’s invocation of a constitutional right to information that is “verified,
contrasted, precise, and contextualized,” opens the door to censorship by giving
the government or judges the power to decide if information is truthful.
A government regulatory body, the Superintendent of Information and
Communication, may order media outlet directors to rectify and publicly apologize
for information deemed to be untruthful, impose fines for repeated incidents,
and pursue judicial action against them. Moreover, the law grants the
government extremely broad regulating powers that could severely limit free
speech by defining social communication through media as a “public service”
that should be provided with “responsibility and quality” and “contribute to the
good life of people.”
In addition, journalists responsible for “media lynching”—defined as persistent
critical reporting “with the purpose of undermining the prestige or credibility of
a person or legal entity” may be obliged to issue a public apology, and may
face criminal prosecution for other crimes.
In August, citing provisions of the law that define matters of public relevance
and the right to a correction for disseminating inaccurate information, the communications
minister ordered El Universo newspaper to publicly apologize for
publishing tweets he alleged undermined the president’s honor and reputation.
The minister accused El Universo of “quoting out of context” and “frivolity”
(ligereza), and of publishing information of no “public relevance.” El Universo
had published tweets by Correa explaining his decision to allow oil exploitation
in the Yasuní national park, and tweets by individuals to Correa opposing his
decision.
President Correa continues to use criminal defamation laws to target his critics.
In September 2013, the National Court of Justice upheld the conviction of opposition
legislator José Cléver Jiménez for slandering the president, sentenced
him to 18 months in prison, and ordered him to publicly apologize to the president
and pay him approximately US$140,000. Together with two union members
whose conviction the court also upheld, Jiménez had asked the attorney
general to investigate Correa’s responsibility for violence that led to five deaths
during a September 2010 police mutiny, accusing him of ordering an armed
assault on a hospital where civilians were present.
The attorney general—who had been Correa’s personal lawyer during part of his
first term of office—found that there was insufficient evidence to open an investigation
and, in May 2012, a judge dismissed the case. In August 2012, Correa
filed a complaint before the National Court of Justice accusing Jiménez and the
others of slander. A proposal to reform the Ecuadoran Criminal Code under
debate in the National Assembly as of October 2013 would eliminate several
defamation provisions from the current code, but retain the crime of slander.
The Correa government frequently requires private outlets to transmit official
broadcasts to refute information or critical opinions, which authorities argue is
necessary to fulfill the government’s obligation to refute media falsehoods and
distortions.
Judicial Independence
Corruption, inefficiency, and political influence have plagued Ecuador’s judiciary
for years. With a popular mandate following a 2011 referendum, the Correa
administration initiated an ambitious judicial reform process that included appointing a new National Court of Justice and hundreds of lower level judges.
In December 2012, government-invited observers from Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
Guatemala, Mexico, and Spain, published a report finding anomalies in the
judicial appointment process, including that of top justices. The observers
urged the passage of a law to regulate disciplinary procedures, defining faults
clearly in order to avoid the risk of judges being suspended or punished simply
for exercising their duties.
Disproportionate Criminal Charges against Protesters
The Criminal Code contains sweeping provisions on sabotage and terrorism,
which prosecutors have repeatedly applied inappropriately against participants
in public protests and other gatherings. Acts classified as terrorism in Ecuador
include vaguely defined crimes such as “crimes against the common security of
people or human groups of whatever kind or against their property,” by individuals
or associations “armed or not.” Such crimes carry a possible prison sentence
of four to eight years. A new draft of the criminal code that was under
congressional debate as of October 2013 would modify the existing definition
of terrorism, but the new definition could still allow prosecutors to bring terrorism
charges against participants in public protest.
In February 2013, a court sentenced ten people, known as the Luluncoto 10
(after the Quito neighborhood where they were detained), to one year in prison
for attempted sabotage and terrorism. Arrested in March 2012 while holding a
peaceful meeting to plan a public protest, most were held in pretrial detention
for nine months. Their lawyers maintained the only evidence against them consisted
of personal objects found in their homes, such as innocuous books,
clothing, and music. As of October 2013, their appeal alleging mistrial was still
pending.
Prosecutors have filed other serious charges against participants in public
protests that are disproportionate to alleged acts. In February 2013, 12 students
were charged for rebellion, a crime that carries a prison sentence of up to six
years, for their alleged participation in violent incidents during a protest in
Quito against the decision to change the name of their university. A judge later
dismissed the charges after the prosecutor was unable to substantiate them.
After Correa criticized the judge’s decision in his weekly TV broadcast, another prosecutor reopened the case. In a second trial in July, the 12 were convicted
and sentenced to 21 days in prison.
Accountability for Past Abuses
Efforts to hold to account those responsible for human rights violations committed
by governments from 1984 to 2008 made significant progress in 2013. In
2010, a special prosecutorial unit was formed to investigate 118 cases involving
456 victims (including 68 victims of extrajudicial execution and 17 of enforced
disappearance), which had been documented by a truth commission created by
the Correa administration. In 2012, the number of cases under investigation
rose to 138. In October 2013, two former government defense ministers and
eight retired military and police officers were charged with enforced disappearance
and torture in connection with the illegal arrest in 1985 and torture of
three people linked to a guerilla group. As of October 2013, work by a human
rights investigative unit attached to the Attorney General’s Office had led to
charges being filed against 36 government agents in three other cases from the
period covered by the Truth Commission report.
Reproductive Rights
Women and girls in Ecuador have the right to seek abortions only when their
health or life is at risk or when pregnancies result from the rape of an “idiot or
demented” woman. In October, as part of the drafting of the new criminal code,
the National Assembly was considering a change in terminology, substituting
“mental disability” for “idiot or demented.” The new language continues to
imply that women and girls with disability would be “unfit” mothers, and to prevent
all other victims of rape from accessing legal abortion. One in four women
in Ecuador have been victims of sexual violence, according to government figures.
Threat of criminal penalty drives some women and girls to have illegal and
unsafe abortions, and impedes health care and post-rape services for victims of
sexual violence. Fear of prosecution also hinders detection and prevention of
sexual and gender-based violence.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Private drug and alcohol rehabilitation centers continue to operate to “cure”
gay people of homosexuality, a practice Ecuador’s health minister has said is
illegal. Following the June 2013 escape by 22-year-old psychology student
Zulema Constante from confinement in one such center, the minister of health
announced a crackdown on clinics engaging in this practice. According to the
minister, from March 2012 to July 2013 authorities closed 15 clinics for alleged
human rights violations.
Human Rights Defenders and Civil Society Organizations
Correa’s government has routinely sought to discredit human rights defenders
by accusing them of seeking to destabilize the government. On at least two
occasions in 2013, the communications ministry interrupted programming on
the Ecuavisa channel to excoriate the nongovernmental press freedom group
Fundamedios after the station transmitted interviews with its director.
The Correa administration has issued sweeping executive decrees that allow
greater control over nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), some of which
have been outspoken critics of the government. In June 2013, Correa issued a
decree granting the government broad powers to intervene in NGO operations.
The decree’s vague language, which includes authority to dissolve Ecuadorian
groups for “compromis[ing] public peace,” provides scope for arbitrary application
and poses a threat to a robust civil society.
Refugees
As of August 2013, Ecuador had nearly 55,000 registered refugees, the largest
number of any Latin American country. Most are Colombians fleeing armed conflict.
Presidential Decree 1182, which Correa issued in May 2012 to regulate asylum
procedures, narrows the definition of who may be considered a refugee,
and establishes an unfair procedure to determine which asylum claims should
be deemed “manifestly unfounded.” It also allows officials to reject an asylum
application before a substantive review if well-founded reasons exist to believe
the applicant had committed a crime, without providing for rigorous procedural
safeguards that international standards require to ensure a full factual and legal assessment of the case. The decree also grants overly broad powers to
revoke refugee status.
These provisions are counter to international standards in the Convention
Relating to the Status of Refugees and its Protocol, the Cartagena Declaration
on Refugees, and guidelines adopted by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees.
Key International Actors
In March 2013, the Organization of American States (OAS) rejected proposals
led by Ecuador with the support of other members of the Bolivarian Alliance for
the Americas (ALBA) to block outside funding for the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights, including the special rapporteur on freedom of
expression. However, Ecuador, as well as other ALBA members, made clear its
intent to continue pressing for these changes.
In a speech to the OAS General Assembly in June, Ecuador’s foreign minister
complained that the funds available to the special rapporteur on freedom of
expression discriminated against OAS bodies dealing with other human rights
issues, and that the rapporteur’s 2012 report on Ecuador distorted information,
used biased sources, and was politically motivated. The special rapporteur continues
to play an important role in advocating for press freedom in Ecuador. In
October at an ALBA meeting in Cochabamba, Bolivia, President Correa said he
would “think seriously” about continuing to participate in the Inter-American
system of human rights protection if the changes that Ecuador advocated were
not implemented.