Ecuador
On September 30 President Rafael Correa was held captive inside a hospital for
several hours by police who were protesting a law that diminished benefits for
law enforcement officers. During the standoff, the government declared a state of
emergency and ordered all TV stations to transmit the official channel’s programming.
A shootout broke out when members of the military rescued President
Correa, resulting in at least five deaths. The government stated the events constituted
an attempted coup d’etat. At this writing hundreds of police officers are
under investigation.
At least a dozen participants in protests and demonstrations were prosecuted or
investigated in 2010 on the exaggerated charge of terrorism, due to the overly
broad provisions of the criminal code. Police officers responsible for abuses in
previous years have not been held accountable.
Criminal defamation laws that restrict freedom of expression remain in force.
Some articles of the draft Communications Law could open the door to media
censorship. At this writing there is still no date set for the debate on the bill in the
National Assembly.
Misuse of Anti-Terror Laws in Dealing with Social Protests
Prosecutors have applied a “terrorism and sabotage” provision of the criminal
code in cases involving protest marches that have ended in confrontations with
police. Involvement in acts of violence during lawful protests should be an ordinary
criminal offense. Yet Ecuador’s criminal code includes, under the category of
sabotage and terrorism, “crimes against the common security of people or human
groups of whatever kind, or against their property,” by individuals or associations
“whether armed or not.” Such crimes carry a possible prison sentence of four to
eight years.
In June 2010 Marlon Santi, president of the Confederation of Indigenous
Nationalities of Ecuador (CONAIE), Ecuador’s largest indigenous organization, and
two other indigenous leaders were under criminal investigation for terrorism and
sabotage after leading a protest during a meeting of the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas (ALBA) in the city of Otavalo. Protesters broke through a police barrier
to gain entry to the building where Presidents Hugo Chávez, Evo Morales, and
Rafael Correa were meeting. In September a judge charged Pepe Acacho, a Shuar
indigenous leader, and 10 others, with sabotage and terrorism for their alleged
participation in violent protests in September 2009 in the city of Macas in the
Ecuadorean Amazon, in which a teacher was killed. According to the Ministry of
Justice, Acacho was accused of using a community radio station he directed,
Radio La Voz de Arutam, to incite demonstrators to take to the streets with poisoned
spears to protest the government’s alleged intent to privatize water.
In August a judge ordered the preventive detention of Juan Alcívar, a reporter for
La Hora newspaper and El Nuevo Sol radio station, on terrorism charges. Two
employees of the La Concordia town council accused Alcívar of throwing a tear
gas canister at President Correa during a demonstration, causing the Ecuadorean
leader to have to cover his face with a mask. Alcívar, who was an outspoken critic
of La Concordia’s mayor, argues he merely pushed the canister away. In
September the judge lifted the detention order, but the terrorism case against
him continued.
Accountability
Impunity for police abuses, including extrajudicial executions, is widespread, and
those responsible for murders often attributed by police to a “settling of
accounts” between criminal gangs are rarely brought to justice. In a June 2010
statement Philip Alston, the United Nations special rapporteur on extrajudicial
executions, described the justice system as “broadly dysfunctional.” The same
month a truth commission created by the Correa administration published a
report documenting 68 extrajudicial executions and 17 “disappearances”
between 1984 and 2008, and named 458 alleged perpetrators of abuses.
According to the commission, few of those responsible for the abuses had been
held accountable due to statutes of limitations, jurisdictional disputes, and procedural
delays. In October 2010 a team of prosecutors appointed by the attorney
general to investigate cases reported by the commission began re-interviewing
suspects and witnesses.
Indigenous Justice
Competing jurisdiction of the ordinary courts and of traditional indigenous
authorities, which have equal status under the 2008 constitution, has been a
source of controversy. Critics of indigenous justice maintain that it is responsible
for a number of recent lynchings, which received wide press coverage. In 2010
two UN rapporteurs—on extrajudicial executions and on indigenous peoples—criticized
these allegations as unfounded. Both urged dialogue to resolve possible
conflicts between the two spheres of justice. At this writing the government is
working on draft legislation to determine the scope of each jurisdiction.
Freedom of Expression
The Ecuadorean criminal code still has provisions criminalizing “desacato,” under
which anyone who “offends” the president or other government authorities may
receive a prison sentence of up to three months (for offending officials), and up
to two years (for offending the president).
Journalists also face prison sentences for criminal defamation of public officials.
In March 2010 Emilio Palacio, an editorial writer for the Guayaquil newspaper El
Universo, received a three-year prison sentence for calling the president of a government-
run financial institution “a thug” in an August 2009 editorial. The Inter-
American Commission on Human Rights has urged member states to abolish
“desacato” provisions, and to use only civil sanctions to guarantee protection of
public officials’ reputations.
From September 2009 until June 2010 a National Assembly committee debated
draft legislation to regulate media. The draft Communications Law contains positive
elements that would strengthen free expression if enacted. It explicitly prohibits
monopolies and oligopolies in media ownership, potentially extending the
range and diversity of public debate. It broadens access for those with hearing
disabilities by promoting subtitles and sign language.
However, the bill contains several provisions that could undermine freedom of
expression. It includes restrictions whose vague language could open the way for
prior censorship, which the American Convention on Human Rights explicitly prohibits.
Employing the same language included in the constitution, it refers to the right to freedom of expression as “the search, reception, exchange, production
and dissemination of truthful, verified, opportune, contextualized and plural
information.” Such definition is at odds with Principle 7 of the Declaration of
Principles of Freedom of Expression, endorsed by the Inter-American Commission
on Human Rights that states that the “prior conditioning of expressions… is
incompatible with the right to freedom of expression.” Moreover, the bill allows
an exception to the prohibition of prior censorship “in those cases established…
in the law.”
In addition, the proposed law includes sanctions that impose unreasonable
restrictions on free expression, and could allow undue interference in the work of
media outlets. Infractions for which an outlet could be punished include failure
“to observe its ethics code,” and publishing unsigned or anonymous letters. At
this writing the bill had still to be debated on the floor of the legislature.
Human Rights Defenders
President Correa has frequently accused environmental activists and NGOs
defending indigenous rights of interfering in politics, promoting violence, and
receiving funds from abroad to destabilize the country. In July 2010 Correa threatened
NGOs that “meddle in politics” with expulsion from the country. In October
he stated that he would review the list of some 50,000 NGOs registered in
Ecuador, some of which he said were suspected of tax evasion and prejudicing
the state.
In July unidentified assailants kidnapped Germán Antonio Ramírez Herrera, a
forensic expert specializing in investigating torture and extrajudicial executions,
forced him into a car, and later shot him. Ramírez, an expert consultant for PRIVA,
a member organization of the International Rehabilitation Council for Torture
Victims, had been investigating prisoners’ injuries following a police raid at the
prison of Quevedo, where he was a forensic doctor. He was killed on the same
day that he presented evidence to the UN’s special rapporteur on extrajudicial
executions. Ramírez was reported to have received death threats previously.
Key International Actors
Members of the Union of South American Nations organized an emergency meeting
in Buenos Aires to support the presidency of Rafael Correa after he was held
by police in September. Other governments and international institutions, including
the United States and the Organization of American States (OAS) also
expressed support for Ecuador’s democratic institutions.
After visiting Ecuador in July, the UN’s special rapporteur on extrajudicial executions
criticized the justice system’s failure to hold accountable those responsible
for execution-style killings, whether committed by state agents, hired assassins,
or illegal armed groups. The OAS rapporteur on persons deprived of liberty, who
visited Ecuador in May 2010, stated that he had received reports of continuing
police torture. He urged Ecuador to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention
against Torture.
In May 2010 a court in Ontario, Canada struck out a claim for damages that three
Ecuadorean community leaders had filed against two directors of the Copper
Mesa Mining Corporation and the Toronto Stock Exchange, where the company is
listed. Since 2006, residents of Imbabura province, northern Ecuador, have
received repeated death threats because of their opposition to a mining project in
the area. On one occasion, Copper Mesa company guards physically attacked
them, an incident captured on film. The court argued the plaintiffs had failed to
establish the responsibility of the company directors and the stock exchange in
causing the alleged harm.