E>PGK
Egyptians took to the streets starting on January 25 to protest peacefully
against President Hosni Mubarak’s 30-year rule, calling for social justice,
democracy, and an end to police brutality. Police violence against protesters,
especially on January 28, only hardened the protesters’ determination. On
February 11 Mubarak was forced to resign and the Supreme Council of the
Armed Forces (SCAF), composed of leading army figures, took over, assuming
full legislative and executive powers two days later. In March voters approved
constitutional amendments in a referendum, and the SCAF issued a
Constitutional Declaration setting out a roadmap for holding parliamentary and
presidential elections.
Overall, there was no improvement in human rights protections in Egypt. On
assuming power the SCAF ordered the release of all detainees held under the
Emergency Law (Law No. 162 of 1958)—numbering several thousand at the end
of 2010 according to estimates by human rights groups—and promised to end
the State of Emergency. However, the SCAF has continued to use special courts
under the Emergency Law and has referred more than 12,000 civilians to military
tribunals since January, more than the total number of civilians tried by military
courts during the 30-year-long Mubarak presidency. Those referred to military
tribunals have included children as young as 15, even though international
law discourages trials of children in military proceedings. Furthermore, on
September 10 the SCAF announced that it was expanding the scope of the
Emergency Law’s application, and that it would remain in force through May
2012.
Throughout the year the military used excessive force to break up demonstrations
and torture detainees. Despite official recognition of the need to rebuild
public confidence in the police, no process of security sector reform was initiated.
There has been no comprehensive investigation into systematic acts of torture
and ill-treatment practiced in recent years by Egyptian police, and in particular
the State Security Investigations (SSI) agency.
On August 3 the trial began of Mubarak and former Minister of Interior Habib
al-Adly, as well as 11 other police officials around the country. They were charged with the killing of protestors and corruption. Their trials were still in
progress at this writing.
Police Violence and Killing of Unarmed Protesters
On January 28, tens of thousands of demonstrators took to the streets of
Alexandria, Suez, and Cairo, the capital. Police responded with tear gas, water
cannons, rubber bullets, and live ammunition in an effort to prevent protesters
from advancing towards the central squares of those cities. The Ministry of
Health said 846 persons died during the protests in January and February. Most
of these were killed on January 28 and 29. On February 2 and 3, armed men in
plainclothes—some mounted on camels and horses—attacked protesters in
Tahrir Square, injuring several hundred; on those two days at least eight people
died of gunshot wounds.
Torture and Excessive Use of Force by Military and Police Officers
The military arbitrarily arrested scores of journalists while they were covering
the protests in January, in addition to hundreds of peaceful protesters. The journalists
were released within a few days of their arrests, but military courts sentenced
many protesters to imprisonment. For example, authorities filed dubious
charges of “thuggery” against peaceful protester Amr Beheiry, arrested during a
protest in Tahrir Square on February 26. Military courts convicted and sentenced
him to five years in prison. Beheiry remained in prison at this writing.
Authorities also detained children, who faced physical abuse and torture.
Street children were particularly vulnerable to arrest and abuse.
Torture by military personnel was first reported on February 2, shortly after the
army took over law enforcement duties from the police. On March 9 the military
broke up a peaceful sit-in in Tahrir Square, arrested at least 174 protesters, and
beat, kicked, whipped, and applied electric shocks to them on the grounds of
the nearby Egyptian Museum. The military brought these protesters before military
courts, which sentenced 134 of them to three to five years in prison on
charges of “thuggery,” but released all of them in May after two months of public
campaigning on their behalf.
The military used excessive force and carried out arbitrary mass arrests in various
cities to disperse demonstrations and sit-ins on numerous occasions—
February 25, March 9, March 23, May 16, July 22, and August 1—beating and
tasering those arrested. On April 9, military officers used rubber bullets and live
ammunition to break up a sit-in opposing SCAF’s rule, wounding at least 71 protesters,
one fatally. On October 9, during the dispersal by military police and
riot police of a protest of Coptic Christians in front of the state TV building in
Cairo, at least two military vehicles ran over and killed 13 protesters and a further
24 were killed by live ammunition. Military prosecutors are overseeing the
investigation into the incident, a conflict of interest likely to reinforce military
impunity.
Central Security Forces, Egypt’s riot police, continued to use excessive force
when policing demonstrations. On June 28 and 29, riot police clashed with protesters
outside the ministry of interior for 16 hours. The police fired tear gas
into the crowd and used rubber bullets and pellet guns, injuring 1,114 persons
according to the Ministry of Health. After the removal of Mubarak, police continued
to use torture in police stations, detention centers, and at points of arrest.
In June bus driver Mohamed Sabah Nasr died in custody in Azbakeya police station
in Cairo after police arrested him along with seven others for “disrupting
traffic.” Those detained with Nasr said that they saw the police beating him.
The Ministry of Interior said that it is investigating his death but they have yet
to make a report public.
Freedom of Expression and Association
News media enjoyed greater freedom in the aftermath of the ouster of Mubarak
on all issues except those concerning the military. As of September the military
prosecutor under the SCAF had summoned at least nine activists and journalists
for questioning on charges of “insulting the military,” but released most
without charge. An exception was blogger Maikel Nabil, whom a military tribunal
in April sentenced to three years imprisonment for “insulting the military”
and “spreading false information” on his blog. At this writing Nabil remained in
prison while awaiting his retrial, scheduled for November 27.
On September 7, Minister of Information Osama Heikal said that due to the current
“media chaos” he would no longer issue broadcasting licenses for new
satellite TV stations. Four days later police raided the offices of Al Jazeera Live
Egypt, the station that had provided the most detailed coverage of anti-SCAF
protests over the preceding weeks, and ordered it to stop broadcasting from
Egypt. The station continued to broadcast from Qatar. On October 30 a military
prosecutor detained blogger Alaa Abdel Fattah, one of the most vocal critics of
the military, for 30 days on charges of inciting the October 9 demonstration at
Maspero and assaulting military officers, charges for which the prosecutor provided
no evidence. Abdel Fattah remained in detention at this writing.
In March the SCAF amended the Political Parties Law to make it easier for new
political parties to form by enabling them to register as long as they meet the
requirements set out in the law. Under Mubarak, applications to register new
parties were usually rejected. However, there was no move to amend the
Associations Law, which allows for excessive government interference in associations.
In July the state security prosecutor announced that he would investigate
possible “treason” charges against NGOs that were not registered under
the Associations Law and that received foreign funding. In November a Cairo
criminal court ordered banks to report on all transactions on the private
accounts of 63 human rights defenders and organizations.
Freedom of Religion and Sectarian Violence
Incidents of sectarian violence continued throughout 2011. In the early hours of
January 1, 2011, a bomb went off in a church in Alexandria, killing 23 people.
The prosecutor opened an investigation but had not charged anyone in connection
with the attack at this writing. On March 8, Christians in the eastern Cairo
suburb of Muqattam protested the burning of a church four days earlier in Atfih,
13 miles south of Cairo, and clashed with Muslims. Twelve people died in the
ensuing violence and shootings, and several Christian homes and businesses
were torched. The prosecutor has yet to investigate the incident.
In May sectarian violence outside a church in Imbaba, a neighborhood of Cairo,
left 12 dead. On July 3, the trial of those arrested in connection with the violence
opened before an Emergency State Security Court. On September 30, a mob burnt down the Mar Girgis church in Marinab, in Aswan, but local authorities
and prosecutors failed to investigate instead insisting on a settlement. The
prime minister ordered an acceleration of the drafting of a new law to facilitate
the renovation and construction of churches, a long-standing demand of
Christians, who face discrimination in this respect.
Refugee and Migrants’ Rights
Egyptian border police continued to shoot at unarmed African migrants who
attempted to cross the Sinai border into Israel, killing at least 22 since January.
Police arrested hundreds of irregular migrants, primarily Eritreans, Ethiopians,
and Sudanese, and detained them in police stations and prisons in Sinai and
Upper Egypt without access to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, thereby denying them the right to make an asylum
claim.
In October immigration officials forcibly deported three Eritreans. Prison officials
in Shallal gave Eritrean embassy officials access to 118 detained Eritrean
men who were asylum seekers and beat them to force them to sign paperwork
agreeing to return to Eritrea. Egyptian authorities announced they would deport
the group to Eritrea.
Migrants reported beatings and rape at the hands of traffickers operating in the
Sinai. In September traffickers detained a group of 120 Eritreans, including 6
women, and threatened to detain and abuse them until they or their families
paid US$3,000 each to allow them to continue their journey to Israel. The
Egyptian authorities failed to conduct any investigations into this organized
trafficking or to arrest anyone in connection with it.
Labor Rights
Strikes, sit-ins, and labor protests increased in number compared to previous
years and spread to new sectors. In April the SCAF passed Law 34 criminalizing
strikes that involve “the disruption of the work of public institutions or public or
private work.” Military police used excessive force on at least 11 occasions to
disperse labor protests and sit-ins. In June military police arrested five workers demonstrating outside the Ministry of Petroleum and a military court sentenced
them to a one-year suspended sentence for participating in the strike. In March
the minister of labor and manpower recognized the right of independent trade
unions to be established through a simple formality of declaration—pending
adoption of a draft law—prepared by the cabinet, that would ease registration
procedures. At least 70 new independent trade unions have declared their
establishment since March.
Women’s Rights
On March 9, military police arrested 20 women as they broke up a sit-in in
Tahrir Square and then beat them on the grounds of the nearby Egyptian
Museum. Military officers took 17 of the group to a military prison and the next
day conducted virginity tests on seven of the women who identified themselves
as unmarried. In response to the public outcry, the SCAF said that it would
“look into the truth of the matter,” but at this writing there had been no
progress in investigating or prosecuting those officers involved.
In May the SCAF amended the Political Rights Law, canceling the women’s
quota of 64 seats in the People’s Assembly that was first used in the November
2010 parliamentary elections, and replacing it with a requirement that each
party must nominate at least one female candidate on its list, a formula likely
to lead to a sharp drop in the number of women deputies.
Egypt’s Sharia-based Personal Status Law—which discriminates against women
in family affairs—applies only to Muslims, while Copts are governed by church
regulations that prohibit them from divorcing, except in cases of adultery. Some
Copts grew more vocal in their demand for a civil law that would give them the
right to divorce.
Key International Actors
When protests broke out in January United States and European Union officials
initially voiced cautious support of the protesters’ right to freedom of assembly
and expression and criticized police violence. As the protests grew, their support for protesters’ demands became stronger and eventually they called upon
President Mubarak to step down.
The US announced in March that it had earmarked $65 million for democracy
and human rights funding in Egypt for 2011, as well as $100 million for economic
development in addition to the roughly $250 million of economic and $1.3
billion in military aid that it had provided in previous years. In May the US also
laid out plans for debt relief. The US Agency for International Development quietly
removed its requirement that local organizations applying for funding be
registered under Egypt’s restrictive Associations Law, provoking criticism from
the Egyptian government. In October US President Barack Obama spoke to Field
Marshall Mohamed Hussein Tantawy, head of the SCAF, and urged him to lift
the Emergency Law and end trials of civilians before military courts.