Egypt
Egypt continued to suppress political dissent in 2010, dispersing demonstrations;
harassing rights activists; and detaining journalists, bloggers, and Muslim
Brotherhood members. Security officers used lethal force against migrants
attempting to cross into Israel and arbitrarily detained recognized refugees.
Despite promising since 2005 to end the state of emergency, the government
renewed Law No. 162 of 1958 in May, but promised to restrict its use. Afterward
authorities released at least 450 individuals detained under the emergency law,
including Bedouin rights defender Mus’ad Abul Fagr and blogger Hany Nazeer.
The government continues to refuse to disclose the number of persons detained
under the emergency law, but Egyptian human rights organizations estimate the
number at around 5,000.
The June 1 elections for the Shura Council, the upper house of parliament, were
marred by reports of fraud and voter intimidation. The High Elections Committee
failed to issue 2,600 of the 4,000 civil society permits requested by the National
Council for Human Rights. People’s Assembly elections took place on November
28 with ineffective judicial supervision.
Freedom of Expression
Security officers targeted bloggers and journalists who criticized government policies
and exposed human rights violations, and activists supporting Mohamed El
Baradei’s Campaign for Change. In March State Security Investigations (SSI)
arrested Tarek Khedr, who had been gathering signatures for the Baradei petition,
and detained him incommunicado at an unknown location for three months. In
April SSI officers arrested publisher Ahmed Mehni for publishing a book, “El
Baradei and the Dream of the Green Revolution.”
In February military intelligence officers arrested Ahmad Mustafa, a blogger and
activist in the April 6 Youth Group, after he blogged about corruption in the
Military Academy. The prosecutor charged Mustafa with “spreading false information”
and transferred the case to a military tribunal, where a judge released him
after 10 days on the condition that he apologize.
In the run-up to the parliamentary elections, the government on October 13
brought all live broadcasts by private companies under control of state television,
and on November 1 issued directives requiring prior permission for every live
broadcast.
Freedom of Assembly and Association
In April security officials cracked down on a peaceful protest–organized by the
April 6 Youth Group–calling for an end to the state of emergency; more than 100
were arrested and 33 were brought before a prosecutor, who charged them with
demonstrating “to overthrow the regime” and released them. In June a number of
peaceful demonstrations expressed outrage at the police killing of Khaled Said in
Alexandria. Security officials beat and dispersed protestors, arresting at least 101
in one day.
In February SSI arrested 16 senior Muslim Brotherhood members, including
deputy leader Mahmud Ezzat and prominent member Essam El Erian. A state
security prosecutor charged them with leading a Brotherhood faction that promotes
violence against the government. The prosecutor dropped all charges and
released them two months later. After the changes to the emergency law came
into effect, the Ministry of Interior released almost all Muslim Brotherhood members
detained under the law. As of November 18, Egyptian security officers had
arrested 487 members of the Muslim Brotherhood in connection with campaigning
for the members of the group who are running as independents in the parliamentary
elections, and held 288 of them in preventive detention on charges of
“membership in an illegal organization.”
Arbitrary Detention and Torture
Officials of SSI appear to have “disappeared” more political detainees in 2010.
Security officers “disappeared” those accused of membership in Islamic groups
for up to three months and also “disappeared” young political activists for several
days. SSI arrested Amr Salah on September 9 and detained him incommunicado
at an unknown location before releasing him 30 hours later. In a rare case of a
long-term disappearance, the whereabouts and well-being of Mohamed Tork, a
23-year-old student, have been unknown since his arrest in July 2009. Family complaints to the prosecutions and the Interior Ministry have received no
response.
Police and security forces regularly engaged in torture in police stations, detention
centers, and at points of arrest. In March SSI arrested Muslim Brotherhood
member Nasr al-Sayed Hassan Nasr, detained him incommunicado for three
months, and tortured him for 45 days during interrogation. They released him
without charge in June. Also in June two policemen beat 28-year-old Khaled Said
to death on an Alexandria street, causing public outrage. Following widespread
protests, a public prosecutor referred the two policemen to court on charges of
excessive use of force, but failed to indict their superior officer; at this writing two
sessions of the trial have taken place.
Fair Trial and Special Courts
The year 2010 saw increases in the number of trials of civilians before military
courts and in reliance on special courts that do not meet fair trial standards. At
this writing the ongoing trial of 25 defendants accused of membership in a terrorist
organization, the so-called Zeitoun trial, has already been marred by the
incommunicado detention of the defendants, their lack of access to counsel, and
allegations of torture that prosecutors did not properly investigate. In August
prosecutors referred former torture victim Imad al-Kabir to trial before a state
security court on charges of possession of an illegal weapon after a neighborhood
brawl.
Labor Rights
Egypt witnessed waves of worker protests and unauthorized strikes throughout
2010, and security officers dispersed several of these using excessive force. In
August a military court tried eight civilian workers on charges of deliberately stopping
production, going on strike, and “disclosing military secrets.” The case followed
an amendment to the Military Justice Code, after workers from the Helwan
Military Factory participated in a protest against factory conditions following
another worker’s death. The court acquitted three of the workers but gave two
others suspended prison sentences and fines, and recommended disciplinary
measures against a further three.
Freedom of Religion
Although Egypt’s constitution provides for equal rights without regard to religion,
there is widespread discrimination against Egyptian Christians, as well as official
intolerance of heterodox Muslim sects. In January gunmen shot dead six Coptic
Christians as they left a Christmas Mass in Nag’ Hammadi, forcing the government
to acknowledge increasing sectarian violence. Prosecutors charged three
men with premeditated murder in this incident, and transferred the case to a
State Security Court. Authorities responded to a subsequent incident of sectarian
violence in March in Marsa Matrouh in a more typical fashion, merely urging the
parties to drop complaints and not pursuing criminal investigations or holding
perpetrators accountable.
In March SSI arrested at least nine members of the Ahmadi faith and detained
them for 80 days on charges of “showing contempt for the Islamic faith.” Security
officials continued to detain eight adherents of the Shia faith under successive
emergency law detention orders, despite government promises to release all
those detained under the law for reasons other than terrorism and drugs, and
despite successive court orders for their release.
Refugees and Migrants
The treatment of refugees and migrants in Egypt deteriorated further. At this writing
Egyptian border guards have shot dead at least 27 migrants attempting to
cross the Sinai border into Israel since the start of 2010. A government official
said that security forces had “only” killed 4 percent of those attempting to cross
in 2009. Egypt denied the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) access to detained migrants, preventing them from making asylum
claims. Egypt also continues to detain UNHCR-recognized refugees and charge
refugees and migrants alike with illegal entry, bringing their cases before military
courts that do not meet international fair trial standards.
In January SSI officials arrested at least 25 Sudanese refugees and asylum seekers
and detained many incommunicado for up to three months. Among them was
Faisal Mohamed Haroun, a recognized refugee from Darfur, who disappeared
when SSI arrested him on January 7 and did not reappear until April 6, when officials brought him before a state security prosecutor. A prosecutor dropped the
charges against Haroun and closed the investigation, but he and at least 14 other
refugees and asylum seekers remain in detention. Egypt has made four attempts,
one successfully, to deport refugees who have been recognized by UNHCR.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
In February the State Council, Egypt’s highest administrative court, voted to ban
women from serving as judges on the council. The decision was overturned by
Egypt’s Constitutional Court, but women are still not represented on the State
Council and are extremely underrepresented in the Egyptian judiciary.
In June a decision by Egypt’s Supreme Administrative Court allowing Christian
divorcees to remarry prompted an outcry from the Orthodox Coptic Church, which
refused to recognize the decision. In July the Supreme Constitutional Court overruled
the administrative court’s decision, and the Coptic Church approved a draft
personal status law for non-Muslims that only allows for divorce under certain
conditions, such as adultery, and denies Christian divorcees the right to remarry.
In August officials arrested an Egyptian doctor for illegally performing female genital
mutilation on a 13-year-old girl who later died from complications arising from
the procedure. The Egyptian government criminalized performing female genital
circumcision in 2008.
Egypt still lacks a legal environment to protect girls and women from violence,
encourage them to report attacks, and deter perpetrators from committing abuses
against them.
Key International Actors
At Egypt’s Universal Periodic Review before the UN Human Rights Council in
February, the government accepted 140 out of 165 recommendations, but rejected
key ones related to abolishing the death penalty, eliminating the crime of “habitual
debauchery,” and permitting NGOs to receive funding without prior authorization.
The United States condemned the renewal of the emergency law and
pressed for the release of detainees. US Senators Russ Feingold and John McCain introduced a Senate resolution with broad support calling for ending the state of
emergency and abuses by security officers, and establishing free elections in
Egypt. Egyptian government lobbyists strenuously opposed the resolution.
European Union Heads of Mission issued a statement in July calling for an impartial
investigation into the police killing of Khaled Said.