Egypt
Egypt stepped up attacks on political dissent in 2007. In March the government
enshrined aspects of emergency rule via amendments to the constitution, providing
a continued basis for arbitrary detention and trials of civilians before military
and state security courts. The government arrested thousands of Muslim
Brotherhood members and tried senior members in military courts. It brought
charges against journalists and bloggers who criticized human rights abuses, and
closed human rights and labor rights organizations.
Emergency Rule
The government renewed the Emergency Law (Law No. 162 of 1958) in April 2006
for an additional two years. Egyptian human rights organizations estimate that
between 4,000 and 5,000 people remain in prolonged detention without charge
under the law. On March 21, 2007, parliament approved changes to article 179 of
the constitution that removed safeguards requiring judicial warrants before
authorities search people’s homes or communications in cases deemed “terrorist-
related.” The president may now send such cases to “exceptional” courts or
military tribunals. On March 26, voters approved these amendments in a referendum
that Egyptian rights monitors and independent media said was marked by
vote-rigging.
Political Violence and Torture
On November 30, 2006, a State Security Emergency Court in Isma`iliyya sentenced
three men to death after convicting them in connection with the October 7,
2004, bombings in and around the resort city Taba. This court, established under
Egypt’s Emergency Law, does not provide the right of appeal; the defendants said
they had been tortured into signing false confessions while held incommunicado.
Human rights organizations received credible reports that security services and
police tortured and mistreated detainees, particularly during interrogations. On
November 7, 2007, Judge Samir Abu al-Mati sentenced two police officers to three
years in prison on charges that they tortured `Imad al-Kabir, a microbus driver detained in January 2006 on charges of resisting arrest. Al-Kabir said that the officers
beat him on the street and then, in a police station, bound and whipped
him, and sexually assaulted him with a stick while another officer filmed the
episode with a mobile phone. On January 9, 2007, Judge al-Mati sentenced Al-
Kabir to three months in prison for “resisting authorities” and assaulting a civil
servant.
On September 4, 2007, a Cairo court acquitted State Security Investigations (SSI)
officer Ashraf Mustafa Hussain Safwat on charges that he tortured to death
Muhammad `Abd al-Qadir, who died in SSI custody in 2003. An autopsy performed
soon after `Abd al-Qadir’s death showed bruises as well as burns on his
mouth, nipples, and penis. A forensic doctor said he had sustained these injuries
shortly before his death.
Egyptian border guards reportedly killed three Sudanese nationals trying to cross
Egypt’s border into Israel. The killings followed a reported informal agreement in
June between President Mubarak and Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert that
Egypt would accept the return of third-country nationals who had crossed the border
illegally into Israel. Egyptian border guards reportedly shot and killed a
woman from Darfur on July 22 and Israeli soldiers reportedly saw Egyptian guards
shoot and beat to death three Sudanese as they tried to cross the border on
August 1. Egypt did not acknowledge killing anyone. In another incident, on
November 10, Egyptian border guards shot and killed an Eritrean national who
was attempting to cross into Israel.
On August 18 Israel returned to Egypt 44 Sudanese, three Ivorians, and one
Somali. Egypt reportedly forcibly returned at least five of the 48 to Sudan on
October 28 after holding the larger group at an unknown location. At this writing,
Egypt continues to hold the remaining 43 in incommunicado detention, refusing
to allow the United Nations or others access to them.
Freedom of Expression
The government jailed numerous peaceful critics over the course of 2007. On
March 12, the Alexandria Court of Appeals upheld a four-year prison sentence against `Abd al-Karim Nabil Sulaiman, a blogger who had criticized Islam and
President Hosni Mubarak.
On May 2, a Cairo criminal court sentenced Al-Jazeera journalist Huwaida Taha
Mitwalli, an Egyptian national, to six months in prison for “possessing and giving
false pictures about the internal situation in Egypt that could undermine the dignity
of the country,” in connection with an Al-Jazeera documentary about torture
in Egypt. The court also fined her 20,000 Egyptian pounds (US$3,518). At this
writing, Mitwalli is free on appeal.
On September 13, a Cairo misdemeanor court sentenced four editors of independent
opposition newspapers, `Adil Hamuda (Al-Fagr), Wael al-Ibrashi (Sawt al-
Umma), `Abd al-Halim Qandil (Al-Karama), and Ibrahim `Issa (Al-Dustur), to a
maximum one year in prison and a US$3,500 fine on charges of publishing “with
malicious intent, false news, statements or rumors likely to disturb public order.”
Freedom of Association
Egypt’s law governing associations, Law 84/2002, gives the government unwarranted
control over the governance and operations of nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs). The law provides criminal penalties for carrying out activities prior
to an NGO’s official authorization and for receiving foreign donations without
prior approval from the Ministry of Social Affairs. It also provides criminal rather
than civil sanctions for activities such as “engaging in political or union activities.”
The prohibitions are broadly framed to discourage legitimate NGO activity.
In April 2007 security officers closed the headquarters and two branches of the
Center for Trade Union and Workers’ Services (CTUWS), which offers legal aid to
Egyptian factory workers and reports on labor-rights issues. Authorities blamed
the CTUWS for inciting labor unrest around the country. On October 12, a court
sentenced the group’s general coordinator, Kamal Abbas, and his lawyer,
Muhammad Hilmi, to a year in prison on criminal libel charges after the CTUWS
magazine published a story about alleged corruption at a youth center whose
board is chaired by a member of the ruling party.
On September 4 the government shut down the Association for Human Rights
Legal Aid, which reports on human rights violations and provides legal assistance to victims, charging that it used funds from abroad prior to getting government
permission.
The Political Parties Law (Law 40/1977), as amended in 2005, empowers the
Political Parties Affairs Committee (PPC), headed by the chair of the ruling
National Democratic Party, to suspend an existing party’s activities if it judges
this to be “in the national interest” and to refer alleged breaches of the law to the
prosecutor general.
The government detained more than 1,000 members of the Muslim Brotherhood,
the banned organization that is the country’s largest opposition group. On June 3,
2007, authorities prevented Egyptian and international human rights organizations
from attending the military trial of 40 leading members of the Muslim
Brotherhood. In January, a Cairo criminal court had dismissed all charges against
16 of the defendants and ordered their immediate release. Security forces rearrested
the men moments after their release, and President Hosni Mubarak
ordered their cases, and those of 24 others, transferred to the military court. At
this writing, the accused are in custody pending the conclusion of their trial.
Ill-Treatment of Street Children
The government periodically conducts arrest campaigns of homeless or truant
street children who have committed no crime. In custody many face beatings,
sexual abuse, and extortion by police and adult suspects, and police at times
deny them access to food, bedding, and medical care. The authorities do not routinely
monitor conditions of detention for children, investigate cases of arbitrary
arrest or abuse in custody, or discipline those responsible. In many cases, the
police detain children illegally for days before taking them to the public prosecutor
on charges of being “vulnerable to delinquency.”
Women’s Rights
Despite reforms, particularly of nationality laws, Egypt’s family and penal laws
still discriminate against women and girls. The penal code does not effectively
deter or punish gender-based violence and police are routinely unsympathetic to
the concerns of victims. A series of well-publicized cases of sexual harassment affecting large groups of women in October 2006 in Cairo’s streets resulted in
hardly any prosecutions, highlighting the government’s tacit acceptance of abuses
against women and girls.
The government took some positive measures in 2007 to advance the rights of
women and girls. On March 14, the Supreme Judicial Council appointed Egypt’s
first group of female judges to the bench. In June, the Ministry of Health issued a
decree that fully criminalizes female genital mutilation, eliminating a legal loophole
allowing girls to undergo the procedure for ostensible health reasons. The
ban followed the death of an 11-year old girl at a private clinic.
Religious Intolerance and Discrimination against Religious
Minorities
Although Egypt’s constitution provides for equal rights without regard to religion,
discrimination against Egyptian Christians and official intolerance of Baha’is and
some Muslim sects continue. Egyptians are able to convert to Islam generally
without difficulty, but Muslims who convert to Christianity face difficulties amending
their identity papers. Baha’i institutions and community activities are prohibited
by law.
In August and October 2007 security agents detained two activists, Muhammed
al-Dereini and Ahmad Sobh, who had promoted the rights of Egypt’s Shia Muslim
minority. At this writing they ere being held in solitary confinement in Tora prison
outside Cairo on charges of “promoting extreme Shia beliefs with the intent of
causing contempt of the Islamic religion” and “spreading false rumors” that could
“undermine trust in security agencies by claiming that prisoners and detainees
died as a result of torture.”
Key International Actors
The US remains Egypt’s largest provider of foreign military and economic assistance.
In 2006 it provided approximately US$1.3 billion in military aid and
US$490 million in economic assistance. In June 2007 the US House of
Representatives’ Appropriations Committee approved an amendment that would
make $200 million of the aid package conditional on efforts to curb police abuse and increase the independence of the judiciary, as well as measures unrelated to
human rights.
In April 2006 the European Parliament voted to make respect for human rights a
priority in negotiations for Egypt on an EU-Egypt Action Plan under the European
Neighborhood Policy, but EU officials have yet to indicate how they plan to do
this. The January 2007 Action Plan agreement made human rights and the participation
of civil society important components of the action plan, but lacked specific
benchmarks.