Egypt
Egypt’s human rights record showed little improvement during 2004.
The government set up a National Council for Human Rights and
appointed several respected independent activists to its board, but serious
issues like routine torture of persons in detention and suppression
of non-violent political dissent remain unaddressed. Emergency rule
continues, providing the basis for arbitrary detention and trials before
military and state security courts. Victims of torture and ill-treatment
include not just political dissenters but also persons detained in ordinary
criminal inquiries, men suspected of engaging in consensual homosexual
conduct, and street children. Nongovernmental organizations are subjected
to stringent controls under the new law on associations, and the
authorities arbitrarily reject the applications of several organizations to
register as NGOs, as required by the law. Women and girls face systematic
discrimination under personal status and other laws, and violence
directed at women and girls frequently goes unpunished.
Emergency Rule
In February 2003, the government extended twenty-two years of continuous
emergency rule for another three years. The Emergency Law,
Law No. 162 of 1958, allows arbitrary arrest and indefinite detention
without trial, and creates an atmosphere of impunity in which torture
and ill-treatment flourish. The government has used the emergency
rule to criminalize political dissent at will, and to refer civilian defendants
to military courts or to exceptional state security courts in which
trials do not meet international fair trial standards. Some seven hundred
alleged Islamist militants who had never been tried or convicted of a
crime were reportedly released during 2004. The Cairo-based Human
Rights Association for Assistance to Prisoners in early 2004 estimated
that the total number of persons then detained without charge for prolonged
periods was around fifteen thousand. The group released a list of sixty-five attorneys who have been held without charge or trial under
the provisions of the emergency law, some for as long as sixteen years.
Torture
Security forces and police routinely torture and mistreat detainees, particularly
during interrogations. Torture in the past was used primarily
against political dissidents, especially Islamists, but in recent years it has
become rife in ordinary police stations as well, affecting citizens who
find themselves in custody as suspects or in connection with criminal
investigations. Torture and ill-treatment are known or suspected to be
the cause of at least seventeen deaths in detention in 2002 and 2003,
including at least three cases at the hands of the State Security
Investigations (SSI) branch of the Ministry of Interior, and additional
cases of deaths in detention were reported in 2004. Ministry of Interior
officials confirmed to Human Rights Watch in February 2004 that there
had not been a single criminal investigation of SSI officials for torture
or ill-treatment in the past eighteen years, and no internal disciplinary
measures were imposed, despite numerous credible allegations of serious
abuse.
Restrictions on Freedom of Association
Egypt’s new law governing associations, Law 84 (2002), severely compromises
the right to freedom of association, giving the government
unwarranted control over the governance and operations of NGOs.
The law, which took effect in June 2003, provides criminal penalties for
“unauthorized” activities, including “engaging in political or union
activities, reserved for political parties and syndicates” (Article 11). The
law also provides for up to six months in prison for receiving donations
on behalf of an NGO without prior ministry approval. Persons carrying
out NGO activities prior to the organization’s formal registration are
liable to a three-month prison term.
NGOs whose applications for registration were initially rejected include
the New Woman Research Center, which raises public awareness of
women’s rights issues, including female genital mutilation and domestic
violence, and the Land Center for Human Rights, which works on economic
and social rights issues in rural areas. The authorities in both
cases said that security agencies did not approve the applications. The
government rejected the application of the Egyptian Association
Against Torture because it listed among its goals “to change Egyptian
legislation in accordance with human rights conventions.” The Ministry
of Social Affairs wrote that civil associations had no legal right to be
“concerned with legislation” and that such activities were unconstitutional.
Egypt also maintains strict controls over political associations. The official
Political Parties Affairs Committee, composed almost entirely of
government officials and currently headed by the chairman of the ruling
National Democratic Party, routinely rejects applications to form new
political parties, based on broadly worded criteria such as whether the
party’s program “constitutes an addition to public life.” On October 27,
2004, the committee, for only the third time since 1977, approved a
new party. Al Ghad (Tomorrow) is headed by independent member of
parliament Ayman Nur. The committee however continued to reject
other applications.
Arrests and Torture of Men for Consensual Homosexual Conduct
Since early 2001, the Cairo vice squad has spearheaded a campaign of
entrapment and harassment that has resulted in the arrest, prosecution,
and conviction of hundreds of men alleged to have had sex with other
men. Officials claim that they are targeting promiscuity and prostitution
(“debauchery”), but the authorities routinely raid private apartments,
wiretap phones, and employ extensive surveillance of and entrapment
via the Internet to round up individuals whose only offence is their
alleged homosexual conduct. Many of those detained endure routine torture and ill-treatment at the hands of security officials. Doctors participate
in torturing these detainees under the guise of collecting forensic
evidence to support the charge of “habitual debauchery.”
Ill-treatment of Street Children
The government periodically conducts mass arrest campaigns of street
children. Typically, the children are homeless, beggars, or truants from
school but have committed no crime. In custody, they often face beatings,
sexual abuse, and extortion by police and adult suspects, and police
routinely deny them access to food, bedding, and medical care. The
authorities do not routinely monitor conditions of detention for children,
investigate cases of arbitrary arrest or abuse in custody, or appropriately
discipline those responsible. In many cases, children are
detained illegally for days before going before the public prosecutor on
charges of being “vulnerable to delinquency.” Police often do not notify
parents about arrests, and children who have fled parental abuse or who
lack guardians have no recourse for assistance.
Women’s Rights
Egypt’s family and nationality laws have seen some reforms in recent
years. However, additional steps are required to amend laws that discriminate
against women and girls, to prosecute gender-based violence,
and to grant women and girls full and equal citizenship rights.
Discriminatory personal status laws governing marriage, divorce, custody,
and inheritance have institutionalized the second class status of
women in the private realm and undermined their legal standing.
Discriminatory divorce laws and policies, for instance, undermine the
ability of many women, including those in abusive relationships, from
ever attempting to seek a divorce and leave others languishing in legal
limbo for years. The penal code does not effectively deter or punish
domestic violence, and police are routinely unsympathetic to the concerns
of battered women and girls. Current governmental policy also denies women the opportunity to become judges. This exclusion of
women from the judiciary is not codified in law but is a matter of practice
that violates Egypt’s constitution and its international obligations
not to discriminate on the basis of gender.
Religious Intolerance and Discrimination against Religious
Minorities
Although Egypt’s constitution provides for equal rights without regard
to religion, discrimination against Egyptian Christians and intolerance
of Baha’is and minority or unorthodox Muslim sects remains a problem.
Egyptian law recognizes conversions to Islam but not from Islam to
other religions. There are credible reports that Muslims who convert to
Christianity sometimes face harassment. Difficulties in getting new
identity papers have resulted in the arrest of converts to Christianity for
allegedly forging such documents. Baha’i institutions and community
activities are prohibited by law. The authorities have detained and prosecuted
individuals adhering to or promoting non-orthodox Islamic sects
on grounds of insulting one of the “heavenly religions”—Islam,
Christianity, and Judaism.
Key International Actors
The United States has long been Egypt’s largest provider of foreign
military and economic assistance, amounting to $1.3 billion in military
aid and $600 million in economic assistance in Fiscal Year 2004. Egypt
hosts the bi-annual Bright Star multilateral military exercises with U.S.
forces, the largest military exercise in the region. The U.S. considers
Egypt to be “an active partner in the global war against terror”: Deputy
Assistant Secretary of State David Satterfield told a Congressional committee
in June 2004 that the two governments “cooperate closely on a
broad range of counter-terrorism and law enforcement issue.”
The Association Agreement between Egypt and the European Union,
signed in June 2001, came into force on June 1, 2004. Although the
agreement is premised on “respect for human rights and democratic
principles,” Egypt’s serious human rights problems do not seem to have
affected its operation. The E.U. is Egypt’s biggest trading partner, currently
taking 40 percent of its exports and providing 34 percent of its
imports.