Egypt
Egypt displayed a heavy hand against political dissent in 2006. In April 2006, the
government renewed emergency rule for an additional two years, providing a continued
basis for arbitrary detention and trials before military and state security
courts. Torture at the hands of security forces remains a serious problem.
After a period of relative tolerance of political opposition and dissent in early
2005, the government reversed course starting in late 2005. In November 2005
the government responded to the Muslim Brotherhood’s strong showing in the
first round of national elections with extensive irregularities and violence by
police and ruling party vigilantes in the subsequent two rounds. It renewed its
crackdown on the Muslim Brotherhood in March 2006, arresting at least 792
members of the banned organization over the following six months. The crackdown
was emblematic of continuing limits on freedom of association and expression
in Egypt.
Emergency Rule
The government renewed the Emergency Law (Law No. 162 of 1958) in April 2006
for an additional two years. The state of emergency has been in effect without
interruption since October 1981. Although President Husni Mubarak, during the
September 2005 presidential re-election campaign, said that he would allow it to
expire, officials claimed the renewal was necessary because they had not yet
drafted what Mubarak termed “a firm and decisive law that eliminates terrorism
and uproots its threats.” Egyptian human rights defenders fear that this legislation
will perpetuate many objectionable features of the Emergency Law. Egyptian
human rights organizations estimate that up to 10,000 people remain in prolonged
detention without charge under the terms of the law.
Political Violence and Internal Security
Three explosions in the Sinai resort town of Dahab killed 23 people and wounded
80 more on April 24, 2006, the third such attack in Sinai resorts in two years.
After the first attack, in which car bombers struck the resort town of Taba in October 2004, authorities carried out mass arbitrary arrests, detaining 3,000 people
for questioning; more than 100 of them remained in detention without charge
at this writing. A devastating series of bombings in Sharm al-Shaikh in July 2006
was followed by another spate of mass arrests. The Egyptian Organization for
Human Rights reported that as of August, 300 people had been detained in connection
with the bombings.
On September 7, 2006, the Emergency Supreme State Security Court in Ismailiyya
sentenced Osama al-Nakhlawi and Mohamad Hussein to death for their alleged
role in the Taba bombings, based on what the defendants said were false confessions
extracted under torture. A third man, who died in a gun battle with police,
was sentenced in absentia. As of mid-November 2006, twelve others were on trial
for their alleged roles in the bombings.
Torture
Human rights organizations continue to receive credible reports that security
services and police routinely torture and mistreat detainees, particularly during
interrogations. On May 25 State Security officers detained Karim al-Sha`ir and
Mohamed al-Sharqawi, badly beat them both, and sexually assaulted al-
Sharqawi. The authorities had detained the two for participating in protests supporting
the Judges’ Club (see below).
In its 2006 annual report, the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights (EOHR)
reported that it documented 34 torture cases in 2005. There are no indications
that the government conducted any criminal investigations of, or imposed any
disciplinary measures against, State Security Investigations (SSI) officials for torture
or ill-treatment of detainees in 2006. The most recent investigation into allegations
of torture by SSI officers was in 1986, despite numerous credible allegations
of serious abuse in SSI custody in the past twenty years.
Freedom of Assembly
Before daylight on December 30, 2005, police used excessive force to disperse
approximately 2,000 Sudanese, including many refugees and asylum seekers,
who had staged a sit-in protest near the offices of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for more than three months. Twenty-seven Sudanese, more
than half of them women and children, were killed, and a 14-year-old boy died a
month later after he was hospitalized for injuries sustained in the melee. Most
demonstrators carrying proof of their status as refugees or asylum-seekers were
released within a few days, and the remainder over the following two months.
In the early hours of April 24, 2006, plainclothes police beat activists who had
staged a sit-in to support senior judges facing disciplinary action after they publicly
criticized election irregularities and campaigned for greater judicial independence.
At subsequent demonstrations police beat dozens of protesters and
detained hundreds more. At a May 11 demonstration, police also assaulted journalists,
including `Amr `Abd-Allah, a staff photographer for the daily Al-Misri al-
Yom, `Abir al-Askari, a writer for the weekly Al-Dustur, Yasir Suleiman, a cameraman
for Al-Jazeera, and Nasri Yusef, a soundman for the network.
Freedom of Expression
On May 24 the state security prosecutor charged Wa’el al-Ibrashi and Hoda Abu
Bakr, reporters for the independent weekly Sawt al-Umma, and `Abd al-Hakim
`Abd al-Hamid, editor-in-chief of the weekly Afaq `Arabia, with defaming Mahmud
Burham, the judge in charge of the electoral commission in the Dakhlia governorate.
Their December 2005 articles included a “blacklist” of initials of judges
that implied Burham was implicated in electoral fraud. The presiding judge twice
postponed their trial, which was still pending at this writing.
On June 26 a local court sentenced Ibrahim `Issa, editor of the opposition weekly
Al-Dustur, and Sahar Zaki, a journalist for the paper, to a year in prison on
charges of “insulting the president” and “spreading false and tendentious
rumors” after they reported on an anti-government lawsuit. At this writing the two
were free, pending a ruling on their appeal.
On July 11, President Mubarak signed an amended version of Egypt’s press law
that left intact provisions allowing the authorities to detain journalists who criticize
the president or foreign leaders, or who publish news “liable…to cause harm
or damage to the national interest.”
The Law on Political Rights (Law 73/1956), revised in 2005, includes criminal
penalties for journalists and publishers convicted of reporting “false information”
intended to affect election results.
Freedom of Association
Egypt’s law governing associations, Law 84/2002, severely compromises the right
to freedom of association, giving the government unwarranted control over the
governance and operations of nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). The law
provides criminal penalties for carrying out activities prior to an NGO’s official
authorization and for receiving donations without prior approval from the Ministry
of Social Affairs. It also provides criminal rather than civil sanctions for certain
other activities, including “engaging in political or union activities, reserved for
political parties and syndicates.” The broad terms in which the prohibitions are
framed discourage legitimate NGO activity.
Egypt maintains strict controls over political associations as well. In July 2005, the
parliament passed government-sponsored revisions to the Political Parties Law
(Law 40/1956) providing that new parties be legally registered automatically
unless the Political Parties Affairs Committee (PPC), headed by the chair of the
ruling National Democratic Party, rejects the application. The revised law also
empowers the PPC to suspend an existing party’s activities if it judges this to be
“in the national interest” and to refer alleged breaches of the law to the
Prosecutor General.
Between March and July 2006 security services detained at least 792 members of
the Muslim Brotherhood, which, though officially banned, is the country’s largest
opposition group, with 88 out of 454 seats in parliament. The crackdown accelerated
in April and May, as members of the Muslim Brotherhood joined secular
activists in street protests in support of judicial independence and fair elections.
Ill-Treatment of Street Children
The government periodically conducts arrest campaigns of homeless or truant
street children who have committed no crime. In custody many face beatings,
sexual abuse, and extortion by police and adult suspects, and police at times deny them access to food, bedding, and medical care. The authorities do not routinely
monitor conditions of detention for children, investigate cases of arbitrary
arrest or abuse in custody, or discipline those responsible. In many cases, the
police detain children illegally for days before taking them to the public prosecutor
on charges of being “vulnerable to delinquency.”
Women’s Rights
Despite recent reforms of Egypt’s family and nationality laws, additional steps are
needed to amend laws that discriminate against women and girls, to prosecute
gender-based violence, and to grant women and girls equal citizenship rights.
Discriminatory personal status laws governing marriage, divorce, custody, and
inheritance have institutionalized the second-class status of women in the private
realm. The penal code does not effectively deter or punish domestic violence, and
police are routinely unsympathetic to the concerns of battered women and girls.
Religious Intolerance and Discrimination against Religious
Minorities
Although Egypt’s constitution provides for equal rights without regard to religion,
discrimination against Egyptian Christians and official intolerance of Baha’is and
unorthodox Muslim sects continue. Egyptians are able to convert to Islam generally
without difficulty, but Muslims who convert to Christianity face difficulties in
getting new identity papers and some have been arrested for allegedly forging
such documents. Baha’i institutions and community activities are prohibited by
law.
Key International Actors
The US remains Egypt’s largest provider of foreign military and economic assistance.
In 2006 it provided approximately US$1.3 billion in military aid and
US$490 million in economic assistance. In June 2006, the US Congress defeated
a proposed amendment that would have cut $100 million from the US aid package
in response to Egypt’s poor human rights record.
In 2006 The Bush administration scaled back its public pressure on the Egyptian
government with respect to human rights and democracy. In a 2005 visit to Cairo,
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice spoke forcefully about the importance of
political reform in Egypt. In 2006, by contrast, official US pronouncements
stressed that change must come from the Egyptian people and government. And
while the US government continued to express concern over human rights abuses
in Egypt, no visible consequences ensued.
In April 2006 the European Parliament voted to make respect for human rights a
priority in its continuing negotiations with Egypt on an EU-Egypt Action Plan under
the European Neighborhood Policy. As of October 2006 negotiations were still
stalled over human rights language. The deadline for reaching an agreement is
January 1, 2007.
Egypt failed to respond to a July 2006 request from the UN special rapporteur on
torture for an invitation to visit the country, a request that has been outstanding
since 1996. In October a Canadian federal court judge ruled that Canadian authorities
could not deport a suspected terrorist, Mahmud Jaballah, to Egypt because
of risk of torture. In late 2005 lawyers from the US Department of Justice said that
`Ala `Abd al-Maqsud Muhamad Salim—an Egyptian detained in Pakistan in 2002,
transferred to Guantanamo Bay, and subsequently declared “No Longer an Enemy
Combatant”—would be released and returned to Egypt. In January they filed a
motion claiming that, based on new information, there were no longer “immediate
plans to transfer, repatriate, or release him.” Salim’s Washington-based attorneys
had asked that Salim be held in Guantanamo because of fears that he
would face torture in Egypt. According to briefs filed by his lawyer, when Egyptian
officials visited him at the Guantanamo facility, they threatened to take him
somewhere where people “will never see [him] again.”