Eritrea
Eritrea remains a country in shackles. Arbitrary arrests and detention, torture,
extrajudicial killings, severe restrictions on freedoms of expression and worship,
and forced labor are routine. Despite government efforts to veil abuses from
scrutiny, Eritrean refugees provided consistent firsthand accounts of widespread
abuses. Thousands of people fled the country in 2009 due to Eritrea’s serious
human rights violations and indefinite military conscription.
Arbitrary Detention, Enforced Disappearances,
and Deaths in Custody
Thousands of Eritreans are estimated to be incarcerated in known and secret
detention facilities.
In September 2001 the government arrested eleven high-ranking government officials
who had publicly criticized President Isayas Afewerki’s leadership and called
for democratic reforms in the wake of the 1998-2000 border war with Ethiopia.
Simultaneously, the government closed all private newspapers and arrested their
editors and publishers. None of those prisoners has been charged or brought to
trial. The government ignored two judgments from the African Commission on
Human and People’s Rights and a finding by the United Nations Working Group
on Arbitrary Detention criticizing the detentions and ordering the detainees’
release. The leaders and journalists were reported to be held in incommunicado
detention in remote prisons. In 2009 an opposition website published purported
electronic copies of death certificates (but without official seals) for nine of the
eleven leaders; four of the journalists have been presumed dead.
These prominent cases represent only a fraction of the number of people arbitrarily
detained since September 2001. Thousands of less prominent people have
been arrested and incarcerated without charge, trial, or opportunity to appeal and
without access to family, lawyers, or independent prison monitoring organizations.
A few prisoners were freed without explanation and warned not to speak to
anyone about their detention. Most prisoners, however, remain in jail indefinitely.
Among those reported to have been arrested in 2009 were five members of the
staff of Radio Bana, a radio station sponsored by the Ministry of Education, two journalists for the government radio system, and twelve residents of a town who
allegedly helped their children escape to Ethiopia to avoid conscription.
Deaths in custody are common as a result of ill-treatment, torture, starvation, and
denial of medical care. Many other detainees have “disappeared,” their whereabouts
unknown. In 2009 a reliable website reported the deaths of four prisoners
held because of their religious beliefs; three died after torture, the fourth after
denial of treatment for malaria.
The Eritrean government is also responsible for extrajudicial killings. Some deliberate
killings occurred during detention, others when prisoners attempted to
escape confinement or flee the country. The government maintains a “shoot-tokill”
policy for anyone caught trying to cross the country’s borders. Five teenage
boys were reportedly shot at close range after having been captured trying to
cross the border to Ethiopia in December 2008. Four were killed; the fifth managed
to escape to Ethiopia after the others fell on him and he faked death.
Torture and Ill-Treatment
Torture and ill-treatment in detention are routine in Eritrea. Former detainees told
Human Rights Watch that detention almost always included severe beatings,
often leading to permanent physical damage. In addition to beatings, punishment
entailed being hung up by the arms from trees, tied up in the sun in contorted
positions for hours or days, and subjected to mock drowning.
Poor detention conditions often amount to cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment.
Prisoners were held in a variety of known and secret detention facilities, in
unlit underground bunkers, or in shipping containers where they were subjected
to extreme temperatures of well over 40°C (104°F) during the day and freezing
conditions at night. People who escaped detention reported poor nutrition and
starvation rations in most facilities. Medical care is minimal at best. In December
2008, 27 political prisoners, including three journalists arrested in 2001, were
moved to the Dahlak archipelago in the Red Sea where prisoners were held in
searing heat in subterranean isolation cells. In 2009 four prisoners held in underground
cells for five years without access to daylight because they were “unrepentant”
for their religious beliefs were reportedly blinded by sudden glare when they were brought to the surface; over the years there have been similar reports
about other prisoners released from underground cells.
Freedom of Expression and Association
Since the private press was destroyed in 2001 no independent newspaper has
been allowed to publish. No political organization other than the ruling People’s
Front for Democracy and Justice (PFDJ) was permitted. Eyewitnesses told Human
Rights Watch that actions as innocuous as signing a petition for changes in educational
policy result in imprisonment and beatings. Asking a critical question at
a government-convened forum could have the same consequences. According to
an expatriate website security officials arrested three internet users in late 2008
for allegedly connecting with opposition sites, and internet café owners were
warned that they must control internet use.
The government prohibits the formation of private associations not under its leadership
and control, including labor unions and self-help organizations.
Freedom of Religion
Since 2002 it is unlawful to practice any religion except the four official faiths:
Eritrean Orthodox, Islam, Catholic, and Lutheran. Despite government statements
that other religious groups could apply for registration, no applications have ever
been granted.
Security forces indefinitely detain members of “illegal” religions. Persons arrested
for their religious affiliations and practices suffer the same torture and abuse as
other prisoners, usually with the expressed intent of compelling them to
renounce their faith. In late 2008 and June 2009 the government arrested 25
Jehovah’s Witnesses, some in their 70s and 80s, bringing the number of
Jehovah’s Witnesses in detention to 61, three of whom have been detained since
1994. In December 2008 members of unrecognized churches and of a modernizing
wing of the Orthodox Church were victims of a wave of arrests. The patriarch
of the Orthodox Church, deposed by the government in 2006, remained under
house arrest.
Forced Labor
Eritrea’s population is the world’s second most militarized according to the
International Institute of Strategic Studies. By law, all able-bodied adult Eritreans
are required to perform 18 months of national service; in practice national service
is prolonged indefinitely. National service conscripts are paid a pittance and are
often used as cheap, involuntary labor on projects for the personal benefit of
ranking civilian and military leaders: they are also sometimes used to provide
forced labor to implement development projects. Abuse of conscripts, including
torture, is common.
Relations in the Horn of Africa
Relations with Ethiopia remain tense. Ethiopia refused to accept the border
demarcated by a Border Commission established under an armistice agreement
ending the countries’ 1998-2000 war. Although the commission demarcation was
to be binding, Ethiopia still occupies Badme, the village where the war started,
which falls on the Eritrean side of the demarcated border. In 2009 a Claims
Commission established under the armistice agreement awarded Ethiopia US$174
million and Eritrea US$161 million in war-related damages. The Commission
found both sides had raped civilians, imprisoned civilians under harsh conditions,
mistreated prisoners of war, and engaged in other violations of international
law. It also reaffirmed its earlier holding that Eritrea had violated international
law in 1998 by attacking Badme, then under Ethiopian administration.
Eritrea continued to occupy a portion of Djibouti, which it entered in 2008,
despite a unanimous UN Security Council resolution demanding that it withdraw
its forces by the end of February 2009. The Security Council had taken no further
action by late 2009.
A UN team monitoring a UN arms embargo on Somalia accused Eritrea of smuggling
weapons and up to US$500,000 per month to insurgents fighting the transitional
Somali government. Eritrea denied violating the embargo.
Key International Actors
Foreign aid, while modest, grew in importance as expatriate Eritreans increasingly
protested government repression by refusing to remit Eritrea’s two percent tax on
foreign incomes. One of Eritrea’s few international investment projects, a mining
development at Bisha in western Eritrea, jointly owned by a Canadian firm and
the Eritrean government, is to begin production in late 2010.
Eritrea receives little development aid. In 2009 the European Commission agreed
to provide €122 million between 2008 and 2013, principally for food production
and “infrastructure rehabilitation.” China in 2009 agreed to provide an undisclosed
number of volunteers for a year in agriculture, information technology, and
sports. UN assistance was about US$12 million. Abu Dhabi will lend US$19.9 million
for unspecified infrastructure projects. In late 2008 Iran’s Bank for Export
Development reportedly extended US$35 million in credit. Eritrea was also the
recipient of loans and grants in undisclosed amounts from Qatar and Libya.
The United States provided no direct assistance because President Isayas,
angered by US support of Ethiopia, refused its aid, and because the United States
accused Eritrea of providing arms to the al Shabaab insurgency in Somalia. The
US threatened to place sanctions on Eritrea but to date had not implemented the
threat.
The African Union called for sanctions on Eritrea in May as a result of its role in
Somalia.