Eritrea
Torture, arbitrary detention, and severe restrictions on freedom of expression,
association, and religious freedom remain routine in Eritrea. Elections have not
been held since Eritrea gained independence in 1993, the constitution has
never been implemented, and political parties are not allowed. There are no
institutional constraints on President Isaias Afewerki, now in his twentieth year
in power.
In addition to ongoing serious human rights abuses, forced labor and indefinite
military service prompt thousands of Eritreans to flee the country every year.
Access to the country for international humanitarian and human rights organizations
is almost impossible and the country has no independent media. In recognition
of the “continued widespread and systematic violation of human rights,”
the United Nations Human Rights Council (HRC) in 2012 appointed a special
rapporteur on Eritrea.
Forced Labor and Indefinite Military Service
National service keeps most young Eritreans in perpetual bondage. Although a
decree mandating compulsory national service limits service to 18 months, in
practice the government prolongs service indefinitely. National service conscripts
are poorly fed and receive inadequate medical care. Eritrean refugees
describe them as emaciated. Their pay (less than US$30 per month) is insufficient
to provide sustenance for a family. Female conscripts report sexual abuse
by commanding officers. In early 2012, President Isaias acknowledged that
national service members and government employees are so poorly paid that
they essentially “have been fulfilling their duties apparently without pay” for
the past 20 years.
Conscripts allegedly provided forced labor to construct infrastructure at the
Bisha gold mine, Eritrea’s only operating mine and a major source of revenue.
Although the Eritrean government had agreed with the mine’s principal international
owner that no national service conscripts would be allowed to work at
Bisha, it required use of a ruling party-controlled contractor, Segen Construction. Segen makes widespread use of conscript labor and there is evidence
that it did so at Bisha as well. Escapees told Human Rights Watch in 2012
that they worked 12-hour shifts and endured dangerously inadequate food and
housing conditions. They did not complain because, as one escapee told
Human Rights Watch, “we were afraid for our lives.”
Recent escapees report that conscripts are also involuntarily assigned to public
works projects, the ruling party’s commercial and agricultural enterprises, farms
owned by high-tanking military officers, and the civil service.
On average, over 1,500 Eritreans flee the country monthly despite shoot-to-kill
orders to border guards and immense dangers along escape routes.
Unaccompanied minors also flee; the office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) reported over 1,100 unaccompanied minors
living in one Ethiopian refugee camp in 2012. Not only are ordinary citizens
defecting, so are those the government had privileged with authority, foreign
travel, and publicity.
In October, two senior air force pilots defected to Saudi Arabia in the plane normally
used by Isaias. Earlier, Eritrea’s standard bearer at the 2012 Olympics
asked for asylum along with three teammates. Repression in Eritrea, he said,
“forces people to do things that may cost them their life, but at the end of the
day sometimes there isn’t a choice.” Two prominent musicians were also reported
to have fled abroad.
Torture, Death, and Prolonged Incarceration without Trial
Eritreans are routinely subject to imprisonment without explanation, trial, or any
form of due process. Incarceration often lasts indefinitely. Senior government
officials and journalists, arrested in 2001 after they raised questions about
President Isaias’ rule, remain jailed incommunicado. Defecting guards report
that most of these officials have died.
According to accounts from those who have fled, conditions in Eritrea’s detention
facilities are abysmal, with minimal food and medical care. Prisoners are
held in underground cells and shipping containers, subject to boiling and freezing
temperatures. Many prisoners die from the harsh conditions.
Torture and other abuses during detention are routine. Punishments include
mock drowning, being hung from trees by the arms, being tied up in the sun in
contorted positions for hours or days, being doubled up inside a rolling tire,
having handcuffs tightened to cut off circulation, as well as frequent beatings.
Restrictions on Freedoms of Expression and Association
The Isaias government closed the independent press in 2001 by revoking their
licenses and arrested its editors and publishers. Based on former guards’ testimony,
Reporters without Borders reported that four journalists died in prison in
2012, including two imprisoned since 2001. Journalists working for government
agencies, arrested since 2009 for allegedly providing information to Western
nongovernmental organizations and governments, remain incarcerated incommunicado.
All domestic media are controlled by the government. Two of four internet service
providers prohibit access to sites unapproved by the government and persons
using internet cafes are subject to surveillance. Eritrea periodically jams
satellite radio transmissions by opposition groups. For the sixth year, the
Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) in 2012 named Eritrea “one of the world’s
most censored countries.”
Defectors describe a climate of intense fear in the country. To question authority,
much less criticize it, can result in imprisonment and worse. Gatherings of
more than seven unrelated people are forbidden and formation of NGOs is prohibited.
Political organization is restricted to the ruling party, the Peoples Front
for Democracy and Justice (PFDJ). Unions are prohibited, except for PFDJ subsidiaries.
Interference with Religious Beliefs and Practices
The Isaias government controls all religious activity. The government acknowledges
a right to exist only for four “recognized” religious groups, the Orthodox
Church, Sunni Islam, Roman Catholicism, and the Evangelical (Lutheran)
Church. Other religious groups have applied for recognition since 2002 but the
government has never acted on their applications. It deposed the Eritrean Orthodox Church patriarch in 2005, after he protested government interference
in church affairs. He remains under house arrest in ill health. The government
selected his successor and also appointed the current Sunni mufti, the chief
Islamic legal authority.
Members of “unrecognized” religions are arrested, held in oppressive conditions,
and sometimes tortured to compel them to recant their faith. Jehovah’s
Witnesses are especially victimized. Twelve were arrested in 2012 while attending
a funeral, and one died in 2012 because of heat prostration in an underground
cell. Currently, 56 Jehovah’s Witnesses are incarcerated, including 11 in
their 70s and 80s and 3 conscientious objectors held since 1994.
Retaliation against Family Members
Since at least 1995, Eritrea has imposed a 2 percent income tax on Eritrean
expatriates (retroactive to 1992) to be eligible for consular services, such as
notarizing powers of attorney, certifying educational decrees, and issuance of
travel documents. Relatives in Eritrea of expatriates who refuse to pay the tax
have been threatened with loss of business licenses or have been prevented
from selling property because of a missing notarial. Canada and Germany prohibit
collection of the tax, while the Netherlands and others are considering a
ban.
Families of national service conscripts who abscond are fined 50,000 Nakfa
(US$3,333), a crushing sum for many in a country where annual per capita
income is 8,040 Nakfa (US$536).
Horn of Africa Relations
Eritrea is under UN sanctions for trying to destabilize neighboring states by arming
rebel groups and for having attacked Djibouti.
Relations with Ethiopia remain strained 12 years after the end of a border war
between the two countries. Ethiopia occupies territory that a Boundary
Commission, established by the parties’ armistice agreement, awarded to
Eritrea, a decision that Ethiopia has ignored. A United Nations Security Council (Security Council) Monitoring Group on Eritrea and Somalia reported in July 2012
that Eritrea continued to violate Security Council resolutions “by deploying
Ethiopian armed opposition groups via Somali territory.” Earlier in the year,
Ethiopia launched brief cross-border raids against rebel groups that Ethiopia
claimed Eritrea was training and arming. Eritrea mobilized but did not retaliate
militarily. In October, Ethiopia released 75 Eritrean prisoners of war (POWs) captured
in the raids; seven POWs asked for asylum.
Eritrea invaded Djibouti in 2008 but persistently denied it had done so until
2010 when, succumbing to international pressure, it pulled back its troops and
agreed to Qatari mediation of border issues. Even so, Eritrea refused to address
Djibouti’s claims that it was holding 19 POWs. In 2012, three escaped POWs told
the UN Monitoring Group they had been among eight POWs held by Eritrea. All
suffered from malnutrition and denial of medical treatment for wounds. As a
result, the other five prisoners were too weak to escape; two had gone blind,
one had lost use of an arm.
The UN Monitoring Group reported it had found no evidence of direct Eritrean
support for Al-Shabaab in Somalia in 2012.
Key International Actors
At the end of 2011, Eritrea expelled nearly all remaining foreign nongovernmental
aid groups (a small UN aid mission remains). Although President Isaias
asserts the expulsions promote his policy of self-reliance, they reinforce his policy
of isolating the Eritrean population from foreigners. Earlier in 2011, Isaias
accused international NGOs of having a “pathological compulsion for espionage.”
In late 2011, Eritrea cancelled a multi-year European Union assistance program.
No country that had previously provided loans or grants to Eritrea announced
new financial assistance in 2012. Isaias repeatedly accuses the CIA of conspiring
against Eritrea. The CIA, he said in 2012, “is preoccupied with targeting the
key aspects of the Eritrean economy.”
One source of foreign exchange comes from extensive smuggling of weapons
and Eritrean refugees to Sudan and Egypt by Eritrean security forces, according
to the UN Monitoring Group.