Eritrea
Eritrea is among the most closed countries in the world; human rights conditions
remain dismal. Indefinite military service, torture, arbitrary detention, and
severe restrictions on freedoms of expression, association, and religion provoke
thousands of Eritreans to flee the country each month. Among those fleeing
in 2013 were the minister of information—whose 85-year-old father, brother,
and 15-year-old daughter were immediately arrested—and the deputy head of
economic affairs of the People’s Front for Democracy and Justice (PFDJ),
Eritrea’s sole political party that controls most major domestic commercial
enterprises.
In October, more than 300 Eritrean refugees drowned when a boat bringing
them to Europe capsized near Lampedusa, Italy. According to the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), over 305,000 Eritreans
(more than 5 percent of the population) have fled during the past decade.
Eritrea has no constitution, functioning legislature, independent judiciary, elections,
independent press, or nongovernmental organizations; it does not hold
elections. All power is concentrated in the hands of President Isaias Afewerki,
in office since 1991.
In a rare sign of domestic dissent, on January 21, 2013, a group of soldiers with
tanks, led by a brigadier general and three colonels, briefly occupied the
Ministry of Information (“Forto”) and forced the director of government television
to read a statement demanding the release of political prisoners and
implementation of the 1997 constitution. The transmission was cut after a few
sentences and the protestors surrendered when other military units failed to
deliver expected support. According to credible reports, 60 or more high-level
alleged collaborators were arrested, several of whom are now dead, some by
suicide. Among them is said to be Abdella Jaber, PFDJ’s chief administrator.
Despite repeated requests, Eritrea denied the United Nation special rapporteur
on Eritrea, Sheila Keetharuth, a visa. In a 2013 report based on refugee interviews,
she concluded that “basic tenets of the rule of law are not respected.”
Following her report, the Council “strongly condemn[ed]” Eritrea’s “continued
widespread and systematic violations of human rights and fundamental
freedoms.”
Indefinite Conscription and Forced Labor
Eritrea conscripts all men and unmarried women into “national service.”
Although Eritrean law limits national service to 18 months, most conscripts
serve for much of their working lives. Conscripts are routinely used as forced
labor on essentially civilian jobs. In 2013, Human Rights Watch reported that
conscripts were used by a state-owned construction company, Segen
Construction Co., engaged by Canadian mining firm Nevsun Resources, to build
infrastructure at its Bisha gold mine. Former conscripts described working long
hours for minimal food rations, primitive lodging, and wages too low to sustain
themselves, much less their families. They were not allowed to leave the work
site.
Children as young as 15 are inducted and sent for military training, according to
recent interviews by refugee agencies. They and other recruits are regularly subject
to violence and ill-treatment for raising questions or for other perceived
infractions. Beatings, torture, and prolonged incarcerations are common.
Women are subject to sexual violence from military commanders, including
rape. No mechanisms for redress exist.
Since mid-2012, all men in their 50s, 60s, and 70s are compelled to perform
militia duty: carrying military weapons; reporting for training; and going on periodic
patrols.
Arbitrary Arrest, Prolonged Detention, and Inhumane
Conditions
Thousands of ordinary citizens are arrested and incarcerated without charge,
trial, or opportunity to appeal, and without access to family, lawyers, or independent
prison monitoring organizations. While some are freed without explanation
and warned not to speak about their detention, most prisoners remain in
jail indefinitely. Until the “Forto” incident in January 2013, the most prominent
prisoners were 21 government officials and journalists arrested in September
2001 and still held incommunicado 12 years later. None have been formally
charged, much less tried; former guards who have left Eritrea report that half of
them have died.
Former detainees describe brutal detention conditions. Death in captivity is not
unusual. Many prisoners disappear, their whereabouts and health unknown to
their families. Former prisoners describe being confined in vastly overcrowded
underground cells or shipping containers, with no space to lie down, little or no
light, oppressive heat or cold, and vermin. Medical treatment is poor or nonexistent.
Food consists of a piece or two of bread a day, occasional servings of
lentils or beans, a cup of tea, and insufficient water. Beatings and torture in
detention are common; wardens are able to impose any physical punishment
they devise. A former interrogator told Human Rights Watch he ordered beatings
of prisoners until they confessed to whatever they were accused of; they
were then beaten to implicate others.
Eritreans who were forcibly repatriated to Eritrea from Middle Eastern countries
and then fled again told Human Rights Watch in 2012 they had been incarcerated
in crammed cells and beaten shortly after their return. They displayed scars
from beatings and electric shocks. One escapee reported that several prisoners
in his group of returnees died from their beatings.
Freedom of Religion
Since 2002, the government has jailed and physically abused citizens for practicing
religions other than the four government-controlled or recognized religions—
Sunni Islam, Ethiopian Orthodox, Catholicism, and Lutheranism. Most
arrests occur in private houses but many also occur during private Quran or
Bible study at colleges or at national service training centers.
Some prisoners are offered release on condition that they sign statements
renouncing their faith. Three deaths during captivity were reported by foreignbased
religious monitoring groups in 2013, but given the difficulties of obtaining
information, the number may be higher.
The octogenarian Orthodox patriarch, whom the government deposed in 2007,
remains under strict house arrest.
Reprisals against Family Members
Family members of some draft evaders or national service deserters have been
punished by fines of Nakfa 50,000 (US$3,333) and by detention, in a country
with, according to the World Bank, per capita income in 2012 of $560.
Families are also punished when relatives living abroad fail to pay a 2 percent
tax on foreign income, retroactive to 1992, or to contribute “national defense”
fees. Punishments include revocation of resident families’ business licenses,
confiscation of houses and other property, and refusal to issue passports to
allow reunification of children and spouses with overseas parents or spouses.
Freedom of Expression and Association
The government maintains a complete monopoly on domestic sources of information
since it closed all local press outlets in 2001 and arrested their staff.
Telephone and Internet communications are monitored. Eritrea expelled the last
accredited foreign correspondent in 2008. Although foreign language transmissions
are accessible, the government jammed Al Jazeera in early 2013 and has
long jammed overseas transmissions from Eritrea diaspora stations. At least six
government journalists arrested in 2009 and 2011 remain in solitary confinement
without trial.
No independent civil society organizations are permitted. Labor unions remain
a government monopoly.
Key International Actors
Eritrea’s government has few allies. Relations with Ethiopia remain hostile following
the 1998-2000 border war and Ethiopia’s failure to implement an international
boundary commission’s ruling awarding disputed territory to Eritrea.
Eritrea has been under United Nations sanctions since 2009 because of its support
for armed Islamic insurgents in Somalia and its refusal to release Djibouti
prisoners of war captured during a 2008 invasion of Djibouti’s border territory.
A UN monitoring group reported in July 2013 that although Eritrea had made a
tactical decision to court the Somali government, it fostered regional destabilization
by “maintain[ing]close links to a network of warlords and other spoilers in Somalia,” including at least two Al-Shabaab leaders. Eritrea refuses to
acknowledge that it holds Djibouti prisoners of war although three escaped in
late 2011. Following the report, the UN Security Council retained sanctions and
renewed the monitoring group’s mandate for a year.
Eritrea’s relationship with Qatar, which had been mediating Eritrea-Djibouti border
issues, frayed in 2013 and Qatar apparently stopped funding a large Red
Sea resort. The Yemeni Foreign Ministry complained that Eritrea seized Yemeni
fishing vessels in international waters and detained their crews. In October,
Eritrea released 81 Yemeni fishermen held for 18 months without trial; Yemen
claims another 519 remain jailed.
In June 2013, Canada expelled Eritrea’s Toronto consul for continuing to solicit
“national defense” fees (and the 2 percent tax) from Eritrean expatriates
despite Canadian demands that he stop because the practice violated UN sanctions.
Eritrea has warmer relations with China. The Chinese government provided a
630 million Yuan ($10.3 million) loan in 2013 to construct canning, food coldstorage,
and PCV pipe manufacturing plants. The projects will be run by SFECO,
a Shanghai Construction Co subsidiary. SFECO bought a 60 percent share of the
Zara gold exploration site near Asmara in 2013 and has contracts to repair and
enlarge Asmara’s power plant. Lengthy power shortages occurred in 2013.
In earlier years, Eritrea expelled all nongovernmental aid agencies. In 2013, the
UN and Eritrea agreed on a four-year $188 million “cooperation framework.”
The UN will provide $50 million and attempt to raise the remaining $138 million
from donor countries for capacity building, food security, environmental
improvements, and social services. Providing assistance presents “acute coordination
challenges,” according to the UN Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, because of “access restrictions on international staff”
and the “absence of up-to-date information” from the government.
The Bisha mine, a major hard currency generator, was expected to earn less in
2013 as production shifted from gold to copper and copper prices fell. Eritrea
issues no budget; government finances are opaque and secret. President
Afewerki nevertheless complained in 2013 that “international organization” statistics
(ostensibly referring to the World Bank and International Monetary Fund)
“are based on speculation and aimed at serving vested political interests” and
“should be dismissed.”