Eritrea
Plagued by famine and heightened tensions with Ethiopia over their
joint border, Eritrea has remained a highly repressive state in which dissent
is suppressed and nongovernmental political, civic, social, and
minority religious institutions are largely forbidden to function.
Suppression of Political Dissent and Opinion – Arbitrary Arrest
and Illegal Detention
Eritrea is a one-party state. No political party other than the People’s
Front for Democracy and Justice (PFDJ) is allowed to exist. No group
larger than seven is allowed to assemble without government approval.
No national elections have been held since Eritrea won its independence
from Ethiopia in 1993. Elections were canceled in 1997 because of
a border war with Ethiopia. They were canceled again in 2001, two
years after the war ended. They remain unscheduled. Regional non-partisan
assembly elections were held in 2004 but the offices involved have
little power.
The government has refused to implement the 1997 constitution, drafted
by a constitutional assembly and ratified by referendum, that respects
civil and political rights. The constitution contains restraints on the
arbitrary use of power. It provides for writs of habeas corpus, the rights
of prisoners to have the validity of their detention decided by a court,
and fair and public trials. The constitution protects freedom of the
press, speech, and peaceful assembly. It authorizes the right to form
political organizations. It allows every Eritrean to practice any religion.
Many individuals arrested in 2001 and many of those arrested since are
held incommunicado in secret detention sites. In September 18, 2001,
the government arrested eleven leaders of the PFDJ after release of a
letter they sent to President Issayas Afewerki, criticizing his leadership
and asking for democratic reform, including implementation of the 1997 constitution. At the same time, the government arrested publishers,
editors, and reporters and closed all nongovernmental newspapers
and magazines. In the years since, the government has arrested scores of
Eritreans because of their ties to the dissidents, their perceived political
views, or their deviation from government dogma.
Although President Issayas has called the detainees traitors and spies,
the government has been unwilling to bring them to trial or to accord
them any semblance of due process. Under the Eritrean penal code,
detainees should not be held for over thirty days without charges. In
late 2003, the African Commission held Eritrea to be in violation of
Articles 2, 6, 7(1), and 9(2) of the African Charter on Human and
Peoples’ Rights and urged the immediate release of the eleven political
leaders arrested in 2001.
Arbitrary arrests and prolonged imprisonment without trial have not
been limited to political leaders and the press. The government detains
about 350 refugees who fled Eritrea but were involuntarily repatriated
in 2002 (from Malta) and in 2004 (from Libya). They are held incommunicado
in detention centers on the Red Sea coast and in the Dahlak
islands. Faced with the grim prospect of incommunicado detention and
torture, a planeload of 75 Eritreans being forcibly returned to Eritrea
from Libya commandeered their Libyan transport and forced it to land
in Sudan.
Since the closing of the private press in 2001, the government has
maintained a monopoly on access to information. In 2003, the government
posted guards to prohibit access to two information centers operated
by the United Nations Mission to Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE).
It then asked UNMEE to close both centers on the grounds that they
were unnecessary and that some of their materials were not suitable for
young children. In 2004 the government expelled the British
Broadcasting Corporation correspondent, the sole resident foreign journalist.
In 2004, as part of its campaign to isolate its citizens and to prevent the
flow of information, the government placed all Internet cafes under
government supervision, thereby controlling access. The government
claimed that it was acting to protect Internet users and to prevent access
to “pornographic” sites. The government also imposed travel restrictions
on foreign diplomats, requiring government approval for travel
outside Asmara. It prevented UNMEE from using the most accessible
route to service its observers and troops in central and western Eritrea
along the border with Ethiopia, a road that passes through urban centers
and could bring Eritreans into contact with the outside world.
Suppression of Minority Religions
Members of Pentecostal Christian churches have been arrested for possession
of bibles or for communal worship. The government closed all
religious institutions in May 2002 except for those affiliated with the
Eritrean Orthodox, Roman Catholic, and Eritrean Evangelical
(Lutheran) churches and Moslem mosques. At the end of 2004, there
were reliable reports that over 300 members of unrecognized churches
were incarcerated. Many of those arrested were beaten or otherwise tortured
during their arrest or while in captivity. Jehovah’s Witnesses have
been especially mistreated. Some have been detained for a decade for
refusing to participate in national service even though the official penalty
is incarceration for no more than three years. In September 2004, the
United States designated Eritrea as a country of “particular concern”
for its intolerance and mistreatment of adherents of minority religions.
The Eritrean government defended its practices on the ground that the
unrecognized churches had failed to register, but the United States
State Department report noted that some of the religious groups had
applied for registration in 2002 and that the government had issued no
registration permits since the registration regime was imposed.
Compulsory Military Service
All Eritreans between the ages of eighteen and forty-five must perform
two years of compulsory national service. In practice, however, the time
for service is repeatedly prolonged. There are frequent sweeps to round
up evaders. During a massive roundup in November 2004, security
forces shot into hundreds of detainees being held in an overcrowded
military prison camp (Adi Abeito) near Asmara, killing as many as twenty
and injuring dozens more, after some detainees managed to collapse
part of the compound wall. The government often uses national service
as retribution for perceived criticism of government policies. Those
accused of evading service are frequently tortured.
Prison Conditions and Torture
Due to the volume of arrests, prisoners are often held in improvised
cargo containers. At Aderser, near Sawa, prisoners are held in underground
cells. At least six high school students were also reported incarcerated
in solitary confinement in underground cells at Sawa in 2003. In
addition to psychological abuse, escapees report the use of physical torture
at some prisons. Prisoners have been suspended from trees, arms
tied behind their backs, a technique known as almaz (diamond).
Prisoners have also been placed face down, hands tied to feet, a torture
known as the “helicopter.” Prison visits by international human rights
organizations are prohibited.
Relations with Ethiopia
The 1998-2000 war with Ethiopia ended with an armistice agreement
by which Eritrea and Ethiopia agreed to binding arbitration of their
border. In 2003, Ethiopia announced that it rejected the decision of the
independent boundary commission, largely because it awarded the village
of Badme, the flashpoint for the war, to Eritrea. (See Ethiopia).
The Eritrean government uses the possibility of renewed conflict as a justification for postponing elections and for prolonging national service.
Eritrea has increasingly lashed out against the international community
for not compelling Ethiopia to implement the border commission
decision. Throughout 2004, it adamantly refused to meet with the
special envoy appointed by the U.N. Secretary General to attempt to
resolve the border impasse.
Key International Actors
UNMEE maintains just under four thousand troops along the twentyfive-
kilometer-wide armistice buffer line between the two countries. In
September 2004 the Security Council voted to extend UNMEE’s mandate
through March 2005.
The international community’s assistance consists of food and other
humanitarian assistance. Because of Eritrea’s woeful human rights
record, it receives little in other types of assistance. The European
Union (E.U.) announced in 2003 that it would provide Eritrea an
unstated sum under the European Initiative for Democracy and Human
Rights, in addition to a ?96 million five-year aid package (until 2007)
for social and economic development. The E.U. said that its assistance
would depend on the government’s willingness to improve civil liberties.
The United States has withheld non-humanitarian assistance, largely
because Eritrea has refused to release two American Embassy local
employees arrested in 2001. (After three years, no charges have been
filed against them.) While the official U.S. position is one of keeping its
distance, U.S. defense department officials, including the secretary of
defense, frequently praise the Eritrean government for its support in
fighting terrorism. 