Eritrea
The Eritrean government’s tyranny became more ruthless in 2005. Rule by
force and caprice remains the norm, as the government aggressively moves to
intimidate the population and to isolate it from the outside world.
The border dispute with Ethiopia continues to fester and is used by the government
to justify repressive policies. The government of Eritrea seriously
interfered with the United Nations’ ability to monitor troop movements
along the border in 2005 and threatened to resume war unless Ethiopia
accepts an independent Boundary Commission decision which it considers
favorable.
Arrests, Imprisonment and Torture
Suppression of Political Dissent and Opinion, Arbitrary Arrest, and Illegal
Detention
No political party other than the People’s Front for Democracy and Justice
(PFDJ) is allowed to exist in Eritrea and no national elections have been held
since the country won its independence from Ethiopia in 1993. Using the
excuse that Eritrea remains at war, the government has refused to implement
the 1997 constitution, drafted by a constitutional assembly and ratified by
referendum, that respects civil and political rights.
The government has arrested thousands of citizens for expressing dissenting
views, practicing an “unregistered” religion, avoiding endless military conscription,
attempting to flee the country, or on suspicion of not fully supporting
government policies. Mass arrests began in September 2001 with the
detention of eleven leaders of the PDFJ who questioned President Isayas
Afewerki’s erratic and autocratic leadership. The government arrested publishers,
editors and reporters and closed all independent newspapers and
magazines. The arrests continued in 2005 and included three leaders of government-
affiliated labor unions, the only unions allowed to operate in the
country.
Most of those arrested are held indefinitely in incommunicado detention.
None are formally charged, given access to lawyers or brought to trial. Some
prisoners are released but are warned not to talk about their imprisonment or
treatment. Some manage to escape and flee the country. As of September
2005, the World Food Program reported that ten thousand fleeing Eritreans
are in refugee camps in Ethiopia, two hundred of whom fled since January,
with two hundred to three hundred more arriving monthly.
Prison Conditions and Torture
Prisoners are often held in secret prisons, including underground cells.
Because of the large number of arrests, less prominent prisoners are packed
into cargo containers or in other overcrowded prisons. In addition to psychological
abuse, solitary confinement and abysmal conditions, escapees report
the use of physical torture. Prisoners are suspended from trees with their
arms tied behind their backs, a technique known as almaz (diamond).
Prisoners are also placed face down, hands tied to feet, a method of torture
known as the “helicopter.”
Military Conscription Roundups and Arrests
Eritreans between the ages of eighteen and forty-five must perform two years
of compulsory national service. In practice, however, the time for service is
repeatedly prolonged. There are frequent giffas (sweeps) to round up
“evaders”—some of whom have already fulfilled their lawful obligations. The
government often uses national service as retribution for perceived criticism
of government policies. Those accused of evading service are frequently tortured.
Conscripts are often used for public works projects, such as road
building. There have been persistent reports that they are also used as laborers
on party, military, and officers’ personal farms.
In September 2005, the Italian newspaper Corriere della Sera published photographs
taken by a diplomat in Asmara who witnessed a killing by security
forces of a young man wounded during a giffa. According to the diplomat, a
security agent shot the man at close range, execution-style, while the victim
lay in the road. The government denied the diplomat’s account and photographs, quoting several persons who lived in the area who asserted that the
only body in the street was that of a drunk.
In mid-2005, the government for the first time made hundreds of arrests of
family members of children who had not reported to the military training
camp at Sawa for their final year of high school or who otherwise did not
report for national service. Although the government issued denials, foreign
diplomats confirmed the arrests.
Three separate immigration decisions in 2005, by an appellate court in the
United States (Nuru v. Gonzales, 404 F.3d 1207 (9th Cir.), the European
Court of Human Rights (Said v. the Netherlands, Application no. 2345/02),
and the United Kingdom Immigration Appeal Tribunal (Appeal No: Eritrea
CG [2005]UKIAT 00106), granted asylum to Eritreans fleeing conscription
on the grounds that national service is used as a measure of political repression
and that anyone forcibly returned to Eritrea is likely to be tortured.
Religious Persecution
The government closed all religious institutions in May 2002 except for
those affiliated with the Eritrean Orthodox, Roman Catholic, Eritrean
Evangelical (Lutheran) churches and Sunni Muslim mosques. Members of
Pentecostal Christian churches are arrested for possession of Bibles or for
attending communal worship. In 2005, the government intensified its persecution
of adherents of unregistered religions by raiding wedding parties at
private homes. Some clergy of a modernizing wing of the Eritrean Orthodox
church were also arrested in 2005. Many of those arrested are beaten or tortured
during their arrest or while in captivity.
Jehovah’s Witnesses have been especially mistreated. Some have been
detained for a decade for refusing to participate in national military service
even though the official penalty is incarceration for no more than three years.
The Eritrean government defends its practices on the ground that the unrecognized
churches have failed to register, but some religious groups applied
for registration in 2002 and have not been registered. The government announced in April 2005 that it soon would register the Seventh Day
Adventist denomination, but as of November 2005, it had not done so.
In September 2005, the United States imposed sanctions after having earlier
designated Eritrea as a “country of particular concern” for its religious persecution.
Suppression of Human Rights Groups
Neither domestic nor international human rights organizations are allowed
to operate in Eritrea. Indeed, almost no domestic civil organizations are
allowed to function except as an appendage to the government or to the
PDFJ. In June 2005, the government imposed new restrictions on nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) providing assistance to the country. The
restrictions require annual registration and prohibit any NGO with less than
U.S.$2 million in capital (if foreign) or U.S.$1 million (if domestic) from
being registered.
No non-governmental sources of information exist except word-of-mouth.
Foreign broadcasts are periodically jammed.
Relations with Ethiopia
The 1998-2000 war with Ethiopia ended with an armistice agreement by
which Eritrea and Ethiopia agreed to binding arbitration of their border. An
international peace-keeping force, U.N. Mission in Eritrea-Ethiopia
(UNMEE), maintains troops and observers along the twenty-five-kilometerwide
armistice buffer line between the two countries. The force and the zone
are based on the armistice agreement that suspended the conflict.
In 2003, Ethiopia announced its rejection the decision of the independent
Boundary Commission, largely because it awarded the village of Badme, the
flashpoint for the war, to Eritrea. The Eritrean government uses the possibility
of renewed conflict as a justification for postponing elections, prolonging
national service, and for its repressive policies. Eritrea has lashed out against
the international community for not compelling Ethiopia to implement the border commission decision. Eritrea insists that the border be demarcated
without conditions and Ethiopia insists that, while it accepts the Boundary
Commission’s decision in principle, demarcation can proceed only after bilateral
discussions. No serious international pressure has been applied to
Ethiopia to honor its commitments.
In 2005, President Issayas threatened to resume the war if the impasse is not
resolved. In October 2005, the government declared that UNMEE helicopters
and night patrols could no longer be used to monitor the border. By
November, both Eritrea and Ethiopia had substantially increased troop levels
and armament near the border.
Key International Actors
In January 2005, the African Union adopted a 2003 African Commission on
Human and Peoples’ Rights report finding Eritrea’s arrest of the eleven government
officials in 2001 and their continued incarceration in violation of the
African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights. In April, the Inter-
Parliamentary Union unanimously concluded that continued detention was a
gross violation of fundamental rights under Eritrean and international law,
and inferred from the conflicting justifications given by the government that
the accusations against the eleven were groundless.
The international community’s assistance consists of food and other humanitarian
assistance. The European Union announced in 2003 that it would provide
Eritrea an unstated sum under the European Initiative for Democracy
and Human Rights, in addition to a ? 96 million five-year aid package (until
2007) for social and economic development. The European Union said that
its assistance would depend on the government’s willingness to improve civil
liberties but has taken no action to withdraw assistance in the face of government
intransigence.
With minor exceptions, the United States withholds non-humanitarian assistance
to Eritrea because it has refused to release two American embassy local
employees arrested in 2001. (After four years, no charges have been filed
against them.) In August 2005, Eritrea arrested two more local embassy staff, allegedly for human trafficking. In early summer, the government demanded
that the U.S. Agency for International Development cease operations in the
country without offering a reason, other than that the government was
uncomfortable with HIV/AIDS programs and wanted assistance to be provided
directly to the government. In September, the United States imposed a
partial denial of arms-export licenses on Eritrea for its religious persecution.
This sanction is more symbolic than real because the United States exports
few arms to Eritrea. The Eritrean ministry of defense issued a statement calling
the sanction part of a U.S. Central Intelligence Agency plot to “instill
chaos” in Eritrea and to rescue the Ethiopian government. Despite the official
U.S. position of keeping its distance, high-level U.S. Defense department
officials frequently visit and praise the Eritrean government for fighting terrorism.