Eritrea
In less than two decades of independence, the government of President Isayas
Afewerki has established a totalitarian grip on Eritrea. Increasing numbers of citizens
are fleeing oppression and seeking refuge in neighboring countries and
beyond.
President Isayas’s government controls all levers of power: political, economic,
social, journalistic, and religious. A constitution approved by referendum in 1997
remains unimplemented. No national election has ever been held, and an interim
parliament has not met since 2002. The judiciary exists only as an instrument of
control. The press is entirely government-owned. No private civil society organizations
are sanctioned; all are arms of the government or the sole political party,
the People’s Front for Democracy and Justice (PFDJ). International human rights
organizations are denied entry.
Isayas uses Ethiopia’s failure to permit demarcation of the border with Eritrea as
the excuse to justify his repressive rule, claiming that the country must remain on
a war footing. In 2008 he said that elections will not be held for decades because
they polarize society “vertically.” He declared he will remain in full control until
Eritrea is secure, “as long as it takes.”
Suppression of Free Expression
Dissent in any form has been ruthlessly suppressed since 11 PFDJ leaders were
arrested in September 2001 for questioning the president’s leadership. They
remain detained without charge or trial in a remote maximum-security prison in
solitary confinement. The independent press was destroyed in 2001 and its editors
and publishers, except those who managed to flee, remain detained. In 2008
Reporters Without Borders ranked Eritrea last of 173 countries on its Press
Freedom Index. An Asmara-based British reporter was expelled in 2008 after he
refused a demand from the Ministry of Information for the names of sources for
his report that veterans of the war of independence complained about life in
Eritrea. More than 40 community leaders were detained in September 2008 for no
apparent reason other than that they had complained about Isayas’s economic
policies at public meetings.
Prison Conditions and Torture
Detention conditions are harsh. There are generally no trials or terms of confinement;
detention lasts as long as the government chooses. No independent monitoring
organization has access to Eritrean prisons. Former detainees and guards
report that prisoners are packed into unventilated cargo containers under extreme
temperatures or are held in dark and cramped underground cells. Torture is common,
as are indefinite solitary confinement, starvation rations, lack of sanitation
and medical care, and hard labor. Of 31 political leaders and journalists arrested
in 2001, nine are reported to have died. Other deaths in captivity have also been
reported. For example, the family of a founder of the Eritrean Liberation Front—an
armed pre-independence group—who was arrested in 2005, learned of his death
in jail in 2008 only when called to collect his body.
Military Conscription and Arrests
Under a 1995 decree, all men between ages 18 and 50, and women between 18
and 27, must serve 18 months of military service. In fact, men serve indefinitely
and boys under 18 years of age increasingly report being conscripted. In 2008 the
World Bank estimated that 320,000 Eritreans are in the military. Conscripts are
used as labor on infrastructure and projects benefitting military commanders.
Working conditions are severe. Dozens of conscripts have died from intense heat,
malnutrition, and lack of medical care; female conscripts are often victims of
rape.
Eritreans flee the country by the thousands despite “shoot-to-kill” orders for anyone
caught crossing the border. When Eritrea deployed troops to the border and
clashed with Djiboutian forces in early 2008, at least 40 soldiers deserted. A
refugee camp in northern Ethiopia became so cramped in 2008 that the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees opened two new camps to accommodate
new arrivals. Thousands of Eritreans escape through Sudan to Egypt and
Libya despite efforts by Sudanese officials and Eritrean intelligence agents to
return truckloads of people. Over 2,500 Eritreans arrived in Israel, mostly by way
of Egypt, in the first nine months of 2008. In June 2008 Egypt forcibly returned
about 1,200 refugees to Eritrea. Although women with children were soon released, single women and most men were incarcerated at Wi’a, a notorious military
camp near the Red Sea.
In 2008, President Isayas claimed that international reports of increasing Eritrean
refugees are deliberate distortions and that defections are caused by an “orchestrated,
organized operation financed by the CIA.”
Unable to staunch the flow of escapees, the government uses collective punishment
to extort money. Once the government identifies those who have evaded or
fled service, it fines their families at least 50,000 nakfa (US$3,300); if the family
cannot pay, it imprisons family members or seizes their land. No law authorizes
either practice.
Religious Persecution
The government permits members of only Orthodox Christian, Catholic, and
Lutheran churches and traditional Islam to worship in Eritrea. Although four other
denominations applied for registration in 2002, none has been registered.
Members of unregistered churches, especially Protestant sects, are persecuted.
Over 3,000 members of unregistered churches are incarcerated. Many are beaten
and otherwise abused to compel them to renounce their faiths. Some are
released after a month or two, but others are held indefinitely. Youths who
protested confiscation of religious books at a military training school in 2008
were locked into shipping containers.
“Recognized” religious groups have not been spared. In 2006 the government
removed the 81-year-old patriarch of the Eritrean Orthodox Church after he
refused to interfere with a renewal movement within the church. He has been in
solitary confinement since May 2007. Members of the renewal movement have
been arrested and abused in the same fashion as members of non-recognized
churches. In 2008 the regime revoked the exemption from military service of most
Orthodox priests.
The government has also interfered with the Roman Catholic Church. It has taken
over church schools, health clinics, and other social service facilities. Since
November 2007 it expelled at least 14 foreign Catholic missionaries by refusing to
extend their residency permits.
Relations with Neighboring Countries
Tensions with Ethiopia remain high. Ethiopia has not implemented the 2002 border
demarcation recommended by the Border Commission established under an
armistice agreement that Ethiopia and Eritrea signed at the end of their 1998-
2000 war. The commission’s decision was supposed to be binding, but Ethiopia
refuses to permit demarcation to the extent that the demarcation awards the village
of Badme, the flashpoint of the war, to Eritrea.
In July 2008 the United Nations disbanded a peacekeeping force that had been
patrolling the border. Eritrea had heavily restricted the force’s activities by denying
it access to fuel and to large sections of the border, and the opportunity to
engage in aerial observation. Heavily armed Ethiopian and Eritrean troops are
now within meters of each other.
As in previous years, in 2008 a UN team monitoring an arms embargo on Somalia
accused Eritrea of smuggling weapons to insurgents fighting the Somali transitional
government and Ethiopian troops in Somalia. Eritrea hosts a faction of the
Somali armed opposition led by Hassan Dahir Aweys, as well as several Ethiopian
armed opposition groups, consistent with Eritrea’s policy of supporting armed
groups fighting the Ethiopian government.
In early 2008 Eritrea launched border incursions against Djibouti. On June 10, the
Eritrean military opened fire on Djiboutian troops after Djibouti ignored an ultimatum
to return Eritrean troops, including officers, who had deserted. The clash
resulted in 35 deaths and dozens of wounded, according to a UN investigation.
Although the UN did not receive access to Eritrea to investigate the incursions, it
concluded that Eritrea was the aggressor.
Key International Actors
Eritrea depends heavily on remittances from Eritreans living abroad, including a 2
percent tax on foreign incomes. Because of Eritrea’s repressive policies, remittances
have fallen, from 41 percent of GDP in 2005, to 23 percent in 2007.
As a result, Eritrea still depends on substantial foreign aid despite Isayas’s policy
of self-sufficiency. In 2008, the European Union announced it will provide €115 million between 2008 and 2013. The World Bank announced US$29.5 million in
grants for electrification and for early childhood health and education.
The United States provides no direct assistance partly because Isayas, angered by
US support of Ethiopia, refuses its aid. Nevertheless, the US contributed US$3.1
million through UNICEF and other channels. The US did not in 2008 declare
Eritrea a state sponsor of terrorism as it had earlier threatened to do because of
Eritrea’s support of Somali groups the US regards as “terrorists.” However, in
October the US government did ban arms sales to Eritrea on the basis that it is
“not fully cooperating with anti-terrorism efforts.”
Despite Eritrea’s efforts to encourage financial assistance from Iran, China, and
Middle Eastern countries, funding from those sources remains modest.
A 60 percent Canadian and 40 percent Eritrean government-owned gold-mining
venture in Bisha, western Eritrea, is scheduled to begin in 2010.
Eritrea’s human rights record is due to be reviewed under the Universal Periodic
Review mechanism of the UN Human Rights Council in December 2009.