Eritrea
Since 2001 the government of President Isayas Afewerki has carried out an
unremitting attack on democratic institutions and civil society in Eritrea by arresting
political opponents, destroying the private press, and incarcerating anyone
thought to challenge the government’s policies. Almost no civil society institutions
survive but the assault continued in 2006 on religious practitioners, military
service evaders, and staff of international agencies.
A constitution approved by referendum in 1997 has never been implemented. No
national elections have been held since independence in 1993. No opposition
political party is allowed to exist. No independent labor organizations are permitted.
Nongovernmental organizations have been systematically dismantled and
their assets confiscated; those still operational are closely monitored. The government
controls all access to information.
The border dispute with Ethiopia that led to the devastating 1998-2000 war continues
to fester, a circumstance the government uses to justify repressive policies.
Ethiopia has demanded “dialogue” with Eritrea about the border in the
Badme sector (where the war began) before it will comply with the independent
boundary commission decision on border demarcation, but Eritrea, having
accepted the April 2002 commission decision, rejects further talks before full
demarcation. In 2006 the threat of war resuming between Ethiopia and Eritrea
waned temporarily, but Eritrea continued arming rebel forces in parts of Ethiopia.
Eritrea denies reports by the United Nations and United States that in 2006 it
sent arms and military trainers to assist the Islamic Courts movement that has
taken power in Somalia’s capital and is strongly opposed to Ethiopia.
Suppression of Political Dissent and Free Expression
Governing party and government leaders and journalists arrested in 2001 as
alleged traitors, spies, and foreign agents continue to be held incommunicado in
undisclosed prisons. In 2006 a website issued a detailed but unconfirmed report
asserting that 31 prisoners, including the leaders and journalists, were being held
in isolation cells in a remote jail built expressly to hold them. The report claimed
that nine of the 31 had died in captivity (one by suicide).
Absent an independent press and with foreign broadcasts periodically jammed,
Eritreans seldom have access to information other than from government-run
media outlets. The government also takes pains to avoid information filtering out
of the country. There are no domestic human rights groups; and no international
human rights organizations are allowed to operate in Eritrea.
Freedom of Religion
The government closed all religious institutions in May 2002 except those affiliated
with the Eritrean Orthodox, Roman Catholic, and Eritrean Evangelical
(Lutheran) churches and with traditional Islam. Although the government claimed
it would register other churches, it had not done so as of November 2006 despite
having had applications pending for more than four years. Some religious groups
have not applied, fearing that disclosing membership rolls will endanger their
members. The government is reported to have confiscated all assets of the Kale
Hiwot (Baptist) Church in 2006, including orphanages and kindergartens, even
though the church had applied for registration.
In 2006 the government arrested members and clergy of religious groups that had
not filed for registration, raiding homes during worship, including wedding ceremonies.
Several hundred are in detention, and recantation of church membership
is often imposed as a condition for release.
Jehovah’s Witnesses have been especially mistreated. Some have been detained
for more than a decade for refusing to participate in national military service even
though the official penalty is a prison term of no more than three years (Eritrea
does not provide for alternative service). Jehovah’s Witnesses are precluded from
government employment and from receiving many government services, including
business licenses.
Religious persecution has not been limited to minority religions. The Orthodox
patriarch was placed under house arrest in 2006 and his lifetime appointment
was rescinded after he questioned the arrest of three reformist bishops. He had
already been stripped of administrative functions in 2005 in favor of a government-
appointed lay administrator.
Military Conscription Roundups and Arbitrary Arrest of Family
Members
Eritrean men between the ages of 18 and 50 must perform two years of compulsory
national service. In addition to military duties, conscripts are used for public
works projects, but there have been repeated reports that they have also been
used as laborers on military generals’ personal properties. Spurred by the rigors
and abuses of the national service system, draft-age Eritreans and high school
seniors have been fleeing the country in the thousands over the past five years or
have gone into hiding. Refugee agencies estimated that each month in 2006
about 700 Eritreans fled to Sudan and another 400 to Ethiopia.
Since mid-2005 the government has been arresting family members when a conscript
fails to report for service. Relatives can buy their release by forfeiting the
equivalent of about US$3,500, a huge penalty in a country where, according to
the World Bank, the annual per capita income is around $220; there were reports
in 2006 that the amount to be forfeited had doubled.
Prison Conditions, Torture, and Ill-Treatment
Ongoing political and religious persecution and the clampdown connected to
evasion of national service have contributed to thousands of people being
detained. Most of those arrested are held incommunicado indefinitely without
formal charge or trial. Torture has frequently been reported. Detention facilities
are severely overcrowded—because of the large number of arrests, less prominent
prisoners (such as adherents to unregistered religious groups) are sometimes
packed into cargo containers, located so as to be unbearably hot or cold.
Other harsh detention conditions include starvation rations, lack of sanitation,
and hard labor. Psychological abuse can include indefinite solitary confinement.
Information on abusive prison conditions emerges despite frequent warnings to
prisoners who are released not to talk about their imprisonment or treatment.
Freedom of Movement
Eritreans must have exit visas to leave the country. These are rarely granted to
men of military age. In 2006 government officials and members of sports teams
defected when abroad, as others had in previous years. To discourage defections,
the government reportedly began requiring the posting of bonds equivalent to
US$7,000 for participants in sports teams traveling outside the country.
The government imposed internal travel restrictions in 2006 on all foreign nationals,
requiring permits to travel beyond Asmara.
Key International Actors
An international peacekeeping force, the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea (UNMEE) maintains troops and observers in a 25-kilometer-wide buffer line
between the two countries. The force and the zone are based on the agreement
suspending the conflict. In late 2005 the Eritrean government placed severe
restrictions on UNMEE’s patrols and grounded helicopter surveillance flights,
despite the UN Security Council’s strong objections. In 2006 the government periodically
arrested UNMEE local staff, releasing some after a short period but keeping
others jailed. It declared five UNMEE personnel persona non grata, accusing
them of aiding Eritrean nationals to escape to Ethiopia. Faced with Eritrean belligerency
and Ethiopian obstinacy, the Security Council in 2006 reduced the
UNMEE force by about a third, to 2,300.
Because of Eritrea’s woeful human rights record, it receives little other than
humanitarian assistance. In 2005-06, the government cut the number of free food
aid recipients from 1.3 million to 70,000 to promote self-reliance through a “foodfor-
work” program. In August 2006 the European Commission, which had appropriated
€6 million for assistance through UN agencies, stated that it would
protest the selling of food aid without consultation and might ask Eritrea to repay
€2.4 million for the cost of the food.
The United States withholds non-humanitarian assistance in part because Eritrea
has refused to release or bring to trial US Embassy local employees arrested in
2001 and 2005. USAID operations ended in 2005 when the government demanded
that the local USAID office close. In 2006 the United States maintained the partial denial of arms export licenses first imposed in 2005 because of the government’s
religious persecution. It also imposed travel restrictions on Eritrean
diplomats and consular officials in retaliation for restrictions placed on US officials
in Asmara.
In 2006 the Eritrean government expelled six Italian aid NGOs and confiscated
their equipment and supplies; it also told Mercy Corps, Concern Worldwide, and
the Agency for Co-operation and Research in Development (ACORD) to leave.
Other aid NGOs, including two Italian ones, have been allowed to continue operations.
China’s president promised economic assistance when President Isayas traveled
to Beijing early in 2006, but no major initiatives have been announced at this
writing.