Morocco/Western Sahara
Morocco continues to present a mixed picture on human rights. It has made great
strides in addressing past abuses and allowed considerable space for public dissent
and protest in recent years. But authorities, aided by complaisant courts,
continue to use repressive legislation to occasionally punish peaceful opponents
and the police use excessive force to break up demonstrations, especially in outlying
areas.
Controls were particularly tight in the restive and disputed Western Sahara region,
which Morocco administers as if it were part of its national territory. A pro-independence
movement known as the Polisario Front (Popular Front for the
Liberation of the Saguia el-Hamra and Rio de Oro) contests Moroccan sovereignty
and demands implementation of a stalled UN plan for a referendum on self-determination
for the Sahrawi people.
Several hundred suspected Islamist extremists arrested in the weeks after the
Casablanca bombings of May 2003 continue to serve prison terms, despite a
series of royal pardons that freed a few hundred Islamist prisoners. The remaining
prisoners held hunger strikes during the year to demand their freedom or a review
of their convictions, and improvements in prison conditions. Many of those
rounded up in 2003 had been held in secret detention for days or weeks and subjected
to mistreatment, and sometimes torture, while under interrogation, and
then convicted in unfair trials.
Reforms to the family law, enacted in 2004, raised the minimum age of marriage
for women from fifteen to eighteen, made the family the joint responsibility of
both spouses, rescinded the wife’s duty of obedience to her husband, and placed
the practice of polygamy under strict judicial control. Concerns remain that these
reforms are being implemented at a slow pace.
Child labor is widespread, despite the Labor Code’s ban on children under 15
working. Young girls working as live-in servants in private homes are especially
vulnerable to abuse, including sexual abuse, and frequently work one hundred
hours a week without access to education or adequate food and medical care.
Authorities rarely punish employers who abuse child domestics, and labor inspectors are not authorized to enter private homes. The government introduced
draft legislation in 2006 to regulate employment conditions for domestic workers
but, as of early November, the draft did not provide an adequate enforcement
mechanism accessible to children.
The Justice System and Legal Reforms
Police are rarely held accountable for human rights violations. However, authorities
told a visiting UN delegation in May 2006 that two policeman were awaiting
trial for having caused the death of Hamdi Lembarki, a Sahrawi who died from
blows to the head on October 30, 2005, during a turbulent period in el-Ayoun. A
new law on torture entered into force in February, providing prison terms for state
agents guilty of torturing or ill-treating persons in custody.
In cases with a political color, courts routinely denied defendants a fair trial,
ignoring requests for medical examinations lodged by defendants who claim to
have been tortured, refusing to summon exculpatory witnesses, and convicting
defendants solely on the basis of apparently coerced confessions.
For example, in December 2005, a court in El-Ayoun convicted seven Sahrawi
human rights activists in connection with the sometimes-violent protests that had
broken out sporadically in the region since the previous May. The evidence linking
the seven to acts of violence was dubious and in some cases appeared fabricated.
Authorities appear to have targeted these Sahrawis because of their
human rights activism and outspoken pro-independence views. The seven got
prison terms of up to two years but by April all had been released.
In another instance of justice denied—one that seems to involve personal scoresettling
rather than political repression—Casablanca businessman Mourad
Belmâachi entered his third year in pretrial detention on charges of stealing documents
and altering them illegally in an effort to evade creditors. After emerging
from police interrogation in June 2004, Belmâachi immediately demanded a medical
examination, claiming his confession had been obtained under torture, but
judicial authorities did not act on this request. Since then, judges have refused to
release him pending trial, without justifying this refusal.
Freedom of Association and Assembly and Movement
Authorities generally tolerate the work of the many human rights organizations
active in Rabat and Casablanca. They also generally do not hamper foreign
human rights organizations visiting Morocco, and often respond to their letters of
concern. However, in the Western Sahara, surveillance is tighter, and harassment
of domestic and foreign rights workers more common.
Most types of public assemblies require authorization from the Interior Ministry,
which can refuse permission if it deems them liable to “disturb the public order.”
This discretion is exercised more often when the demonstrators’ agenda is critical
of government policies. Although many of the frequent public protests in Rabat
run their course undisturbed, baton-wielding police have broken up others with
brutality. For example, they used force to disperse a small sit-in on July 6, 2006,
in front of parliament in Rabat called to protest recent violations of the right of
assembly.
Police repression of public protests was fiercer in the Western Sahara than elsewhere,
and involved a pattern of excessive force against demonstrators, some of
whom threw rocks and Molotov cocktails.
Authorities continued to restrict foreign travel for some Sahrawi activists,
although such measures have decreased overall in recent years. As of early
November, authorities had yet to return the passports they confiscated from nine
activists whom they had blocked from traveling to Geneva in 2003 to participate
in UN human rights activities.
Press Freedom
Media criticism of the authorities is often quite blunt, but is nevertheless circumscribed
by a press law that provides prison terms for libel and for expression critical
of “Islam, the institution of the monarchy, or the territorial integrity.” A 2004
law liberalized broadcast media but requires foreign media seeking licenses for
stations inside Morocco to “scrupulously respect the values of the monarchy and
its heritage in terms of Islam and territorial integrity.” Authorities blocked access
to certain pro-Polisario websites, explaining to a visiting UN delegation that they
controlled online material to prevent attacks on “territorial integrity.”
Since mid-2005, a series of prosecutions of independent weeklies, the most outspoken
and critical sector of the Moroccan news media, showed the continuing
limits on press freedom. Courts convicted at least four weeklies, or their journalists,
on criminal charges of libel, publishing “false news,” or “insulting” a foreign
head of state, and were trying a fifth for “undermining” the institution of the
monarchy. An appeals court on April 18 confirmed a record 3.1 million dirham (US
$356,500) libel judgment against Le Journal Hebdomadaire (“The Weekly
Journal”). A Brussels-based research institute said Le Journal had defamed it by
saying that its report on the Western Sahara was so one-sided that it gave the
impression of having been commissioned by the Moroccan government. The
weekly said it would have to close if forced to pay the fine.
Counterterrorism Measures
There were persistent but unconfirmed media reports throughout the year that
Morocco had agreed to receive detainees secretly transferred by Western countries,
for harsh interrogations by Moroccan intelligence agents. Moroccan authorities
denied these reports categorically.
On September 14, 2006, Francesca Longhi, lawyer for Italian citizen Abou el-
Kassim Britel, testified before a temporary committee of the European Parliament
that her client had been arrested in Pakistan in 2002 and then secretly flown in a
private plane “under CIA aegis” to his native Morocco, where police tortured him
under interrogation. Britel was freed after nine months in detention without
charge but then rearrested in 2003 and sentenced to a long prison term on terrorism
charges. Binyam Mohammed, an Ethiopian-born detainee at the US-run
Guantanamo facility, claimed through his lawyer that American agents transferred
him in 2002 from Pakistan to Morocco, where interrogators tortured him, before
he was transported to US custody in Afghanistan and then Guantanamo.
Acknowledging Past Abuses
On November 30, 2005, Morocco’s Equity and Reconciliation Commission (ERC),
launched in 2004 by King Mohamed VI, issued its report into grave human rights
violations committed between 1956 and 1999, stimulating taboo-breaking discussions
of past repression. The ERC provided an official acknowledgement of past repression, gave a long-overdue voice to victims, and elucidated many individual
cases. However, non-cooperation by public officials prevented it from resolving
other cases. And despite ERC recommendations on ending impunity, authorities
took no steps to bring to trial those implicated in past abuse, including some who
continue to hold high government posts. During 2006, in accordance with its
mandate, the ERC worked on determining the level of compensation that the state
would pay to past victims.
Key International Actors
Morocco is an important ally of the United States because of its cooperation in
fighting terrorism, the 2004 signing of a bilateral free-trade agreement, and its
generally pro-West policies. In June 2004, the United States designated Morocco
“a major non-NATO ally,” thus easing restrictions on arms sales. In public comments,
US officials emphasized these facets of the bilateral alliance and spoke
rarely about human rights problems, even though the State Department reports
on human rights accurately reflected the range of rights violations in Morocco and
the Western Sahara.
An association agreement has been in effect between Morocco and the European
Union since 2000. Morocco is the leading beneficiary of MEDA funds, the EU’s
main aid program for its Mediterranean partner countries. Morocco received 1.25
billion euros in grants over the past decade; the program for 2005-2006 was budgeted
at 275 million euros. EU public comments on Morocco’s human rights situation
are rare. A bilateral subcommittee on human rights, governance, and democratization,
was due to convene for the first time in November.
France is Morocco’s leading trade partner and the leading provider of investments
and public development aid. French officials made almost no public comments
on human rights in Morocco during 2006.
The UN High Commissioner for Human Rights dispatched a delegation in May to
examine human rights conditions in the Moroccan-administered Western Sahara
and the Polisario-administered Sahrawi refugee camps in Tindouf, Algeria. After
negotiating the easing of a tight Moroccan security presence, the delegation was
able, in its own words, “to meet with whomever they deemed useful.” It concluded, “The Sahrawi people are not only denied their right to self-determination but
equally are severely restricted from exercising a series of other rights, and especially
rights of particular importance to the right of self-determination, such as the
right to express their views about the issue, to create associations defending
their right to self-determination and to hold assemblies to make their views
known.” The delegation said it was unable to collect sufficient information about
human rights conditions in the Tindouf camps, but called closer monitoring of
rights conditions there and in the Moroccan-controlled areas “indispensable.”