MFIF::F 8E; W<JK<IE S8?8I8
Responding to the pro-democracy Arab Spring movements and to pro-reform
demonstrations in Morocco, King Mohammed VI proposed in June constitutional
amendments with substantial human rights guarantees but few significant
curbs on the monarch’s own powers. The electorate voted the amendments into
law in July.
The new constitution recognizes Amazigh, the Berber language, as an official
language and prohibits torture, inhuman, and degrading treatment; arbitrary
detention; and enforced disappearances. It also requires any person who is
arrested to be informed “immediately” of the reason for his arrest, and to enjoy
the presumption of innocence and the right to a fair trial. However at this writing
the amendments had yet to transform Morocco’s decidedly mixed human
rights performance.
Freedom of Assembly, Association, and Expression
Inspired by popular protests elsewhere in the region, Moroccans began marching
on February 20 to demand sweeping political reforms. The marches—usually
spearheaded by the youthful, loosely-organized February 20 Movement for
Change and backed by other political and civil society forces, including the
powerful Islamist Justice and Spirituality movement—sometimes exceeded
10,000 participants and were staged in several cities simultaneously. The
police tolerated some of the protests, but on some occasions attacked and
beat protesters severely. Some of the harshest police violence occurred at
peaceful protests in Casablanca, Kenitra, and Rabat, the captial, during the
weeks prior to the king’s much-anticipated speech in June outlining constitutional
reforms.
On May 29, security forces in the town of Safi beat Kamal Ammari, a 30-year old
protester. He died on June 2. The Office of the Prosecutor announced that forensic
doctors concluded that Ammari died from a pre-existing condition that was
“aggravated” by “a simple blow to the torso that would normally have been
benign.” The case remains under investigation.
Terrorism and Counterterrorism
On April 28, a bomb exploded in a Marrakesh cafe frequented by foreign
tourists, killing 17 persons and wounding dozens. No group claimed responsibility
for what was the deadliest terrorist attack in Morocco since 2003. The
special terrorism chamber of the Rabat Court of Appeals on October 28 convicted
nine suspected Islamist militants in the attack and sentenced one to death
and the others to prison. Moroccan courts continue to impose the death penalty
but Morocco has not executed anyone since the early 1990s.
Hundreds of suspected Islamist extremists arrested in the aftermath of the
Casablanca bombings of May 2003 remain in prison. Many were convicted in
unfair trials after being held in secret detention and subjected to mistreatment
and sometimes torture. Since further terrorist attacks in 2007, police have
arrested hundreds more suspected militants, many of whom were convicted
and imprisoned, not for having committed acts of terrorism, but for belonging
to a “terrorist network” or preparing to join “the jihad” in Iraq or elsewhere.
There were fewer reports than in previous years of intelligence agencies interrogating
terrorism suspects at unacknowledged detention centers and holding
them in pre-charge custody for longer than the 12-day maximum period the law
allows for terrorism cases. In May delegations from parliament and the new
National Human Rights Council (NHRC), which the king established in March to
replace his Advisory Council on Human Rights, visited the reported site of the
most notorious of these detention centers, the headquarters of the General
Directorate for the Surveillance of the Territory in Témara, near Rabat. They
reported finding no evidence during their visit of a detention facility operating
there.
Police Conduct and the Criminal Justice System
Courts seldom provide fair trials in cases with political overtones. Judges routinely
ignore requests for medical examinations from defendants who claim to
have been tortured, refuse to summon exculpatory witnesses, and convict
defendants based on apparently coerced confessions.
The minister of justice in August 2010 suspended Judge Jaâfar Hassoun from
his post as president of the Marrakesh Administrative Court. Then in December
2010 Hassoun was ousted from his membership in the High Council of the
Magistrature (HCM). Authorities accused Hassoun of disclosing confidential
deliberations of the HCM to Essabah newspaper. Hassoun said he was innocent
and the authorities were persecuting him for his judicial independence, such as
his 2009 ruling that invalidated a Marrakesh mayoral election won by a candidate
from a pro-palace party. In January the king signed an order expelling
Hassoun from the judiciary.
In January an appeals court upheld the conviction and imprisonment of champion
boxer Zakaria Moumni for fraud after trials at which the complainants never
appeared and a confession allegedly coerced by torture was used as evidence.
Moumni, who was being retried at this writing, contends that his prosecution is
politically motivated and stems from his persistent and public lobbying of the
palace for government benefits to which he says he is entitled.
In March Mohammed VI pardoned and freed retired Maj.-Col. Kaddour Terhzaz.
In November 2008 a military court convicted Terhzaz of disclosing “national
defense secrets” based on a 2005 letter he wrote to the king criticizing what he
saw as Morocco’s bad treatment of its pilots whom the Polisario had imprisoned
for a quarter century.
In April the king also pardoned five political figures convicted in the mass
“Belliraj” trial on charges of mounting a terrorist plot. In 2010 an appeals court
had upheld the guilty verdict against all 35 defendants even though most had
repudiated their confessions. The court refused to investigate the defendants’
allegations of torture, detention in secret jails, and the falsification of confessions.
Twenty-nine other defendants in the case continued to serve their prison
terms, which included a life term for alleged ringleader Abdelkader Belliraj.
Another defendant had already been freed in 2010 after serving a two-year
term.
A Casablanca court on April 14 provisionally released prominent, non-violent,
pro-independence, Sahrawi activists Ali Salem Tamek, Brahim Dahane, and
Ahmed Naciri, after 18 months of pre-trial detention. The police had arrested them and four other activists in October 2009 upon their return from a visit to
the Polisario-run refugee camps in Algeria. The trial of the seven, on charges of
“harming [Morocco’s] internal security,” started in October 2010, but was postponed
repeatedly. At this writing it had not resumed.
Twenty-three Sahrawi civilians remained in pre-trial detention before a military
court for their alleged role in clashes in and around El-Ayoun in November 2010
between security forces and Sahrawis that caused fatalities on both sides.
Another 120 Sahrawis were bailed and faced less serious charges before a civilian
court for their role in the clashes. One year after they occurred, no trials had
begun.
Freedom of Association
Morocco boasts of thousands of independent associations, but government
officials arbitrarily impede the legalization of many, undermining their freedom
to operate. Groups affected include some that defend the rights of Sahrawis,
Amazighs (Berbers), sub-Saharan immigrants, and unemployed university graduates,
as well as charitable, cultural, and educational associations whose leadership
includes members of Justice and Spirituality, a well-entrenched, nationwide
movement that advocates for an Islamic state and questions the king’s
spiritual authority. The government, which does not recognize Justice and
Spirituality as a legal association, tolerated many of its activities but prevented
others.
Local and international human rights organizations operate with few impediments
in the major cities, but individual activists sometimes pay a heavy price
for whistle-blowing. Chekib el-Khayari, president of the Association for Human
Rights in the Rif, served two years of a three-year term for “gravely insulting
state institutions” and minor currency violations, before the king pardoned him
in April. The authorities jailed el-Khayari after he accused certain Moroccan officials
of complicity in narcotics trafficking.
Women’s Rights
The new constitution guarantees equality for women, “while respecting the provisions
of the Constitution, and the laws and permanent characteristics of the
Kingdom.” Major reforms to the Family Code in 2004 raised the age of marriage
and improved women’s rights in divorce and child custody. However, the new
code preserved discriminatory provisions with regards to inheritance and the
right of husbands to unilaterally repudiate their wives.
On April 8 Morocco withdrew its reservations to articles 9(2) and 16 of the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,
while maintaining other reservations. The withdrawal signaled a commitment to
eliminate gender discrimination in marital rights and responsibilities and in the
right of spouses to confer Moroccan nationality on their children when the other
spouse is non-Moroccan. In its first national study on violence against women
the Haut Commissariat au Plan, a government agency tasked with compiling
national statistics, found that 55 percent of Moroccan women surveyed
between 18 and 64-years-old experienced domestic violence during 2009; 15
percent reported suffering physical violence and 48 percent emotional violence.
Domestic Workers
In July an employer allegedly beat to death an 11-year-old domestic worker in el-
Jadida. The case drew attention to the tens of thousands of Moroccan children
employed as live-in household workers, and the abusive conditions to which
they are often subjected. The case was still in court at this writing. Morocco
approved a draft law in October that, if approved by parliament, would toughen
sanctions on persons who violate the prohibition on employing children under
15 and would tighten conditions for employing persons aged 15 to 18 in households.
Freedom of Media
Morocco’s independent print and online media investigate and criticize government
officials and policies, but face prosecution and harassment when they
cross certain lines. The press law includes prison terms for “maliciously” spreading “false information” likely to disturb the public order or for speech
that is defamatory, offensive to members of the royal family, or that undermines
“Islam, the institution of the monarchy, or territorial integrity,” that is,
Morocco’s claim on Western Sahara.
Moroccan state television provides some room for investigative reporting but
little for direct criticism of the government, or dissent on key issues. Hundreds
of journalists who work for state-controlled media, notably the television channels
and the state news agency, held protests on March 25 to demand, among
other things, more editorial independence.
In April authorities arrested Rachid Nini, a popular columnist and editor of al-
Masa’ daily. In June a Casablanca Court of First Instance convicted him of
attempting to influence judicial decisions, showing contempt for judicial decisions,
and falsely accusing public officials of crimes. The court gave him a oneyear
prison term and refused to free him provisionally pending appeal. The evidence
against him consisted of articles he wrote that criticized Morocco’s intelligence
agencies and accused persons close to the royal palace of corruption.
An appeals court confirmed the verdict and sentence on October 24.
Morocco revoked or delayed renewal of accreditation of some journalists working
for foreign media. Voicing its displeasure with Al Jazeera’s coverage of the
Western Sahara conflict, the government closed the station’s news bureau in
Morocco in 2010.
Key International Actors
In 2008 the European Union gave Morocco “advanced status,” placing it a
notch above other members of the EU’s “neighbourhood policy.” Morocco is
the biggest Middle Eastern beneficiary of EU aid after the Occupied Palestinian
Territories, with €580 million (US$808 million) earmarked for 2011 to 2013.
France is Morocco’s leading trade partner and source of public development aid
and private investment. France increased its Overseas Development Assistance
to €600 million ($810 million) for 2010 to 2012. France rarely publicly criticized
Morocco’s human rights practices and openly supported its autonomy plan for
Western Sahara. On July 18 the French presidency of the G8 praised the results of the constitutional referendum and pledged the G8 countries’ “concrete support”
for “the full and swift implementation of Morocco’s reform agenda.”
The United States provides financial aid to Morocco, a close ally, including a
five-year $697 million grant beginning in 2008 from the Millennium Challenge
Corporation to reduce poverty and stimulate economic growth. On human
rights, the US continued to publicly praise Morocco’s reform efforts and
advances made by women. However, US Deputy Assistant of State Tamara
Wittes, on a visit to Morocco in June, said that US officials had voiced concerns
to the Moroccan government about police violence when handling peaceful
demonstrations.
The 2011 United Nations Security Council resolution renewing the mandate of
the peacekeeping force for Western Sahara (MINURSO) contained human rights
language more explicit than in previous years but did not enlarge the MINURSO
mandate to include human rights monitoring, an enlargement that the Polisario
supports and Morocco opposes. MINURSO is the only peacekeeping operation
created since 1990 that has no human rights monitoring component. Resolution
1979 encouraged “the parties to work with the international community to
develop and implement independent and credible measures to ensure full
respect for human rights.” It welcomed “the commitment of Morocco to ensure
unqualified and unimpeded access to all Special Procedures of the United
Nations Human Rights Council.”