Morocco/Western Sahara
Morocco continues to present a mixed picture on human rights. It has made great
strides in addressing past abuses, allowed considerable space for public dissent
and protest, and reduced gender inequality in the family code. But authorities,
aided by complaisant courts, continue to use repressive legislation to punish
peaceful opponents, especially those who violate the taboos against criticizing
the king or the monarchy, questioning the “Moroccanness” of Western Sahara, or
“denigrating” Islam. The police continue to use excessive force to break up
demonstrations.
There was sporadic unrest in 2008 over socioeconomic grievances, notably in the
city of Sidi Ifni where security forces intervened on June 7 to lift a protesters’
blockade of the port. The security forces used excessive force and committed
other abuses in Sidi Ifni, according to numerous reports.
Controls are particularly tight in the restive and disputed Western Sahara region,
which Morocco administers as if it were part of its national territory. A pro-independence
movement known as the Polisario Front (Popular Front for the
Liberation of the Saguía al-Hamra and Río de Oro) contests Moroccan sovereignty
and demands a referendum on self-determination for the Sahrawi people. The
Polisario rejected a Moroccan proposal, presented in April 2007, for enhanced
autonomy for the region, mainly because that proposal nowhere mentions a referendum
in which independence would be an option. (For human rights in
Polisario-run refugee camps, see Algeria chapter.)
Terrorism and Counterterrorism
Hundreds of suspected Islamist extremists arrested in the aftermath of the
Casablanca bombings of May 2003 continue to serve prison terms, despite a
series of royal pardons that freed a few hundred of them. Many of those rounded
up in 2003 were held that year in secret detention for days or weeks, subjected to
mistreatment and sometimes torture while under interrogation, then convicted in
unfair trials. Some of those convicted were sentenced to death, a punishment
that Morocco has not abolished even though it has not carried it out since 1993.
Since August 2006 police arrested hundreds more suspected Islamist militants, bringing the total to more than a thousand (by some estimates) as of September
2008.
Intelligence agencies continued to interrogate terrorism suspects at an unacknowledged
detention center at Temara, near Rabat, according to numerous
reports from detainees. Suspects allege that police tortured them under interrogation,
while holding them in pre-charge custody for longer than the 12-day maximum
the law provides for terrorism cases. For example, schoolteacher Abdelkrim
Hakkou went missing from near his home in Ain Taouijdat on May 16, 2008. His
family did not learn his whereabouts until July, when he was brought before a
judge and charged with attempting to recruit jihadists to fight in Iraq. Hakkou told
his family that police had held him during most of the six-week period in secret
detention in Temara, where they tortured him. At this writing, Hakkou remained in
pretrial detention. The authorities claim Hakkou was arrested only on July 1 and
presented to the prosecutor July 11.
Over the past decade, those like Hakkou who “disappeared” turned up after
some weeks in police custody, unlike hundreds of persons who had “disappeared”
during the reign of the late King Hassan II and were never found again
alive. The state acknowledged responsibility for this practice following the work of
Morocco’s Equity and Reconciliation Commission and its 2005 report. Beginning
in 2007, the state paid the equivalent of around US$85 million in compensation
to some 16,000 victims or to their survivors, and began providing other forms of
assistance to individuals and to communities that suffered repression in past
years.
The Justice System and Law Enforcement
Police are rarely held accountable for violating human rights. In cases with political
overtones, courts rarely provide fair trials, ignoring requests for medical examinations
lodged by defendants who claim to have been tortured, refusing to summon
exculpatory witnesses, and convicting defendants on the basis of apparently
coerced confessions. Police in Marrakesh arrested Sahrawi human rights activist
Naâma Asfari on April 17, 2008, and charged him with drunk driving and assaulting
a woman motorist. According to Asfari, the police beat him severely during an interrogation that focused mainly on his political activism, and then forced him to
sign a confession. The court sentenced him to two months in prison.
After raucous anti-gay demonstrations in the city streets, a court in Ksar el-Kbir,
under penal code article 487, sentenced six men to between four and 10 months
in prison on December 10, 2007, for committing homosexual acts, even though
the prosecution introduced no evidence that acts violating the article had
occurred. An appeals court upheld the verdicts on January 15, 2008.
In another closely watched case, authorities in February announced the dismantling
of a terrorist plot and arrested five political figures and a journalist whom
they accused of complicity. The figures included members of three legally recognized
parties, one of which, al-Badil al-Hadari (the Civilized Alternative), they
promptly dissolved. The men remained in custody while awaiting the scheduled
opening of their trial November 14.
Morocco is home to an estimated 10,000 sub-Saharan illegal immigrants, many of
whom hope to gain entry to Europe. On April 29 a Moroccan naval ship intercepted
an inflatable dinghy filled with would-be migrants in the Mediterranean Sea.
According to interviews a Moroccan NGO conducted with survivors, when the
dinghy’s crew defied orders to return to shore, a crewman of the naval ship punctured
the dinghy, causing a reported 29 passengers to drown. Morocco denied its
agents played any role in the drowning but conducted no inquiry that was made
public.
Freedom of Association and Assembly
Authorities generally tolerate the work of the many human rights organizations
active in Rabat and Casablanca. They generally do not hamper foreign human
rights organizations visiting Morocco, and often respond to their letters of concern.
However, in Western Sahara surveillance is tighter and harassment of rights
defenders more common. Authorities have refused to grant legal recognition to
any Sahrawi organization dedicated to exposing Moroccan abuses. Authorities
expelled on April 25 a delegation from France that had come to observe the trial
of Naâma Asfari and that included members of pro-Sahrawi organizations.
Most types of public assembly require authorization from the Interior Ministry,
which can refuse permission if it deems them liable to “disturb the public order.”
Although many of the frequent public protests in Rabat run their course undisturbed,
baton-wielding police have brutally broken up others. For example, during
a peaceful sit-in on July 1 in front of the Parliament in Rabat in solidarity with
political prisoners, law enforcement officers used excessive force to disperse participants,
injuring members of the Moroccan Human Rights Association.
Police systematically prevented or dispersed peaceful sit-ins or gatherings by
groups that favor independence for Western Sahara. They often used excessive
force in responding to incidents when Sahrawi demonstrators laid stones across
streets or threw rocks or, very occasionally, threw Molotov cocktails. Sahrawi protester
violence fatally injured a policeman for the first time, on February 26 in
Tantan.
Freedom of Expression and the Media
Media criticism of the authorities is often quite blunt. It is nevertheless circumscribed
by a press law that provides prison terms for “maliciously” spreading
“false information” likely to disturb the public order or for speech that is defamatory,
offensive to members of the royal family, or that undermines “Islam, the
institution of the monarchy, or [Morocco’s] territorial integrity.”
On July 11, 2008, a Rabat court fined Hassan Rachidi, Al Jazeera television’s
Morocco bureau chief, for maliciously spreading “false news.” The charge
stemmed from an Al Jazeera report, citing human rights sources, that people had
died when security forces clashed with protestors in Sidi Ifni. The court convicted
Rachidi even though Al Jazeera had broadcast government denials of the fatalities.
Authorities also suspended Rachidi’s press accreditation. The same day, a
Rabat court convicted on the same grounds the person who had provided Al
Jazeera this information, Brahim Sab’alil of the Moroccan Center for Human
Rights. The day before, a court sentenced Sab’alil to six months in prison and a
fine for “insulting authorities by alleging fictional crimes” when he accused security
forces at a June 26 press conference of “crimes against humanity” in connection
with alleged deaths, rapes, and “disappearances” in Sidi Ifni. An appeals
court upheld Sab’alil’s six-month sentence. A Casablanca court sentenced Fouad Mourtada on February 22 to a three-year
prison term on a charge of “usurping an identity” for having created an unauthorized
and spurious, but non-defamatory, Facebook profile of King Mohamed VI’s
brother. An Agadir court on September 8, handed a two-year prison term to
Mohamed Erraji for “disrespecting the king” in an article he published at
www.hespress.com criticizing the way that the monarch dispensed privileges and
favors. After international outcry over the convictions, the king pardoned
Mourtada on March 18, and an appeals court overturned Erraji’s conviction on
September 18.
In April a royal pardon freed seven members of the Moroccan Human Rights
Association imprisoned nearly one year earlier for “attacking sacred values” by
allegedly chanting slogans against the king during 2007 marches. But in February,
wheel-chair-bound, 95-year-old Ahmed Nasser died in prison, five months into
the three-year sentence he received for “attacking sacred values” for allegedly
insulting the king during a street altercation.
In May 2008 authorities revoked Al Jazeera’s license to broadcast its Maghreb
news show from Rabat. They cited technical and legal reasons, but observers suspected
the real reason to be dissatisfaction with the station’s coverage of
Morocco.
Family Law and Women’s and Children’s Rights
Reforms to the family law enacted in 2004 have raised the minimum age of marriage
for women from 15 to 18, made the family the joint responsibility of both
spouses, rescinded the wife’s duty of obedience to her husband, expanded
access to divorce for women, and placed the practice of polygamy under strict
judicial control. In January 2007 Morocco reformed its nationality code to give
women the right to pass their nationality to their children. Reaffirming the minimum
legal age for marriage, authorities in September 2008 closed schools and a
website run by a cleric who advocated marriage for girls as young as nine.
Morocco lacks a functioning child protection system, and government efforts to
create a system of child protection units showed little progress in 2008.
Unaccompanied children are at special risk of abuse while attempting to cross to Spain (see European Union chapter) and upon return to Morocco, including police
beatings and detention with adult criminal suspects.
Key International Actors
Morocco has sought privileged relations with the European Union, which is in turn
eager for Morocco’s cooperation in combating terrorism and illegal migration. The
kingdom is the biggest beneficiary of the European Neighbourhood and
Partnership Instrument, with €654 million in aid earmarked for 2007-2010. On
October 13, the EU voted to give Morocco “advanced status,” placing it a notch
above other members of the EU’s “neighbourhood policy.” While noting progress
in many areas of human rights, the EU also “renew[ed] its appeal … that Morocco
ensure respect for freedom of expression and … reform again the Press Code and
the Penal Code by decriminalizing offenses of opinion.” The EU also invited
Morocco “to safeguard freedom of association and assembly, notably in the territory
of Western Sahara,” and called upon “the forces of authority [sic] to show
restraint in the recourse to force.”
Presenting its request that the United States grant Morocco a total of US$29 million
in aid in 2009, the State Department called Morocco “one of the United
States’ oldest and closest allies in the region…. [A] moderate, stable, democratizing
Arab Muslim nation, an important actor in the war on terrorism and a constructive
force in the pursuit of Middle East peace.” In 2007 the US governmentbacked
Millennium Challenge Corporation approved a five-year US$697.5 million
economic aid package to Morocco to fight poverty and promote economic growth.
The US State Department has stated that it supports autonomy for Western
Sahara under Moroccan sovereignty. While supporting this basic Moroccan position,
US officials held meetings with Sahrawi human rights activists, and publicly
criticized Moroccan abuses in Western Sahara. In addition, a law took effect in
December 2007 conditioning US$1 million in US military aid to Morocco on
human rights progress, particularly in the realm of freedom of expression on the
Western Sahara issue.
France is Morocco’s leading trade partner and the leading source of public development
aid and private investment. It also endorses Morocco’s autonomy plan
for Western Sahara.
The UN Security Council in April 2008 renewed for one year the MINURSO peacekeeping
force in Western Sahara but once again declined to extend its mandate
to include human rights observation and protection. Morocco opposes giving
MINURSO such a mandate, whereas the Polisario says it supports it.
Morocco was examined under the UN Human Rights Council’s Universal Periodic
Review in April 2008. The review did not cover the situation in Western Sahara.