Morocco/Western Sahara
Morocco continues to present a mixed picture on human rights. It has made great
strides in addressing past abuses, allowed considerable space for public dissent
and protest, and reduced gender inequality in the family code. But authorities,
aided by complaisant courts, continue to use repressive legislation to punish
peaceful opponents, especially those who violate the taboos against criticizing
the king or the monarchy, questioning the “Moroccanness” of the Western
Sahara, or “denigrating” Islam. The police continue to use excessive force to
break up demonstrations, especially in outlying areas.
Controls are particularly tight in the restive and disputed Western Sahara region,
which Morocco administers as if it were part of its national territory. A pro-independence
movement known as the Polisario Front (Popular Front for the
Liberation of the Saguia al-Hamra and Rio de Oro) contests Moroccan sovereignty
and demands a referendum on self-determination for the Sahrawi people. The
Polisario rejected a Moroccan proposal, presented in April 2007, for enhanced
autonomy for the region, mainly because that proposal nowhere mentions a referendum
in which independence would be an option.
International observers pronounced Morocco’s multiparty legislative elections in
September 2007 to be generally clean, but many attributed the 63 percent
abstention rate to a prevailing sense that parliament wields little power relative to
the king and the executive branch.
Terrorism and Counterterrorism
Hundreds of suspected Islamist extremists arrested since the Casablanca bombings
of May 2003 continue to serve prison terms, despite a series of royal pardons
that freed a few hundred of them. The remaining prisoners staged hunger
strikes during 2007 to demand their freedom or a review of their convictions, and
improvements in prison conditions. At least 20 of the suspected militants were
among the more than 100 prisoners facing death sentences. Many of those
rounded up in 2003 were held that year in secret detention for days or weeks,
subjected to mistreatment and sometimes torture while under interrogation, and
convicted in unfair trials.
Since August 2006, police have arrested at least 500 additional suspected
Islamist militants. The intelligence agencies continue to use an unacknowledged
detention center at Temara to interrogate some of those suspected of serious
offenses, according to numerous reports from detainees and their lawyers.
Suspects continue to allege that they have been tortured while under interrogation,
although there were fewer complaints of torture and excessive incommunicado
pre-arraignment detention in 2007 than in the immediate aftermath of the
2003 Casablanca bombings.
Morocco was on edge after three incidents in March and April 2007 in which
would-be suicide bombers in Casablanca narrowly missed inflicting heavy casualties.
The Justice System and Legal Reforms
Police are rarely held accountable for human rights violations. However, in June
2007 a court in al-Ayoun sentenced two policemen to ten years in prison for their
role in the beating death of Hamdi Lembarki, a Sahrawi, during political unrest in
al-Ayoun in October 2005.
In cases with political overtones, courts routinely deny defendants fair trials,
ignoring requests for medical examinations lodged by defendants who claim to
have been tortured, refusing to summon exculpatory witnesses, and convicting
defendants solely on the basis of apparently coerced confessions. Courts in the
cities of Agadir and Ksar al-Kbir convicted and imprisoned seven members of the
Moroccan Human Rights Association (Association Marocaine des Droits de
l’Homme, AMDH) for “attacking sacred values” by allegedly chanting slogans
against the king during May Day marches. Agadir defendants Abderrahim Kerrad
and Mehdi Berbouchi attempted unsuccessfully to challenge their own incriminating
statements, claiming the police had beaten and threatened them into signing.
The court also denied them the opportunity to confront the policeman whose testimony
helped to convict them. The appeals court confirmed their sentence of two
years in prison. The court in Ksar al-Kbir sentenced five other AMDH members to
three years in prison on the same charges, increased to four years on appeal.
Since August 2006, police have arrested at least 500 additional suspected
Islamist militants. The intelligence agencies continue to use an unacknowledged
detention center at Temara to interrogate some of those suspected of serious
offenses, according to numerous reports from detainees and their lawyers.
Suspects continue to allege that they have been tortured while under interrogation,
although there were fewer complaints of torture and excessive incommunicado
pre-arraignment detention in 2007 than in the immediate aftermath of the
2003 Casablanca bombings.
Morocco was on edge after three incidents in March and April 2007 in which
would-be suicide bombers in Casablanca narrowly missed inflicting heavy casualties.
The Justice System and Legal Reforms
Police are rarely held accountable for human rights violations. However, in June
2007 a court in al-Ayoun sentenced two policemen to ten years in prison for their
role in the beating death of Hamdi Lembarki, a Sahrawi, during political unrest in
al-Ayoun in October 2005.
In cases with political overtones, courts routinely deny defendants fair trials,
ignoring requests for medical examinations lodged by defendants who claim to
have been tortured, refusing to summon exculpatory witnesses, and convicting
defendants solely on the basis of apparently coerced confessions. Courts in the
cities of Agadir and Ksar al-Kbir convicted and imprisoned seven members of the
Moroccan Human Rights Association (Association Marocaine des Droits de
l’Homme, AMDH) for “attacking sacred values” by allegedly chanting slogans
against the king during May Day marches. Agadir defendants Abderrahim Kerrad
and Mehdi Berbouchi attempted unsuccessfully to challenge their own incriminating
statements, claiming the police had beaten and threatened them into signing.
The court also denied them the opportunity to confront the policeman whose testimony
helped to convict them. The appeals court confirmed their sentence of two
years in prison. The court in Ksar al-Kbir sentenced five other AMDH members to
three years in prison on the same charges, increased to four years on appeal.
deemed critical of “Islam, the institution of the monarchy, or [Morocco’s] territorial
integrity.”
Since mid-2005, a series of prosecutions of independent weeklies, the most outspokenly
critical sector of the Moroccan news media, showed the continuing limits
on press freedom. During 2007, authorities tightened those strictures. In
January, a court convicted Driss Ksikes and Sanaa al-Aji, publisher and reporter,
respectively, at the popular Arabic weekly Nichane, for a December 2006 article
on how popular jokes reflected Moroccan attitudes about sex, politics, and religion.
The court gave them three-year suspended sentences for “denigrating
Islam.” The prime minister temporarily suspended the weekly after that issue
appeared, invoking his authority under the 2002 press code. In August, prosecutors
charged Ahmed Benchemsi, editor of Nichane and its sister French-language
weekly TelQuel, with disrespect for the king, apparently because of a pre-election
editorial questioning the king’s commitment to democracy. The interior minister
ordered the police to confiscate copies of both publications from printers and
newsstands. Benchemsi was still on trial at this writing.
On July 17 police arrested journalist Moustapha Hormatallah of al-Watan al-Aan
shortly after that weekly published an article about classified government documents
regarding terrorism threats in Morocco, reproducing one of the purportedly
secret documents. A Casablanca court on August 15 handed Hormatallah an
eight-month sentence and magazine publisher Abderrahim Ariri a six-month suspended
sentence for “concealing items derived from a crime.”
Family Law
Reforms to the family law enacted in 2004 have raised the minimum age of marriage
for women from fifteen to eighteen, made the family the joint responsibility
of both spouses, rescinded the wife’s duty of obedience to her husband, expanded
access to divorce for women, and placed the practice of polygamy under strict
judicial control. In January 2007, Morocco reformed its nationality code to give
women the right to pass their nationality to their children. Concerns remain that
these reforms are being implemented at a slow pace.
Children
Child labor is widespread, despite the Labor Code’s ban on children under 15
working. Young girls working as live-in servants in private homes are especially
vulnerable to abuse, including sexual abuse, and frequently must work up to 100
hours a week without access to education or adequate food and medical care.
Authorities rarely punish employers who abuse child domestics, and labor
inspectors are not authorized to enter private homes. At this writing draft legislation
to regulate employment conditions for domestic workers was still pending.
Large numbers of unaccompanied Moroccan children continue to attempt dangerous
and illegal journeys to Europe. On March 6, 2007, Morocco and Spain concluded
a readmission agreement that would allow Spain to repatriate an estimated
3000 unaccompanied Moroccan children (see Spain chapter). The agreement
lacks explicit safeguards against abuse and provides no independent monitoring
of its implementation, despite a pattern of earlier forced returns that exposed
children to police abuse and often failed to reunite them with their parents or
guardians.
Acknowledging Past Abuses
In 2005, Morocco’s Equity and Reconciliation Commission (ERC) issued its report
into grave human rights of the past, stimulating taboo-breaking discussions. The
ERC provided an official acknowledgement of past repression, gave a long-overdue
voice to victims, and elucidated many individual cases. However, non-cooperation
by public officials prevented it from resolving other cases. Despite ERC
recommendations, authorities took no steps to bring to trial those implicated in
past abuse, including some who continue to hold high government posts. Nor
has the government implemented the ERC’s recommendation that it ratify the
International Criminal Court statute and abolish the death penalty. But during
2007 the state did pay compensation to victims of past abuse, pursuant to guidelines
established by the ERC.
Key International Actors
In June 2004, the United States designated Morocco “a major non-NATO ally,”
easing restrictions on arms sales. The US government-backed Millennium
Challenge Corporation (MCC) approved on August 31, 2007, a five-year US$697.5
million economic aid package to Morocco—the largest grant made by the MCC
since its creation in January 2004—to fight poverty and promote economic
growth.
In public comments, US officials in 2007 praised Morocco’s commitment to political
and economic reform and counterterrorism cooperation. President George W.
Bush saluted Morocco along with six other countries that “have recently taken
strides toward liberty” in his address before the U.N. General Assembly on
September 25. US officials rarely spoke out about human rights problems in
Morocco, but the US embassy engaged in some public advocacy in favor of press
freedom and reforming laws that criminalize libel.
Morocco has sought a privileged relation with the EU, which is in turn eager for
Morocco’s cooperation in combating terrorism and illegal immigration, among
other issues. The EU considers Morocco’s process of democratization and consolidation
of the rule of law “as the most advanced in the region,” according to its
Morocco “Strategy Paper” for 2007-2013. Public criticism by EU officials of
Morocco’s human rights practices was rare. In July, the EU and Morocco signed an
agreement for €654 million in EU financial aid for the period 2007-2010. The
agreement designates “human rights and governance” as one of its priority areas.
France is Morocco’s leading trade partner and the leading source of public development
aid and private investments. President Nicolas Sarkozy made a three-day
visit to Morocco in October 2007. Addressing parliament on October 23, he
evoked “this democratic Morocco” and the “pluralism and openness that
Morocco is experiencing today.” He endorsed Morocco’s autonomy plan for the
Western Sahara, but said nothing during his visit publicly about continuing
human rights problems in Morocco or the disputed Western Sahara region.