Morocco / Western Sahara
Human rights conditions deteriorated overall in 2009 in Morocco, although the
country continued to have a lively civil society and independent press. The government,
aided by complaisant courts, used repressive legislation to punish and
imprison peaceful opponents, especially those who violate taboos against criticizing
the king or the monarchy, questioning the “Moroccanness” of Western
Sahara, or “denigrating” Islam.
Restrictions on rights are particularly tight in the restive Western Sahara region,
which Morocco claims sovereignty over and administers as if it were part of its
national territory. A pro-independence movement known as the Polisario Front
(Popular Front for the Liberation of the Saguía al-Hamra and Río de Oro) demands
a referendum on self-determination for the Sahrawi people. The Polisario rejected
an April 2007 Moroccan proposal for enhanced autonomy for the region, mainly
because it nowhere mentions a referendum in which independence would be an
option. Numerous Sahrawis were charged or imprisoned because of their peaceful
advocacy of self-determination for the contested Western Sahara. Politically
motivated restrictions on the right to travel increased.
Terrorism and Counterterrorism
Hundreds of suspected Islamist extremists arrested in the aftermath of the
Casablanca bombings of May 2003 continue to serve prison terms. Many were
convicted in unfair trials after being held that year in secret detention for days or
weeks, and subjected to mistreatment and sometimes torture while under interrogation.
Some were sentenced to death, a punishment that Morocco has not abolished
even though it has not carried it out since 1993. Since August 2006 police
have arrested hundreds more suspected Islamist militants, many of whom were
convicted and imprisoned for belonging to “a criminal gang” or preparing to join
“the jihad” in Iraq.
Intelligence agencies continued to interrogate terrorism suspects at an unacknowledged
detention center at Temara, near Rabat, according to numerous
reports from detainees. Many suspects alleged that police tortured them under
interrogation, while holding them in pre-charge custody for longer than the 12-day maximum the law provides for terrorism cases. For example, several of the defendants
in the so-called Belliraj mass trial (see below) contended that the police
abducted them and held them incommunicado for between two and four weeks
before presenting them to a judge. Some of these contended at trial that police at
Temara tortured them in order to extract false confessions.
Confronting Past Abuses
Following the pioneering work completed in 2005 by Morocco’s Equity and
Reconciliation Commission (ERC), the state acknowledged responsibility for “disappearances”
and other grave abuses in the past, and compensated some
16,000 victims or their survivors. However, no Moroccan officials or security force
members are known to have been prosecuted for violations committed during the
period from 1956 to 1999 that the ERC investigated, and the government has yet
to implement most of the institutional reforms recommended by the ERC to safeguard
against future abuses. In addition, as of October, the families of the “disappeared”
persons whose cases were handled by the ERC and, afterwards by the
Advisory Council on Human Rights, had not received a full account of the ERC’s
findings concerning the “disappearance” of their relatives.
Police Conduct and the Criminal Justice System
Police are rarely held accountable for violating human rights. In cases with political
overtones, courts seldom provide fair trials; judges routinely ignore requests
for medical examinations lodged by defendants who claim to have been tortured,
refuse to summon exculpatory witnesses, and convict defendants on the basis of
apparently coerced confessions. On July 28 the Rabat Court of Appeals convicted
all 35 defendants in the “Belliraj” case of forming a terrorist network, sentencing
them to terms of up to life in prison. The defendants included the heads of two
parties and four other well-known political figures. The court based the guilty verdicts
almost entirely on the statements attributed to the defendants by the
police, even though most defendants had repudiated those statements before
the investigating judge and all repudiated the statements at trial. The court
refused to investigate allegations of torture, falsified statements, and statements written in Arabic for defendants unable to read that language. The appeals hearing
was due to begin in December 2009.
Police arrested seven non-violent Sahrawi activists on October 8 upon their return
from openly visiting the Polisario-run refugee camps near Tindouf, Algeria. A
Casablanca judge referred their case to a military court on the grounds that the
alleged offenses included harming “external state security,” by “causing harm to
Morocco’s territorial integrity.” The referral of civilians to a military court, where
the procedural rights of defendants are abridged, was a rare and ominous development.
Freedom of Association, Assembly, and Movement
Morocco boasts thousands of independent associations. However, government
officials arbitrarily impede the legalization of some organizations, undermining
their freedom to operate. Groups affected include those defending the rights of
Sahrawis, Amazighs (Berbers), sub-Saharan immigrants, and unemployed university
graduates, as well as charitable, and cultural and education associations
whose leadership includes members of Justice and Spirituality, one of the country’s
largest Islamist movements.
The government generally tolerates the work of the many human rights organizations
active in Rabat and Casablanca. In northern Morocco, authorities on
February 17, 2009 arrested Chekib el-Khayari, president of the Association for
Human Rights in the Rif, after he accused certain Moroccan officials of complicity
in narcotics trafficking. On June 24 a Casablanca court convicted el-Khayari of
“gravely insulting state institutions” and minor currency violations, and sentenced
him to three years in prison and a heavy fine. He was still in jail awaiting
his appeal as of November.
Authorities generally do not hamper foreign human rights groups visiting
Morocco, although the security forces sometimes question Moroccans who have
had contact with them. Beginning in October the police enforced new restrictions
on groups visiting the homes of Sahrawi activists, breaking up at least seven such
visits on the grounds that visitors would henceforth require clearance for such
meetings. Most types of outdoor gatherings require authorization from the Interior Ministry, which can refuse permission if it deems them liable to “disturb
the public order.” Although many of the frequent public protests run their course
undisturbed, baton-wielding police have brutally broken up others.
The government prevented Sahrawi activists from traveling abroad more often
than in recent years. On August 5, authorities prevented six Sahrawi students
from departing from Agadir airport to travel to the United Kingdom to participate
in a program of cross-cultural dialogue. On October 6, Moroccan authorities
detained and turned back five well-known Sahrawi activists who were on their
way to Mauritania via the land border crossing. They confiscated the men’s passports
and had not returned them as of early November. Authorities declined to
issue a passport to Brahim Sabbar, secretary-general of a Sahrawi human rights
organization.
Media Freedom
Press freedom declined in 2009.The press law provides prison terms for “maliciously”
spreading “false information” likely to disturb the public order or for
speech that is defamatory, offensive to members of the royal family, or that
undermines “Islam, the institution of the monarchy, or [Morocco’s] territorial
integrity.” After the Arabic daily Akhbar al-Youm published on September 26 a
cartoon about a cousin of King Mohammed VI, authorities froze its bank account
and sent police to shut down its editorial offices – actions that have no basis in
Moroccan law. A court on October 30 ordered the closure of Akhbar al-Youm’s
offices and sentenced the cartoonist and director of publication to fines and suspended
prison terms. Driss Chahtane, editor of al-Mish’al weekly, went to prison
on October 15, the day a court of first instance sentenced him to a one-year term
for maliciously publishing “false news” about the king’s health. On August 1 the
minister of the interior ordered the seizure of the new issues of TelQuel and
Nichan because the two weeklies had published the result of a public opinion
poll on King Mohammed VI, even though the results were favorable. Disregarding
the applicable law, the authorities then destroyed copies of the issues before the
publisher could appeal the seizure in court.
Key International Actors
Morocco is the biggest beneficiary of the European Neighbourhood and
Partnership Instrument, with €654 million in aid earmarked for 2007-2010,
including grants to many independent Moroccan human rights organizations. In
2008 the European Union voted to give the kingdom “advanced status,” placing
it a notch above other members of the EU’s “neighbourhood policy.”
A European parliamentary delegation conducted a fact-finding mission to
Morocco and Western Sahara in January 2009 that Morocco had blocked for three
years. The delegation said it was able to conduct its visit without obstacles.
Among its recommendations was that Morocco “ensure that the clauses relating
to territorial integrity do not apply to the mere expression of opinions, including
those in support of independence, provided that they respect the principle of
non-violence.”
While supporting autonomy for Western Sahara under Moroccan sovereignty, US
diplomats traveled to Western Sahara, where they met with Sahrawi human rights
activists.
In the first visit to North Africa by a senior official of the Obama administration,
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton met in Morocco with King Mohammed VI on
November 2. In her public rermarks the next day, Clinton saluted the reforms that
have enabled Moroccan women to “bring their considerable talents to strengthening
democratic institutions, accelerating economic growth and broadening the
work of civil society.”
France is Morocco’s leading trade partner and the leading source of public development
aid and private investment. France gave Morocco €460 million in
Overseas Development Assistance in 2007-2009, making it the leading recipient
of such assistance. France rarely criticized publicly Morocco’s human rights practices.
The United Nations Security Council in April 2009 renewed for one year the MINURSO
peacekeeping force in Western Sahara but once again declined to extend
its mandate to include human rights observation and protection. Morocco opposes
giving MINURSO such a mandate, whereas the Polisario says it supports it.
Morocco ratified the International Convention on the Protection and Promotion of
the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities on April 9. King Mohammed VI
announced on December 10, 2008 that Morocco would lift its reservations to the
Convention for the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women but
that had yet to happen as of November 2009. Morocco hosted a visit in June by
the Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances, the first by the
group in an Arab or African country. The group praised the ERC but expressed concern
that its mandate, which excluded the prosecution of perpetrators, could promote
impunity.