Ethiopia
Ethiopia is on a deteriorating human rights trajectory as parliamentary elections
approach in 2010. These will be the first national elections since 2005, when
post-election protests resulted in the deaths of at least 200 protesters, many of
them victims of excessive use of force by the police. Broad patterns of government
repression have prevented the emergence of organized opposition in most
of the country. In December 2008 the government re-imprisoned opposition
leader Birtukan Midekssa for life after she made remarks that allegedly violated
the terms of an earlier pardon.
In 2009 the government passed two pieces of legislation that codify some of the
worst aspects of the slide towards deeper repression and political intolerance. A
civil society law passed in January is one of the most restrictive of its kind, and its
provisions will make most independent human rights work impossible. A new
counterterrorism law passed in July permits the government and security forces to
prosecute political protesters and non-violent expressions of dissent as acts of
terrorism.
Political Repression and the 2010 Elections
As Ethiopia heads toward nationwide elections, the government continues to
clamp down on the already limited space for dissent or independent political
activity. Ordinary citizens who criticize government policies or officials frequently
face arrest on trumped-up accusations of belonging to illegal “anti-peace”
groups, including armed opposition movements. Officials sometimes bring criminal
cases in a manner that appears to selectively target government critics, as
when in June 2009 prominent human rights activist Abebe Worke was charged
with illegal importation of radio equipment and ultimately fled the country. In the
countryside government-supplied (and donor-funded) agricultural assistance and
other resources are often used as leverage to punish and prevent dissent, or to
compel individuals into joining the ruling party.
The opposition is in disarray, but the government has shown little willingness to
tolerate potential challengers. In December 2008 the security forces re-arrested
Birtukan Midekssa, leader of the Unity for Democracy and Justice Party, which had begun to build a grassroots following in the capital. The government announced
that Birtukan would be jailed for life because she had made public remarks that
violated the terms of an earlier pardon for alleged acts of treason surrounding the
2005 elections. The authorities stated that there was no need for a trial as the
move was a mere legal technicality.
In July the Ethiopian government passed a new anti-terrorism law. The law provides
broad powers to the police, and harsh criminal penalties can be applied to
political protesters and others who engage in acts of nonviolent political dissent.
Some of its provisions appear tailored less toward addressing terrorism and more
toward allowing for a heavy-handed response to mass public unrest, like that
which followed Ethiopia’s 2005 elections.
Civil Society Activism and Media Freedom
The space for independent civil society activity in Ethiopia, already extremely narrow,
shrank dramatically in 2009. In January the government passed a new civil
society law whose provisions are among the most restrictive of any comparable
law anywhere in the world. The law makes any work that touches on human rights
or governance issues illegal if carried out by foreign non-governmental organizations,
and labels any Ethiopian organization that receives more than 10 percent of
its funding from sources outside of Ethiopia as “foreign.” The law makes most
independent human rights work virtually impossible, and human rights work
deemed illegal under the law is punishable as a criminal offense.
Ethiopia passed a new media law in 2008 that improved upon several repressive
aspects of the previous legal regime. The space for independent media activity in
Ethiopia remains severely constrained, however. In August two journalists were
jailed on charges derived partly from Ethiopia’s old, and now defunct, press
proclamation. Ethiopia’s new anti-terror law contains provisions that will impact
the media by making journalists and editors potential accomplices in acts of terrorism
if they publish statements seen as encouraging or supporting terrorist
acts, or even, simply, political protest.
Pretrial Detention and Torture
The Ethiopian government continues its longstanding practice of using lengthy
periods of pretrial and pre-charge detention to punish critics and opposition
activists, even where no criminal charges are ultimately pursued. Numerous
prominent ethnic Oromo Ethiopians have been detained in recent years on
charges of providing support to the outlawed Oromo Liberation Front (OLF); in
almost none of these cases have charges been pursued, but the accused, including
opposition activists, have remained in detention for long periods. Canadian
national Bashir Makhtal was convicted on charges of supporting the rebel Ogaden
National Liberation Front (ONLF) in July, after a trial that was widely criticized as
unfair; he was in detention for two-and-a-half years before his sentence was
handed down, and he was unable to access legal counsel and consular representatives
for much of that period.
Not only are periods of pretrial detention punitively long, but detainees and convicted
prisoners alike face torture and other ill-treatment. Human Rights Watch
and other organizations have documented consistent patterns of torture in police
and military custody for many years. The Ethiopian government regularly
responds that these abuses do not exist, but even the government’s own Human
Rights Commission acknowledged in its 2009 annual report that torture and other
abuses had taken place in several detention facilities, including in Ambo and
Nekemte.
Impunity for Military Abuses
The Ethiopian National Defense Force (ENDF) has committed serious abuses, in
some cases amounting to war crimes or crimes against humanity, in several different
conflicts in recent years. Human Rights Watch is not aware of any meaningful
efforts to hold the officers or government officials most responsible for those
abuses to account. The only government response to crimes against humanity
and other serious abuses committed by the military during a brutal counterinsurgency
campaign in Gambella in late 2003 and 2004 was an inquiry that prosecuted
a handful of junior personnel for deliberate and widespread patterns of abuse.
No one has been investigated or held to account for war crimes and other widespread violations of the laws of war during Ethiopia’s bloody military intervention
in neighboring Somalia from 2006 to 2008.
In August 2008 the Ethiopian government did purport to launch an inquiry into
allegations of serious crimes in Somali Regional State, where the armed forces
have been fighting a campaign against the rebel Ogaden National Liberation
Front for many years. The inquiry was sponsored by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
lacked independence, and concluded that no serious abuses took place. To date
the government continues to restrict access of independent investigators into the
area.
Relations in the Horn of Africa
In August the Eritrea-Ethiopia Claims Commission issued its final rulings on monetary
damages stemming from the bloody 1998-2000 border war between
Ethiopia and Eritrea. Nonetheless the two countries remain locked in an
intractable dispute about the demarcation of the heavily militarized frontier.
Eritrea continues to play a destabilizing role throughout the Horn of Africa
through its efforts to undermine and attack the government of Ethiopia wherever
possible. The government of President Isayas Afewerki hosts and materially supports
fighters from Ethiopian rebel movements, including the Oromo Liberation
Front. Eritrea has also pursued a policy of supporting armed opposition groups in
Somalia as a way of undermining Ethiopia’s support for the country’s weak
Transitional Federal Government.
Key International Actors
Ethiopia is one of the most aid-dependant countries in the world and received
more than US$2 billion in 2009, but its major donors have been unwilling to confront
the government over its worsening human rights record. Even as the country
slides deeper into repression, the Ethiopian government uses development aid
funding as leverage against the donors who provide it—many donors fear that the
government would discontinue or scale back their aid programs should they
speak out on human rights concerns. This trend is perhaps best exemplified by
the United Kingdom, whose government has consistently chosen to remain silent in order to protect its annual £130 million worth of bilateral aid and development
programs.
Donors are also fearful of jeopardizing access for humanitarian organizations to
respond to the drought and worsening food crisis. Millions of Ethiopians depend
on food aid, and the government has sought to minimize the scale of the crisis
and restrict access for independent surveys and response.
While Ethiopia’s government puts in place measures to control the elections in
2010, many donors have ignored the larger trends and focused instead on negotiating
with the government to allow them to send election observers.
A significant shift in donor policy toward Ethiopia would likely have to be led by
the US government, Ethiopia’s largest donor and most important political ally on
the world stage. But President Barack Obama’s administration has yet to depart
from the policies of the Bush administration, which consistently refused to speak
out against abuses in Ethiopia. While the reasons may be different—the current
government is not as narrowly focused on security cooperation with Ethiopia as
was the Bush administration— thus far the practical results have been the same.
The events described above attracted little public protest from the US government
in 2009.