Ethiopia
The sudden death in August 2012 of Ethiopia’s long-serving and powerful prime
minister, Meles Zenawi, provoked uncertainty over the country’s political transition,
both domestically and among Ethiopia’s international partners. Ethiopia’s
human rights record has sharply deteriorated, especially over the past few
years, and although a new prime minister, Hailemariam Desalegn, took office in
September, it remains to be seen whether the government under his leadership
will undertake human rights reforms.
Ethiopian authorities continued to severely restrict basic rights of freedom of
expression, association, and assembly in 2012. Thirty journalists and opposition
members were convicted under the country’s vague Anti-Terrorism
Proclamation of 2009.The security forces responded to protests by the Muslim
community in Oromia and Addis Ababa, the capital, with arbitrary arrests,
detentions, and beatings.
The Ethiopian government continues to implement its “villagization” program:
the resettlement of 1.5 million rural villagers in five regions of Ethiopia ostensibly
to increase their access to basic services. Many villagers in Gambella region
have been forcibly displaced, causing considerable hardship. The government is
also forcibly displacing indigenous pastoral communities in Ethiopia’s Lower
Omo Valley to make way for state-run sugar plantations.
Freedom of Expression, Association, and Assembly
Since the promulgation in 2009 of the Charities and Societies Proclamation
(CSO Law), which regulates nongovernmental organizations, and the Anti-
Terrorism Proclamation, freedom of expression, assembly, and association have
been increasingly restricted in Ethiopia. The effect of these two laws, coupled
with the government’s widespread and persistent harassment, threats, and
intimidation of civil society activists, journalists, and others who comment on
sensitive issues or express views critical of government policy, has been severe.
Ethiopia’s most important human rights groups have been compelled to dramatically
scale-down operations or remove human rights activities from their mandates, and an unknown number of organizations have closed entirely. Several of
the country’s most experienced and reputable human rights activists have fled
the country due to threats. The environment is equally hostile for independent
media: more journalists have fled Ethiopia than any other country in the world
due to threats and intimidation in the last decade—at least 79, according to the
Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ).
The Anti-Terrorism Proclamation is being used to target perceived opponents,
stifle dissent, and silence journalists. In 2012, 30 political activists, opposition
party members, and journalists were convicted on vaguely defined terrorism
offenses. Eleven journalists have been convicted under the law since 2011.
On January 26, a court in Addis Ababa sentenced both deputy editor Woubshet
Taye and columnist Reeyot Alemu of the now-defunct weekly Awramaba Times to
14 years in prison. Reeyot’s sentence was later reduced to five years upon
appeal and most of the charges were dropped.
On July 13, veteran journalist and blogger Eskinder Nega, who won the prestigious
PEN America Freedom to Write Award in April, was sentenced to 18 years
in prison along with other journalists, opposition party members, and political
activists. Exiled journalists Abiye Teklemariam and Mesfin Negash were sentenced
to eight years each in absentia under a provision of the Anti-Terrorism
Law that has so far only been used against journalists. Andualem Arage, a member
of the registered opposition party Unity for Democracy and Justice (UDJ),
was sentenced to life for espionage, “disrupting the constitutional order,” and
recruitment and training to commit terrorist acts.
In September, the Ethiopian Federal High Court ordered the property of Eskinder
Nega, exiled journalist Abebe Belew, and opposition member Andualem Arage
to be confiscated.
On July 20, after the government claimed that reports by the newspaper Feteh
on Muslim protests and the prime minister’s health would endanger national
security, it seized the entire print run of the paper. On August 24, Feteh’s editor,
Temesghen Desalegn was arrested and denied bail. He was released on August
28, and all the charges were withdrawn pending further investigation.
Police on July 20 raided the home of journalist Yesuf Getachew, editor-in-chief of
the popular Muslim magazine Yemuslimoche Guday (Muslim Affairs), and arrested
him that night. The magazine has not been published since, and at this writing,
Yesuf remained in detention.
On December 27, 2011, two Swedish journalists, Martin Schibbye and Johan
Persson, were found guilty of supporting a terrorist organization after being
arrested while traveling in eastern Ethiopia with the Ogaden National Liberation
Front (ONLF), an outlawed armed insurgent group. They were also convicted of
entering the country illegally. The court sentenced them to 11 years in prison. On
September 10, they were pardoned and released along with more than 1,950
other prisoners as part of Ethiopia’s annual tradition of amnesty to celebrate
the Ethiopian New Year.
On several occasions in July, federal police used excessive force, including beatings,
to disperse largely Muslim protesters opposing the government’s interference
with the country’s Supreme Council of Islamic Affairs. On July 13, police
forcibly entered the Awalia mosque in Addis Ababa, smashing windows and firing
tear gas inside the mosque. On July 21, they forcibly broke up a sit-in at the
mosque. From July 19 to 21, dozens of people were rounded up and 17 prominent
leaders were held without charge for over a week. Many of the detainees
complained of mistreatment in detention.
Forced Displacement
The Ethiopian government plans to relocate up to 1.5 million people under its
“villagization” program, purportedly designed to improve access to basic services
by moving people to new villages in Ethiopia’s five lowland regions:
Gambella, Benishangul-Gumuz, Afar, Southern Nations Nationalities and
Peoples’ Region (SNNPR), and Somali Region.
In Gambella and in the South Omo Valley, forced displacement is taking place
without adequate consultation and compensation. In Gambella, Human Rights
Watch found that relocations were often forced and that villagers were being
moved from fertile to unfertile areas. People sent to the new villages frequently
have to clear the land and build their own huts under military supervision, while the promised services (schools, clinics, water pumps) often have not been put
in place.
In South Omo, around 200,000 indigenous peoples are being relocated and
their land expropriated to make way for state-run sugar plantations. Residents
reported being moved by force, seeing their grazing lands flooded or ploughed
up, and their access to the Omo River, essential for their survival and way of life,
curtailed.
Extrajudicial Executions, Torture and other Abuses in Detention
An Ethiopian government-backed paramilitary force known as the “Liyu Police”
executed at least 10 men who were in their custody and killed 9 other villagers
in Ethiopia’s Somali Region on March 16 and 17 following a confrontation over
an incident in Raqda village, Gashaamo district.
In April, unknown gunmen attacked a commercial farm owned by the Saudi Star
company in Gambella that was close to areas that had suffered a high proportion
of abuses during the villagization process. In responding to the attack,
Ethiopian soldiers went house to house looking for suspected perpetrators and
threatening villagers to disclose the whereabouts of the “rebels.” The military
arbitrarily arrested many young men and committed torture, rape, and other
abuses against scores of villagers while attempting to extract information.
Human Rights Watch continues to document torture at the federal police investigation
center known as Maekelawi in Addis Ababa, as well as at regional detention
centers and military barracks in Somali Region, Oromia, and Gambella.
There is erratic access to legal counsel and insufficient respect for other due
process guarantees during detention, pre-trial detention, and trial phases of
politically sensitive cases, placing detainees at risk of abuse.
Treatment of Ethiopian Migrant Domestic Workers
The videotaped beating and subsequent suicide on March 14 of Alem Dechasa-
Desisa, an Ethiopian domestic worker in Lebanon, brought increased scrutiny to
the plight of tens of thousands of Ethiopian women working in the Middle East.
Many migrant domestic workers incur heavy debts and face recruitment-related
abuses in Ethiopia prior to employment abroad, where they risk a wide range of
abuses from long hours of work to slavery-like conditions (see chapters on the
United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia, and Lebanon).
Key International Actors
Under Meles Zenawi’s leadership, Ethiopia played an important role in regional
affairs: deploying UN peacekeepers to Sudan’s disputed Abyei area, mediating
between Sudan and South Sudan, and sending troops into Somalia as part of
the international effort to combat al-Shabaab. Ethiopia’s relations with its
neighbor Eritrea remain poor following the costly border war of 1998-2000.
Eritrea accepted the ruling of an independent boundary commission that awarded
it disputed territory; Ethiopia did not.
Ethiopia is an important strategic and security ally for Western governments,
and the biggest recipient of development aid in Africa. It now receives approximately
US$3.5 billion in long-term development assistance each year. Donor
policies do not appear to have been significantly affected by the deteriorating
human rights situation in the country.
The World Bank approved a new Country Partnership Strategy in September that
takes little account of the human rights or good governance principles that it
and other development agencies say are essential for sustainable development.
It also approved a third phase of the Protection of Basic Services program (PBS
III) without triggering safeguards on involuntary resettlement and indigenous
peoples.