Ethiopia
The aftermath of Ethiopia’s landmark May 2005 parliamentary elections has
laid bare the deeply entrenched patterns of political repression, human rights
abuse and impunity that characterize the day-to-day reality of governance in
much of the country. This dispiriting reality has come as a shock to many
international observers who had viewed the electoral process with a great
deal of optimism. The run-up to the May elections witnessed displays of
openness and genuine political competition unprecedented in Ethiopia’s long
history. But many Ethiopians experienced these limited openings in a context
still dominated by heavy-handed government efforts to suppress and punish
any form of political dissent. Worse, the aftermath of the May elections has
been marred by seemingly intractable controversy and displays of government
brutality that threaten to reverse the gains yielded by the electoral
process.
Post-election Uncertainty and Violence
Official tallies in the weeks following the May 15 voting indicated that opposition
parties had made enormous gains in parliament but had fallen well
short of obtaining a majority. The largest opposition coalition, the Coalition
for Unity and Democracy (CUD), refused to accept those results, alleging
that it had been robbed of outright victory by widespread government fraud.
The government, in turn, has accused the CUD of conspiring to overthrow
the government by force. At the time of writing, a full five months after the
elections, it is still unclear whether the CUD will take its seats in parliament.
These tensions exploded in early June, when protests broke out in Addis
Ababa in defiance of a government ban on public assemblies. Police and military
forces responded with excessive force, killing at least thirty-six unarmed
civilians and wounding more than 100. Security forces then arrested several
thousand opposition supporters throughout the country. In November negotiations
between the government and leading opposition parties broke
down, sparking a fresh wave of protests. Ethiopian security forces again
reacted with brutality, killing at least 46 people and arresting more than 4000 in Addis Ababa and other towns. The government then ordered the
arrest of several dozen opposition politicians, journalists, editors and civil
society activists. Ethiopian authorities have indicated that several among
them are likely to face charges of treason, which carries a potential sentence
of death under Ethiopian law.
Political Repression
Government officials and security forces in much of Ethiopia make routine
use of various forms of human rights abuse to deter and punish dissent. For
more than a decade, authorities in the country’s vast Oromia region have
used exaggerated concerns about armed insurgency and “terrorism” to justify
the torture, imprisonment and sustained harassment of their critics and even
ordinary citizens. Student protests in 2004 at Addis Ababa University and in
secondary schools throughout Oromia led to the arrest of hundreds of students,
many of whom were mistreated while in custody. Ever since the
protests and throughout 2005, regional officials in Oromia have gone to
oppressive lengths to monitor and control the speech and conduct of students
and teachers alike.
In rural areas in Oromia, local officials often threaten to withhold vital agricultural
inputs such as fertilizer from impoverished farmers if they speak out
against them or their policies. In other cases, local officials selectively enforce
harsh penalties for the non- repayment of debts to justify the imprisonment
of their critics or the seizure of their property. In the months prior to the
May 2005 elections, regional officials in Oromia created new quasi-governmental
structures used to subject the rural population to intense levels of surveillance
and to impose restrictions on farmers’ freedoms of movement, association
and speech.
Abuses Committed by the Ethiopian Armed Forces
The Ethiopian government has taken no meaningful action to address widespread
atrocities committed by Ethiopian military forces in the remote
southwestern region of Gambella. Federal authorities have refused even to
investigate human rights abuses so severe that they may rise to the level of crimes against humanity and continue to allow the authors of those crimes
the enjoyment of near-total impunity.
In December 2003, military personnel joined civilian mobs in a rampage
through indigenous Anuak neighborhoods in Gambella town, murdering as
many as 424 Anuak civilians. In the months that followed, Ethiopian military
forces subjected Anuak communities throughout the region to widespread
and systematic acts of murder, rape, torture, arbitrary imprisonment and the
destruction of entire villages. The immediate trigger for these abuses was a
series of attacks in 2004 by Anuak civilians against civilians on other ethnic
groups in the area.
A government-sponsored Commission of Inquiry set up to investigate the
December 2003 violence in Gambella town resulted in a whitewash, and
since then the government has refused even to investigate any of the abuses
that have taken place throughout the region since early 2004. Reports of
ongoing abuses continued to emerge from Gambella in 2005, albeit on a
smaller scale than the violence in late 2003 and 2004.
Security forces frequently arrest civilians in other parts of Ethiopia, claiming
they are members of the Oromo Liberation Front in Oromia state or the
Ogaden National Liberation Front and Al-Itihad Al-Islamiya in Somali state.
Few of those arrested are brought to trial. Some are released; others are kept
in arbitrary detention for prolonged periods, often without a hearing or cause
shown, sometimes incommunicado. Frequent reports of extrajudicial executions
and torture emerge from Somali region, but access to the region has
been restricted by the military to such a degree that these reports are impossible
to confirm.
Restrictions on the Press
Many independent journalists, editors and publishers continue to endure
harassment and intimidation, and criminal penalties for a range of speechrelated
penalties remain on the books. In June 2005, the Ministry of
Information revoked the licenses of five Ethiopian journalists working for the Voice of America and Radio Deutsche-Welle because it disapproved of their
coverage of the elections and the post-election controversy.
Judicial Delay
The courts in Ethiopia often step in to order the release of government critics
jailed on trumped-up charges of treason or armed insurrection. However,
judicial action often occurs only after unreasonably long delays, both because
of the courts’ enormous workload and because of excessive judicial deference
to bad faith police requests for additional time to produce evidence. In addition,
courts have shown themselves far less likely to contest prolonged pretrial
detention in high-profile cases that have the attention of high-level federal
officials.
Fourteen years after the overthrow of the former military government (the
Derg), several thousand of its former officials remain jailed awaiting trial,
charged with genocide, crimes against humanity, and major felonies. Former
dictator Mengistu Haile Mariam, on trial in absentia, remains a guest of the
Mugabe government in Zimbabwe, with little chance of being held accountable
for his abuses so long as he remains there.
Local Human Rights Defenders
Ethiopia has only one large, nationwide human rights organization, the
Ethiopian Human Rights Council (EHRCO). Government officials routinely
accuse the organization of working to advance an anti-government political
agenda and its staff and ordinary members are often subjected to harassment
and intimidation by local officials and members of the security forces. In June
2005, three EHRCO investigators were arrested and taken to military detention
camps because of their efforts to document the human toll of the government’s
post-election crackdown. All three were subsequently released but
were threatened with future criminal proceedings.
Another human rights organization, the Human Rights League, reopened its
offices in March 2005 after winning a protracted court battle against government efforts to ban its operations. It remains to be seen whether the organization
will be allowed to operate free of government interference.
Key International Actors
Ethiopia is considered an essential partner of the United States in its “war on
terrorism,” and Washington has generally been unwilling to apply meaningful
pressure on the Ethiopian government over its human rights record. The
U.S. suspects Islamic extremist groups are hiding in bordering areas of
Somalia, and sometimes inside Ethiopia itself. The U.S. military, operating
primarily out of a base in Djibouti, cooperates closely with the Ethiopian
armed forces in counterterrorism efforts and capacity building work. The
United States is also the largest donor of bilateral aid in Ethiopia.
Other Western donors have also been reluctant to criticize Ethiopia’s human
rights record and have in many respects actually embraced the Ethiopian
government as something of a model for Africa. UK Prime Minister Tony
Blair invited Ethiopian Prime Minister Meles Zenawi to play a leading role
on Blair’s Commission for Africa, which was charged with finding solutions
to some of the continent’s most intractable problems. There is no indication
that donors’ unusually robust criticism following the post-election crackdown
in Addis Ababa will translate into a sustained willingness to be more vocal in
demanding that the federal government respect human rights.
The United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) maintains
approximately 3300 troops and military observers along the twenty-five kilometer-
wide armistice buffer line between the two countries. In September
2005 the Security Council voted to extend UNMEE’s mandate through March
2006, as tensions remain high between the two countries (see Eritrea chapter).