Ethiopia
The Ethiopian government’s human rights record remains poor, marked by an
ever-hardening intolerance towards meaningful political dissent or independent
criticism. Ethiopian military forces have continued to commit war crimes and
other serious abuses with impunity in the course of counterinsurgency campaigns
in Ethiopia’s eastern Somali Region and in neighboring Somalia.
Local-level elections in April 2008 provided a stark illustration of the extent to
which the government has successfully crippled organized opposition of any
kind—the ruling party and its affiliates won more than 99 percent of all constituencies,
and the vast majority of seats were uncontested. In 2008 the government
launched a direct assault on civil society by introducing legislation that
would criminalize most independent human rights work and subject NGOs to pervasive
interference and control.
Political Repression
The limited opening of political space that preceded Ethiopia’s 2005 elections
has been entirely reversed. Government opponents and ordinary citizens alike
face repression that discourages and punishes free expression and political activity.
Ethiopian government officials regularly subject government critics or perceived
opponents to harassment, arrest, and even torture, often reflexively accusing
them of membership in “anti-peace” or “anti-people” organizations. Farmers
who criticize local leaders face threats of losing vital agricultural inputs such as
fertilizer or the selective enforcement of debts owed to the state. The net result is
that in most of Ethiopia, and especially in the rural areas where the overwhelming
majority of the population lives, there is no organized opposition to the ruling
Ethiopian People’s Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF).
The local-level elections in April 2008 were for kebele and wereda administrations,
which provide essential government services and humanitarian assistance,
and are often the institutions used to directly implement repressive government
policies. In the vast majority of constituencies there were no opposition candidates
at all, and candidates aligned with the EPRDF won more than 99 percent of
all available seats.
Where opposition candidates did contest they faced abuse and improper procedural
obstacles to registration. Candidates in Ethiopia’s Oromia region were
detained, threatened with violence by local officials, and accused of affiliation to
the rebel Oromo Liberation Front (OLF). Oromia, Ethiopia’s most populous region,
has long suffered from heavy-handed government repression, with students,
activists, or critics of rural administrations regularly accused of being OLF operatives.
Such allegations often lead to arbitrary imprisonment and torture.
War Crimes and Other Abuses by Ethiopian Military Forces
Ethiopian National Defense Force (ENDF) personnel stationed in Mogadishu continued
in 2008 to use mortars, artillery, and “Katyusha” rockets indiscriminately
in response to insurgent attacks, devastating entire neighborhoods of the city.
Insurgent attacks often originate in populated areas, prompting Ethiopian bombardment
of civilian homes and public spaces, sometimes wiping out entire families.
Many of these attacks constitute war crimes. In July ENDF forces bombarded
part of the strategic town of Beletweyne after coming under attack by insurgent
forces based there, displacing as many as 75,000 people.
2008 was also marked by the proliferation of other violations of the laws of war
by ENDF personnel in Somalia. Until late 2007, Ethiopian forces were reportedly
reasonably disciplined and restrained in their day-to-day interactions with Somali
civilians in Mogadishu. However, throughout 2008 ENDF forces in Mogadishu participated
in widespread acts of murder, rape, assault, and looting targeting ordinary
residents of the city, often alongside forces allied to the Somali Transitional
Federal Government. In an April raid on a Mogadishu mosque ENDF soldiers
reportedly killed 21 people; seven of the dead had their throats cut.
ENDF forces have also increasingly fired indiscriminately on crowds of civilians
when they come under attack. In August ENDF soldiers were hit by a roadside
bomb near the town of Afgooye and responded by firing wildly; in the resulting
bloodbath as many as 60 civilians were shot and killed, including the passengers
of two crowded minibuses.
In Ethiopia itself, the ENDF continues to wage a counterinsurgency campaign
against the rebel Ogaden National Liberation Front (ONLF) in the country’s restive Somali region. The scale and intensity of military operations seems to have
declined from a peak in mid-2007, but arbitrary detentions, torture, and other
abuses continue. Credible reports indicate that vital food aid to the droughtaffected
region has been diverted and misused as a weapon to starve out rebelheld
areas. The military continues to severely restrict access to conflict-affected
regions and the Ethiopian government has not reversed its decision to evict the
International Committee of the Red Cross from the region in July 2007.
The Ethiopian government denies all allegations of abuses by its military and
refuses to facilitate independent investigations. There have been no serious
efforts to investigate or ensure accountability for war crimes and crimes against
humanity committed in Somali Region and in neighboring Somalia in 2007 and
2008. Nor have ENDF officers or civilian officials been held accountable for crimes
against humanity that ENDF forces carried out against ethnic Anuak communities
during a counterinsurgency campaign in Gambella region in late 2003 and 2004.
Regional Renditions
In early 2007 at least 90 men, women, and children from 18 different countries
fleeing conflict in Somalia were arrested in Kenya and subsequently deported to
Somalia and then Ethiopia, where many were interrogated by US intelligence
agents. An unknown number of people arrested by Ethiopian forces in Somalia
were also directly transferred to Ethiopia. Many of the victims of these “regional
renditions” were released in mid-2007 and early 2008, but at least two men,
including a Kenyan and a Canadian national, remain in Ethiopian detention
almost two years after their deportation from Kenya. The whereabouts and fate of
at least 22 others rendered to Ethiopia, including Eritreans, Somalis, and
Ethiopian Ogadeni and Oromo, is unknown.
Civil Society and Free Expression
The environment for civil society continues to deteriorate. In 2008 the government
announced new legislation—the Charities and Societies Proclamation—
which purports to provide greater oversight and transparency on civil society
activities. In fact, the law would undermine the independence of civil society and criminalizes the work of many human rights organizations. At this writing, the law
looked set to be introduced to parliament.
Alongside a complex and onerous system of government surveillance and control,
the law would place sharp restrictions on the kinds of work permissible to foreign
organizations and Ethiopian civil society groups that receive some foreign funding—
barring such organizations from any kind of work touching on human rights
issues. Individuals who fail to comply with the law’s Byzantine provisions could
face criminal prosecution.
A new media law passed in July promises to reform some of the most repressive
aspects of the previous legal framework. Most notably, the law eliminates the
practice of pretrial detention for journalists—although in August, the prominent
editor of the Addis Ababa-based Reporter newspaper was imprisoned without
charge for several days in connection with a story printed in the paper. In spite of
its positive aspects, the law remains flawed—it grants the government significant
leeway to restrain free speech, including by summarily impounding publications
on grounds of national security or public order. The law also retains criminal
penalties including prison terms for journalists found guilty of libel or defamation.
In March 2008 civil society activists Daniel Bekele and Netsanet Demissie were
released from more than two years of incarceration, but only after the Ethiopian
Federal High Court convicted them of “incitement” related to the 2005 elections.
Key International Actors
The United States and European donor states provide the Ethiopian government
with large sums of bilateral assistance, including direct budgetary support from
the United Kingdom and military assistance from the US. The US is Ethiopia’s
largest bilateral donor and has also provided logistical and political support for
Ethiopia’s protracted intervention in Somalia, and provides bilateral assistance to
the Ethiopian military. Donor governments view Ethiopia as an important ally in
an unstable region and, in the case of the US, in the “global war on terror.”
The US, UK, and other key donors and political allies have consistently refused to
publicly criticize widespread abuses or to demand meaningful improvements in Ethiopia’s human rights record. The sole exception in 2008 lay in donor government
efforts to lobby against the repressive civil society legislation introduced by
the government. No major donor made any significant effort to raise serious concerns
about or demand a concrete response to war crimes and crimes against
humanity in Ethiopia or ENDF atrocities in Somalia.
Ethiopia remains deadlocked over a boundary dispute with Eritrea dating from the
two countries’ 1998-2000 war. The war in Somalia is another source of tension
between the two countries, with Eritrea backing and hosting one faction of the
insurgency Ethiopian troops are fighting against in Somalia. Eritrea also plays
host to other Ethiopian rebel movements, notably the OLF and ONLF, with the aim
of destabilizing the Ethiopian government.
China’s importance as a trading partner to Ethiopia grows year by year. According
to official figures Chinese investment in Ethiopia totals more than US$350 million
annually, up from just US$10 million in 2003.
Ethiopia is due to be reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism of
the UN Human Rights Council in December 2009.
