Ethiopia
The Ethiopian government continues to deny many of its citizens’ basic
human rights. Police and security forces have harassed, illegally
detained, tortured, and in some cases, killed members of the political
opposition, demonstrators and suspected insurgents. The government
has also continued its efforts to muzzle the private press through the use
of criminal sanctions and other forms of intimidation.
Ethiopia is affected by chronic food security problems, but the government’s
attempts to address the issue through a massive resettlement program
appear to be courting humanitarian disaster in some areas.
Police Brutality, Torture, and Illegal Detention
Police forces often use excessive force to quell peaceful demonstrations,
with demonstrators subject to mass arrest and mistreatment. In January
2004, between 330 and 350 Addis Ababa University students peacefully
protesting the arrest of eight other students two days earlier were themselves
arrested by Federal Police. While in detention, the students were
forced to run and crawl barefoot over sharp gravel for several hours at a
time. Police have repeatedly employed similar methods of torture and
yet are rarely held accountable for their excesses. Police also responded
with force in the early months of 2004 to student demonstrations in
secondary schools throughout Oromia. The Ethiopian Human Rights
Council (EHRCO) reported that dozens of students were detained,
some of whom reported being mistreated while in custody. One student
was reportedly shot and killed by police during a student demonstration
in Tikur Inchini.
In August 2004, several dozen individuals were arrested in and around
the town of Agaro in Oromia and imprisoned for allegedly supporting
the outlawed Oromo Liberation Front (OLF). Some prisoners reported
mistreatment while in custody and police reportedly threatened family members wishing to visit detained relatives. As of October 2004, the
prisoners remained in detention even though none had been charged
with any crime.
In July 2004, the Ethiopian government revoked the license of the venerable
Oromo self-help association Mecha Tulema for allegedly carrying
out “political activities” in violation of its charter. The police subsequently
arrested four of the organization’s leaders on charges of “terrorism”
and providing support to the OLF. The four were released on bail
in August but were arbitrarily arrested a week later.
Repression of Opposition Political Parties
Ethiopia will hold national legislative elections in May 2005, and the
continuing intolerance of dissent on the part of many officials raises
serious concerns as to whether opposition candidates will be able to
contest that poll in an environment free of fear. The last national elections
in 2000, and local elections held in most of the country in 2001,
were marred by serious irregularities including violence directed against
opposition supporters and candidates in the most closely contested constituencies.
Much of that abuse was orchestrated by provincial officials
belonging to parties allied with the ruling coalition. EHRCO observers
monitoring local elections held in Somali state in January 2004 reported
widespread instances of intimidation, harassment, and arrest of opposition
candidates.
Abuses Committed by the Ethiopian Armed Forces
The Ethiopian military has committed human rights abuses against
civilians. In Gambella state, armed attacks directed against the Anuak
community claimed up to 424 lives in the last weeks of 2003 and beginning
of 2004, with at least some soldiers and policemen participating in
the violence. The immediate trigger for the violence was a series of
attacks by Anuak insurgents against civilians of other ethnic groups in the area. A government-appointed Commission of Inquiry largely
absolved the military of any blame, but serious doubts have been raised
about the thoroughness of that commission’s work and the credibility of
its findings. Many eyewitnesses allege that military involvement in the
violence was widespread and apparently well-coordinated, and reports
continue to emerge of attacks carried out by the military against Anuak
in the countryside. The violence has left some 50,000 people displaced
within Gambella state and led several thousand Anuaks to flee to
refugee camps near Pochalla, Sudan.
Occasional skirmishes between security forces and armed insurrectionary
bands continue in other parts of the country. Security forces frequently
arrest civilians, claiming they are members of the OLF in
Oromia state or the Ogaden National Liberation Front (ONLF) and
Al-Itihad Al-Islamiya in Somali state. Few of those arrested are brought
to trial. Some are released; others are kept in arbitrary detention for
prolonged periods, often without a hearing or cause shown, sometimes
incommunicado. Frequent reports of extrajudicial executions and torture
emerge from Somali region, but access to the region has been
restricted by the military to such a degree that these reports are impossible
to confirm.
Restrictions on the Press
Ethiopia’s last imprisoned journalist, Tewodros Kassa, was freed from
prison in September 2004 after serving a two-year sentence for allegedly
defaming a dead businessman and inciting “political violence.”
However, many independent journalists, editors, and publishers continue
to endure harassment and intimidation, and criminal penalties for a
range of speech-related offenses remain on the books.
Serious concerns remain over the government’s efforts to introduce a
controversial new press law. The government has agreed to reconsider
some of the more worrying provisions of the law, such as criminal sanctions for offenses by journalists and the creation of a state-run press
council, but it remains to be seen whether any substantive changes will
be made. Ethiopia’s only independent journalists’ organization, the
Ethiopia Free Press Journalists Association (EFJA), was shut down
shortly after publicly opposing the draft law in late 2003, ostensibly for
failure to submit required annual audits. The EFJA’s leadership was then
purged and replaced at a meeting organized by government officials.
Many of the EFJA’s members continue to contest the legitimacy of the
government’s actions.
Food Security
Ethiopia has a chronic food insecurity problem, and in recent years
failed rains have left millions of people in need of food aid. In an effort
to find a long-term solution to these problems, the Ethiopian government
has launched a U.S. $3.2 billion plan aimed at ending the country’s
dependence on foreign aid over the next several years. A key component
of that program is the planned resettlement of 2.2 million people
from drought-prone areas to relatively fertile and underpopulated
land. However, appalling logistical failures have left many of the
350,000 who have already moved without access to clean water, health
care, shelter, education, or even food. Many resettled populations suffer
from unacceptably high levels of morbidity, malnutrition, and child
mortality. These problems may worsen as the pace of resettlement
accelerates in the next 2-3 years. Many settlers have been induced to
migrate to the new sites by false promises of schools, clinics, wells, food
aid, and new houses.
Judicial Delay
Thirteen years after the overthrow of the former military government
(the Derg), several thousand of its former officials remain jailed without
trial, charged with genocide, crimes against humanity, and major
felonies. Of those who have been tried, many have been acquitted, some after more than a decade of imprisonment. The loss of evidence over
the years has resulted in some acquittals, but such losses may also make
presenting an effective defense more difficult. Former dictator
Mengistu Haile Mariam, on trial in absentia, remains a guest of the
Mugabe government in Zimbabwe, with little chance of being held
accountable for his abuses so long as he remains there.
Tensions with Eritrea
While the governments of both Ethiopia and Eritrea insist that they are
committed to a peaceful resolution of their ongoing border dispute, the
situation remains at an impasse. In August 2004, the Boundary
Commission charged with demarcating the border reported that it was
impossible for it to make any progress under the present circumstances.
That commission’s 2002 decision was rejected by Ethiopia in 2003
when it became clear that the contested village of Badme, where the
war started, would fall on the Eritrean side. Eritrea has refused to negotiate,
insisting that Ethiopia is bound by the commission’s decision,
while Ethiopia refused to consider any solution that requires it to surrender
control of Badme. In December 2004, Prime Minister Meles
Zenawi softened his previous position by announcing acceptance of the
Commission’s decision “in principle” and calling for a “dialogue” over
its implementation.
Human Rights Commissioner and Ombudsman
After years of delay, the Ethiopian government appointed Dr. Kasa
Gebre Hiwot and Abay Tekle Beyene to fill the constitutionally-mandated
posts of head of the Human Rights Commission and
Ombudsman, respectively. Many opposition MPs opposed both
appointments, complaining that they were forced through without
meaningful debate or consultation. It remains to be seen whether the
government will provide these institutions with the capacity to do their
work effectively and respect their independence.
Key International Actors
Ethiopia is considered an essential partner of the U.S. in its “war on
terrorism” and Washington has generally been unwilling to apply meaningful
pressure on the Ethiopian government over its human rights
record. The U.S. suspects Islamic extremist groups are hiding in bordering
areas of Somalia, and sometimes inside Ethiopia itself. In 2003,
the U.S. military, operating out of its base in Djibouti, trained an
Ethiopian army division in counter-terrorism. The United States is also
the largest donor of bilateral aid in Ethiopia.
The United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) maintains
just under 4,000 troops along the twenty-five kilometer-wide
armistice buffer line between the two countries. In September 2004 the
Security Council voted to extend UNMEE’s mandate through March
2005.