EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA OVERVIEW
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Introduction
The continued expansion of European institutions in 2002 marked significant
economic and political progress in many parts of the region. The North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), a quintessential Cold War institution, once again
stretched across old divides to extend membership invitations to the three former
Soviet Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, as well as to Bulgaria, Slovenia,
Romania, and Slovakia. The European Union (E.U.) and ten candidate countries
made rapid progress toward their proposed 2004 admission to the E.U.
The remarkable pace of European integration could not mask continued serious
human rights problems throughout the region, however. In fact, it accentuated the
increasing disparity between the progress in Central and Eastern Europe and the
deteriorating rights situation in much of the former Soviet Union.Continued integration
also brought new human rights challenges to Western European states
adjusting to their growing multicultural reality.Even as the European Union poised
itself to become more diverse, it became less friendly to migrants and certain
minority communities. The popularity of political parties touting anti-immigrant
and nationalistic agendas drove more moderate politicians to embrace increasingly
restrictive asylum and immigration policies that threatened the fundamental rights
of migrants, asylum seekers, and refugees at both the national and the European
Union level.
In some cases integration got ahead of reform, as when NATO offered to partner
with Russia in a NATO-Russia Council, notwithstanding continued violations
of human rights and humanitarian law committed by Russian troops in Chechnya.
In a similar fashion, the Council of Europe admitted Bosnia and Herzegovina
although it had achieved few of the conditions originally set for its admission. Such
premature integration promised to strain European institutions and the principles
on which they were founded.
Throughout the Europe and Central Asia region, repressive governments justified
violations as necessary for the United States-led global fight against terrorism.
Russia fought its abusive war in Chechnya,Uzbekistan continued its violent crackdown
against independent Muslims, and Belarus gave its police Stalinesque powers
of surveillance, all in the name of combating terrorism. Even former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic sought advantage in the anti-terrorism discourse,
defending himself against war crimes charges at the International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) by arguing that his troops had been combating
Muslim terrorists in Kosovo.
A Region Divided
While the prospect of European Union membership secured substantial
improvements in candidate states, especially Turkey, progress in other parts of the
region stalled, or reversed. The year saw a widening gap between those countries
choosing European integration and democratization, and those—particularly
among states of the former Soviet Union—opting for the brutal and repressive
practices of the past.
Russia seemed to embrace reform with the entry into force of a new criminal
procedure code, but this positive step was completely eclipsed by continued atrocities
committed in Chechnya, which remained the region’s most intense human
rights crisis. Throughout the year, Russian troops brutalized Chechen civilians in
the course of sweep operations. Purportedly searching for rebel fighters, Russian
troops rounded up and detained thousands of civilians, many of whom faced torture.
Hundreds last seen in Russian custody simply “disappeared” during the year.
Some prosecutors opened inquiries into alleged abuses, but only a handful of servicemen
were the subject of serious investigations or trial. Russia also made an
unprecedented push to force persons displaced by the conflict out of their tent
camps in Chechnya and Ingushetia. In June, the Russian authorities closed one
camp, offering their inhabitants no viable alternative shelter and effectively forcing
them to return home to the war zone.As this report went to press, Russian officials
were threatening additional camp closures.
Chechen rebels also failed to respect the laws of war, shocking the world with the
October hostage taking of seven hundred civilians in a Moscow theater. The Russian
government’s rescue operation left 128 dead from the consequences of inhaling
a gas pumped into the theater to incapacitate the hostage-takers.The government’s
failure to provide victims adequate medical treatment raised questions about
whether it had met its obligation to minimize the loss of civilian life. But no mishandling
by the Russian authorities could obscure the severity of the crime against
humanity committed by the hostage-takers.
The war in Chechnya spilled over into neighboring Georgia,where several thousand
Chechen civilians sought refuge. Chechen rebels hid in their midst in the
Pankisi Gorge, which they used as a rest and re-supply base in their military campaign
against Russian armed forces. Under United States (U.S.) and Russian pressure,
Georgian security forces undertook operations to counter Chechen rebel
activity in the Pankisi Gorge. As of mid-November, Human Rights Watch had
received reports of a number of arbitrary arrests and illegal detentions and deportations,
as well as one extrajudicial execution, committed in the course of these
operations.
The year also saw a deepening human rights crisis in Central Asia. The U.S. and
its allies in the war in Afghanistan sought critical logistical support from the repressive governments in the region,which in turn found new excuses to disregard their
human rights commitments.
Turkmenistan remained one of the most repressive states in the world. The government
tolerated no political opposition, no independent media, and no independent
human rights activity. At this writing, there were grave fears of an
impending intensified crackdown after a late-November assassination attempt
against President Saparmurad Niazov.
In early 2002, Uzbekistan took a few halting positive steps, including the registration
of one independent human rights organization and the trial and conviction
of several law enforcement officers for two deaths in custody. In March,Uzbek President
Islam Karimov visited U.S. President George W. Bush in Washington and
signed an ambitious agreement to uphold human rights. But after that, forward
progress appeared to halt, and human rights abuses continued unabated.Hundreds
of independent Muslims were arrested, tortured, convicted, and sentenced to ten to
twenty years in prison. In particular, the government targeted members of Hizb ut-
Tahrir (Party of Liberation), a non-violent Islamic group that sought to establish a
Caliphate, or Islamic state, in Central Asia. As of this writing, five people had died
of injuries from apparent torture in Uzbek prisons during the year, and six human
rights defenders were in prison or pre-trial detention, while a seventh was held in
forced psychiatric hospitalization.
In Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan the governments demonstrated increasing intolerance
of opposition views. Leading Kyrgyz and Kazakh opposition figures, journalists,
and human rights defenders faced physical attacks, harassment, detention,
arbitrary or spurious criminal charges, and imprisonment after unfair trials. Tajikistan’s
political opposition also faced obstruction,with repression focused particularly
in the north of the country, where the government imprisoned a former
governor and eighteen others after a closed trial. Uzbekistan’s intolerance of Hizb
ut-Tahrir seemed to catch on with Kazakh, Kyrgyz, and Tajik authorities, who
stepped up their repression of the group, arresting, trying, and convicting dozens
of members for distributing its leaflets and other non-violent activity.
Human rights continued to deteriorate in Belarus, as President Alexander
Lukashenka sought to consolidate his power by relentlessly persecuting his political
opponents, independent civil society, and the media. Hopes of a thorough
democratic transition also seemed to recede in Ukraine, as the government tightened
its grip on independent media through arbitrary tax inspections and licensing
procedures, censorship, harassment, and violence. The killings of three
journalists in the past two years remained unsolved, and journalists faced repeated
threats and beatings, in at least one case with police involvement.
The threat of instability posed by poor governance in the former Soviet Union
became apparent during the year when security forces clashed with demonstrators
in both Kyrgyzstan and Azerbaijan. In both countries, citizens who lacked other
legitimate avenues for the expression of their grievances took to the streets, and
governments intolerant of public criticism reacted with violence and repression. In
Kyrgyzstan, police opened fire on demonstrators protesting the apparently politically
motivated detention of a popular member of parliament; in Azerbaijan the
police fired on protestors seeking improved economic conditions.During the year, the authorities in Belarus, Uzbekistan, and Ukraine broke up similar demonstrations
and jailed participants; in Armenia, protesters faced arrest, fines, and detention
after demonstrations.
Stalled Peace Building in the Balkans
The Balkan states did not follow the course of many former Soviet countries
backward toward the authoritarianism of the past, but neither did they unequivocally
choose the rule of law, respect for human rights, and European integration. In
contrast to much of the past decade, the year saw sustained peace in the Balkans,
but disappointing progress on human rights. The continued failure of governments
in the region to come fully to terms with the crimes committed during the
wars of the Yugoslav break-up was a major problem, with a detrimental impact on
refugee return, reconciliation, and political normalization.
In Croatia, President Stjepan Mesic argued forcefully for war crimes accountability
and cooperation with the ICTY.Mesic had little authority to pursue cooperation,
however, and the government adamantly refused to arrest two former senior
Croatian generals sought by the ICTY.
More than half of the twenty-four individuals publicly indicted by the ICTY
who were still at large in the region were believed to be harbored in Republika Srpska—
the Bosnian Serb entity of Bosnia and Herzegovina—which continued to
refuse to cooperate with the Hague tribunal. NATO troops arrested four indictees
in Bosnia during the year, but Bosnian Serb wartime leader Radovan Karadzic
remained at large there, and the Republika Srpska president and prime minister
condemned NATO operations aimed at apprehending him.
The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (F.R.Yugoslavia) also flouted its obligations
to cooperate with the ICTY.Under pressure of a cut-off in U.S. aid, F.R.Yugoslavia
arrested and transferred one indictee to The Hague and adopted a law on cooperation
with the tribunal. This law contained a number of loopholes, however, and in
a November statement to the United Nations (U.N.) Security Council, ICTY Prosecutor
Carla Del Ponte complained that F.R. Yugoslavia was harboring Bosnian
Serb wartime military commander Ratko Mladic and continuing to block access to
documents she had requested.
The trial of former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic for crimes committed
during the wars in Bosnia, Croatia, and Kosovo began in February. Defending
himself,Milosevic used the opportunity to advance a nationalist version of the war
to the court of public opinion in F.R.Yugoslavia, and current Yugoslav and Serbian
government leaders failed to offer the public an alternative version.
Other than the Milosevic trial, progress on accountability for war crimes committed
in Kosovo was also limited. Although the ICTY had opened investigations,
it failed to indict any Kosovo Albanians for crimes committed during the war.
Neither the U.N. Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) nor the Serbian government took
effective steps to hold lower-level Serbs accountable for war crimes. And when the
U.N. began arresting Kosovo Albanian rebel leaders for crimes committed during
and after the war, the Kosovo government protested that the arrests were politically
motivated.
Finally, in Macedonia, under pressure from the U.S. and the E.U., the government
adopted an amnesty for all crimes relating to the 2001 conflict other than
those that would be prosecuted by the ICTY. Because the tribunal had limited
capacity to pursue prosecutions in Macedonia, the practical effect of the law was
immunity for serious violations committed by both sides during the conflict.
The authorities in Bosnia,Croatia, and Serbia all conducted local war crimes trials
during the year, but in all three countries those proceedings were seriously
flawed by evident witness tampering and a biased judiciary.
In sum, it became abundantly clear in 2002 that the Balkans was a region unreconciled
to its wartime past. The result was a grave injustice to the thousands of victims
of war crimes committed during the Yugoslav wars. It also had a profound
effect on the region’s reconstruction, reintegration, and political development.
With each ethnic population still holding the others collectively responsible for
wartime abuses, refugees and the internally displaced remained reluctant to return
home to communities where they would be in the minority. Even if the displaced
did not fear their neighbors, they often had no home to which to return. The lack
of accountability for violations committed during the war helped sustain laws that
stripped some refugees and internally displaced of their pre-war property rights,on
the presumption that they had abandoned their homes voluntarily, rather than out
of fear. As the year came to a close, more than 1.5 million refugees and internally
displaced persons remained unable or unwilling to return to their pre-war homes
in the region, and much of the wartime ethnic cleansing seemed increasingly irreversible.
The Challenges of European Union Expansion
At their December 2001 council meeting in Laeken (Belgium), E.U. heads of
state agreed to convene a “Convention on the Future of Europe.” Throughout the
year, convention delegates from member state governments, parliaments, the European
Parliament, and the European Commission debated how to restructure the
E.U. to improve its effectiveness and pave the way for its planned expansion in 2004.
The prospect of a larger and more thoroughly integrated E.U. continued to have
a profound effect on the human rights situation in both E.U. member and applicant
states. Perhaps most remarkable were the developments in Turkey during
2002. After two years during which the draw of E.U. membership had had limited
impact on the human rights situation in Turkey, the Turkish government seemed
to get serious about showing the E.U. its reformist stripes in 2002. Significant
reforms adopted in February and August included repeal of the death penalty,
removal of some significant restraints on the use of the Kurdish language, and steps
to address the persistent problem of torture by restricting the length of time
detainees could be held without access to a lawyer.While these were welcome steps,
much remained to be done to implement them and address other serious problems,
including the plight of hundreds of thousands of Kurds displaced from the formerly
war-torn southeast and continued restrictions on free expression that landed
scores in jail for peaceful expression of their views.
On the eve of its December summit in Copenhagen, it was unclear whether the E.U. would set a date for membership negotiations with Turkey. E.U. officials
acknowledged the significant strides Turkey had taken in 2002, but nonetheless
noted accurately that Turkey still did not meet the Union’s political criteria for
membership, a prerequisite for negotiations to begin. Some European leaders
voiced other objections, suggesting that the European Union would never welcome
a predominantly Muslim country into its midst. Most significantly, in November
the president of the Convention on the Future of Europe,Valéry Giscard d’Estaing,
gave an interview in which he was reported to say that the admission of Turkey
would be “the end of the European Union,”alluding to Turkey’s Muslim population
and distinct culture. E.U. officials scrambled to distance themselves from his comments
and emphasize that Turkey was a candidate on equal footing with others, eligible
for admission upon satisfaction of the conditions set for all applicant states.
By introducing other cultural and political considerations into what should have
been a transparent assessment of human rights progress, Giscard d’Estaing’s comments
threatened to undermine the Turkish authorities’ confidence in the process
and distract them from pressing forward on critical reforms.As this report went to
press, a newly elected government with Islamist roots was working hard to establish
its Western-oriented credentials. With the appropriate encouragement from
the European Union, it appeared likely to continue to progress toward greater
respect for human rights and the rule of law.
Giscard d’Estaing’s remarks on Turkey’s E.U. candidacy also highlighted the
most significant human rights challenge the E.U. itself faced: ensuring tolerance
and respect for the rights of minorities in a growing and increasingly multicultural
community of states.Throughout the E.U. and its candidate states, minorities continued
to suffer serious violations of their rights. In the countries of Central and
Eastern Europe, Roma in particular faced persistent problems of police abuse,
racist violence, and official discrimination in obtaining access to housing, health
care, education, and other public services. The European Union continued to press
for progress in the treatment of Roma in applicant states, but often failed to apply
the same scrutiny within the Union, where their situation also often fell short of
international standards.
The year also saw an alarming growth in incidents of anti-Semitic violence in
Western Europe,with widespread reports of harassment,personal attacks, and vandalism
of Jewish property. Synagogues were torched in Belgium and France. Initial
responses from a number of governments were disappointing. Local authorities
stepped up security, opened investigations, and promised to hold those responsible
accountable, but national and regional bodies were slow to exercise political leadership,
or develop a coherent policy, to respond to the problem. French officials in
particular seemed at least initially to explain the violence as the understandable
response of Arab immigrants to the Middle East conflict.
The most worrying expressions of growing xenophobia in Europe came in the
field of immigration. As hundreds of thousands of migrants and refugees continued
to arrive in Western Europe in 2002, the region saw a surge of “Fortress Europe”
politics, with far-right political parties using virulently anti-immigrant platforms
to garner increasingly broad support at the polls. Governments throughout the
region adopted rhetoric of intolerance toward migrants and pushed through new immigration laws with restrictions threatening refugees’ and migrants’ rights at
both the national and E.U. level.
In many cases, officials conflated the policy debate on immigration control with
discussion of terrorism, drug trafficking, and crime—fueling public perceptions of
immigration as a major factor in many social ills. Indeed, both security and migration
ranked top on the Spanish E.U. Presidency’s agenda for the Seville summit in
June, where governments pressed forward to develop common E.U. border controls
and decided to link the E.U.’s aid and trade relationships to governments’
cooperation in controlling migration.
E.U. member states continued to back away from their commitments under the
1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, with a number of justice and
home affairs ministers openly calling for a redrafting of the convention. As this
report went to press, E.U. member states were close to agreement on a proposed
common interpretation of the convention. Refugee advocates expressed concern
that in the context of the global anti-terror effort, the E.U.would adopt a common
interpretation that would broaden the scope of those who could be excluded from
refugee protection on national security grounds, and would erode protections
against refoulement.
Even where the letter of the law on immigration controls met international standards,
practice often fell far short.Detention conditions for migrants and refugees
in a number of Western European countries remained substandard, despite
repeated criticism from the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and
the U.N.Committee against Torture.To illustrate this widespread problem,Human
Rights Watch reported on the detention of migrants under severely substandard
conditions in an old airport terminal on the Canary Islands. The Spanish authorities
regularly detained more than three hundred migrants in the facility, which the
Red Cross said was fit for fifty. Sanitation and health care was grossly inadequate,
and opportunities for the migrants to get fresh air and exercise were non-existent.
The Spanish authorities argued the arrangement was a temporary, emergency
response to a new migration phenomenon, but took no meaningful steps to
improve the conditions.Violations suffered by migrants in detention were not limited
to substandard conditions. A September 2002 report by Amnesty International
and the International Helsinki Federation (IHF) stated that migrants and asylum
seekers detained in holding centers in Greece faced threats, beatings, and sexual
abuse by law enforcement officers.
Throughout the region, the deportation of migrants was characterized by persistent
rights violations, including inadequate information and translation services,
insufficient access to legal representation during detention, and lack of judicial
oversight or opportunities for migrants to appeal their expulsions. Following the
Seville summit, the E.U. undertook an explicit policy of linking its aid to countries
to their willingness to enter into readmission agreements committing them to
accept the return of migrants who had entered the union through their territory.
The web of readmission agreements effectively shifted the burden of immigration
control and refugee protection from E.U.member and applicant states to their eastern
and southern neighbors,which had markedly fewer resources to devote to it.As
evidence of the concerns raised by these readmission agreements, Human Rights Watch documented the regular expulsion from Spain of migrants, including unaccompanied
children, by the Spanish police pursuant to an ad hoc procedure that
seemed to turn on the whims of the local authorities. Thousands of migrants were
returned to Morocco on the basis that they were Moroccan or had transited
Morocco to Spain,with little regard for the Moroccan authorities’ capacity or willingness
to absorb the migrants, provide adequate services and protection for unaccompanied
children, or protect refugees against return to a country where they
faced a threat of persecution.
While member states pursued migration policies and practices that violated
international standards, E.U. joint action to combat immigration failed to specify
any concomitant joint obligations to respect migrants’ rights. The European Commission’s
Green Paper and Communication proposing a community return policy
merely suggested that detention conditions and return procedures were subjects on
which the E.U. might choose to articulate common standards in the future. The
resultant E.U. Return Action Plan adopted in late November prioritized operational
cooperation in returning unwanted immigrants through measures such as
closer contacts among member state law enforcement agencies and deportation
operations via joint charter flights. It neglected the need for common standards for
such operations, putting the development of such standards off to the indefinite
future.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights activists continued to experience the brunt of much of the persistent
authoritarianism in the region. Repression in Turkmenistan was so severe
that activists remained largely underground.Defenders in Kazakhstan,Kyrgyzstan,
Tajikistan, Turkey, and Uzbekistan worked under the constant threat of harassment,
violent attack, arrest, torture, and imprisonment on trumped-up charges. In
Georgia, defenders were beaten by a paramilitary mob.And in Azerbaijan, Belarus,
and Ukraine, the authorities erected significant obstacles to human rights work in
the form of onerous and sometimes arbitrary registration, licensing, funding, or
taxation rules and procedures for defender organizations. Although human rights
defenders in the Balkans operated relatively freely, some of their activities drew
exceptionally hostile commentary from government officials in Albania, Croatia,
Macedonia, and Serbia.
Against the backdrop of these challenges, the strength, resilience, and creativity
of the human rights movement was again evident in the region in 2002, as groups
forged new alliances to support one another and confront new challenges. For
example, international human rights organizations joined together to provide constructive
commentary on the Council of Europe’s draft human rights guidelines for
the war against terrorism. Some fifty human rights, democracy, and conflict prevention
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) came together to offer a submission
to the Convention on the Future of Europe, identifying ways in which the
convention should address human rights within the E.U. and strengthen the E.U.’s
global role.More than fifty groups campaigned together around plans of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) for its 2003 annual meeting
in Tashkent. (See below.) At their November general assembly, the International
Helsinki Federation network of human rights groups throughout the region
adopted an “Action Plan on Chechnya” aimed at keeping the abusive conflict high
on the international agenda in 2003.And on two occasions during the year, the IHF
convened activists in the region to support Turkmen dissidents and strategize on
promoting change in that most closed society.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
Once again, Russia’s conduct in Chechnya proved one of the most controversial
issues before the U.N.Commission on Human Rights, but for the first time in three
sessions, the commission failed to adopt a resolution condemning this conduct.
The resolution came to a vote only after E.U.-led negotiations on a consensus-based
chairman’s statement failed (by one vote, with twenty-two states abstaining). The
E.U. and U.S. blamed each other for the resolution’s failure, but in fact both contributed
richly to the outcome. The E.U. was clearly reluctant to see the resolution
go to a vote, even when the Russian government refused to cooperate on the chairman’s
statement.Hoping to maintain maximum flexibility to withdraw the resolution,
the E.U. discouraged other states from co-sponsoring the resolution and
excluded them from discussions about Chechnya. The U.S., for its part, used its
non-membership in the commission as an excuse to sit on the sidelines, and waited
until the day before the vote to co-sponsor.
U.N. treaty bodies provided some of the only official documentation of human
rights abuses in the former Soviet Union, making apparent the need for greater
U.N. engagement in the region. Georgia was one of the few countries of the former
Soviet Union to issue standing invitations to U.N. human rights monitoring mechanisms;
meanwhile, citing security concerns, the Russian government postponed a
scheduled visit of the U.N. special rapporteur on violence against women and the
special representative of the secretary-general on internally displaced persons to
Chechnya. Secretary-General Kofi Annan’s trip to Central Asia reinvigorated the
Uzbek government’s promise to invite the special rapporteur on torture to visit the
country. But the secretary-general’s silence on human rights during a visit to Turkmenistan
was a bitter disappointment to many.
The U.N. continued to play a significant role in peace building in the Balkans.
After facing criticism for mismanagement and inefficiency, in 2002 the ICTY took
steps to improve its performance and aim to wind up its work by 2008. Its efforts
were substantially undermined, however, by the continued failure of the authorities
in the former Yugoslavia to cooperate, as well as NATO’s failure to apprehend
indictees who remained at large in Bosnia. Pressure mounted on the ICTY to consider
referring cases back to national courts for trial. In a June report, the ICTY
accepted in principle that it could refer cases involving middle-ranking commanders,
but it identified reforms that would first be necessary to ensure fair trials in national courts. By year’s end, little progress had been made by the international
community or regional governments to undertake those reforms.
The U.N. continued to face significant challenges in Kosovo, which essentially
functioned as a U.N. protectorate. During the year, UNMIK arrested a number of
former commanders of the ethnic Albanian Kosovo Liberation Army on charges of
wartime crimes, as well as several Serbian extremists charged with post-conflict
attacks against the U.N. and interethnic violence. These efforts came late, however,
and were as yet insufficient to fully restore the faith of Kosovars in the rule of law
and the authority of the U.N. justice system.
International Financial Institutions
The international financial institutions were actively engaged in Central Asia
notwithstanding the lack of political and economic reforms in the region.The decision
by the EBRD—unique among financial institutions for its embrace of political
pluralism and the rule of law as a condition for engagement—to hold its 2003
annual meeting in Uzbekistan dramatically exposed this deficit of reform. This
year,Human Rights Watch joined fifty-three other NGOs in a campaign to urge the
bank to press the Uzbek government for specific human rights improvements as a
condition for the 2003 meeting, arguing that failure to do so would grant the Uzbek
government undeserved political prestige and financial benefit.
Challenged with the apparent breach of bank principles, EBRD President Jean
Lemierre stated that Tashkent’s selection was “an incentive to make progress, and
not an endorsement.” As of this writing, though, Human Rights Watch was not
aware of any specific efforts by the bank to encourage such progress in advance of
the meeting.
The EBRD was more forthright in its response to Belarus and Turkmenistan.
Bank strategies for both countries made clear that engagement would be strictly
limited to the private sector until they made progress on political pluralism,human
rights, and market reforms.
During his visit to Central Asia,World Bank President James Wolfensohn met
with civil society leaders but otherwise did little to publicly acknowledge the
region’s stunning lack of reform. The World Bank, the International Monetary
Fund (IMF), and several donor states promised an aid package of U.S.$700 million
to Kyrgyzstan,without apparent regard for the deteriorating rights situation there.
The IMF, under apparent pressure from the U.S. government, returned in 2002 to
Uzbekistan (having suspended lending in 1996 and essentially withdrawn in 2001),
even though no reform standards had been met.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) continued to
play an important role, though its impact on human rights conditions often
seemed to fall short of its potential. The performance of its missions continued to
vary widely, with the mission in Kosovo setting the best example through its thorough
and publicly available reports on minority rights and the judiciary. Though operating on a more confidential, low-key basis, the Assistance Group in Chechnya
also did important proactive monitoring and reporting, which OSCE member
states unfortunately made little use of in their multilateral and bilateral dialogues
with Russia. OSCE election monitoring missions continued to provide an important
check against electoral abuses, including through a first-ever mission to Turkey
for the November elections. The Office for Democratic Institutions and Human
Rights (ODIHR), the high commissioner on national minorities, and the representative
on freedom of the media all continued their efforts to articulate human
dimension standards and develop specific recommendations to member states on
how to meet those standards. ODIHR was particularly active in efforts to combat
trafficking in human beings and received high marks for this work from NGOs in
the region.
Unfortunately, the recommendations flowing from the OSCE’s missions, election
monitors, and human dimension institutions were ignored more often than
not, as noncompliance had limited consequences for offending states. While the
E.U., the U.S., and the EBRD rhetorically conditioned aid relationships on compliance
with OSCE norms, these linkages were not effectively or consistently enforced,
particularly where they competed with other political, economic, and military
agendas.
Perhaps more than any other international organization, the growing variance
in human rights conditions across the region strained the OSCE,which purports to
unite the countries in the region through common commitments in the politicomilitary,
economic, and human dimensions of security. Countries of the former
Soviet Union that were on the receiving end of much human rights scrutiny and
criticism from the OSCE were increasingly emboldened to attack the organization
as disproportionately preoccupied with its “human dimension,” particularly in the
eastern half of the region. The organization responded by appropriately increasing
its scrutiny of human rights problems in the more developed democracies ofWestern
Europe and North America, but also by increasing its economic and politicomilitary
dimension activities, unfortunately too often neglecting important
linkages to respect for human rights and the rule of law. In particular, the OSCE
highlighted its role in the global effort to combat terrorism, the theme of both its
2001 and 2002 ministerial meetings as well as regular smaller seminars and official
gatherings throughout the year. As an organization committed from its beginning
to addressing human rights as an essential element of security, the OSCE was
uniquely positioned to ensure that the war against terrorism was conducted in a
manner that comported with and promoted human rights. Although OSCE officials
and member states made repeated reference to the importance of respect for
human rights in the war against terrorism, much remained to be done to mainstream
and implement human rights monitoring, reporting, and promotion
within the organization’s expanding anti-terror agenda.
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
Undertaking an historic step toward expansion eastward during 2002, the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) had an important opportunity to promote respect for human rights and democratic principles in the region. Its impact was
most keenly felt in the states invited to join in November.For example,Bulgaria and
Slovakia were eager to meet E.U. and NATO standards and took steps to tighten
their weapons trade controls, albeit more work remained to be done. In states outside
the 2002 expansion, however, NATO seemed to fall short of its potential to
effect change. The most glaring lapse was the creation of the NATO-Russia Council,
according Russia a special relationship notwithstanding Russian troops’ ongoing
serious humanitarian law violations in Chechnya. At year’s end, it remained to
be seen whether the council would become an effective forum for addressing the
substandard conduct of the Russian military in Chechnya.
NATO continued to play an important role in peace implementation in the
Balkans.The NATO-led Stabilization Force in Bosnia apprehended four war crimes
suspects during the year, but its continued failure to bring Radovan Karadzic and
other at-large indictees to justice was a disappointment.
Council of Europe
The Council of Europe continued its expansion, even as its institutions were
strained by the demands of monitoring, promoting, and enforcing standards in
states previously admitted despite having seriously substandard human rights
records. In June, Bosnia and Herzegovina became the council’s forty-fourth member
state, although key conditions on cooperation with the ICTY and the return of
refugees remained unfulfilled. In September, the Parliamentary Assembly (PACE)
recommended that the council also admit the F.R. Yugoslavia, which agreed to
undertake a long list of reforms upon admission.The Committee ofMinisters postponed
Yugoslavia’s formal admission until its constituent republics Serbia and
Montenegro ratified a new constitutional framework.
Meanwhile, Council of Europe institutions were busy attending to the serious
human rights problems in a number of its newer members, including Russia,
Ukraine, and the southern Caucasus states. Nearly all Council of Europe institutions
remained actively engaged on Chechnya,but to no tangible result.The human
rights work of Council of Europe experts in Chechnya continued to depend on the
Russian authorities who essentially served as their hosts. The Council of Europe
experts’ mandate was enlarged to include education and judicial reform, raising
fears that the expansion would come at the expense of efforts to promote accountability
for human rights abuse.
Council of Europe engagement on the southern Caucasus was principled and
courageous.Representatives of the PACE monitoring committee refused to be bullied
by the Azerbaijani government into backing away from their trenchant reporting
on the human rights situation there. Several Council of Europe institutions
took the Georgian government to task for its indulgence of religious violence.
Council of Europe institutions also remained actively engaged with Turkey’s
human rights problems in 2002. The Committee for the Prevention of Torture visited
the country twice, and its observations and recommendations served as an
important benchmark for progress Turkey needed to make to advance its E.U.
application. A PACE rapporteur examined the plight of Turkey’s internally displaced population and his recommendations were reinforced by new judgments
against Turkey at the European Court of Human Rights. In November, at the invitation
of the government of Turkey, the Council of Europe sent its first-ever election-
monitoring mission to Turkey.
European Union
The E.U. replicated its poor performance on Chechnya at the U.N.Commission
on Human Rights in its bilateral relations with Russia. Throughout the year European
heads of state muted nearly all criticism of Russia’s conduct of the war in
Chechnya.
The E.U. confined its human rights engagement in Central Asia and the Caucasus
to forthright statements at such venues as the OSCE Permanent Council. Casting
itself in a role secondary to the U.S. in the region, it effectively forfeited
important opportunities for leverage, such as its Partnership and Cooperation
Agreements and its voice at the EBRD.
The E.U. remained intensively engaged in the Balkans, which was an important
arena for proving the capacity of its Common Foreign and Security Policy. Its
takeover of the international policing operation in Bosnia from the U.N. in 2003
was seen as a significant pending test of E.U. capabilities. The E.U. was increasingly
insistent that the governments of Bosnia, Croatia, and F.R. Yugoslavia cooperate
with the ICTY, but it continued to refuse to link its aid program for the region
directly to such cooperation.
As mentioned previously, the E.U. accession process proved an important catalyst
for reform in Turkey, although nagging questions about whether the E.U. was
genuinely committed to the process threatened to undermine that important
opportunity for change.While the E.U. had in recent years focused considerable
attention on Roma rights in candidate states, it remained to be seen whether this
scrutiny would continue as the candidate states neared E.U. membership, highlighting
the need for E.U. scrutiny of conditions for Roma in member states as well
as beyond.
United States
The Bush administration made repressive governments in the former Soviet
Union allies in the global campaign against terrorism, without a consistent policy
for checking their proclivity for human rights violations. The U.S. established a
military presence in Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan, and it pressed for
greater support of these countries with international financial institutions. In
recognition of their cooperation,President Bush met with the leaders of three Central
Asian states, an unprecedented amount of attention to what was once a U.S. foreign
policy backwater. The region’s new prominence opened new avenues for
effective U.S. engagement on human rights issues. Yet it seemed increasingly likely
that the United States would find it hard to dissociate itself from its new allies’
abuses.
In some cases, particularly Uzbekistan, the U.S. pressed for specific improvements, such as the registration of human rights organizations and political parties
and the release of political prisoners. But in approving aid recently conditioned by
the U.S. Congress on human rights progress, the Bush administration exaggerated
the impact of small, positive steps made by the Uzbek government.Overall the U.S.
failed to take full advantage of many opportunities to use its influence with Central
Asian governments. Concerns were raised diplomatically. But with few exceptions,
such as the cancellation of a trade delegation to Kyrgyzstan over its reluctance to
allow an independent printing press, the United States did not make clear that there
would be consequences for failure to make real improvements.
In Georgia,U.S. military ties expanded to include in situ anti-terror training for
Georgian forces. And yet the U.S. expressed no outward concern about the arbitrary
or brutal methods used by Georgian security agencies in anti-terror operations
and detentions in and around the Pankisi Gorge.
The Russian government repeatedly cast its war in Chechnya in the rhetoric and
imagery of the U.S.-led war on terrorism. This should have prompted the U.S. to
speak and act unequivocally about continuing abuses. At times, the U.S. government
did so, but many opportunities were missed to take a strong stand, particularly
at the U.N. Commission on Human Rights.
In the Balkans, the U.S. undermined its longstanding significant investment in
building the rule of law when it apprehended six terror suspects in Bosnia in January,
circumventing formal extradition proceedings and disregarding the rulings of
Bosnian courts. Likewise, there were reports of extralegal extraditions of terror suspects
from Georgia to U.S. territory; the Bush administration would neither confirm
nor deny the allegations. To some in Georgia, the U.S. approach to the issue
contributed to an atmosphere in which “disappearances”were tolerated. A similar
dynamic emerged when U.S. efforts to promote the jurisdiction of the ICTY in the
Balkans were undermined by the pressure it put on governments in the former
Yugoslavia to agree that they would not surrender U.S. soldiers to the International
Criminal Court.
THE WORK OF HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
Throughout the year,Human Rights Watch investigated the persistent and deepening
human rights problems in the former Soviet Union. In three missions to
Ingushetia, we documented and reported on the alarming pattern of “disappearances”
in neighboring Chechnya and the Russian government’s utter failure to bring
those responsible to account.We also closely monitored the government’s efforts to
pressure displaced Chechens to return home from Ingushetia, although the security
conditions in Chechnya remained perilous.We took our reporting on Chechnya to
relevant international bodies and Russia’s bilateral partners, including the OSCE,
the Council of Europe, the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, the U.N. Committee
on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, the U.N. Committee
on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights, the E.U., and the U.S. administration. In
numerous letters and in-person briefings, we urged these international actors to
step up monitoring and reporting in Chechnya and to insist that Russia rein in its troops and hold those responsible for abuses accountable. Seeing the war in Chechnya
begin to slip from the international spotlight, in 2002 we made extra efforts to
raise awareness of our findings among members of the press.We issued a statement
unequivocally condemning the Chechen hostage-taking in October, underscoring
that no amount of suffering by civilians in Chechnya could justify such an atrocity.
Human Rights Watch also monitored the fallout of this tragedy,documenting a significant
increase in harassment of Chechens and members of other ethnic minorities
in Moscow and a new abusive crackdown by Russian troops in Chechnya.
Chechnya was not Human Rights Watch’s only focus in Russia, however.During
the course of the year we commenced a multi-year investigation into abuses suffered
by soldiers in the army, and we published a subset of our findings in a November
report on the annual forced conscription of hundreds of young men, arbitrarily
detained in Moscow and St. Petersburg and then immediately shipped off to the
army.We also looked into trumped-up charges of espionage pressed by the Russian
security services against several academics and a journalist.
The year saw our first ever investigation into human rights conditions in
Ukraine,where we documented the presidential administration’s campaign to control
the television media through informal censorship of news broadcasting.
Human Rights Watch researchers also visited Belarus for a preliminary investigation
in anticipation of a more substantial research project in 2003.
Our Tbilisi office actively monitored a range of issues in the southern Caucasus.
Our chief priority was documenting the Georgian government’s indulgence of
dozens of violent attacks against religious minorities. We repeatedly pressed the
Georgian government to curb the violence and raised our concern with international
actors, especially the U.S. ambassador at large for international religious freedom
and the U.S.Commission on International Religious Freedom, both of which
committed to follow developments in Georgia closely. We asked the Council of
Europe to track the issue more closely as well. Throughout the year we monitored
the trial of Vasili Mkalavishvili and Petre Ivanidze, the only people indicted on
charges of religious violence.
In March,Human Rights Watch wrote to the U.N.Human Rights Committee in
anticipation of its review of Georgia’s implementation of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, highlighting in particular our concerns
about religious violence and widespread and persistent torture. In April, we held a
press conference, jointly with three Georgian human rights NGOs, to publicize the
committee’s concluding observations, which took the extraordinary step of giving
Georgia one year to report back on measures it had taken to improve its deplorable
treatment of prisoners and detainees. In meetings with Georgian government officials
we continued to press for criminal procedure code reform that would advance
human rights protections.
Our work on Armenia and Azerbaijan also focused on abuses by law enforcement
agencies. In late 2001,we investigated government efforts to hold accountable
those responsible for beating to death Poghos Poghosian, killed in a Yerevan
nightspot in September after he allegedly insulted Armenian President Robert
Kocharian. Several of Kocharian’s bodyguards were implicated in the killing, but
only one of them faced a relatively minor involuntary manslaughter charge after investigators characterized the death as an accident. In a December 2001 statement,
Human Rights Watch decried the investigation, saying it sent “a chilling message to
the Armenian people that state security personnel can kill with virtual impunity.”
In response to the June 3-4, 2002 police shootings in Nardaran, Azerbaijan,
Human Rights Watch wrote a letter to President Heidar Aliev, calling upon the government
to refrain from using unnecessary or disproportionate force in response
to public protests.
Central Asia remained a major priority for Human Rights Watch. Our office in
Tashkent was on the front line of responding to the Uzbek government’s crackdown
on independent Muslims. Our staff there documented hundreds of cases of abuses,
sought legal counsel for political and religious prisoners, monitored trials, and
briefed the international community resident in and visiting Tashkent.
A mid-year research mission in Kazakhstan documented the human rights
aspects of the burgeoning HIV/AIDS epidemic in Kazakhstan, to be detailed in a
2003 report. U.N. AIDS experts had reported that the spread of the disease in the
former Soviet Union was the fastest growing AIDS problem in the world. Human
Rights Watch found that, even more clearly than in other parts of the world, the epidemic
in Central Asia is driven by human rights abuses that prevent vulnerable
populations, primarily injecting drug users, from obtaining the information, protection,
and treatment they need. In Kazakhstan,Human Rights Watch also monitored
and reported on the increased repression of the independent media,
particularly the harassment and mistreatment of journalist Sergei Duvanov. In
Kyrgyzstan, we monitored the state reaction to a wave of public demonstrations
and called on the government to account for police use of excessive force that
resulted in the shooting deaths of five civilian protesters in the south.
In September, we raised the alarm when Turkmen opposition figure Gulgeldi
Annaniazov was detained in Kazakhstan pending imminent deportation to Turkmenistan
where he would have most certainly faced persecution. Our intervention
with U.S. officials in Washington and Almaty, with the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR), and—through collaboration with the Norwegian
Helsinki Committee—with the Norwegian government, helped block the
deportation and secure Annaniazov refuge in Norway.
Throughout the year, Human Rights Watch sought opportunities to bring the
human rights situation in Central Asia to the attention of international actors and
to encourage them to press the governments in the region for specific reforms.We
worked with sympathetic members of Congress to craft legislation that conditioned
U.S. aid to Uzbekistan on progress toward implementing the human rights
commitments President Karimov made to President Bush in February, and we
urged that the U.S. link security assistance to Uzbekistan to concrete improvements
in its human rights record. In the same vein, we called on the U.S. to press the governments
of Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan to improve their performance on religious
freedom or face censure under the U.S. International Religious Freedom Act.
Such U.S. conditionality did in fact yield the only bright spots in Uzbekistan’s
record during the year—the registration of one human rights NGO in late 2001 and
a visit by the U.N. special rapporteur on torture in late 2002.
The international financial institutions were also increasingly a focus of our advocacy on Central Asia.We briefed World Bank President Wolfensohn on human
rights in the region prior to his April visit, and we worked with his staff to identify
civil society representatives with whom he should meet there. In May, a Human
Rights Watch team, including our Tashkent-based researcher, attended the annual
meeting of the EBRD in Bucharest, and, on behalf of fifty-four NGOs from most of
the bank’s shareholder states, we launched a campaign to press for reform in
Uzbekistan in advance of the May 2003 annual meeting to be held in Tashkent. In
meetings with EBRD President Lemierre, bank board members, and staff,Human
Rights Watch argued that prior to the 2003 meeting the bank should seek specific
reforms in Uzbekistan in order to avoid embarrassment. In follow-up meetings at
the EBRD in London in September,we updated President Lemierre and his staff on
the human rights situation in Uzbekistan and elaborated ideas for promoting more
openness in Uzbekistan in the lead-up to and during the May 2003 meeting. In particular,
we emphasized the importance of unfettered civil society participation in
the meeting, and an agenda for the meeting that emphasized the bank’s mandate to
invest only in countries committed to multi-party democracy.
In the Balkans,Human Rights Watch remained focused on the imperative of justice
for war crimes. In June, former Human Rights Watch researcher Fred Abrahams
testified in the Milosevic trial about Human Rights Watch’s investigation into
war crimes in Kosovo.He told the court that during the war Human Rights Watch
had repeatedly sent Milosevic information about the crimes being committed
under his command—a crucial link in the prosecutor’s case that Milosevic had
command responsibility for those crimes. Our staff regularly monitored the Milosevic
trial and provided valuable background information and analysis to journalists
trying to explain the proceedings to the public in the Balkans and beyond. Our
Belgrade-based researcher published a number of editorials and letters to the editor
in the Belgrade press, excoriating the media to report on the Milosevic proceedings
in a balanced and accurate manner, and urging the Serbian political elite
to publicly embrace the tribunal proceedings as an important part of Serbia’s effort
to put the Milosevic era definitively behind it.
In November,Human Rights Watch published a report on trafficking of women
and girls to Bosnia and Herzegovina for forced prostitution. The report documented
corruption among local police and complicity by certain actors within the
international community as significant aspects of the trafficking problem.
Throughout the year we monitored continued impediments to minority return in
Croatia and at the year’s end were finalizing a substantial report on that subject.
In Kosovo, we conducted a three-week investigation into impunity for wartime
and post-war ethnic and political violence. Our findings—due for publication in
2003—highlighted important lessons learned about how NATO and the U.N.
might better ensure security and the rule of law in post-war settings.
In June,we released a major report highlighting serious violations of media freedom
in Albania, including harassment, threats, and violence against journalists,
often with police involvement; discriminatory allocation of government advertising
and subsidies; and crippling criminal and civil defamation suits brought against
journalists by government officials subjected to critical media attention. We
released the report in a press conference in Tirana and presented our key recommendations to relevant government and international officials there. Throughout
the rest of the year, we sought opportunities to raise our concerns further with relevant
international actors, including the European Commission, European Parliament,
and the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly Monitoring Committee.
Turkey was the focus of intensive research and advocacy in 2002, as we sought to
capitalize on the human rights demands put on Turkey as part of its E.U. membership
bid. Human Rights Watch’s researcher on Turkey made regular trips to Brussels
to brief E.U. officials on human rights developments and to urge them to
champion several specific significant reforms.Curbing torture was a major focus of
these efforts and in numerous letters to E.U. and Turkish officials, editorials, and
press releases, we emphasized the importance of amending Turkish law to give
lawyers access to all detainees from the first moments of detention. Our efforts were
rewarded when, on the eve of the E.U.’s publication of its annual report on applicant
states, the Turkish government prepared a new draft law on access for lawyers.
In November, Human Rights Watch honored Turkish freedom of expression
activist Sanar Yurdatapan at its annual dinners in New York City, Los Angeles, and
San Francisco. The dinners and the attendant media attention and meetings with
U.S. government officials gave us an important opportunity to outline human
rights priorities for the new Turkish government, particularly in the realm of free
expression.
The expansion of NATO and the E.U. presented an important opportunity to
press for arms trade reforms in candidate countries, which we did with particular
vigor in 2002.Through the work of our Arms Division,we monitored, encouraged,
and reported on reform efforts in Central and Eastern Europe, and also highlighted
continued areas of concern. In meetings, letters, and briefing papers, we encouraged
E.U. and NATO decision makers to use their leverage to maximum advantage
to secure needed improvements in candidate countries.We focused efforts to promote
change in particular on Slovakia, carrying out new research in the country in
April,May, and October.
In Western Europe, we focused our monitoring and advocacy on Spain, which
had the E.U. presidency in the first half of 2002, and on Greece, which was due to
have the presidency for the first half of 2003. In Spain, we published three reports
based on research carried out in late 2001. They addressed extremely poor conditions
of detention for migrants in the Canary Islands; mistreatment of unaccompanied
children arriving in the Spanish cities of Ceuta and Melilla; and arbitrary
implementation of Spain’s new immigration law. The reports, which were widely
covered in the Spanish media, were the subject of several Human Rights Watch
meetings with responsible Spanish government officials.
In Greece,we monitored developments relating to its efforts to combat trafficking
in human beings and offered written comments on draft anti-trafficking legislation,
urging that it be amended to include protections for victims.We submitted
information on Greece’s anti-trafficking efforts to the U.N. Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,which was due to review Greece in 2003.We also
continued to gather information regarding Greece’s treatment of migrants and asylum
seekers, the subject of three reports we had published in 2000 and 2001.
At the E.U. level,we drew on our country research to draft critiques of E.U. proposals on a common short-term residence permit for trafficking victims and on a
common policy for returning migrants to the countries from which they have
come.We formally submitted our concerns about the return policy to the European
Commission and European Parliament at a July hearing. In November,we met with
commission and council officials to discuss our recommendations further and how
they could be addressed through implementation of the action plan on return that
member states were expected to adopt at the end of November.