European Union
In a watershed year for European institutions, 2004 marked the expansion
of the European Union (E.U.) from fifteen to twenty-five member
states and initial agreement on a new Constitutional Treaty. A series of
train bombings in Madrid on March 11, 2004, marked a more sinister
milestone: the worst terrorist attack in modern European history, leaving
191 civilians dead and hundreds wounded. Such defining events
leave Europeans with the challenge of protecting rights in a newly
enlarged union and meeting the threat of terrorism while protecting
Europe’s long human rights tradition.
European governments and institutions did not rise to these challenges,
instead continuing to scale back rights protections—in particular, for
asylum seekers and migrants. They also missed the opportunity to distinguish
European practice from the abusive actions of other countries
by employing counterterrorism strategies that also violate fundamental
rights, including the prohibitions against torture and indefinite detention.
Asylum Seekers and Migrants
Migration into the E.U. poses clear challenges for European governments,
and few would question the legitimacy or urgency of policies to
address these concerns. But the exclusive focus on combating illegal
immigration in Europe reflects a disturbing and prevailing attitude that
migrants have no rights. Consequently, regional and national policies
and practices have focused on keeping migrants and asylum seekers out
of Europe. The tragedies of September 11 and March 11 are used to
justify such exclusionary practices. The labeling of migrants and asylum
seekers as terrorists or national security threats has resulted in the
“securitization of migration,” often to the serious detriment of
migrants’ rights.
Regional Developments
Five years after the 1999 Tampere European Council, during which
member states decided to establish the E.U. as an “area of freedom,
security and justice,” the conclusion of the first phase of harmonizing
regional asylum and immigration law in May 2004 reflected the further
erosion of the right to seek asylum and of migrants’ rights more broadly.
In December 2003, the European Parliament (E.P.) requested that
the European Court of Justice (ECJ) review the legality of the Family
Reunification Directive, adopted in September 2003. Human rights and
children’s rights organizations shared the E.P.’s serious concern that the
directive failed to guarantee the protection of family life enshrined in
the European Convention on Human Rights, the E.U. Charter of
Fundamental Rights, and the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the
Child.
In March 2004, in an unprecedented move, Human Rights Watch
together with other human rights groups called for the withdrawal of
the proposed Asylum Procedures Directive, eventually adopted by the
European Council in April 2004, because it clearly eroded the individual
right to seek asylum. The directive failed to guarantee the right of
asylum seekers to remain in a country of asylum pending an appeal and
provided for a “safe country of origin” regime. The “safe country of origin”
regime would result in a common list of safe countries of origin
whose nationals would be tracked into an accelerated asylum procedure,
often so brief as to deny asylum seekers full and fair hearings on their
claims. The most alarming feature of the directive was provision for the
use of the “safe third country” and “super safe third country” concepts,
the result of which would prohibit access to asylum procedures for persons
who traveled through a third country deemed “safe.” A “safe third
country” would be one that has ratified the 1951 Refugee Convention
and the European Convention on Human Rights, and has a functioning
asylum system.
One positive development came in the form of the Qualification
Directive, adopted in April 2004. The directive duplicates the definition
of what constitutes a “refugee” provided in the Refugee Convention and
includes an express obligation on E.U. member states to grant asylum
to individuals falling within that definition. The directive also recognizes
that non-state actors are often agents of persecution, and acknowledges
child-specific and gender-specific forms of persecution. Those
persons not recognized as refugees will be eligible for “subsidiary protection,”
but human rights and refugee organizations have raised concern
that persons granted other forms of protection will not be eligible
for the same social benefits as recognized refugees.
Implications of Enlargement
The ten new member states admitted to the E.U. in May 2004—
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta,
Poland, Slovakia, and Slovenia—were confronted instantly with the
challenge of becoming countries of final destination for asylum seekers,
without having the means and the experience to deal with increased
numbers of refugees. Long considered refugee-producing and transit
countries (for asylum seekers making their way to the E.U.), the new
member states’ asylum systems and immigration procedures are woefully
under-developed and under-resourced to meet this challenge. Early
reports indicate that few of the new member states have systems that
can offer full and fair asylum determination procedures; detention
regimes that comport with international standards; and policies in place
to ensure that no person is sent back to a place where her or his life or
freedom is threatened.
Processing Migrants and Asylum Seekers Outside the E.U.
Instead of responding adequately to criticism regarding the absence of
human rights safeguards in the harmonization process or the need for
such safeguards to be in place in the new member states, key E.U. countries resurrected the previously discredited idea of processing
claims for asylum outside the E.U. In August 2004, Rocco Buttiglione,
then European Commissioner-designate of the Directorate-General for
Justice, Freedom and Security voiced enthusiastic support for a German
proposal to establish detention centers in North Africa to process asylum
applications for protection in the newly-expanded European
Union. While Buttiglione’s nomination was ultimately defeated, proposals
to process asylum seekers and migrants in select off-shore locations
have gained momentum.
That momentum is somewhat counterintuitive given the negative reaction
of Germany and key E.U. institutions to a similar proposal from
the United Kingdom in early 2003. In March 2004, the European
Parliament Committee on Citizens’ Freedoms and Rights expressed
concern that off-shore centers could violate an individual’s right to seek
asylum and could shift responsibility for migrants and asylum seekers to
developing countries with scarce resources and poor human rights
records. The committee stated that processing centers could undermine
the 1951 Refugee Convention, the European Convention on Human
Rights, and the key idea of responsibility-sharing.
The off-shore processing idea is not dead, however. It became apparent
in 2004 that in the face of opposition to the earlier U.K. proposals, the
E.U. had decided to take a more gradual approach aimed at the development
of off-shore centers. In the meantime, the E.U. embarked on a
project of rapprochement with potential host countries, including Libya.
As a result, bilateral agreements were concluded in August 2004. They
focused on combating illegal migration from Libya to Italy and into the
E.U., and the E.U. agreed to lift an eight-year long arms embargo on
Libya in October 2004.
In October, Italy expelled several hundred persons to Libya without a
proper assessment of their asylum claims or any access to fair asylum
procedures. These persons are believed to have been sent to detention camps in Libya. Libya has not ratified the 1951 Refugee Convention,
signed a cooperation agreement for a formal relationship with the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), or developed
an asylum system in compliance with international standards. In
addition to Libya’s appalling human rights record with respect to its
own citizens, reports regarding its treatment of migrants and asylum
seekers raises special concern about placing processing centers there.
The German Ministry of Interior was also actively involved in supporting
the revival of the idea of developing extraterritorial processing centers
though its concrete proposals were not made available to the public.
Although France, Spain, and Sweden rejected such proposals and
called for “absolute caution” and “respect for human rights of refugees,”
in October 2004 the E.U. Informal Justice and Home Affairs Council
considered five pilot projects proposed by the Commission to improve
immigration and asylum regimes in Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco,
and Mauritania.
Role of the International Organization for Migration
The operations of the International Organization for Migration (IOM),
an independent intergovernmental organization with no formal human
rights or refugee protection mandate, came under increasing scrutiny in
2003-2004. The organization’s mandate states that it provides assistance
to governments and migrants for only voluntary migrant returns, but
Human Rights Watch’s research revealed that some IOM field operations
have placed migrants at risk of return to places where they face
persecution. Human Rights Watch is also concerned about the role of
the IOM as convener of the 5+5 Dialogue of the Western
Mediterranean Forum and the Forum’s emphasis on combating illegal
migration. In September 2004, the IOM sent a special technical team to
Libya to consult with the government about the management of illegal
migration. The timing of the visit, coming on the heels of proposals to
establish off-shore detention centers for the processing of asylum seekers in North African countries, gives rise to concerns that IOM will be
involved in advising Libya and the E.U. about the establishment and
management of such centers in the future.
National Developments
Asylum policy and practice in the Netherlands and an aggressive program
for the return of failed asylum seekers raised considerable alarm in
2003-2004. Concerns include the use of an accelerated (forty-eight
hour) asylum determination procedure (AC procedure); the inappropriate
treatment of migrant and asylum-seeking children; restrictions on
asylum seekers’ rights to basic material support, such as food and housing;
and proposals for returning large numbers of failed asylum seekers,
some in violation of international standards. The AC procedure is regularly
used to process and reject some 60 percent of asylum applications.
The brevity of the procedure affords applicants little opportunity to
adequately document their need for protection or to receive meaningful
legal advice, and the right to appeal is severely curtailed. To date, there
has been no measurable change in the AC procedure to ensure that asylum
seekers receive a full and fair hearing.
In light of such restrictive asylum policies, a key concern over the last
year has been the increasing rate of migrant returns to states where
failed asylum seekers would face persecution or a real risk of torture or
ill-treatment. In early 2004, for example, the Dutch government
revealed proposals to deny failed asylum seekers community-based
social assistance and to place them in special centers prior to their “voluntary”
return—or in detention centers pending their forcible deportation.
Thousands of failed asylum seekers would be threatened with
return over the next few years, including persons from countries where
ongoing conflicts will threaten their safety, such as Chechens, Afghans,
Liberians, some Somalis, and persons from Northern Iraq.
Human Rights Watch publicly challenged the Dutch returns plan in
February 2004, arguing that it represented a further degradation of the
Netherlands’ commitment to the right to seek asylum and the principle
of nonrefoulement, and signaled a continuing and disturbing trend on the
part of Dutch authorities to depart from international standards in their
treatment of asylum seekers and migrants.
Counterterrorism Measures
The climate of fear generated by the September 11 attacks in the U.S.
and further exacerbated by the March 2004 Madrid bombings resulted
in regional and national counterterrorism laws and policies permitting
the indefinite detention of foreign terrorism suspects; extended periods
of incommunicado detention; and the erosion of the absolute ban on
torture, including the use of evidence extracted by torture and growing
reliance upon so-called “diplomatic assurances” to return alleged terrorist
suspects to places where they face a real risk of torture or ill-treatment.
Indefinite Detention
In the aftermath of September 11, the U.K. passed the Anti-Terrorism,
Crime and Security Act (ATCSA), which provided for the indefinite
detention of foreign terrorist suspects. In order to establish such a
detention regime, the U.K. had to suspend (“derogate” from) some of
its human rights obligations under the European Convention on
Human Rigghts and the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights (ICCPR) by formally declaring “a public emergency threatening
the life of the nation.” The U.K. is the only Council of Europe and
U.N. member state to declare such an emergency and to determine that
the global threat from terrorism required it to abandon one of its core
human rights obligations—the prohibition against indefinite detention
without charge or trial.
Under the ATCSA, the Home Secretary can certify a foreign national as
a “suspected international terrorist” if he has a “reasonable belief ” that
the person is a threat to national security and a “suspicion” that the person
is an international terrorist or had links with an international terrorist
group. Certification is based on secret evidence. Detainees can
challenge their detention in the Special Immigration Appeals
Commission (SIAC), a tribunal with limited procedural guarantees and
a low standard of proof. Detainees are assigned a security-cleared barrister
known as a “special advocate.” Classified evidence is heard during
“closed” sessions attended by the special advocate. Detainees and their
lawyers of choice are excluded from those sessions, and contact between
the special advocates and detainees is limited.
Seventeen men in total have been detained under the ATCSA regime.
To date, eleven men remain detained indefinitely without charge or
trial. The treatment of detainees under the ATCSA in high security
U.K. prisons also raises concerns that they have been subject to cruel,
inhuman, or degrading treatment. Detainees have complained of long
periods of isolation; lack of access to health care, religious observance,
and educational services; lack of exercise; obstacles to visits from friends
and family; and psychological trauma associated with not knowing when
they will be released.
The indefinite detention regime has been criticized and challenged in
U.K. courts. Two U.K. parliamentary committees—the Privy Council
Review Committee (known as the “Newton Committee”) and the Joint
Human Rights Committee—have called for the urgent repeal of the
measures that allow for indefinite detention. In October 2002, upon a
challenge that the indefinite detention regime discriminates against foreign
nationals, the British Court of Appeal ruled that indefinite detention
was compatible with U.K. and international law. In October 2004,
a specially convened nine-judge panel in the House of Lords heard an
appeal on the lawfulness of the derogation and the compatibility of the legislation with other human rights obligations from which Britain has
not derogated. That decision is pending.
Incommuncado detention
In Spain, the prolonged detention of foreign terrorist suspects has also
given rise to serious concerns about procedural and other violations in
the special detention regime. The Spanish Code of Criminal Procedure
(Ley de Enjuiciamiento Criminal) provides for incommunicado detention
for up to thirteen days, limitations on the right to counsel, pre-trial
detention for up to four years, and secret legal proceedings (causa
secreta). The proceedings governing the detentions of suspected al-
Qaeda operatives apprehended in Spain since September 11, among
others, were declared secret by the Audiencia Nacional, a special court
that supervises terrorist cases. The imposition of secrecy can bar
defense access to the prosecution evidence—except for information contained
in the initial detention order—for the majority of the investigative
phase. Human Rights Watch detailed its concerns with the Spanish
counter-terrorism regime in a December 2004 report titled, Setting An
Example? – Counterterrorism Measures in Spain. Many of those concerns
have been echoed by the European Committee for the Prevention of
Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT),
and the U.N. special rapporteur on torture.
Evidence Extracted under Torture
In August 2004, Britain’s second highest court ruled that evidence
obtained under torture in third countries could be used in special terrorism
cases. The Court of Appeal held that the British government can
use evidence extracted under torture as long as the U.K. neither “procured
the torture nor connived at it.” Such evidence can be used to
“certify” foreign terrorist suspects and during appeals against indefinite
detention in the SIAC. The court’s decision undermines the global prohibition
against torture. Article 15 of the Convention against Torture explicitly prohibits the consideration of evidence obtained under torture
in any legal proceedings. The House of Lords has been asked to review
the question of use of evidence obtained under torture on appeal.
Diplomatic Assurances No Safeguard against Torture
European governments also contributed to the erosion of the ban on
torture by relying on so-called “diplomatic assurances” to return terrorist
suspects and foreigners labeled national security threats to countries
where they were at risk of torture or ill-treatment. Diplomatic assurances
are formal guarantees from the receiving government that it will
protect a person from torture upon return. Under international law, the
absolute prohibition against torture includes the obligation not to send
a person to a country where he or she is at risk of torture or ill-treatment.
Human Rights Watch’s research, detailed in an April 2004 report
titled, “Empty Promises:” Diplomatic Assurances No Safeguard Against
Torture, revealed that such assurances provide no guarantee against torture,
which is practiced in secret and often denied by governments in
states where torture is systematic or used to repress and intimidate particular
groups. The report detailed cases where persons returned based
on diplomatic assurances were in fact tortured or ill-treated, and highlighted
cases in several European countries where the courts intervened
and ruled that diplomatic assurances from governments in states where
torture is a serious problem were not reliable. Schemes for “post-return
monitoring”—that is, an agreement by the two governments involved
that the sending government could deploy its diplomats to monitor a
person’s treatment after return—did not provide an additional safeguard
against torture.
Cases in which European governments have relied upon or attempted
to employ assurances to effect a return have been documented in
Sweden, the U.K., Germany, the Netherlands, Austria, Georgia, and
Turkey, among others. In Sweden, the cases of two Egyptian asylum
seekers expelled in December 2001 from Stockholm to Cairo based on diplomatic assurances from the Egyptian government were of particular
note. The Swedish authorities determined in 2001 that the men, Ahmed
Agiza and Mohammad al-Zari, had a well-founded fear of persecution if
returned to Egypt. Based on secret evidence never made available to the
men or their lawyers, the Swedish government excluded the men from
protection under the 1951 Refugee Convention and ordered their
expulsions, based on assurances from the Egyptian authorities that the
men would not be subject to the death penalty, subject to torture or illtreatment,
and that they would receive fair trials. The men were
expelled from Sweden on the same day the decision to deny them protection
was made.
It was subsequently revealed that the men were handed over to U.S.
operatives at Bromma Airport in Stockholm; hooded, shackled, and
drugged by these operatives; placed aboard a U.S. government-leased
plane; and transported to Cairo. They were held in incommunicado
detention for a full five weeks before the Swedish ambassador to Egypt
visited them. The men have credibly alleged that they were tortured
and ill-treated in those five weeks and that such treatment continued
even after the Swedish diplomats began monitoring their treatment. A
classified Swedish government monitoring report from January 2002
indicated that the men told the Swedish authorities about this abuse,
but the Swedish government took no action and in fact deleted these
allegations from its public reporting on the cases.
In October 2003, al-Zari was released without charge and he remains
under constant surveillance by Egyptian police. Ahmed Agiza’s April
2004 re-trial (he had been tried in absentia in Egypt in 1999 and sentenced
to 25 years of hard labor) was conducted in a special military
court. A Human Rights Watch trial monitor, present throughout the
trial, documented numerous serious fair trial violations. In the course of
the trial, Agiza told the court that he had been tortured in prison and
requested an independent medical examination, which the court denied.
The Swedish authorities were denied access to the first two of the four trial hearings, and did not take action on Agiza’s claims that he was tortured.
Human Rights Watch criticized the Swedish government for violating
its absolute obligation not to return a person to a country where
they are at risk of torture and publicly called for an international, independent
inquiry under the auspices of the United Nations to investigate
all three governments’ involvement in the men’s abuse.
This disquieting trend was further substantiated by recent indications of
the growing use of diplomatic assurances in Germany, the Netherlands,
and the United Kingdom. Thus, although in May 2003 a German court
rejected as insufficient diplomatic assurances offered by the Turkish
government in the extradition case of Metin Kaplan, the leader of the
banned Islamic fundamentalist group, “Caliphate State,” Mr. Kaplan
was subsequently deported to Turkey in October 2004. Similarly, in
September 2004, the Dutch government decided to extradite Nuriye
Kesbir, a high-level member of the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK),
following diplomatic assurances from Turkey that she would not be tortured
or ill-treated upon return and would receive a fair trial. In a letter
to the Dutch Minister of Justice, Human Rights Watch detailed the real
risk of torture and ill-treatment Kesbir would face upon return and stated
that assurances from Turkey could not be considered reliable given
Turkey’s failure to implement adequate monitoring mechanisms to
ensure that torture did not occur. In October 2004, during the House of
Lords appeal on the lawfulness of the indefinite detention regime (see
above), the British government indicated that it is actively seeking
diplomatic assurances from states where there is a risk of torture to
facilitate the removal from the U.K. of men currently subject to indefinite
detention.
A number of international and regional actors have also criticized states’
growing reliance on diplomatic assurances. In his October 2004 report
to the U.N. General Assembly, the U.N. Special Rapporteur on Torture
stated that assurances from governments in countries where torture is
systematic cannot be relied upon and should not be employed to circumvent the obligation not to return a person to a country where he or
she risks torture. Similarly, in his April 2004 report, the Council of
Europe Commissioner for Human Rights. Gil Robles expressed concern
that the use of diplomatic assurances in the Agiza/al-Zari cases did
not provide the two men with an adequate safeguard against torture.
The U.N. Human Rights Committee has also expressed concern about
the adequacy of such assurances as an effective safeguard. The Agiza
case is pending before the U.N. Committee against Torture.
At the regional level, the European Court of Human Rights was presented
with the opportunity to reaffirm the absolute nature of the prohibition
against returning any person to a country where she or he
would be at risk of torture or prohibited ill-treatment in Mamatkulov
and Askarov v. Turkey, a case for which Human Rights Watch and the
AIRE Centre submitted an amicus curiae brief. In its brief, Human
Rights Watch documented the systematic practice of torture in
Uzbekistan, a conclusion echoed by a February 2003 report by the U.N.
special rapporteur on torture. Human Rights Watch also questioned the
reliability of the diplomatic assurances proffered by the Uzbek authorities
as well as the follow-up monitoring of the assurances by the Turkish
government, which was limited to one prison visit by Turkish officials
(more than two years after the men were returned) and reliance on
medical certificates from prison doctors employed by the state and
alleged to be implicated in acts of torture. A decision is expected in the
Mamatkulov case before the end of 2004. 
