EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA OVERVIEW
August 2001 marked ten years since the failed 1991 coup that presaged the
end of the Soviet Union, and the anniversary provoked impatience at
the uneven progress on human rights in the region.After the September 11 attacks
one month later, impatience turned to regret at the lost opportunities for a more
thoroughgoing transition during the interlude between the Cold War and the Antiterror
War.
Many countries in the region had made significant strides since 1991, but abusive
authoritarian rule persisted in several, and others still struggled to overcome
the ethnic conflict that had engulfed large parts of the disintegrating Soviet Union
and Yugoslavia. Looking westward toward eventual integration into the European
Union, central and eastern European countries had undertaken important reform,
while western Europe had turned inward and become increasingly intolerant of
immigration and ethnic diversity. As the year drew to a close, it was not entirely
clear what the new post-September 11 era would hold for human rights, but in
much the same way the Cold War once distorted the human rights agenda, the
prospects for tackling the region’s persistent and newly emerging human rights
problems seemed suddenly to dim in light of the competing and overriding antiterrorism
imperative.
After September 11, governments from Skopje to Moscow scrambled to cast
their own often brutal internal conflicts as part of the new international antiterrorist
cause.With too few exceptions, this opportunism went unchecked. At the same
time,Western European leaders ramped up their anti-immigrant rhetoric and further
restricted the rights of migrants, refugees, and asylum seekers, all in the name
of fighting terrorism. And criticism of human rights abuse softened, particularly
for those states that were strategically important to the U.S.-led military action in
Afghanistan. The United States and Uzbekistan announced a “qualitatively new
relationship,” notwithstanding the latter’s brutal crackdown on independent Muslims.
German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder urged a reevaluation of Russia’s abusive
war in Chechnya. In November, U.S. President George Bush praised Russian
President Vladimir Putin’s talk of negotiating peace in Chechnya, with no public
mention of continued atrocities perpetrated against Chechens since September 11.
The most alarming developments of the year came in Central Asia, where the
transition from the Soviet Union had brought only grinding poverty and ever more
repressive governance. After September 11, it was these very governments that
became the essential allies of the U.S.-led military campaign in Afghanistan. Of
particular concern was the close and apparently unconditional U.S. relationship
with Uzbekistan,where Islam Karimov’s dictatorship permitted no true opposition political activity, no civil society, and no independent media and locked up and tortured
thousands who dared demonstrate independent thinking. U.S. officials
argued that the new relationship with Uzbekistan put them in a better position to
address their partner’s gross violations, but as this report went to press there was
no relief from the Uzbek government’s assault on its own society. In the two months
following September 11, yet another human rights defender was detained, dissidents
and religious believers continued to be arrested and tortured—one died in
custody—and convictions on trumped-up charges of anti-state activity continued.
Ethnic conflict had attended the breakup of the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia for
ten years, and in 2001 its aftermath continued to shape much of the human rights
landscape. Russia’s transitional record remained marred by the continued grave
violations committed by its forces in Chechnya. As the Chechen conflict dragged
into its third year, the government’s halfhearted peace bid and promised troop
reductions made no difference in the lives of Chechen civilians. Sweep operations
purportedly aimed at apprehending rebel fighters resulted in widespread looting,
arbitrary detention, torture, and an alarming number of “disappearances” of
Chechens last seen in Russian custody,with the bodies of some later found dumped
or hastily buried in unmarked graves. Chechen fighters were also believed to be
behind an increasing number of abuses, including a wave of assassinations of
Chechen civil servants and religious leaders seen as cooperating with the Russian
government, and the fatal shooting of Viktor Popkov, a leading Russian human
rights activist.
Ethnic tensions flared again in the Balkans, this time in southern Serbia and
Macedonia. The response of both the implicated governments and the international
community differed from past conflicts in the region, reflecting important
transitional developments and lessons learned. When an ethnic Albanian rebel
group emerged in southern Serbia, it was clear that Slobodan Milosevic was no
longer in power in Belgrade. In contrast to Kosovo in 1998, the international community
immediately and intensively engaged and worked with a relatively cooperative
Serbian government to address the legitimate grievances of the ethnic
Albanian community, including through the deployment of a multiethnic police
force in the region. In May the rebels disarmed, and displaced ethnic Albanians
began returning to the region.The lack of Albanian representation in local government,
serious employment discrimination, and sporadic incidents of ethnic violence
remained concerns, but the threat of armed conflict had receded for the time
being.
Similar success came more slowly in Macedonia, where for months the government
insisted upon a military response to its ethnic Albanian insurgency, led by the
so-called National Liberation Army (NLA). The government’s security operations
were characterized by indiscriminate attacks, widespread arbitrary detentions and
beatings of ethnic Albanians, some extrajudicial executions, and vigilante violence
tolerated and in some instances abetted by the police.The Albanian rebels were also
responsible for serious crimes, including the detention and torture of ethnic Macedonians
and Serbs and the “disappearance” of at least ten people from NLA-controlled
areas. Determined to avoid another drawn-out war and cognizant of
Macedonia’s strategic location, the international community mounted an intensive peacemaking effort. Guided by E.U. and U.S. special envoys and supported by
OSCE and NATO deployments, on August 13 the Macedonian government concluded
a framework peace agreement with the main ethnic Albanian political parties.
Deep divisions emerged within the government over the peace deal and
implementation lagged behind schedule, but in mid-November the Parliament
adopted constitutional amendments to grant important new rights to the ethnic
Albanian minority.The peace remained fragile,however,with extremists within the
government and police working to derail the process and skirmishes continuing
between a new Albanian National Army and Macedonian forces, even as Parliament
approved the new constitutional provisions.
Accountability for genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanity remained
a high priority in efforts to resolve the ethnic conflicts that have plagued the region.
The April 1 detention of former Yugoslav president Slobodan Milosevic and his
June 28 transfer to the custody of the Hague tribunal were the high points.While
Milosevic stubbornly defied the tribunal and obstructed its proceedings, the prosecutor
brought additional charges against him, expanding the Kosovo indictment
to include important new charges of sexual violence and adding indictments for
war crimes dating from 1991 in Croatia and for genocide and crimes against
humanity in the 1992-1995 Bosnia conflict. The discovery in Serbia of new mass
graves believed to be filled with the bodies of ethnic Albanians slaughtered during
the Kosovo conflict brought unprecedented discussion and reflection in Serbia
about its role in the serial wars in Yugoslavia. Cooperation with the tribunal
remained a contentious issue, however, pitting Serbian nationalist Yugoslav President
Vojislav Kostunica against the more pragmatic Prime Minister of the Republic
of Serbia Zoran Djindjic, who saw cooperation as key to obtaining further
Western integration and much-needed debt forgiveness. Pragmatism seemed to
win the day, with six indictees, in addition to Milosevic, having gone from
Yugoslavia to The Hague by the end of November—three by surrender and three
by Serb government arrest. In contrast, there was no public progress on accountability
for war-time crimes committed by the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA)
against Serbs and others in Kosovo. The ICTY was reportedly investigating crimes
there but issued no indictments. In Kosovo, even speaking publicly about such
crimes brought warnings of retribution from former KLA members.
With the dramatic developments in Serbia, the most conspicuous haven for war
criminals indicted by the tribunal remained the Republika Srpska, the Bosnian
Serb-controlled part of Bosnia, where Bosnian Serb wartime leader Radovan
Karadzic and other indictees remained at large. NATO troops deployed in Republika
Srpska deserved some of the blame for the indicted war criminals’ continued
impunity,which undermined the tribunal and the six-year-old Dayton/Paris peace
process.
Russian officials repeatedly assured their international critics that those responsible
for any abuses in Chechnya would be held accountable. On the eve of the
March meeting of the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, Russian authorities
commenced the high-profile trial of Colonel Yuri Budanov for the killing of Elza
Kungaeva in 2000, and in April the Russian Duma presented the Council of Europe
Parliamentary Assembly with a list of 358 investigations under way.Unfortunately, careful scrutiny of the Russian government’s accountability effort revealed little
more than an international public relations campaign. Few of the cases on the list
provided to the Council of Europe dealt with the worst abuses in Chechnya. Even
fewer had proceeded beyond the initial investigation phase. As of September, only
five cases had resulted in active prison sentences for the perpetrators. Budanov
never faced rape charges, though forensic evidence showed that Kungaeva had been
sexually assaulted prior to her murder. Morever, Budanov appeared likely to be
amnestied altogether after a psychiatric institute found that he had been “emotionally
distressed” at the time of Kungaeva’s murder.
The decade of ethnic conflict in the region was evidenced in the millions who
remained displaced in 2001, in some cases years after they originally left home. In
Ingushetia, over 140,000 Chechens remained too fearful to return. More than
750,000 remained registered as displaced from Bosnia and Herzegovina, two-thirds
of them within the country, and, because many people no longer registered, actual
numbers were likely much higher. Though return increased, it remained at a rate
that would take years to reverse the “ethnic cleansing”of the territory.Over 200,000
Serbs were too afraid to return to post-war Kosovo, and another 200,000-plus Serbs
declined to return to their homes in Croatia. In Turkey, although armed clashes in
the southeast essentially ceased in 1999 and the government announced an ambitious
return program, few of the 250,000 internally displaced Kurds from that
region ventured home. More than 800,000 Azeris remained displaced from
Nagorno-Karabakh and the surrounding districts of Azerbaijan, seven years after a
1994 cease-fire. About 280,000 Georgians who fled their homes in Abkhazia when
the Georgian army surrendered Sukhumi to Abkhazian separatist forces in 1993
continued to endure displacement in Georgia. Sixty thousand Ossetians and 12,000
Georgians remained displaced from their homes in Georgia and its autonomous
territory of South Ossetia after the 1991-1992 fighting between Georgians and
Ossetians over South Ossetia.
Neither the affected countries nor the international community demonstrated
much determination to tackle this persistent problem, which left millions living in
substandard conditions and unable to return to their homes and property. In some
cases initial post-war efforts had not been sustained as attention and resources
shifted to new crises. In others no attempt at promoting return or restitution was
ever made. The prospects for any concerted efforts to enable return became ever
more remote once the aftermath of September 11 drew humanitarian attention to
a new crisis spot,Afghanistan. The long-term impact of displacement was difficult
to assess and varied among countries, yet in many places its effect on postwar
reconciliation and the prospects for lasting peace remained a serious cause for
concern.
Poverty, conflict, and human rights abuse in the region and beyond drove hundreds
of thousands to travel to Western Europe to seek a better life. The inhumane
and often deadly conditions they endured to reach their destination spoke volumes
of their desperation. Trafficking of women for forced prostitution remained
an urgent concern throughout the region. In many countries the victims of trafficking
faced prosecution and expulsion while their traffickers, sometimes in
cahoots with local police, carried on with their lucrative criminal business. Recent
years had seen heightened attention to the problem of trafficking, with high-level meetings convened on the subject at the European Union, OSCE, and Council of
Europe.Whether these initiatives would be pursued remained an open question as
international attention shifted to the all-consuming antiterrorism effort after September
11.
Western European countries’ attempts to address the demands of increased
migration often led to more restrictive immigration and asylum laws, with little
concern for the rights of vulnerable migrants and refugees. Detention conditions
for migrants were grossly substandard in a number of countries, and many
detainees were denied basic procedural guarantees in the detention and deportation
process. Proposals to hinder migrants’ access to basic healthcare and to deny
migrant children access to education were hotly debated in several countries.
In the aftermath of September 11, many European countries adopted antiterrorism
measures inimical to migrants and refugees. In Hungary, all Afghan refugees
were transported to special detention facilities. In Greece, some migrants arriving
on ships were denied access to asylum procedures and given fifteen-day expulsion
orders. The United Kingdom proposed emergency anti-terrorism legislation that
would deny some asylum seekers an individual determination procedure, classify
as “terrorist” any foreigners with ill-defined “links” to terrorist organizations, and
allow authorities to indefinitely detain them. National governments were spurred
on by developments at the E.U. level,where proposals to combat terrorism included
a broad definition of terrorism that threatened to undermine freedom of assembly
and association and a European arrest warrant that lacked adequate fair trial safeguards.
Racist violence targeting migrants and refugees mounted in Western Europe,
particularly in the wake of the September 11 attacks. Politicians failed to curb this
abuse, too often encouraging it with inflammatory rhetoric equating the fight
against terror with the fight against illegal immigration.
European efforts to come to terms with diversity became ever more critical with
the European Union’s rapidly approaching eastward expansion, set in motion in
the heady, early post-Cold War years.With as many as ten countries to be admitted
by 2004, much remained to be done to restructure E.U. institutions, as well as to
adjust applicant states’ laws to E.U. norms. In the field of human rights, poor treatment
of Roma remained a challenge for nearly all applicant states.Turkey’s persistent
problems relating to torture, free expression, and minority rights kept it as a
case apart among applicant states. Its National Program for Accession to the E.U.
announced in March and the constitutional amendments adopted in October were
both disappointing. The national program was too vague to raise any hope of
meaningful change. Not surprisingly then, incommunicado detention, the death
penalty, and emergency rule remained in place, and important free expression
guarantees were neglected. Having missed these important opportunities for
meaningful reform, Turkey continued to face a long road to E.U. membership.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Conditions for human rights defenders varied widely in the region, with
activists in some countries free to develop innovative new projects while others struggled just to survive in extremely hostile environments. In Turkmenistan, no
independent activist dared undertake any human rights activity. In Belarus, Kyrgyzstan,
Turkey, and Uzbekistan, defenders worked under siege, facing a constant
threat of harassment, police raids, violent attacks by unknown assailants, arrest,
torture, and conviction on trumped-up charges.Under pressure from the U.S. government,
Uzbekistan released human rights defenders Mahbuba Kasymova in
December 2000 and Ismail Adylov in July 2001. In the course of the year, however,
the Uzbek government detained two others, one of whom—Shovruk Ruzimuradov—
died in custody.
Defenders also put their lives on the line in Chechnya, where Chechen fighters
were believed responsible for the shooting death of Russian human rights activist
Viktor Popkov and the January kidnapping of humanitarian aid worker Kenneth
Gluck,who was subsequently released unharmed. Russian forces maintained strict
control on access to Chechnya for human rights monitors, with most groups,
including Human Rights Watch, refused entry to the territory.
Accountability for the murders of defenders remained a low priority for many
governments in the region. The United Kingdom again failed to set a positive
example in this respect,persistently refusing to establish independent inquiries into
the murders in Northern Ireland of human rights lawyers Patrick Finucane and
Rosemary Nelson, despite calls to do so from the United Nations, the U.S. government,
bar councils across the globe, and many nongovernmental organizations.
Notwithstanding the challenges they faced, rights workers in many countries
undertook creative new projects to strengthen protection and build a larger grassroots
constituency for human rights. In Turkey, Sanar Yurdatapan’s Freedom of
Expression Initiative challenged the authorities on their arbitrary restrictions on
free speech by enlisting internationally acclaimed authors to republish statements
for which the original authors had been prosecuted. Throughout the region the
Central and Eastern Europe Bankwatch Network trained and empowered consumer,
human rights, and environmental groups to challenge international financial
institutions to take into consideration the impact of their operations on local
communities. Rights groups, refugee, and migrants organizations joined forces in
many European countries to advocate for the fundamental human rights of
migrants and refugees, and to highlight anti-immigration policies and inflammatory
government rhetoric that often contributed to a hostile climate for these vulnerable
groups.An effective coalition of nongovernmental organizations undertook
a multiyear effort to promote implementation and enforcement of a new E.U.
directive aimed at combating race discrimination.Another alliance of groups came
together to battle for victim and witness protection measures in the E.U. Council
Framework Decision on Trafficking of Human Beings. These and many other initiatives
reflected the creativity and resolve of a resilient civil society that, particularly
after September 11, was the region’s best hope for positive change.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
The contentious debate on Chechnya at the U.N. Commission on Human
Rights ultimately yielded a strongly worded resolution condemning ongoing violations
of international humanitarian law there and pressing for accountability and
monitoring by the United Nation’s human rights mechanisms. The European
Union tabled the resolution but under the Swedish presidency negotiated an alternative
consensus chairman’s statement with Russia. The United States (supported
quietly by some E.U.member states) found the statement too weak and pressed for
a vote on the resolution. When the resolution passed, Russia immediately
denounced it, refusing to meet any of the demands it contained.Neither the European
Union, the resolution’s reluctant sponsor, nor the United States, the resolution’s
ultimate champion,publicly raised its implementation during the year.When
U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan visited Moscow in May, however, he did urge
access for the U.N. human rights mechanisms identified in the resolution.
The United Nations maintained a massive peace implementation operation in
Kosovo, the U.N. Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). Though it
gradually shifted certain responsibilities to local authorities, UNMIK, together
with the NATO-led peacekeeping force (KFOR), retained responsibility for security
and judicial affairs, where its activities did not always meet international human
rights standards. In particular, there was a tendency to sacrifice due process guarantees
in the name of improvements to the security situation in the province. Trials
of several Kosovo Serbs and Roma charged before the Kosovo courts with war
crimes and genocide suffered from serious fair trial shortcomings, while the number
of international judges and prosecutors remained far below what was needed to
address ethnic bias in the administration of justice.
The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia made significant
progress toward achieving justice for war crimes committed in the Balkan wars.
The detention and transfer of Milosevic was a watershed for the tribunal, whose
prosecutor Carla Del Ponte persistently pressed the new Yugoslav government to
cooperate. There were important developments in other cases during the year as
well. In the first eleven months of 2001 seventeen defendants surrendered or were
arrested and transferred to custody in The Hague. Giving the lie to charges of bias
against Serbs, the tribunal continued investigations of KLA crimes in Kosovo and
issued indictments against Croatian generals Rahim Ademi and Ante Gotovina.
The tribunal also created an important precedent with convictions for crimes
against humanity and war crimes in the Foca case, the first to focus entirely on rapes
and sexual assaults perpetrated against women in wartime. Finally, the tribunal
played an important deterrent role by opening an office in Skopje and reminding
the parties to the conflict in Macedonia that it had jurisdiction over any war crimes
they might commit. In November,Del Ponte announced that the tribunal would be
investigating war crimes committed by both government forces and the ethnic
Albanian insurgency.
An unqualified success of the U.N.World Conference Against Racism in Durban was the clear articulation of the fundamental rights of refugees and migrants and a
wholesale rejection of the anti-immigration, “Fortress Europe” mentality that
dominated Western Europe throughout the 1990s. Realizing the gains of the conference
with respect to the rights of migrants and refugees promised to be a difficult
task, however, particularly in light of the repressive measures taken by many
European governments in the aftermath of September 11.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
The OSCE started the year reeling from an embarrassing December 2000 ministerial
meeting where foreign ministers failed to agree on a final communiqué after
Russia refused to include any reference to Chechnya. In June 2001, Russia finally
permitted the redeployment in Chechnya of the OSCE Assistance Group, a year and
a half after the OSCE Istanbul Summit at which then-President Yeltsin agreed to the
redeployment. A combination of cumbersome security arrangements and OSCE
timidity in pursuing the mandate substantially compromised the mission’s potential
for curbing ongoing abuse. Even its modest monitoring activities brought
intense criticism from the Russian authorities.
The OSCE played an important confidence-building role in Macedonia. In September,
159 new international staff—mostly security monitors and police advisors—
were added to the fifty-one already deployed. Adopting an overly restrictive
interpretation of its mandate, however, the mission limited its human rights monitoring
activities. Particularly disappointing was its failure to report its findings on
an August government assault on the village of Ljuboten that left ten ethnic Albanian
civilians dead, over a hundred detained and beaten, and scores of houses burnt
down. Interior Minister Ljube Boskovski, who was present in Ljuboten the day of
the operation, referred to the OSCE’s silence as confirmation that the security
forces conducted themselves appropriately.
In Kosovo, the OSCE organized municipal and Kosovo assembly elections in
line with U.N. resolution 1244,which governs the province. In Albania, the OSCE’s
Office of Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) published a report
that, although diplomatically couched, was critical of the electoral system and government
manipulation in the June 24 parliamentary elections.
The OSCE continued to finance antitrafficking projects in the region, focusing
primarily on public education campaigns and work by nongovernmental organizations.
In addition, with financial support from the government of Germany, the
OSCE sponsored a high-level conference on trafficking in human beings in October
2001. Participants made numerous recommendations to member states, but it
remained unclear at the time of this writing whether any of those recommendations
would be implemented.
Council of Europe
Throughout the year, Council of Europe experts were seconded to the office of
President Putin’s representative on human rights in Chechnya, Vladimir Kalamanov,
and the Parliamentary Assembly pursued a dialogue on Chechnya with the Russian Duma.Neither effort had significant impact on the ground, disappointing
in particular in their failure to press effectively for accountability.When the bodies
of fifty-one people—at least sixteen of whom were last seen in Russian custody—
were found dumped near the Russian military’s Khankala base, bearing evidence of
torture and execution, the Council of Europe experts failed even to visit the site or
monitor the forensic examination and investigation.
Continuing an unfortunate pattern of decisions on new members, in 2001 the
Council of Europe undermined its own standards by admitting states that flagrantly
violated them. Following a premature mid-2000 Parliamentary Assembly
recommendation that Armenia and Azerbaijan be admitted, the Committee of
Ministers delayed their admission until after the November general elections in
Azerbaijan.Though Council of Europe officials who monitored the elections found
the electoral fraud there scandalous, and a partial repolling did little to remedy the
situation, the council admitted both states in late January 2001. Likely setting in
motion a similar set of concessions, in September the Political Affairs Committee
of the Parliamentary Assembly recommended that Bosnia and Herzegovina be
admitted, though few of the conditions for admission identified in 1999 had been
fully achieved.
The European Court of Human Rights remained an important source of redress
for human rights abuse, though its growing caseload meant justice was often long
delayed. It issued an important decision against the United Kingdom for inadequate
investigations into the killings of eleven people by security forces and paramilitaries
in Northern Ireland and admitted the first two cases against Russia since
its admission to the Council of Europe in 1996. The court censured Turkey for,
among other things, the conduct of its forces in the southeast and for the unfair
1994 trial that landed four Kurdish parliamentary deputies in prison. In a controversial
July decision the Court sided with Turkey over the 1998 closure of the
Islamist Welfare Party. Finding that the party’s intention to establish Islamic law
conflicted with Council of Europe norms, the court effectively endorsed the Turkish
government’s particular form of secularism, often used to restrict nonviolent
expression and other democratic freedoms.
European Union
The European Union’s accession process remained a valuable incentive for
human rights progress among applicant states. In the European Union’s annual
assessment of applicant states, only Turkey failed to satisfy the political criteria for
admission.
On a number of critical issues, however, the E.U.’s stance undermined human
rights principles. The European Union led the international embrace of the new
Yugoslav government of Vojislav Kostunica,without regard for his refusal to cooperate
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.While the
United States demanded Kostunica cooperate or lose assistance, the European
Union moved forward to organize a May 31 donors conference. Only the threat of
a U.S. no-show caused the European Union to postpone the conference until June
30, by which time the Serb government had been compelled to transfer Milosevic.
A similar myopia infected E.U. policy toward Russia. The European Union and its
member states continued their aggressive cultivation of Russian President Vladimir
Putin with virtually no public reference to the ongoing abuses in Chechnya.
Though it sponsored the resolution on Chechnya at the U.N. Commission on
Human Rights, the European Union did almost everything possible to scuttle it.
In the aftermath of the September 11 attacks, the European Union entertained
a number of proposed security measures that would not only violate human rights
at home, but also undermine the E.U.’s credibility as a champion for human
rights abroad. The proposed security measures contained an overbroad definition
of “terrorist activity” that could potentially have the same sweeping effect as laws
used to silence dissidents in, for example, Turkey and Uzbekistan. Having pressed
for conformity with fair trial standards in E.U. applicant states and elsewhere
abroad, the European Union itself entertained a proposal for a European arrest
warrant that lacked sufficient fair trial guarantees.
United States
In the first eight months of the year, the Bush administration sent the mixed signals
of a human rights policy still in formation. On the one hand the administration
announced a foreign policy driven by strictly construed and narrowly defined
national interests, seeming to foreshadow a retreat from peacekeeping and promoting
human rights.After initial equivocation, however, the Bush administration
firmly committed to keeping its troops in the Balkans. The arrest and transfer of
Slobodan Milosevic and other indicted war criminals in Yugoslavia to the Hague
tribunal probably would not have happened, at least for years to come, without
concerted U.S. pressure.The United States was also the most principled advocate of
a resolution on Chechnya at the U.N. Commission on Human Rights.
After September 11, however, the U.S. anti-terrorism effort threatened to sweep
aside the human rights agenda, most notably in relations with key anti-terror allies
Russia and Uzbekistan. Once again the United States squandered its leverage to
obtain rights improvements when the State Department omitted Uzbekistan from
its list of the most egregious violators of human rights. In November, President
Bush hosted Russian President Putin for three days in Washington and Texas, with
little more than gratuitous reference to ongoing Russian government abuses in
Chechnya.
International Financial Institutions
Human rights continued to play an ever more important role in the operations
of the international financial institutions, although certain issues remained too
controversial for the banks to touch. The European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (EBRD) began to take a more robust approach to its charter mandate
to invest only in countries committed to the principles ofmultiparty democracy. In
strongly worded letters to the presidents of Belarus and Turkmenistan, EBRD President
Jacques Lemierre threatened both countries with expulsion from the bank
unless they started to show some evidence of such a commitment. The bank’s
approach to democratization issues was, however, uneven. While Turkmenistan and Belarus were censured, Uzbekistan received relatively muted criticism, and
plans to hold the 2003 EBRD annual meeting in Tashkent moved forward without
any apparent concern for the symbolism of convening in such a repressive environment.
The World Bank continued to emphasize the importance of judicial and legal
reform, sponsoring a major conference on the subject in St.Petersburg in July. In its
policy dialogue with states, the bank increasingly emphasized the importance of
criminal law reform, but it remained hesitant to finance the much-needed reform
of Soviet-era criminal codes, which remained a source of rampant corruption and
abuse.
At the same time, the international financial institutions resisted calls for them
to condition financing in Yugoslavia on the government’s cooperation with the
ICTY. In the same vein, they refused to link their operations in Russia to improved
conditions in Chechnya.
THE WORK OF HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
Human Rights Watch’s work tracked the most serious human rights problems
in the region.We gathered testimony about abuse in Chechnya in research missions
to neighboring Ingushetia in February and July. In two separate reports, we published
our findings on forced disappearances and on the government’s botched
investigation into the mass grave near the Khankala Russian military base.We also
monitored the opening hearings in the Budanov trial. By presenting our research
to government officials in national capitals and in Geneva,we helped make the case
for the Chechnya resolution adopted at the U.N. Commission on Human Rights.
We also successfully pressed the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly to
enter into a serious dialogue on accountability with its Duma counterparts.When
the Duma produced a long list of crimes investigated, our analysis helped policy
makers appreciate the holes in the list.
Human Rights Watch also continued to track the government of Uzbekistan’s
brutal crackdown on independent Muslims, their families, and supporters. In
August we published a memorandum on the key aspects of the campaign and
pressed the U.S. government to name Uzbekistan a country of particular concern
under its International Religious Freedom Act. A December 2000 report described
the systematic and increasingly deadly use of torture in Uzbekistan. A second
report on Uzbekistan, released in June 2001, highlighted the plight of victims of
domestic violence,which Uzbek police and local councils routinely countenanced,
advising terrorized victims to return to their husbands. Two years of advocacy on
behalf of jailed human rights defenders Mahbuba Kasymova and Ismail Adylov
were rewarded with their releases in December 2000 and July 2001, respectively.We
honored Adylov at our annual dinner in November 2001, which he attended only
after a long struggle to obtain an exit visa from the government of Uzbekistan to
visit the United States for the event.
Uzbekistan was not the only country where religious freedom was the focus of
our work. In an August memorandum we also documented the escalating violence
against non-orthodox religious believers in Georgia.We repeatedly raised the issue in letters to Georgian President Eduard Schevardnadze and urged the U.S. government
to take appropriate action under the International Religious Freedom Act.
When conflict erupted in Macedonia,we sent five consecutive research missions
to monitor the conduct of both sides and published our findings in a series of press
releases and a report on the abusive government operation in Ljuboten. In Skopje,
Washington, Brussels, and Vienna, we briefed officials on our findings and recommended
an active international human rights monitoring presence and a role for
the Hague tribunal.
Building on a decade of research into violations committed in the wars in
Bosnia, Croatia, and Kosovo, we pressed for accountability for former Yugoslav
President Slobodan Milosevic and others responsible for war crimes. We documented
and publicized the Yugoslav government’s failure to cooperate with the
Hague tribunal. An open letter from Human Rights Watch to Yugoslav President
Vojislav Kostunica,published in the Belgrade daily Danas, countered his arguments
against the tribunal. After Milosevic’s transfer to The Hague, a Human Rights
Watch representative attended each of his hearings, providing background and
commentary for the media chronicling the proceedings. In October we published
a six-hundred-page account of violations of international humanitarian law committed
in 1998-1999 in Kosovo, primarily by Serbian and Yugoslav forces, but also
by the rebel ethnic-Albanian Kosovo Liberation Army, and, though not of a criminal
nature, by NATO.Releasing the report in events in Pristina, Djakovica, and Belgrade,
we aimed to contribute to ongoing discussions about justice and
reconciliation among Serbs and Albanians.
In Turkey, the ongoing prisons crisis remained a priority, as did advocacy aimed
at promoting an ambitious reform agenda for Turkey’s E.U. accession process. In
June and July we conducted a six-week investigation of the Turkish government’s
efforts to promote return of those displaced from the southeast and found that its
program fell far short of the U.N.Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement. In
Albania, a November mission focused on restrictions on freedom of the media.
Finally, we continued our monitoring of the treatment of migrants in Western
Europe, publishing the results of a November 2000 investigation in Greece in a
series of memoranda and letters highlighting gaps in proposed immigration legislation,
inadequate detention conditions for foreigners, and the Greek government’s
complete failure to address the serious problem of trafficking in women for
forced prostitution. Our work on detention conditions in Greece sparked close
scrutiny of Greece’s record by U.N. and Council of Europe bodies and contributed
to a growing civil society engagement on migrant rights issues in Greece.We followed
up on the trafficking issue with senior government meetings in Athens in
October. Trafficking was also the focus of a midyear research mission to Bosnia
and Herzegovina. In July, October, and November 2001, we continued our
research on migrant rights issues in Spain, focusing in particular on the law and
practice pertaining to migrants who had just arrived or were in detention. After
September 11, our research in Western Europe took on a new dimension as we
monitored and condemned excessively restrictive security measures proposed at
both the E.U. and national levels and their impact on migrants, refugees, and asylum
seekers.