European Union
In the face of a political and economic crisis affecting the European Union and
many of its member states, protection of human rights was rarely a priority in
2012, especially when those negatively affected were marginalized or unpopular
groups, such as Roma, migrants, and asylum seekers.
Despite deteriorating rights in Hungary and elsewhere, EU institutions largely
failed to live up to the promise of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights, with
the European Council particularly reluctant to hold member states to account for
abuse.
EU Migration and Asylum Policy
Despite efforts towards establishing the Common European Asylum System
(CEAS) by the end of 2012, migrants and asylum seekers continue to experience
gaps in accessing asylum and poor reception and detention conditions, including
for unaccompanied children. At this writing, the EU had not adopted a coordinated
response to the Syrian refugee crisis, and Syrians had access to varying
levels of access to protection in different member states.
In May, the EU adopted the Action on Migratory Pressures strategy detailing a
broad range of steps, including strengthening the capacity of countries outside
the EU to control their borders and the capacity for those countries to provide
refugee or humanitarian protection to individuals who might otherwise seek to
travel on to EU countries.
Boat migration across the Mediterranean decreased, although over 300 people
died at sea between January and November. In April, the Parliamentary
Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) adopted a report documenting a “catalogue
of failures” by EU member states, Libya, and NATO resulting in the
deaths of 63 boat migrants in April 2011. Negotiations continued to create the
European Border Surveillance System (EUROSUR) amid concerns that it lacked
clear guidelines and mechanisms for ensuring rescue of migrants and asylum
seekers at sea.
In September, the European Union Court of Justice (CJEU) annulled rules governing
sea surveillance by the EU border agency Frontex, including where rescued
boat migrants are to be disembarked, because the European Parliament had not
approved them. The rules remain in effect until new ones are adopted. An
inquiry that the European ombudsman launched in March into Frontex compliance
with fundamental rights continued at this writing. Frontex appointed its
new fundamental rights officer in September.
Efforts to revise common EU asylum rules progressed, with changes to the EU
Qualification Directive agreed in December 2011 providing clearer recognition of
gender-specific forms of persecution and gender identity as ground for protection.
The European Parliament and the European Council were expected to give
changes to the Reception Directive and Dublin II Regulation their final approval
by the end of 2012. Changes on minimum reception conditions would improve
access to employment and oblige states to identify vulnerable groups, but still
allow detention of asylum seekers, including unaccompanied children.
Changes to Dublin II would block transfers to countries where an asylum seeker
risks inhuman or degrading treatment, following a December 2011 ruling by the
CJEU on Greece, and improve safeguards but leave intact the general rule that
the first EU country of entry is responsible for claims. In September, the CJEU
ruled that member states must provide minimum reception standards to all asylum
seekers awaiting transfer under Dublin II.
In September, the European Commission released its mid-point assessment of
the Action Plan for Unaccompanied Minors, noting improvements in coordination,
dedicated European funding, and the European Asylum Support Office’s
positive role, but also problems with data collection. Discrepancies in age
assessment procedures continued, with insufficient procedures in Greece, Italy,
and Malta affecting access to appropriate services. Unaccompanied children
faced detention in the EU, including Greece and Malta. In July, Malta initiated a
review of immigration detention, including policies affecting children whose age
is disputed.
In September, Denmark joined efforts by Norway, the UK, and Sweden—through
the EU-funded European Return Platform for Unaccompanied Minors (ERPUM)—to initiate the return of unaccompanied Afghan children to Afghanistan, despite
serious risks of violence, military recruitment, and destitution. At this writing
none had been returned.
In March, the EU adopted a framework for facilitating refugee resettlement,
including increased funds. Five EU countries formally announced national resettlement
programs in 2012, but resettling refugees displaced by conflict in Libya
the previous year progressed slowly. In September, Germany resettled 195
refugees who had taken shelter in Tunisia.
In June, EU interior ministers endorsed a proposal allowing member states to
reinstate border controls within the Schengen area—a free movement zone comprising
25 EU and other countries—if a country fails to control external EU borders.
There were enduring concerns that countries, including France, Germany,
the Netherlands, and Italy, use ethnic profiling to conduct spot-checks at internal
borders. In response to a 73 percent increase over last year in asylum applications
from Balkan countries—primarily from Roma and ethnic Albanians from
Serbia and Macedonia, the vast majority rejected—some member states including
Germany and France pressed for renewed visa restrictions on Balkan citizens,
and in October, the European Commission called on Balkan states to do
more to arrest the trend.
Discrimination and Intolerance
A Fundamental Rights Agency survey published in May showed destitution and
social exclusion among Roma in 11 EU countries, with high levels of unemployment
(over 66 percent) and low levels of secondary school graduation (around
15 percent). In May, a European Commission assessment on progress by member
states in integrating Roma found gaps in health care and housing. In
August, the commission announced it was monitoring evictions and removals of
Eastern European Roma from France, and in September wrote to Italy asking for
information about discrimination against Roma.
The European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (ECRI) warned in May
that economic downturn and austerity were feeding intolerance and anti-immigrant
violence. Council of Europe (CoE) Commissioner for Human Rights Nils Muižnieks called in July for a “European Spring” to counter anti-Muslim prejudice,
citing bans on full-face veils and ethnic profiling by police as examples.
In October, the EU adopted a directive on minimum standards for victims, obliging
states to ensure access to justice without discrimination, including for
undocumented migrants.
At this writing, 14 EU member states had signed (but not ratified) the CoE
Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic
violence, including the United Kingdom in June, and Belgium and Italy in
September.
Counterterrorism
European parliamentarians and victims continued to demand accountability for
complicity in counterterrorism abuses. The European Court of Human Rights
(ECtHR) heard arguments in May in its first case on European complicity in rendition
to torture by the United States concerning German citizen Khaled al-Masri
who was detained in Macedonia in 2003 before the US rendered him to torture
in Afghanistan. At this writing, similar cases against Poland, Romania, and
Lithuania remained pending before the court.
A European Parliament report and accompanying September resolution condemned
the lack of transparency and use of state secrecy impeding public
accountability for collusion in abuses. The report urged full inquiries in
Romania, Lithuania, and Poland, and called on other EU countries to disclose
information about secret CIA flights on their territory.
Human Rights Concerns in Select EU Member States
France
A summer campaign to evict Roma camps and remove migrant Roma from
France echoed a similar push in 2010, raising questions about pledges by
Socialist President François Hollande, elected in June, to tackle discrimination.
By mid-September, an estimated 4,000 people had been forcibly evicted, and
hundreds returned to Eastern Europe.
The UN special rapporteurs on housing, migrants’ rights, minority rights, and
racism issued a joint statement in August expressing concern over authorities’
failure to provide alternative housing, the risk of collective expulsions, and
stigmatization of Roma. The French government moved in September to ease
restrictions on access to employment for Eastern Europeans, including Roma,
and signed a new agreement with Romania on deportations providing for reintegration
projects.
In September, the government backtracked on a proposal to introduce stop
forms for identity checks—a way to improve police accountability and address
persistent concerns about ethnic profiling—in the face of strong opposition from
police unions. The rights ombudsman recommended reforms in October and
legal rules on pat-downs during such checks. In June, France’s highest criminal
court ruled that police powers to ask individuals to prove their right to be in
France, regardless of behavior, violated EU free movement norms.
The government moved to limit detention of children with their families pending
deportation, after an ECtHR ruling in January against France for detaining two
young children with their parents for two weeks in 2007. A July government circular
clarified that detention of families with children remained possible if families
do not respect the conditions of compulsory residence in a particular place
or if one or more family members abscond.
In February, the ECtHR ruled in a case brought by a Sudanese asylum seeker
that the fast-track asylum procedure, including lack of suspensive appeal, did
not provide effective protection against refoulement.
The European Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) expressed concern
in April about conditions and treatment in police and immigration detention,
prisons, and psychiatric facilities, recommending further reforms to ensure that
all suspects can access a lawyer from when they first enter police custody.
Parliament adopted a new sexual harassment law in late July, after the
Constitutional Court struck down previous legislation for vagueness. The new law protects a broader range of situations beyond employment and introduces
protections based on gender identity. In November the government tabled a bill
to legalize same-sex marriage.
In October, one man was killed and eleven arrested in multi-city raids following
a mid-September grenade attack on a Jewish supermarket outside Paris. At this
writing, parliament was examining draft legislation to criminalize acts of terrorism
abroad by French citizens. The measure, first proposed by the previous
administration after a man claiming to be inspired by al-Qaeda shot seven people
in March—including three Jewish children and a rabbi—would allow prosecution
for participating in terrorism training abroad.
Germany
The Federal Constitutional Court ruled in July that asylum seekers and refugees
should receive the same welfare benefits as German citizens, ordering retroactive
payments starting from 2011 to approximately 130,000 people. The suicide
of an asylum seeker in Würzburg in March launched a series of nationwide
protests about conditions in reception centers, restrictions on freedom of movement,
and obstacles to employment for asylum seekers.
German states, including Lower Saxony and Nordrhein-Westfalen, continued to
deport Roma to Kosovo despite concerns about inadequate reception conditions,
including problems accessing and integrating into the educational system.
Three senior intelligence officials resigned in July after repeated failures to correctly
identify and investigate a neo-Nazi cell responsible for murdering nine
immigrants and a policewoman. In October, a Frankfurt court upheld a 2002 ruling
that awarded compensation to a man later convicted of murdering a child
because a police officer had threatened violence during his interrogation.
At this writing, the lower house of parliament was examining two different bills
to make racist motivation an aggravating circumstance during sentencing for
criminal offenses, as well as a bill to introduce hate crimes as a specific category.
In October, the Koblenz administrative appeals court ruled that it was unlawful
and a violation of anti-discrimination law for German police to use racial profiling to conduct checks for irregular migrants, annulling an earlier February
decision that had permitted the police tactic.
In September, the federal justice minister drafted legislation to clarify the legality
of religiously motivated circumcisions, following a June Cologne court ruling
that circumcising young boys amounted to criminal bodily harm. The ruling provoked
considerable debate about freedom of religion and rights of the child.
The same month, Chancellor Angela Merkel called for greater tolerance towards
Muslims.
Greece
There was widespread hardship and protest in 2012 amid economic crisis. The
far-right anti-immigrant Golden Dawn party entered parliament for the first time
with 7 percent of the vote in the June general election.
Legislation passed in April permits police to detain migrants and asylum seekers
on overly broad public health grounds, including susceptibility to infectious
disease based on national origin and living in conditions that do not meet minimum
hygiene standards, prompting condemnation by the UN Committee
Against Torture (CAT).
The new government continued its predecessor’s heavy-handed immigration
control approach. Construction of a 12.5-kilometer fence along the border with
Turkey, begun in February, neared completion at this writing. A vast sweep operation
launched in August had by mid-November led to more than 50,000 presumed
undocumented migrants being detained for questioning based on
appearance alone, and more than 3,700 arrests. By the end of October, over
1,900 of these had been deported and 1,690 had returned home under the
International Organization for Migration’s (IOM) voluntary program. The operation
continued at this writing.
Critical problems with the asylum system persisted. New government bodies
inaugurated in March to oversee asylum reception and application processing
were not fully operational due to staffing delays by November. Severe obstacles
to submitting asylum applications remained, and latest available figures show Greece remained in 2011 the country with the lowest overall protection rate at
first instance in Europe (2 percent).
In July, September, and November, the ECtHR ruled in five separate cases that
Greece had subjected undocumented migrants and asylum seekers in detention
to inhuman and degrading treatment. In October, the government extended permissible
detention of asylum seekers to 3 to 15 months (and from 6 to 18
months for those who applied for asylum only once detained), a decision likely
to increase overcrowding in detention.
Greece established five new detention camps for undocumented migrants
between April and October, with more facilities planned on islands in response
to increased arrivals in 2012, including of Syrians. The European Commission,
the CPT, and CAT noted problematic conditions in detention centers, while nongovernmental
reports documented substandard detention conditions on islands
including overcrowding, poor hygiene, and limited access to health care, water,
and food.
Xenophobic violence reached alarming proportions with regular attacks on
migrants and asylum seekers, and growing evidence of the involvement of
Golden Dawn members. In October, the public order minister presented a draft
presidential decree to create specialized police units to tackle racist violence,
following a commitment in September by the justice minister to initiate legislative
reforms to toughen hate crime sentencing.
The Council of State, the highest administrative court, ruled in November that
criteria for acquiring citizenship under a 2010 law were too lenient; the government
announced it would present stricter requirements shortly.
The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, voiced its concern in May
after the government published photos and personal information, including HIV
status, of accused sex workers after police arrested them for allegedly having
unprotected sex with customers while HIV positive.
In May, the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child (CRC) expressed deep concern
about inhumane conditions experienced by children with disabilities at the Lechaina Children’s Care Center and urged Greece to ensure that children with
disabilities are never placed in such conditions.
Hungary
A new constitution and cardinal laws entered into force on January 1, 2012,
weakening human rights protection, stripping the constitutional court of some
powers, and undermining judicial independence, including a forced retirement
affecting 300 judges. In November, the CJEU ruled that lowering the retirement
age for judges constituted unjustified age discrimination.
In January, 348 religious groups lost their status as “churches” under the new
constitution. The constitution also defines the right to life as starting from conception,
raising concerns about reproductive rights; limits the right to vote for
persons with mental disabilities; and defines family in a way that excludes lesbian,
gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) people.
In November, the Hungarian Constitutional Court ruled unconstitutional a law
adopted in April criminalizing homelessness with repeat offenders subject to
fines or imprisonment. No one was prosecuted while the law was in force.
Despite criticism by the CoE, the European Commission, and the Organization
for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) representative on media freedom,
the Hungarian government failed to sufficiently amend problematic media
laws. The main media regulator, the Media Council, lacks political independence,
potential fines for journalists are excessive, and requirements for content
regulation are unclear. Journalists and media outlets reported self-censorship
and editorial interference. At this writing, the Media Council had yet to renew
the long-term broadcast license of leading independent news station Klubradio,
despite three court rulings in the station’s favor.
Roma continue to face discrimination and harassment. In July and August, rightwing
paramilitary groups marched through Romani settlements threatening residents
and attacking homes. In August, paramilitaries threw stones and bottles
at Romani houses and shouted threats in Devecser during a march against
“gypsy crime.” Police were present at the time but made no arrests. A police
investigation was ongoing at this writing.
There were several anti-Semitic attacks against Jewish leaders and memorials.
In October, two assailants beat and insulted a Jewish leader in Budapest. He
suffered minor injuries. Police later arrested the attackers, who were in custody
at this writing.
Hungary continued to return asylum seekers and migrants to neighboring countries,
including Serbia and Ukraine, despite lack of access to asylum, risk of
return to persecution in third countries, and in the case of Ukraine, risk of illtreatment
in detention. In October, the ECtHR ruled in two separate cases that
Hungary had unlawfully detained asylum seekers in 2010 without effective judicial
review of their detention.
Italy
An estimated 18,000 asylum seekers who arrived in 2011 remained in reception
centers, including emergency facilities, many awaiting final decisions on their
applications. To date, 30 percent of those who arrived from North Africa since
early 2011 had received some form of protection, including refugee status, subsidiary
protection, or humanitarian leave to remain in the country.
In October, the Italian government issued rules for the reexamination of denied
claims that could allow authorities to grant temporary protection. At this writing,
it remained unclear what would happen to those housed in facilities at year’s
end, when the “North Africa Emergency,” which the government declared in
February 2011, is set to expire.
Concern over living conditions and integration for asylum seekers and refugees,
including the risk of homelessness and destitution, led German courts, as well
as the ECtHR, to block transfers to Italy under Dublin II.
In February, the ECtHR ruled that Italy’s summary “push-backs” of migrant boats
to Libya in 2009 amounted to collective expulsions and exposed people to torture
and cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment in Libya or their countries of
origin. The government indicated it would respect the ruling, but commitments
reached with the new Libyan authorities in April raised questions over continued
efforts to externalize border control in ways that violate human rights.
Summary returns to Greece continued, including of unaccompanied children
and asylum seekers who stow away on ferries to Italy. In September and
October respectively, Commissioner Muižnieks and UN Special Rapporteur on
Migrants’ Rights François Crépeau urged Italy to suspend all returns to Greece
due to grave deficiencies in the country’s asylum system.
Muižnieks urged the government to ensure implementation of the first national
strategy on Roma inclusion, which it adopted in February, by establishing precise
targets and allocating adequate resources. Roma continued in 2012 to face
evictions from informal camps and segregation
In March, the ECtHR ruled Italy’s expulsion of a Tunisian terrorism suspect in
2010 violated the prohibition of torture and ill-treatment and the court’s order to
stay removal.
In March, the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD)
expressed serious concerns about racist violence in Italy, and urged measures
to improve prevention, investigation, and prosecution. In June, the UN special
rapporteur on violence against women recommended that Italy adopt a specific
law on violence against women and ensure access to justice for victims, including
Roma, Sinti, and undocumented migrant women.
In July, Italy’s highest criminal court upheld the convictions of senior police officers
for falsifying evidence in relation to police violence during the 2001 G8
summit in Genoa; it also upheld controversial long prison sentences of up to 15
years for some protesters over property destruction, ordering others to be
reviewed.
In September, the same court upheld the 2011 in absentia convictions of 23 US
citizens for the 2003 abduction and rendition to Egypt of an Egyptian imam
known as Abu Omar, and ordered the retrial of five Italian intelligence officers,
including two senior officials, whom lower courts had acquitted citing state
secrecy.
The Netherlands
The People’s Party for Freedom and Democracy and Dutch Labor Party formally
took power in a coalition government in November after winning the September
elections. The anti-immigrant Freedom Party lost nine seats.
In September and October, parliament suspended deportations of children who
have been living in the Netherlands for at least five years, and to postpone
implementation of tighter family reunification requirements. Both measures will
be considered now that a government has been formed.
The Council of State, the highest administrative court, ruled in July that Somalia
was not a safe country of return, and ordered that dozens of Somali failed asylum
seekers be released from immigration detention. The previous government
halted deportations of gay Iraqis in June, and in July announced a policy to grant
protection to Iraqis seeking asylum based on sexual orientation or gender identity.
In August, the Dutch national ombudsman and the CPT criticized conditions in
immigration detention. The CPT expressed concern over families with children
being detained for longer than the 28-day maximum permitted by law. They
urged the government to only detain children in exceptional circumstances and
without locking them in cells.
During the Netherlands’ Universal Periodic Review (UPR) at the Human Rights
Council (HRC) in May, numerous countries recommended measures to combat
discrimination and racism.
At this writing, parliament was due to examine draft legislation tabled in August
to eliminate the sex reassignment surgery requirement for transgender people
who want to get a new identification document.
Poland
In March, news emerged that Poland’s former intelligence chief had been
charged over complicity in CIA secret detention on Polish territory. The ECtHR
agreed in July to examine a case brought by a Saudi national, currently held in Guantánamo Bay, who alleges he was held incommunicado and tortured in a
secret CIA facility in Poland in 2002-2003.
In September, parliament passed a law authorizing appointed provincial governors,
rather than the courts, to decide on appeals against denials of permission
to hold a public demonstration. In September, the OSCE called for Poland to
repeal its defamation laws after a court convicted Robert Frycz, editor of the
Antykomor.pl website, for insulting the president, and sentenced him to 15-
months of community service.
In September, parliament voted against a bill to liberalize access to abortion
and contraception, and institute comprehensive sex education. In October, the
ECtHR ruled that Poland violated the rights of a 14-year-old rape victim who was
denied a legal abortion.
Romania
A political crisis between the president and prime minister led the government
to take steps that undermined separation of powers and the rule of law.
Following a May constitutional court ruling that the president, rather than the
prime minister, should represent Romania in EU meetings, the government in
July stripped the court of its powers to overrule parliamentary decisions,
replaced the ombudsman with a party loyalist, and took control of the official
gazette that publishes court decisions and laws, in order to delay Constitutional
Court rulings coming into effect.
In July, the European Parliament, European Commission, and CoE criticized
these actions as contrary to the rule of law, with Commission President José
Manuel Barroso referring to possible infringement proceedings. A July European
Commission report raised serious concerns about Romania’s commitment to the
rule of law. It called on the country to reverse measures impacting judicial independence
and appoint an ombudsman with cross-party support.
Romanian authorities continued in 2012 to deny allegations that they housed a
secret CIA prison to detain and interrogate terrorism suspects, despite a joint
investigation by the Associated Press and German public television ARD Panorama, and German newspaper Süddeutsche Zeitung, which in December
2011 identified the former location of the prison in Bucharest.
Discrimination and marginalization of Roma remained a concern. Approximately
150 Roma were forcibly evicted in June from informal settlements in Baia Mare,
northwestern Romania, and relocated to a former chemical plant without adequate
accommodation or sanitation. Several hundred more faced imminent
eviction from other informal settlements in Baia Mare.
Spain
Demonstrations continued throughout 2012 as the government imposed austerity
measures amid a deepening economic crisis, and protester and police violence
that included use of rubber bullets. The UN Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR) expressed concern in June that austerity
measures disproportionately affect vulnerable groups, highlighting forced evictions
without due safeguards, curtailed access to health services for undocumented
migrants, and deep cuts in education budgets.
In July, the ECtHR found that Spain had violated anti-torture and non-discrimination
obligations by failing to investigate allegations that in 2005, police conducted
a racially abusive identity check on an African woman who was a legal
resident. In a separate ruling the same month, the court found that retroactive
lengthening of prison sentences, limiting eligibility for parole for people convicted
of terrorism offenses, violated fair trial standards. The ECtHR agreed in
November to hear the Spanish government’s appeal against the ruling.
In April, Frontex attributed continued low levels of boat migration to Spain to
sea patrols and the country’s migration cooperation with African countries.
Spain forcibly removed to Morocco around 70 sub-Saharan Africans from a nearby
Spanish island in September, despite media and NGO reports of migrant illtreatment
in Morocco and dumping at the Algerian border. Two women and
eight children were transported to Spanish mainland. In February, CAT published
its decision against Spain for failing to investigate the responsibility of a
Spanish coast guard unit in the 2007 drowning of a Senegalese man off Ceuta,
the Spanish enclave in Morocco.
In February, the Spanish Supreme Court acquitted Judge Baltasar Garzón of
abusing his judicial powers by investigating enforced disappearances during
the Franco era between 1939 and 1975, despite Spain’s amnesty law. Earlier that
month, the same court convicted Garzón of ordering unlawful wiretaps in a corruption
case and suspended him from the bench for 11 years.
In September, parliament rejected an opposition bill initiated under the previous
government to improve Spain’s anti-discrimination legislation. In
November, the Constitutional Court upheld Spain’s law on marriage equality.
The justice minister announced his intention in July to limit access to abortion
laws, but at this writing no draft legislation had been tabled.
United Kingdom
In May, the government reduced pre-charge detention in terrorism cases from
28 to 14 days, but left open the possibility for parliament to reinstate 28 days in
an emergency. Replacements to control orders on terrorism suspects no longer
permit forced relocation and are subject to stricter time limits. But the new
measures can still be based in part on secret evidence, and parliament can
quickly approve harsher powers in an emergency.
A draft law in parliament at this writing would widen use of secret hearings in
civil courts on national security grounds and prevent material that shows UK
involvement in wrongdoing by other countries being disclosed. In September,
the UN special rapporteur on torture expressed concern that the draft law could
inhibit accountability for torture.
In January, the government halted a widely criticized inquiry into UK involvement
in rendition and torture. It cited new criminal investigations into UK complicity
in rendition and torture in Libya by former dictator Muammar Gaddafi’s
security forces. Although the government promised a second inquiry, it was
unclear at this writing when it would begin, and whether it would have the necessary
independence and powers.
In January, the ECtHR blocked deportation of Jordanian terrorism suspect Abu
Qatada due to the risk of evidence obtained through torture being used against
him at trial upon return, but also held that diplomatic assurances were sufficient to protect him from torture or ill-treatment. In November, a UK court
ordered Qatada’s release from custody saying it was not satisfied that he would
received a fair trial in Jordan; he was placed under house arrest.
In October, the UK extradited five terrorism suspects to the US after the ECtHR in
September definitively rejected their appeals that they would face ill-treatment.
In June, the government signed the CoE Convention on preventing and combating
violence against women and domestic violence, but continued to reject calls
to sign the International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention on Decent Work
for Domestic Workers. Instead, in April it changed immigration rules that will
make it harder for foreign domestic workers to leave abusive situations without
losing their immigration status.
The UK continued to deport failed Sri Lankan Tamil asylum seekers, including 25
on a chartered flight in September, despite evidence of torture upon return for
some Tamils with perceived links to Sri Lanka’s separatist Tamil Tigers.
Official statistics published in August revealed that the number of children
being detained with their parents pending deportation was rising, although
such detention is limited to one week. In April, the UK Border Authority suspended
a pilot program to use dental x-rays to determine age, amid medical
ethics concerns.
In September, the UK’s chief prosecutor announced he would develop guidelines
related to prosecuting offensive speech on the internet and social media
after a series of controversial convictions raised free expression concerns.