European Union
The course of integration of the European Union hit a major obstacle in
2005 when voters in France and the Netherlands rejected the new
Constitutional Treaty, leaving it endorsed by barely half of the twenty-five
member states and prompting some of the undecided states to shelve their
own referendum plans. The E.U.’s expansion project nevertheless continues,
with human rights conditionality being a point of leverage in the negotiations
that led to the opening of formal accession talks with Croatia and Turkey (see
separate country chapters).
In matters such as migration and asylum, and counterterrorism, common
E.U. approaches as well as policy and practice in individual E.U. states continue
to reflect a tendency to circumvent international human rights obligations.
Counterterrorism Measures
The issue of counterterrorism in Europe was dominated in 2005 on the one
hand by the terrorist threat taking on characteristics hitherto not experienced
in E.U. states, and on the other by further developments in E.U. governments’
counterterrorism policy negatively impacting fundamental human
rights. The former was shown most vividly when London was struck on July
7 by three simultaneous bomb attacks on its underground train network, and
a fourth on a bus, killing fifty-six people (including the four bombers), making
it the deadliest attack in modern British history. It also marked the E.U.’s
first experience of suicide bombers who were, moreover, British nationals.
On July 21, exactly two weeks later, there was a failed attempt to stage an
almost identical attack, involving bombers on three London underground
trains and a bus. The next day police shot dead a Brazilian man on a London
underground train, having apparently mistaken him for a terrorist suspect.
The incident, which raised questions about police surveillance methods as
well as about application of a policy authorizing use of lethal force by police,
was immediately referred for investigation by the Independent Police Complaints Commission. At the time of this writing, its report was expected
at the end of 2005.
A Spanish court in September sentenced an alleged al-Qaeda leader to twenty-
seven years’ imprisonment for conspiracy to commit murder by having
provided logistical support to the perpetrators of the September 11, 2001,
attacks in the United States, and for being the leader of a terrorist organization.
Seventeen co-defendants were convicted of belonging to or collaborating
with a terrorist group. A terrorism trial opened in Belgium at the beginning
of November, with thirteen defendants (all Moroccans or Belgians of
Moroccan descent) accused of providing support to the perpetrators of the
2004 Madrid train bombings and the 2003 bombings in Casablanca,
Morocco.
At the beginning of November The Washington Post, citing U.S. government
sources, reported that the U.S. had used secret detention facilities in Europe
and elsewhere to illegally hold terrorist suspects without rights or access to
counsel. While the article did not identify the locations, its allegations were
consistent with Human Rights Watch’s own research suggesting the existence
of secret detention facilities in Poland and Romania (the former an E.U.
member state, the latter an acceding state). Both the European Commission
and the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe immediately
announced investigations, and the International Committee of the Red Cross
requested access to the alleged facilities.
Indefinite or Prolonged Detention
The U.K.’s highest court, the House of Lords Judicial Committee (commonly
known as the “Law Lords”) ruled in December 2004 that the indefinite
detention without charge or trial of foreigners suspected of terrorism was
incompatible with the U.K.’s Human Rights Act (which incorporates the
European Convention on Human Rights into domestic law). In response, the
U.K. government announced a “twin-track” set of alternatives to indefinite
detention. This includes recourse to “control orders” that seriously restrict
the movement and activities of any person who is suspected of terrorismrelated
activities (irrespective of nationality), and the use of “diplomatic assurances” to deport to their home countries foreign nationals who would
be at risk of torture or ill-treatment upon return, despite clear evidence that
assurances are an ineffective safeguard against such treatment (see below).
Human Rights Watch criticized the legislation introducing control orders on
the grounds that there were insufficient procedural safeguards given the serious
restrictions on liberty that could be imposed through the orders. The
Prevention of Terrorism Act 2005 became law in March 2005.
The U.K. government in September published new draft counterterrorism
legislation which included extending the maximum period that terrorism suspects
could be detained without charge, to ninety days (from the current
fourteen, already the longest in Europe), and adding and a new criminal
offense of “encouraging” terrorism (see below). The draft legislation passed
in the House of Commons in November, although the government’s proposal
for the extension to ninety days had been defeated and an amendment
approved instead whereby detention without charge for terrorism suspects
would be extended to twenty-eight days. Human Rights Watch argued that
the case for any extension had not been made, and that detention without
charge for up to twenty-eight days could become a form of arbitrary detention,
and might infringe the right of an arrested person to be informed
promptly of any charge against him. At this writing, the draft legislation was
being debated in the House of Lords.
The Italian government introduced a new antiterrorism law in late July 2005,
and, after a very brief parliamentary review, it entered into force at the beginning
of August. It introduced a number of new offenses, and increased penalties
for others. Among its most troubling provisions, it extended the maximum
period during which a suspect could be held for questioning without
charge and without a lawyer present from twelve to twenty-four hours, and
broadened the range of law enforcement authorities empowered to detain
and question terrorist suspects. It also allowed authorization of senior police
officers to order immediate expulsion of persons residing illegally in Italy
who they determined were a threat to national security; appeals against such
expulsions would be without suspensive effect.
Draft new antiterrorism legislation in France, presented to parliament in
November, included a provision to reclassify “criminal association” in relation
to a terrorist offense from a misdemeanour to a felony. The overly vague
nature of the offense permits detention on the basis of limited evidence. Its
use to detain suspects who are later released without charge has been widely
criticized as a form of preventive detention. The reclassification would
increase the maximum permissible pre-trial detention period from three
years and four months, to four years and eight months. It would also double
the maximum possible sentence, to twenty years. The proposed law would
also increase the period that police are allowed to detain suspects in terrorism
cases from four days to six.
Evidence Obtained under Torture
In October, the U.K. Law Lords began consideration of whether evidence
extracted under torture that had been obtained from third countries is permitted
in domestic British law. The case was an appeal brought by ten men
previously subject to indefinite detention as terrorism suspects against an
August 2004 majority decision by the Court of Appeal that the U.K. government
was entitled to rely on torture evidence in special terrorism cases, provided
that the U.K. “neither procured nor connived at” the torture, a decision
contrary to international human rights law. Human Rights Watch was
part of a coalition of fourteen human rights and anti-torture organizations
that intervened in the House of Lords case. The Law Lords’ ruling, expected
by the end of 2005, is likely to have profound implications for the worldwide
ban on torture.
Refoulement and Diplomatic Assurances
Important rulings were made against individual E.U. governments over their
resort to “diplomatic assurances,” but governments continue to press ahead
with strategies that both challenge head on, and seek to side-step, the
absolute prohibition against refoulement—the return of a person to a country
where he or she would be at risk of torture or ill-treatment. This alarming
trend prompted the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe in October 2005 to remind European governments that “the prohibition of torture…
is absolute and applies in all circumstances. It is not negotiable.” In his
annual report to the U.N. General Assembly, the U.N. Special Rapporteur
on Torture, Manfred Nowak, likewise emphasized that “diplomatic assurances
are unreliable and ineffective in the protection against torture and illtreatment,”
and called on governments to “observe the principle of nonrefoulement
scrupulously.”
Five E.U. governments were reported to have united in a challenge to the
landmark 1996 European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) ruling Chahal v.
United Kingdom, affirming the absolute prohibition against refoulement.
The U.K., Italy, Lithuania, Poland and Slovakia obtained permission in
October to intervene as interested parties in the case of Ramzy v.
Netherlands, pending before the ECtHR at the time of writing, in which an
Algerian man suspected of involvement in terrorism, Mohammed Ramzy, was
challenging deportation on the grounds that he would be at risk of torture if
returned to Algeria. Reportedly, the governments concerned were seeking to
overturn Chahal in favour of the position that the right of an individual not
to be tortured could be balanced against the national security interests of the
state (the essence of the dissenting opinion by a minority of ECtHR judges
in Chahal).
In May 2005 the U.N. Committee against Torture ruled that Sweden had
violated the absolute prohibition on torture by expelling terrorism suspect
Ahmed Agiza to Egypt in 2001. Sweden had sought to justify the transfer by
saying that it had secured assurances from Egypt that Agiza would be treated
humanely, but Agiza credibly alleged that after his forcible return to Egypt
he was tortured. The U.N. committee concluded that the assurances Swedish
authorities secured from Egyptian officials concerning Agiza could not be
trusted as sufficient protection. It noted that Egypt had a well-documented
history of torture abuses, especially when dealing with terrorism suspects,
and that its routine use of torture, in combination with interest in Agiza by
the U.S. as well as Egypt, should have led to a “natural conclusion” that
Agiza was at risk of torture upon return.
The transfer of Agiza and another man, Mohammed al-Zari, had been
undertaken by U.S. intelligence operatives to whom Swedish officials handed
custody of the two men at Stockholm’s Bromma Airport, and as such
amounted to “extraordinary rendition.” In March, a report by the Swedish
chief parliamentary ombudsman concluded that the Swedish security service
and the airport police “displayed a remarkable subordinance to the American
officials” and “lost control of the situation,” resulting in the ill-treatment of
Agiza and al-Zari, including physical abuse and other humiliation, at the airport
immediately before they were transported to Cairo. The U.N. committee
said that the ill-treatment at Bromma Airport should have made it clear
to Swedish authorities that the men would be at risk of torture if they were
returned to Egypt.
An appeals court in the Netherlands ruled in January 2005 against the extradition
to Turkey of Nuriye Kesbir, a high-level member of the former
Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK), who was subject to an extradition warrant
from Turkey alleging that she had committed war crimes as a PKK military
operative in the civil war in Turkey’s southeast. In May 2004 a lower court
had determined that although Kesbir’s fears of torture and unfair trial in
Turkey were not completely unfounded, there were insufficient grounds to
halt the extradition. The court gave exclusive authority to the government to
either grant or reject the extradition request, but advised the Netherlands
minister of justice to seek enhanced diplomatic assurances from Turkey
against torture and unfair trial. The appeal court concluded that diplomatic
assurances could not guarantee that Kesbir would not be tortured or ill-treated
upon return to Turkey.
The ECtHR Grand Chamber issued a decision in February 2005 in the case
of Mamatkulov and Askarov v. Turkey, in relation to which Human Rights
Watch and the Advice on Individual Rights in Europe (AIRE) Centre had
submitted an amicus curiae brief. The two men had been extradited from
Turkey to Uzbekistan in 1999 based on assurances against torture and unfair
trial by the Uzbek authorities. It had been anticipated that the Grand
Chamber might rule on the reliability and/or sufficiency of diplomatic assurances
against torture from the government of Uzbekistan, but the court
determined that it did not have sufficient information before it to rule on whether Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights (prohibiting
torture or ill-treatment) had been violated; the court did not engage in a
discussion of the reliability or sufficiency of the assurances. Nevertheless, the
decision concluded that Turkey should have been bound by a ECtHR request
to delay the men’s extradition until the court had an opportunity to review
the men’s application.
The U.K. government, in August and October 2005, signed memoranda of
understanding (MOUs) with Jordan and Libya containing undertakings that
people deported to those countries from the United Kingdom would not be
tortured or ill-treated there. The U.K. government also confirmed that it was
seeking such arrangements with Tunisia, Lebanon and Algeria, and there are
credible reports that a similar agreement was being sought with Egypt.
In August, the U.N. special rapporteur on torture expressed “fears that the
plan of the United Kingdom to request diplomatic assurances for the purpose
of expelling persons in spite of a risk of torture reflects a tendency in Europe
to circumvent the international obligation not to deport anybody if there is a
serious risk that he or she might be subjected to torture,” adding that “diplomatic
assurances are not an appropriate tool to eradicate this risk.”
The ineffectiveness of diplomatic assurances as a safeguard against torture,
and the danger that such assurances pose to the absolute nature of the nonrefoulement
obligation were extensively documented by Human Rights
Watch in an April 2005 report titled, “Still at Risk: Diplomatic Assurances
No Safeguard against Torture,” as well as in subsequent statements critical of
the U.K.’s bilateral agreements based on blanket diplomatic assurances.
Between August and October, more than twenty foreign nationals suspected
of involvement in terrorism were detained pending their deportation on the
grounds of national security, including persons previously subject to indefinite
detention in the United Kingdom. Some of the men, who originate from
Jordan, Libya, and Algeria among other countries, had previously been
granted asylum in Britain. Four of the Algerians were released on bail in
October, but the majority remained in detention at this writing. No deportations
had taken place under the agreements at this writing, and it remained unclear what weight the U.K. courts would attach to the promises of humane
treatment when evaluating the risk of torture in future appeals against deportation
brought by the detainees.
New Offenses of Incitement
The London bombings gave impetus to legislative and other initiatives
directed towards confronting terrorist recruitment. Some of the proposed
measures had troubling implications for freedom of expression. At the level
of common E.U. policy, the tone was set by a September 2005 commission
communication on “Terrorist Recruitment: Addressing the Factors
Contributing to Violent Radicalization.” The European Council was to adopt
a strategy on this issue by the end of the year, as part of its action plan on
terrorism. A new Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of
Terrorism, adopted in May, requires states to criminalize “public provocation
to commit a terrorist offense,” whether or not involving direct advocacy of
terrorism, when such “provocation” is done with intent.
The draft new counterterrorism legislation published in September by the
U.K. government included a new offense criminalizing speech that amounts
to “encouragement,” including speech that justifies or glorifies terrorism, and
the closure of places of worship used to “foment extremism.” Human Rights
Watch was concerned that such measures would undermine the right to nonviolent
expression by criminalizing speech even where there is no intention
to incite violence. Denmark in September initiated the first case under an
antiterrorism law enacted in 2002 that forbids instigation of terrorism or
offering advice to terrorists, and carries a penalty of up to six years in prison.
The accused, a Moroccan-born Danish citizen, was charged in relation to
having downloaded from the Internet and distributed inflammatory speeches
and images including beheadings carried out by Iraqi insurgents.
In August the U.K. government announced a list of “unacceptable behaviours”
added to the list of national security grounds for the deportation or
exclusion of foreign nationals. These included the speech or publication of
views deemed to “foment, justify or glorify terrorism,” provoke others to
commit terrorist acts, or “foster hatred” that might lead to inter-community violence in the United Kingdom. This went further than a July 2004 law in
France allowing the expulsion of foreigners who engage in acts that “explicitly
and deliberately” incite discrimination, hatred or violence. While expulsions
under French law were subject to appeal, an expulsion order was not
automatically suspended while the appeal was pending, and there were cases
in which persons had been expelled to their countries of origin, only to have
the expulsion order overturned on appeal. In Germany, a new immigration
law entered into effect on January 1, 2005, allowing authorities to expel those
who publicly endorse or promote terrorist acts or incite hatred “in a manner
conducive to disturbing public safety.”
On November 9, 2005, after thirteen consecutive nights of rioting across
France, Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy announced that all adult foreigners
convicted of involvement in the rioting, including those with residence permits,
would be deported.
Asylum Seekers and Migrants
As Human Rights Watch has consistently acknowledged, migration into the
E.U. poses clear challenges for European governments, and few would question
the legitimacy or urgency of policies to address these. However, common
E.U. policy in this area continues its development exclusively in the
direction of keeping migrants and asylum seekers out of and away from
Europe. Moreover, exclusionary practices stepping beyond the rule of law are
seen in at least two E.U. states, Italy and Spain, which have actively engaged
in expulsions without respect for the individual right to seek asylum. These
and other E.U. states also implement returns with scant regard for whether
the receiving countries could offer effective protection.
Common E.U. Immigration and Asylum Policy
The European Commission in September published a proposal for a directive
on “common standards and procedures for returning illegally-staying
third-country nationals.” While the draft directive contains improved language
on human rights protection in comparison to the previous iteration of
the proposal, a number of concerns remain. The text also falls short of meeting the criteria laid out in a set of common principles of return developed by
a coalition of human rights and European refugee nongovernmental organizatrions,
including Human Rights Watch. Key concerns include the absence
of a mandatory right of appeal against removal with suspensive effect, and the
imposition of a re-entry ban that could amount to a double penalty with
potentially far-reaching consequences for the principle of non-refoulement.
At the time of writing, this directive was pending “co-decision” by the
European Council and the European Parliament.
The Asylum Procedures Directive, agreed by the European Council in April
2004, was submitted for consultation with the European Parliament, which in
September 2005 expressed “severe reservations” and called for over one hundred
amendments to the document. In a reaffirmation of the principle that
an asylum seeker should have his/her claim individually assessed, the
Parliament argued that any applicant should have the right to “rebut the presumption
of safety” associated with the proposal for “safe third country” lists.
Human Rights Watch and others had called in March 2004 for withdrawal of
the draft directive on grounds that the “most contentious provisions are all
intended to deny asylum seekers access to asylum procedures and to facilitate
their transfer to countries outside the E.U.” The European Parliament’s proposed
amendments were not binding on the council. At this writing there
had been no further movement towards adopting the draft directive.
Readmission Agreements
Human Rights Watch research in countries on the E.U.’s new eastern frontiers
confirmed concerns that some of the new E.U. member states do not
have systems offering full and fair asylum determination procedures, or policies
and practices in place to ensure that no person is sent back to a place
where his or her life or freedom is threatened. As documented in the
November 2005 Human Rights Watch report, “On the Margins—Ukraine:
Rights Violations against Migrants and Asylum Seekers at the New Eastern
Border of the Europe Union,” border guards in Poland and Slovakia who
intercept persons crossing from Ukraine interview and process them generally
within forty-eight hours, with no genuine effort to identify them by name, origin or status, and without their having access to lawyers or interpreters or
the possibility to challenge a decision by the border guard to return them to
Ukraine. Effected under bilateral readmission agreements between the E.U.
states concerned and Ukraine, some of these returns lent substance to concerns
that, while in theory readmission agreements are not designed to interfere
with the right to asylum, in practice those liable to return can include
asylum seekers whose protection needs have not been determined.
European Community readmission agreements (applicable to all E.U. member
states except Denmark, where an abstention applied) were concluded
with Albania and Russia in April and October respectively, and were being
negotiated with four other countries including Ukraine and Morocco.
Processing Migrants and Asylum Seekers Outside the E.U.
A communication from the European Commission on Regional Protection
Programmes (RPPs) was hailed by the E.U.’s Justice and Home Affairs
Council in October as the E.U.’s first step “in improving access to protection
needs and durable solutions for those in need of international protection, as
quickly and as close to their home as possible.” Pilot RPPs were due to be
launched before the end of 2005.
In its November 2005 report on Ukraine (located in the region covered by
the first pilot RPP), Human Rights Watch noted that RPPs offered the possibility
of real improvements to the target countries’ protection capacity, but
raised concerns that the RPPs might undermine the right to seek asylum in
the E.U., by resulting in premature designation of the target countries as
“safe third countries,” which would then expedite the return of asylum seekers
who had transited them without first considering their protection needs.
Similarly, the office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) welcomed the RPP proposal, but stressed the need for guarantees
that RPPs would be complementary to existing asylum provisions in E.U.
states.
The E.U. continues to press ahead with programs for strict control of access
to Europe, and its migration policies towards neighbouring countries emphasize
enforcement rather than protection.
By bilateral arrangement with Libya, Italy continue to expel—without a
proper assessment of their asylum claims—people who arrive from North
Africa and were being held on the island of Lampedusa under Italy’s mandatory
detention policy for illegal migrants and asylum seekers. In March 2005,
nearly five hundred Egyptians were expelled to Libya and sevety-six directly
to Egypt, handcuffed and blindfolded for their charter flights. Nearly two
hundred persons were expelled to Libya in May and June. The expulsions
ignored the evidence that, as a place in which the basic human rights of
migrants are frequently violated and that has not ratified the 1951
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, Libya cannot be regarded as a
“safe third country” for return.
The Italian Minister of Interior told the Italian Parliament after the March
expulsions that the government’s actions were in full compliance with their
human rights obligations, but they were criticized by UNHCR, whose officials
had been denied access to Lampedusa at that time. A delegation of
Members of the European Parliament (MEPs) visiting the Lampedusa facility
at the end of June queried the appropriateness of third countries’ consular
officials being involved in detainee identification procedures there, given the
danger this presented to a potential asylum seeker, and were informed that
“nobody” had recently claimed asylum, an assertion the MEPs described as
“incredible,” as this would make Lampedusa “the first centre in Italy where
this does not happen.”
In early October, faced with mass attempts by undocumented migrants to
force entry into Spain’s North African enclaves of Ceuta and Melilla, the
Spanish government expelled to Morocco at least 73 people who had reached
the enclaves, including several who had sought to claim asylum. The expulsions
were reportedly carried out without an individual assessment that
would have enabled presentation of asylum claims. On October 23, Morocco
deported forty-nine Malians from this group to their home country despite
the fact that at least two had applied for asylum in Morocco. There are alarming reports of human rights violations against migrants deported to
Morocco from Spain or detained in Morocco as they tried to enter Ceuta or
Melilla, including expulsions in inhumane conditions to the desert borders
with Algeria and Mauritania. At least eleven people were shot dead as
Spanish and Moroccan troops attempted to block entry to the enclaves.
Morocco admitted that its border guards were responsible for four of the
fatalities, while an internal Spanish inquiry exonerated Spanish forces.
Human Rights Watch called for independent investigation into the deaths, as
did the U.N. Special Rapporteur on the Human Rights of Migrants, Dr.
Jorge Bustamente, who also called on Morocco to end collective deportations.