European Union
The EU gained new architecture to protect human rights, with the Charter of
Fundamental Rights entering into force in January, a greater role for the European
Parliament, and the creation of an EU commissioner for fundamental rights. New
commissioner Viviane Reding promised a “zero tolerance” policy for EU states
violating the charter.
Infringement proceedings against Greece over its asylum system indicated the
European Commission’s willingness to hold member states to account for rights
violations. The commission publicly faulted France over expulsion of Roma,
emphasizing procedural safeguards when limiting free movement of EU citizens,
rather than non-discrimination obligations.
The scale of the challenge to ensure full respect of human rights in the EU was
underscored by evidence of growing intolerance—manifest in electoral success by
far-right parties, including in ruling coalitions, and policies targeting Roma,
Muslims, and migrants—and ongoing concerns over abusive counterterrorism
policies, inadequate access to asylum, and uneven protection against discrimination.
Common EU Asylum and Migration Policy
Efforts to reform and harmonize asylum procedures across the EU remained
stalled. Studies by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
in March and the European Commission in September found significant differences
and shortcomings in the way asylum claims are handled across the EU.
Around three-quarters of all irregular migrants entered the EU through Greece in
2009, with early estimates for 2010 suggesting a rising trend. Arrivals by sea
dropped significantly in 2010, with the EU border agency, Frontex, reporting a 75
percent decrease in maritime arrivals in the first half of the year. Only 150 people
reached Italy and Malta in the first quarter of the year, down from 5,200 in the
same period in 2009. Sea arrivals in Spain were also down sharply.
The Dublin II Regulation, which requires asylum claims to be made in the first
country of entry into the EU, exacerbated the burden placed on Greece’s already
broken asylum system (discussed below). But European Commission-led efforts
to initiate modest reform encountered strong opposition from some member
states.
As of mid-2010 the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) had issued orders to
states to suspend more than 750 “Dublin” returns to Greece, with thousands
more pending or blocked at national level. In September the United Kingdom government
halted all such returns to Greece. As of early November the Netherlands,
Belgium, Finland, Sweden, Iceland, and Norway (the latter two not EU countries)
had done the same.
In September the ECtHR heard a challenge to the policy brought by an Afghan
returned by Belgium to Greece, where he claims he was subjected to ill-treatment
and risked being returned to Afghanistan without proper examination of his asylum
claim. A ruling is pending at this writing.
The European Commission’s May action plan on unaccompanied migrant children
called for a common European approach to ensure durable solutions in children’s
best interests.
The UK and other EU countries (as well as Norway) pursued plans to build reception
centers in Kabul, Afghanistan, in order to repatriate unaccompanied children,
despite concerns over security and lack of safeguards.
Dozens of rejected asylum seekers were returned to Iraq in at least three joint
flights between April and September, despite objections by UNHCR. Frontex coordinated
at least one of these charter flights. The UK and the Netherlands organized
their own flights, in addition to participating in joint returns. In November
the Netherlands announced a halt to such deportations after the ECtHR intervened.
The UK said it would suspend removals if ordered to do so by the ECtHR.
New guidelines for Frontex operations at sea, adopted in April, included a ban on
return to persecution and the obligation to consider the needs of vulnerable
groups, including asylum seekers, children, and trafficking victims.
Malta withdrew from Frontex missions in March over the guidelines, which require
those rescued in international waters to be taken to the mission’s host country
rather than the closest port. But in July, Malta participated in a controversial joint
rescue operation with Libya, which led to some Somali migrants being returned to
Libya, while others were brought to Malta.
The European Parliament approved an EU readmission agreement with Pakistan
in September, despite serious concerns about respect for human rights clauses.
There were also concerns that the agreement would facilitate the repatriation of
Afghans, including children, who transited through Pakistan.
The European Commission signed a cooperation agreement with Libya in October,
including €50 million (approximately US$67 million) for border management and
refugee protection, despite the forced closure of UNHCR’s office in Tripoli in June.
Discrimination and Intolerance
The Roma, Europe’s largest minority, continued to face discrimination, exclusion,
and extreme poverty across the region. In April the European Commission adopted
a communication on Roma for the first time, ahead of the second EU Summit
on Roma held later that month in Spain, calling for more effective policies to
address multiple sources of marginalization of Roma. EU countries, notably
Germany, continued to repatriate Roma to Kosovo despite UNHCR guidelines,
while France targeted Roma for repatriation to Eastern Europe.
Despite concerns about interfering with the right to freedom of religion and personal
autonomy, efforts to restrict face-covering veils in Europe gained political
momentum in 2010. France’s parliament approved legislation in September banning
the wearing of such veils in all public places and making it a crime to coerce
women to cover themselves. The Constitutional Council ruled in early October that
the law was compatible with France’s constitution.
The lower house of the Belgian parliament approved similar legislation in May. At
this writing, it has yet to be examined by the Senate. A ban was included in the
coalition agreement in the Netherlands in September, with proposals also on the
table in Spain, Italy, and Denmark.
In May Germany’s interior minister ruled against a similar ban, but a December
2009 Federal Labor Court ruling, which upheld a ban on a teacher in North-Rhine-
Westphalia wearing a headscarf in the classroom, underscored the continued
presence of state-level restrictions on headscarves for teachers and civil servants.
Germany and other EU states blocked efforts to upgrade EU anti-discrimination
laws to prohibit discrimination on grounds of religion, age, disability, and sexual
orientation. National obstacles to ending discrimination against lesbian, gay,
bisexual, and transgender people also remained, including in the Netherlands,
where transgender persons could only officially change gender if they undergo
irreversible sex reassignment surgery, and Italy, which still lacked explicit protection
against discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation.
Counterterrorism Measures and Human Rights
UN special rapporteurs on torture and on human rights while countering terrorism
concluded in a joint February report that Germany (one case, 2002) and the UK
(several cases, from 2002 onward) had been complicit in secret detentions of terrorism
suspects. In June the Council of Europe commissioner for human rights
criticized the lack of progress towards full accountability for complicity in United
States abuses in Poland, Romania, and Sweden. A criminal investigation was
launched in January in Lithuania after a parliamentary committee concluded in
December 2009 that the CIA had established two secret detention facilities in
that country in 2005 and 2006.
Resettlement of Guantanamo Bay detainees in Europe continued. Between
January and September, 10 detainees were resettled in EU countries, three each
in Spain and Slovakia, two in Germany, one in Bulgaria, and one in Latvia. Italy
and Spain both pledged to take two more.
As part of the action plan to counter radicalization and recruitment to terrorism,
the Council of the EU agreed in April to systematically collect and share information
on radicalization, raising right to privacy concerns.
In September the EU General Court annulled a November 2008 European
Commission terrorism finance regulation freezing the assets of Saudi national Yassin Abdullah Kadi, the second EU Court ruling against his asset freeze, in both
cases for lack of procedural fairness.
Human Rights Concerns in Select EU Member States
France
In July the government launched a highly-publicized campaign to expel Roma
from France following riots sparked by the fatal shooting of a member of the community
of French gens du voyage (“travelers”) that month by a gendarme (now
under criminal investigation). By the end of August, 128 informal settlements had
been dismantled–including those occupied by French gens du voyage–and
almost 1,000 Roma sent back to Romania and Bulgaria. An August 5 directive
from the interior minister, leaked in early September and subsequently annulled,
ordered prefects to take “systematic action to dismantle illegal camps, priority
given to those of Roma” linked to the expulsions, showing discriminatory intent.
In September France agreed to improve procedural safeguards after the European
Commission threatened infringement proceedings over its failure to properly
implement EU law on freedom of movement. The changes have yet to be introduced
at this writing.
Following its August review of France, the UN Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination expressed concern over what appeared to be collective
expulsion, as well as the difficulties Roma and French gens du voyage face exercising
their rights and accessing education and decent housing. The committee
also expressed broader concern about discriminatory political discourse in France
and increased racist and xenophobic violence.
In October the National Assembly approved a government draft immigration law
weakening the rights of asylum seekers and migrants, despite criticism from UN
Committee against Torture in May and ECtHR in 2009 about inadequate safeguards
for fast-tracked asylum claims. The Senate is to debate the law in early
2011.
The bill also contained last-minute government amendments designed to widen
the grounds for expelling EU citizens to include “abusing” France’s welfare system,
exploitation of begging, and “abusive” occupation of land. The amendments’
timing and focus and statements made by government ministers strongly
suggested the measures were aimed at Roma.
In late December 2009, French authorities expelled a Tunisian man to Senegal on
national security grounds, despite an order from the ECtHR to suspend his
removal. Earlier that month the court ruled that France would violate its obligations
under the European Convention if it deported an Algerian man who served
six years in France on terrorism charges. France complied.
In July the Constitutional Council declared the inadequate safeguards in ordinary
criminal cases, including denial of the presence of a lawyer during interrogations,
unconstitutional. In October the government introduced draft legislation to reform
police custody. Legislation remains pending at this writing. The ECtHR subsequently
ruled in October that the current rules violated fair trial standards. Also in
October the Court of Cassation, the highest criminal court, ruled that weaker safeguards
in terrorism, organized crime, and drug trafficking cases violate the right
to an effective defense. At this writing the current draft law does not address
these issues.
Germany
In a February report the UN special rapporteur on racism underscored persistent
racism, xenophobia, and discrimination when it comes to housing, employment
and education, living conditions, and movement restrictions for asylum seekers.
The Grand Chamber of the ECtHR ruled in June that Germany had violated the ban
on ill-treatment when it only fined a deputy police chief (later promoted) and his
subordinate for threatening a kidnapper with torture in 2002, concluding that the
punishment lacked the necessary deterrent effect.
In a judgment that became final in May, the ECtHR ruled that a German law allowing
convicted prisoners deemed dangerous to be detained indefinitely after they
have served their sentences violated the right to liberty and prohibition on arbitrary
detention.
In July Germany lifted its restrictions on the application of the UN Convention on
the Rights of the Child, covering a variety of issues, including asylum-seeking
children. German rights groups continue to call on the government to bring the
treatment of unaccompanied migrant children in line with the convention, including
ending accommodation with adults and detention pending deportation of
those aged between 16 and 18.
Greece
In September UNHCR described the situation facing migrants and asylum seekers
in Greece as a “humanitarian crisis.” There were no concrete improvements
despite the government’s repeated commitments to overhaul its broken asylum
system, restore appeal rights, ensure humane treatment for migrants, and police
accountability for ill-treatment.
A presidential decree containing modest reforms, including addressing a backlog
of more than 46,000 cases, remained stalled, in part because of the country’s
budget crisis. Only 11 of 30,000 applicants (0.04 percent) were granted asylum at
first instance in 2009. Wider reforms have been pushed back to 2011 or later.
The European Commission continued infringement proceedings against Greece
for its breach of EU asylum rules, sending the government a second letter of formal
notice on June 24. In response to a request from Greece, Frontex deployed
175 border guards to the Greece-Turkey border in November.
Migrants and asylum seekers continued to be detained in substandard conditions.
There is little or no assistance for unaccompanied migrant children and
other vulnerable groups, many of whom live in destitution or on the streets, at
risk of exploitation and trafficking. Following a visit in October, the UN special
rapporteur on torture called conditions in many immigration detention facilities
inhuman and degrading.
Violence by armed opposition groups, as well as strikes and demonstrations,
marked a year of increasing economic crisis and austerity measures in Greece.
There were several deadly bomb attacks against public buildings, killing a
bystander in March and the assistant to the minister of citizen protection in June.
Other attacks caused structural damage. In November police in Greece and elsewhere intercepted over a dozen letter bombs addressed to foreign embassies in
Athens, the Greek parliament, heads of state, and institutions in Europe.
A policeman was sentenced in October to life in prison for intentionally shooting
a 15-year-old boy in Athens during a demonstration in December 2008, sparking
nationwide riots. Another officer was sentenced to 10 years in prison for complicity.
In May the Council of Europe European Committee of Social Rights made public
conclusions from December 2009 condemning Greece for widespread discrimination
against Roma in access to housing. The same committee had condemned
Greece in 2004.
Italy
Racist and xenophobic violence and hostile political discourse remained a pressing
problem. In January, 11 African seasonal migrant workers were seriously
injured in drive-by shootings and mob attacks over a three day period in Rosarno,
Calabria. At least 10 other migrants, 10 law enforcement officers, and 14 local residents
required medical treatment. Over 1,000 migrants left the town following
the violence, most of them evacuated by law enforcement personnel. Numerous
countries expressed concern about racism and xenophobia in Italy during its
Universal Periodic Review at February’s UN Human Rights Council (HRC).
Roma and Sinti continued to suffer high levels of discrimination, poverty, and
deplorable living conditions in both authorized and unauthorized camps. Eastern
European Roma, primarily from Romania and living in informal settlements, faced
forced evictions and financial inducements to return to their countries of origin. In
October the Council of Europe European Committee of Social Rights published
conclusions from June condemning Italy for discrimination against Roma in housing
and access to justice, economic, and social assistance.
Italy continued to deport terrorism suspects to Tunisia, including Mohamed
Mannai in May, despite the risk of ill-treatment, persistent interventions from the
ECtHR, and condemnation by the Council of Europe. A June resolution from its
Committee of Ministers reiterated Italy’s obligation to comply with European Court
decisions.
The European Committee for the Prevention of Torture said in an April report that
Italy violated the prohibition on refoulement when it intercepted boat migrants
attempting to reach Italy and returned them to Libya without screening for people
needing international protection. Two Italian officials faced prosecution in a Sicily
court for their role in the return of 75 people to Libya on an Italian Financial Police
boat in August 2009.
Italy failed to offer asylum to approximately a dozen Eritreans it had pushed back
to Libya in 2009, where alongside hundreds of other Eritreans they suffered illtreatment,
abusive detention, and threat of deportation to Eritrea.
In May a Genova appeals court convicted 25 out of 29 police officers for violence
against demonstrators at the 2001 G8 summit, overturning acquittals by a lower
court. The Interior Ministry said it would not suspend the officers. Appeals against
the May decision are pending at this writing.
The Netherlands
General elections in June left the anti-immigrant Freedom Party in third place with
24 parliamentary seats. In late September, after months of negotiations, the
Liberal Party and Christian Democrats announced a center-right coalition government
resting on Freedom Party support.
In October Freedom Party leader Geert Wilders appeared in court for inciting discrimination
and hatred against Muslims, non-Western immigrants, and specifically
Moroccans, as well as for group defamation of adherents to Islam. Later that
month new judges were appointed following a challenge by Wilders over alleged
bias; the case remains pending at this writing.
New rules in July extended the 48 hour accelerated asylum procedure to eight
days while making it the default procedure, despite domestic and international
criticism that eight days are insufficient for a proper assessment, particularly in
complex cases and those involving vulnerable groups. In February the UN
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women criticized Dutch
accelerated procedures as unsuitable for women victims of violence and unaccompanied
children, and urged the government to recognize formally domestic
violence and gender-based persecution as grounds for asylum.
The ECtHR ruled in July that the expulsion to Libya of a Libyan man, acquitted of
terrorism charges by a Dutch court in 2003, would violate the ban on returns to
risk of torture.
In September, under a new policy announced in July, the government deported a
Somali who had been refused asylum to Mogadishu, despite UNHCR guidelines
advising against all returns to south-central Somalia.
Poland
Official flight records obtained by two national human rights groups in February
confirmed that at least six CIA rendition flights landed in Poland in 2003. A criminal
investigation launched in 2008 into complicity in a CIA secret prison continued,
with reports suggesting the prosecutor was considering war crime charges
against former president Aleksander Kwasniewski and other former senior officials.
In September the prosecutor in charge of the case said his investigation
would include the alleged detention and torture of a Saudi man while in CIA custody
in Poland.
Discrimination based on race, gender, and sexual identity remained serious problems.
In June the Council of Europe’s European Commission against Racism and
Intolerance (ECRI) expressed concern over Poland’s failure to adequately address
discrimination against Roma and non-citizens in education, housing, employment,
and health. The European Commission referred Poland to the EU Court of
Justice in May for failing to implement the EU directive on race equality. At this
writing a government-sponsored anti-discrimination bill is pending final approval
in parliament and is expected to come into force in January 2011. A coalition of 40
rights groups criticized the bill as failing to protect against discrimination on the
basis of sexual orientation, disability, age, or religion in a variety of spheres, or
against gender discrimination in education.
Warsaw hosted a landmark gay rights rally in July. The first EuroPride parade in a
former Eastern Bloc country was peaceful, despite strong opposition. In
December 2009 the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights had
expressed concerns about discrimination against lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender persons in Poland. The ECtHR ruled in March that Poland discriminated unlawfully against same-sex couples by denying them the same protection in
relation to housing and succession rights afforded to unmarried heterosexual
couples.
In a May report the UN special rapporteur on the right to health criticized Poland
over the lack of access to legal abortions, contraception, and prenatal testing.
Spain
The violent Basque separatist group ETA announced a unilateral ceasefire in early
September after a year of relative inactivity and significant arrests under continuing
France-Spain cooperation. A French gendarme was killed in March near Paris
in a shoot-out with suspected ETA members. In January the Spanish Supreme
Court ruled that 2006 negotiations between elected Basque officials and
Batasuna, the Basque nationalist party declared illegal in 2003 for alleged ties to
ETA, did not constitute a crime. Three ETA members were convicted for the
December 2006 bombing of a Madrid airport. They will serve a maximum of 4o
years in jail each, despite the symbolic 1,000 year sentences.
Spain rejected recommendations from peer governments during its Universal
Periodic Review at the HRC in May. The rejected recommendations included the
improvement of safeguards for terrorism detainees held without access to communication
and the implementation of the 2008 justice reform in terrorism cases
recommendations made by the UN special rapporteur on human rights while
countering terrorism. The Spanish government similarly rejected recommendations
to create an independent police complaints mechanism.
Parliament approved in June an overhaul of Spain’s criminal code effective
December 2010, increasing sentences for over 30 crimes, creating a new system
of post-sentence “supervised liberty” for terrorism and sex offenses, and creating
a new crime of disseminating information to “provoke, foment or foster” the commission
of a terrorism offense.
Judge Baltasar Garzón, known internationally for his efforts to bring former
Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet to justice, was suspended in May and faced
trial for investigating alleged cases of illegal detention and forced disappearances
of more than 100,000 people during Spain’s civil war and under the subsequent Franco regime, despite a 1977 amnesty law. The UN Working Group on Enforced or
Involuntary Disappearances expressed concern in May over Garzón’s suspension
and criticized Spain’s amnesty law.
Around 200 unaccompanied migrant children, mainly from sub-Saharan Africa
and Morocco, remain in “emergency” centers set up in 2006 in the Canary Islands
despite repeated pledges by the local government to close them. Around half live
in La Esperanza, a substandard, large, isolated former detention facility. The UN
Committee on the Rights of the Child expressed concern in September over inadequate
reception conditions and neglect of children in the Canaries. It recommended
that Spain establish child-friendly centers and introduce effective complaints
mechanisms for children in care to report ill-treatment.
A new law came into force in July removing restrictions on abortion to make it
legal on request up to the fourteenth week of pregnancy. It also increased access
to, and information about, reproductive rights and family planning. Prior to the
reform, abortion was lawful only on the grounds of serious health risks for the
woman, fetal malformations, or in rape cases.
United Kingdom
General elections in May resulted in a coalition between the Conservative and
Liberal Democrat parties, Britain’s first coalition government since 1945.
In July the new government announced a judge-led inquiry into allegations of
complicity of UK intelligence agencies in torture, and for the first time published
guidance for intelligence officers on interrogating detainees abroad. The inquiry,
whose detailed terms of reference have yet to be published at this writing, is not
expected to begin until all ongoing criminal investigations into alleged complicity
by British agents in overseas torture were resolved. In November the UK’s top
prosecutor announced there was insufficient evidence to prosecute a Security
Service (MI5) officer over the abuse of Binyam Mohamed. The same month the
government announced it would pay former Guantanamo Bay detainees compensation
to settle civil suits and avoid disclosure of classified documents, without
UK authorities admitting culpability.
Concerns remained that current guidelines on overseas interrogations give too
much latitude to intelligence officers, appear to create ministerial discretion to
permit use of abusive techniques, and foresee assurances as a means of mitigating
the risk of torture or ill-treatment, despite their inherent unreliability.
The Equality and Human Rights Commission warned the government in
September that it would seek judicial review by the courts if the guidance was not
amended. Lawyers representing civilians detained and allegedly tortured by
British forces in Iraq also threatened action because the guidelines do not
unequivocally prohibit hooding, an issue central to the public inquiry into the
2003 death of Iraqi hotel receptionist Baha Mousa while in British military custody
in Basra. The inquiry’s hearings ended in October and a final report is pending
at this writing.
Heavily redacted documents were published in July and September following a
High Court order in a civil case brought against the UK government by six former
Guantanamo Bay detainees. The documents provided evidence that the government
was aware as early as January 2002 of allegations that UK citizens and residents
were being tortured in US custody but failed to object to transferring UK
nationals to Guantanamo Bay. The documents also included 2002 guidance to UK
intelligence officers that if they observed the “mistreatment” of prisoners in foreign
custody “the law does not require you to intervene to prevent this.”
In July the Home Office launched a review of much-criticized counterterrorism
measures, including control orders, extended pre-charge detention, stop and
search without suspicion, and deportation with assurances. At this writing the
government has yet to present its reform proposals to parliament. The government
suspended the terrorism stop and search power in July, following the
ECtHR’s confirmation that the powers violated privacy rights, was too broad, and
lacked safeguards.
Despite the Home Office review, the coalition government agreement endorsed
the use of diplomatic assurances to deport terrorism suspects.
In May the Special Immigration Appeals Commission (SIAC) blocked the deportation
on the basis of diplomatic assurances to Pakistan of two Pakistani terrorism
suspects. In July the US government began extradition proceedings against one of the suspects. The case is ongoing at this writing. SIAC ruled in September that an
Ethiopian terrorism suspect could be safely deported to Ethiopia despite the risk
of torture, the first case involving a 2008 agreement between the two countries.
An appeal is pending at this writing.
In June the UK High Court confirmed a moratorium on transfers of terrorism suspects
to the National Directorate of Security (NDS) facility in Kabul following allegations
of torture. In March the ECtHR ruled that the UK violated the rights of two
Iraqis by transferring them from UK military custody in Basra to Iraqi authorities in
December 2008. The court rejected the UK government’s appeal in October.
The prime minister publicly apologized in June for the “unjustified and unjustifiable”
1972 killing of 14 unarmed protestors in Northern Ireland by British soldiers,
following the long-awaited report from the Bloody Sunday Inquiry published the
same month. The 12 year inquiry concluded the soldiers did not face any threat
and gave no warnings before firing.
The death in October of an Angolan man as he was being deported by private
security guards working for the Home Office prompted an inquiry by the
Parliamentary Home Affairs Committee into restraint techniques used during such
removals. A criminal investigation into the death was ongoing at time of writing.
Children continued to be detained in immigration centers despite the government’s
pledge in May to stop the practice. Women, including survivors of sexual
violence in Pakistan, Sierra Leone and Uganda, continued to be placed in the
“detained fast-track” asylum procedure unsuited to considering such complex
claims.
The Supreme Court ruled in July that two gay asylum seekers from Iran and
Cameroon could not be denied protection on the grounds that they could conceal
their sexuality in their countries of origin. The Home Office announced new rules
to prevent removals to countries where individuals face persecution based on
their sexual orientation or gender identification.