European Union
Terrorism, and state responses to it, continue to pose serious challenges to
human rights protections within the European Union. Restrictions on and, in
some cases, mistreatment of migrants and asylum seekers are also of pressing
concern in the region.
The threat of terrorism in 2006 induced several EU states to adopt laws weakening
human rights protections; a number of states sought to deport foreign suspects
to countries notorious for torture. Courts often acted as an effective check
against abuse during 2006, together with parliaments in some cases, but courts
failed to give sufficient weight to the importance of free expression in cases
involving alleged incitement to terrorism.
Migration policy at EU and national levels remains largely focused on preventing
migrants and asylum seekers from reaching EU territory and summarily returning
those who do, rather than ensuring access to protection for those who need it.
States continued in 2006 to routinely detain migrants, including in substandard
conditions.
Counterterrorism Measures and Human Rights
There was increased momentum during 2006 toward accountability for the complicity
of EU states in the United States government’s abduction and illegal transfer
of terrorism suspects to places where they risked torture, and detention of
“high-value” terrorism suspects in secret facilities. A June report from the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) described a “spider web”
of illegal transfers and detentions, and named EU states among those that could
be held responsible for violations of the rights of specific individuals “rendered”
by the US, including Germany, Italy, Sweden, and the United Kingdom.
In July the European Parliament considered an interim report by a special committee
tasked with investigating the alleged use of current and soon-to-be EU countries
by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) for the movement and illegal detention
of prisoners. The Parliament adopted a resolution on July 6 concluding that
US government agents had been “directly responsible for the illegal seizure, removal, abduction and detention of terrorist suspects on the territory of [EU]
Member States…” and determined that it was “implausible” that member states
were not complicit in these operations. The committee continued its investigative
work throughout 2006, visiting Germany in September, the UK and Romania in
October, and Poland in November. A final report is expected in 2007.
EU governments continue to seek and secure “diplomatic assurances” against
torture in their efforts to transfer terrorism suspects to countries where they
would be at risk of ill-treatment (see sections below on the Netherlands and UK).
This runs counter to the broad consensus among international human rights
experts that diplomatic assurances do not provide an effective safeguard against
torture and ill-treatment, as reflected in strong statements against their use during
2006 by the United Nations high commissioner for human rights and special
rapporteur on torture, the Council of Europe commissioner for human rights, and
the EU Network of Independent Experts on Fundamental Rights.
Some EU states moved in April to establish, through the Council of Europe’s
Group of Specialists on Human Rights and the Fight against Terrorism, guidelines
for the “acceptable use” of diplomatic assurances, but failed. Having considered
mounting evidence that diplomatic assurances do not protect against torture, the
Group of Specialists declined to issue such guidelines.
Common EU Asylum and Migration Policy
Efforts to establish a common EU migration and asylum policy continue to raise
concerns about standard setting that weakens or undermines the protections
required by human rights and refugee law.
In December 2005 the EU’s European Council adopted the Asylum Procedures
Directive without any of the 100-plus amendments proposed by the European
Parliament. In response, the Parliament petitioned the European Court of Justice
(ECJ) in March 2006 to annul the entire directive. A key element of the legal challenge
is a provision establishing an EU-wide list of “safe countries of origin,”
which would oblige EU states to deem asylum applications by nationals of the
listed countries “manifestly unfounded.” At this writing the court had yet to rule
on the admissibility of the challenge.
The ECJ dismissed in June a complaint brought by the European Parliament in
2003 about the directive on the right to family reunification adopted the same
year. The court ruled that provisions in the directive allowing member states to
adopt stricter rules on family reunification than those laid down in the directive
itself do not amount to disproportionate interference with the right to family life.
Countering irregular immigration remains at the top of the EU agenda. The EU’s
response to the large-scale migration by sea to Spain, Italy, and Malta during the
summer of 2006 revolved around securing borders, interception, and repatriation
rather than ensuring that the rights of migrants and refugees are respected.
That approach formed part of the EU’s ongoing effort to “externalize” the control,
processing, and hosting of migrants and asylum seekers to neighboring states
outside its own borders, including through readmission agreements, by which
states outside the EU agree to accept the return of migrants from third countries,
who have transited their territory en route to the EU. In October 2006 the EU and
Ukraine signed a readmission agreement. Implementation is delayed for two
years, but human rights groups are concerned that the delay is insufficient for
Ukraine to carry out reforms to safeguard the rights of migrants and asylum seekers.
In the first major initiative since its creation in 2005, the EU External Borders
Agency FRONTEX was tasked with managing joint patrols off the coasts of
Mauritania, Senegal, and Cape Verde. As the EU attempted to broker a similar
agreement with Libya for joint patrols in the Mediterranean, and Italy reached a
bilateral agreement with Libya for joint police operations at the Libyan coast, the
human rights of asylum seekers and migrants received scant attention.
Human Rights Concerns in EU Member States
France
In July 2006 the French parliament adopted a new law on immigration and integration,
increasing restrictions on family reunification for legal residents, and
abolishing the automatic right to legal status for those living in France without
papers for 10 years. It created an obligatory “integration contract” for those seeking temporary residency, and a proof of integration requirement for those seeking
long-term residence.
In a report published in February, then Council of Europe Commissioner for
Human Rights Alvaro Gil-Robles drew attention to overcrowding and unhygienic
conditions in detention centers for immigrants, as well as in prisons. The holding
center in the Palais de Justice in Paris, where Gil-Robles described conditions as
“inhuman and degrading,” was closed in June.
The August expulsion of Adel Tebourski, a Tunisian man convicted on terrorism
charges, illustrated France’s determination to rely on expulsion as a counterterrorism
policy. Just prior to his completing a five-year sentence for terrorism offenses
in July, Tebourski’s French citizenship (acquired in 2000) was rescinded and the
interior minister ordered his immediate expulsion. Tebourski was detained pending
deportation, and despite a request from the UN Committee against Torture
that he not be removed until the risk of him being tortured upon return to Tunisia
could be properly examined, he was expelled as soon as his application for asylum
was rejected and preliminary hearings determined that he did not face a torture
risk.
In June the Paris Correctional Tribunal convicted 25 men in the so-called
“Chechen network” trial, some for “criminal association in relation to a terrorist
enterprise” and others for falsifying documents and other lesser offenses. Saïd
Arif, a 40-year-old Algerian, was sentenced to nine years’ imprisonment, despite
the court throwing out his confession and other declarations obtained while he
was detained in Syria on the grounds it was “nearly certain” they were obtained
under torture. France’s leading magistrate in terrorism cases Jean-Louis Bruguiere
had provided a set of questions to Syrian authorities, and traveled to Syria at the
time of Arif’s interrogation in May 2004.
In April 2006, on the day it was expected to announce its ruling in the trial of six
former Guantanamo Bay detainees on charges of criminal association with a terrorist
enterprise, a Paris court postponed the verdict until May 2007 in order to
examine the circumstances in which French intelligence officers had interrogated
the individuals at the facility. The six French nationals spent between two-and-ahalf and three years at Guantanamo before being handed over to French authorities
in July 2004 and March 2005.
A counterterrorism law that came into force in January 2006 increases pre-charge
detention for terrorism suspects from four to six days. Human rights groups
expressed concern about the duration of pre-charge detention in view of the lack
of appropriate safeguards, including limited access to a lawyer. A proposed
reform of the justice system under discussion within the government during 2006
would require that all police and judicial interrogations in criminal cases be
filmed as a safeguard against, among other things, prohibited ill-treatment and
procedural violations. Interrogations of terrorism suspects would be excluded
from this rule, however.
Germany
The German government foiled a terrorist bombing plot in July 2006, involving
unexploded devices found on trains heading toward Hamm and Koblenz. Interior
Minister Wolfgang Schaeuble warned in August that the security situation in
Germany was “exceptionally serious” and called for stronger counterterrorism
measures. Measures under consideration by the government include enhanced
video surveillance in public spaces and a counterterrorism database.
Federal prosecutors opened an investigation in February into Germany’s possible
complicity in the abduction and rendition of Khalid el-Masri, a German citizen
apprehended in Macedonia in 2003, handed over to US operatives, and subsequently
held in secret detention in Afghanistan (his case is also the subject of
investigations at the European Parliament and Council of Europe). El-Masri was
released in Albania in May 2004, and never charged with a crime. He claimed that
he had been beaten in detention and interrogated by a German official in
Afghanistan.
A German parliamentary committee of inquiry was established in April to investigate
the possible complicity of the German government in abuses by US agents in
the context of counterterrorism, including whether the Federal Criminal Police
Office questioned terror suspects being held abroad, and the cases of El-Masri
and Mohammed Haider Zammar. A German citizen of Syrian descent, Zammar had been arrested in Morocco in 2001, transferred to US custody, and sent on by
private plane to Damascus, where he is on trial before a security court. German
intelligence and law enforcement officials interrogated Zammar in Syria in
November 2002. The German chancellery issued new interrogation guidelines in
October 2006, which no longer permit members of the German federal police to
question terrorism suspects abroad.
Controversy surrounded the return of Murat Kurnaz, a German-born Turkish citizen,
to Bremen in August 2006 after more than four years in US custody at
Guantanamo Bay, because of revelations that he had been interrogated by
German security officials during his detention, and claims by Kurnaz’s lawyers
that German authorities declined a 2002 offer from the US government to release
him. In October 2006 the parliament’s defense committee began an investigation
of Kurnaz’s claim that he was mistreated in US custody in Afghanistan, prior to
Guantanamo, by members of the German army.
Italy
In the first nine months of 2006, an estimated 16,000 migrants leaving from the
Libyan coast either arrived on the island of Lampedusa, off the Sicilian coast, or
were brought there after having been interdicted by Italian naval or coast guard
vessels. At least 60 people died in two separate boat sinkings in August, including
one incident involving an Italian coast guard ship; the incident was under
investigation at this writing.
Despite pressure from civil society groups and parties within the ruling coalition,
the government of Romani Prodi, elected in April 2006, declined to abolish
mandatory detention for irregular migrants, although the government established
a commission to investigate detention conditions. The government announced in
May that Italy would not expel anyone to countries that have not signed the UN
Refugee Convention, including Libya, marking a shift from the previous administration,
which in some cases removed people without first giving them an opportunity
to seek asylum.
In July Milan’s chief prosecutor formally submitted an extradition request for 26
US citizens (25 suspected CIA agents and the former commander of a US Air Force base at Aviano, Italy) in the investigation into the February 2003 abduction of
Egyptian Hassan Mustafa Osama Nasr (known as Abu Omar), rendered to Egypt
by the CIA via Aviano. The justice minister, who must approve the request, had
not taken any action at this writing. Prosecutors also accused 12 Italians of
involvement, including the director and former deputy director of SISMI, the
Italian military intelligence agency, and six SISMI agents. Milan prosecutors concluded
their investigation in October, portraying the abduction as an illegal operation
organized by the CIA with the help of SISMI. In October the Prodi government
told a parliamentary commission of inquiry that the issue of possible contact
between the US and Italian governments on the case was protected by state
secrecy.
Malta
In July, 51 African migrants rescued at sea by a Spanish fishing boat spent eight
days in legal limbo after Malta refused to allow the ship to dock. Maltese authorities
claimed they had no duty to admit the migrants because they were rescued
outside the country’s territorial waters. They were eventually allowed to disembark
in Malta after Spain agreed to take the majority of the group, with Italy, the
Netherlands, and Andorra accepting others. Malta had allowed a pregnant
woman, a mother, and a two-year-old child to disembark earlier for medical treatment.
Officials from the office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) who
visited these three migrants pending their onward travel stated publicly that they
were “shocked” after they saw 11 men being held in a tiny, dark, unventilated
room. The men were allegedly being punished for attempting to escape. Malta
has a mandatory detention policy for asylum seekers and irregular migrants.
The Netherlands
Nine alleged members of the Hofstad Group, a militant Islamist network, were
convicted in March of membership in a terrorist organization; five others were
acquitted. The only evidence used to convict five of the nine was internet and
phone communications in which they promoted a violent version of Islam and
called for holy war with the West. Judge Rene Elkerbout stated, “Anyone who preaches hate and violence lays the basis for committing crimes directed at
instilling fear among the people and destroying Dutch democracy.” Although seen
as a major breakthrough in the Netherlands’ ability to secure terrorism convictions,
the judgment gave rise to concerns that the five men were prosecuted for
speech and association rather than participation in a criminal conspiracy. Among
those convicted was Mohammad Bouyeri, already serving a life sentence for the
murder of filmmaker Theo van Gogh in November 2004.
In May 2006 the Dutch House of Representatives approved new counterterrorism
legislation. If also adopted by the Senate, which began debating it in September,
the new law would give police special surveillance powers upon an “indication”
(as opposed to the higher standard of “reasonable suspicion”) that a suspect has
committed a crime; increase the maximum period of detention without charge
from three to 14 days; and allow multiple extensions of pre-trial detention for up
to two years.
The Supreme Court, in a final decision in September, confirmed the ruling of a
lower court halting the extradition to Turkey of Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK)
member Nuriye Kesbir. The lower court had determined that diplomatic assurances
of humane treatment and fair trial from the Turkish authorities were not
sufficient to protect Kesbir from ill-treatment upon return.
A proposal in February by Rita Verdonk, minister of alien affairs and integration,
to lift a moratorium on the deportation of rejected gay and lesbian asylum seekers
to Iran was withdrawn in April after strong protests from Dutch civil society
and international human rights organizations, including Human Rights Watch. In
October, the Dutch government announced a major policy shift, recognizing gay
and lesbian Iranians as a “special group” facing persecution at home and deserving
protection in the Netherlands.
Poland
President Lech Kaczy􀀀 ski called for the restoration of the death penalty in Poland
and throughout Europe in a July radio statement, drawing condemnation from the
European Commission and PACE. In August the League of Polish Families, a minority party in the ruling coalition, launched a campaign for a referendum in
Poland on the issue.
In January 2006 the European Parliament, motivated in part by rising homophobia
in Poland, adopted a resolution calling on EU member states “firmly to condemn
homophobic hate speech or incitement to hatred and violence.” But overtly
homophobic rhetoric from Polish government officials, coupled with attacks on
lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) activists, continued during 2006.
The State Prosecutor in May ordered all prosecutors to review the financing of
LGBT organizations after a parliamentarian from the League of Polish Families
accused LGBT groups of associating with pedophiles and the narcotics trade.
Minister of Education Roman Giertych dismissed the director of a teacher training
center in June for using a Council of Europe publication that included sections on
non-discrimination against sexual minorities, a move condemned by Council of
Europe Secretary General Terry Davis. In April, despite the presence of police,
LGBT activists were attacked in Krakow by a far-right group during a demonstration.
The “Vetting Act” signed by the president in November and aimed at identifying
collaborators with security agencies of the Polish People’s Republic between 1944
and 1990 gave rise to human rights concerns including inadequate privacy protections
and limited procedural safeguards for appeals.
Spain
By September over 25,000 migrants had reached the Canary Islands, a five-fold
increase on the total for the whole of 2005. Inadequate capacity in reception centers
for migrants meant that hundreds of unaccompanied minors were placed in
makeshift centers, which a European Parliament delegation described as a “real
emergency” during a June 2006 visit.
The majority of migrants traveled through Senegal and Mauritania. Spain negotiated
agreements with both countries for the return of their nationals. Senegal
interrupted repatriations after the first group of Senegalese to be returned (99
persons in May) complained of ill-treatment by Spanish authorities; operations
later resumed. At this writing, Spain was negotiating with both countries to permit the return of third country nationals who departed from their coasts, raising concerns
that refugees and others at risk could be denied access to protection on
Spanish soil.
After the Basque separatist group ETA declared a permanent ceasefire in March,
Prime Minister José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero formally announced in June his government’s
intention to enter into negotiations to end nearly four decades of political
violence over the status of the Basque region. Prosecutions of alleged ETA collaborators
or members continued in the special terrorism court Audiencia
Nacional, with several of the cases raising concerns about undue restrictions on
freedom of expression and association. In February the court paved the way for
the trial of seven staff members of the Basque-language newspaper Euskaldunon
Egunkaria on terrorism charges when it rejected their appeal against indictment.
The newspaper had been shut down in February 2003 and the staff members
arrested on charges of collaborating with ETA. Batasuna leader Arnaldo Otegi was
convicted in April of glorification of terrorism for a speech given in December
2003 in honor of an ETA leader killed in 1978.
In April 2006, a little over two years after the Madrid train bombings that claimed
191 lives and injured over 1,700 people, investigating magistrate Juan del Olmo
formally charged 29 out of the 116 people under investigation. Eighteen of those
charged are in custody. The trial is expected to begin in February 2007.
In July, citing “a total lack of prosecution evidence,” the Supreme Court overturned
the 2005 terrorism conviction of Hamed Abderrahman Ahmed, a Spanish
citizen who had spent over two years at Guantanamo Bay, and ordered his immediate
release. The court also noted lack of sufficient evidence in June when it
overturned the separate 2005 conviction of Syrian-born Spaniard Imad Yarkas for
conspiracy to commit the September 11 terrorist attacks in the United States, but
upheld his conviction for membership in al Qaeda and his 12-year prison sentence.
Ruling on other appeals by those convicted in the same 2005 trial of
alleged members of an al Qaeda cell in Spain, the court acquitted three individuals
entirely, but upheld the conviction of Al Jazeera correspondent Taysir Allouni.
The Audiencia Nacional began an investigation in June 2006 into the alleged use
of Spanish airports in the illegal transfer of terrorism suspects by the CIA.
In a positive move, Spain ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention against
Torture in March 2006. Less than a month later, however, parliament rejected a
proposal to eliminate provisions of the Criminal Code that allow terrorism suspects
and others charged with serious crimes to be held virtually incommunicado
(with extremely limited access to a lawyer, and no right to communicate with family
members) for 13 days.
United Kingdom
Counterterrorism laws and measures implemented by the UK government came
under judicial scrutiny in 2006, with the courts generally striking down measures
that violated fundamental human rights protections. In December 2005 the UK’s
highest court, the House of Lords Judicial Committee, ruled in the case of A and
Others that evidence extracted under torture can never be used in court proceedings,
reversing an August 2004 majority decision by the Court of Appeal.
Claims by the UK government that it had foiled a major transatlantic airline bombing
plot in August led to the arrest and detention of a number of terrorism suspects
and the first test of extended detention powers under the Terrorism Act
2006, which became law in March and permits 28 days’ pre-charge detention for
terrorism suspects. The Act also criminalizes speech that “encourages” terrorism—
including statements that “glorify” terrorism or are believed to indirectly
encourage it—even where the statements do not directly incite violence. The
restrictive nature of the new law poses a serious risk of infringing legitimate free
expression.
The parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights published an assessment of
the government’s compliance with the Convention against Torture in May 2006,
concluding that its policy of seeking diplomatic assurances against torture in
“memoranda of understanding” with countries to which the UK wants to deport
alleged terrorism suspects—Jordan, Libya, and Lebanon, to date—was likely to
put those returned under the agreement at “substantial risk… of actually being
tortured” as well as undermining the prohibition on returns to risk of torture.
The first legal challenge to a “memorandum of understanding” commenced in
May in the case of Omar Othman, a Jordanian terrorism suspect also known as Abu Qatada, whom the UK government wishes to deport to Jordan. Othman’s
lawyers argued before the Special Immigration Appeals Commission (SIAC) that
he would be at risk of torture, unfair trial, and possible rendition to a third country
if transferred to Jordan based on that country’s inherently unreliable promises
of fair treatment.
The SIAC dismissed the appeal of an Algerian man (“Y”) against his deportation
to Algeria on national security grounds in August, ruling he would not face a real
risk of torture if returned because he would be covered by a new amnesty law. “Y”
is a torture survivor granted refugee status in the UK. He was acquitted by a UK
court in 2005 of charges related to an alleged terrorism plot. At this writing, the
SIAC’s decision was under appeal.
In August the Court of Appeal upheld a lower court ruling quashing “control
orders” against six terrorism suspects on the grounds that they constituted a deprivation
of liberty contrary to the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).
The orders, authorized under the Terrorism Act 2005, imposed 18-hour curfews
and other restrictions of movement on the six. The home secretary subsequently
issued new orders with a 14-hour curfew period. The same month, the Court of
Appeal reversed a lower court ruling that the judicial scrutiny and standard of
proof required for the imposition of a control order violated the right to a fair
hearing under the ECHR.
The Crown Prosecution Service, following the completion of its review into the
death of Jean Charles de Menezes (mistakenly killed by the Metropolitan Police in
London the day after foiled terrorist attacks on July 21, 2005), announced in July
2006 that it would not prosecute any individual police officer for murder,
manslaughter, or any other criminal offense in connection with the shooting, but
indicated it would prosecute the office of the Metropolitan Police Commissioner
over the death using health and safety laws.