ELIFG<’J ONE HLD8E R@>?KJ CI@J@J
By Benjamin Ward
To many friends of human rights in Europe, the Arab Spring has been the
most thrilling period since the fall of the Berlin Wall. Judging from their soaring
rhetoric about yearning for freedom among Arab peoples, European Union
leaders share that enthusiasm. Today there is an opportunity, the optimists
proclaim, to have an arc of human rights-respecting countries around much of
the Mediterranean rim.
The reality of human rights policy in Europe itself and toward its
Mediterranean perimeter has been far less edifying. Documents discovered in
Libya by Human Rights Watch in September 2011 evidenced British complicity
in rendition to Libya under Muammar Gaddafi. Italy, which was willing to send
African migrants and asylum seekers back to Libya during the Gaddafi era to
face abuse and worse, moved quickly to sign a migration cooperation agreement
with the transitional authorities there (although at this writing it has yet
to resume forced returns). EU governments have proved reluctant to help
migrants and others fleeing war-torn Libya. The arrival of thousands of
Tunisian migrants in Italy beginning in January led leading EU governments to
question free movement inside the EU, one of its fundamental pillars.
Move beyond the fine words and human rights in Europe are in trouble. A new
(or rather a resurgent old) idea is on the march: that the rights of “problematic”
minorities must be set aside for the greater good, and elected politicians
who pursue such policies are acting with democratic legitimacy.
At first glance, the idea of a human rights crisis in Europe might seem farfetched.
But scratch beneath the surface and the trends are truly worrying.
Four developments stand out: the rollback of civil liberties in state responses
to terrorist attacks; the debate around the place of minorities and migrants in
Europe, a debate too often laced with xenophobia; the rise of populist
extremist parties and their baleful influence on public policy; and the diminishing
effectiveness of traditional human rights institutions and tools. Unless governments wake up to the scale of the threat, the next generation of
Europeans may see human rights as an optional extra instead of a core value.
Counterterrorism and the Attack on Rights
Terrorist violence in Europe is nothing new. Nor is human rights abuse as part
of the effort to counter it. But the 9/11 attacks, and the subsequent attacks in
Madrid and London, triggered policy responses in Europe that caused lasting
damage to the human rights cause.
In the past decade, European governments too often have shown a willingness
to chip away at the absolute global prohibition of torture, exposing terrorism
suspects to violent abuse and illegal detention overseas, using the
fruits of that torture at home, and denying terrorism suspects the rights
accorded to others accused of crimes. Even now, we do not know the full
extent of European complicity in US abuses (rendition, “black sites,” and torture)
under the Bush administration. (Some governments, like Norway, have
resisted the temptation, responding to terrorist violence using the rule of law).
While many of these laws and policies were deeply problematic, and in some
cases remain unchanged today (especially where courts or national parliaments
were unable or unwilling to curb them), the rhetoric around them
arguably represents an even worse legacy.
Many EU governments sought to construct a new paradigm in which human
rights had to take second place to security or be set aside entirely. As
then-British Prime Minister Tony Blair claimed after the July 2005 suicide
attacks in London, “the rules of the game are changing.” While public concern
about terrorism has been largely supplanted by worries about jobs and
social services (even though the threat remains), these poisonous ideas have
taken root.
European politicians mounted a three-pronged attack on universal human
rights in the context of combating terrorism. The first was that terrorism suspects
deserve fewer rights than others. The second was that Europe could
have security or human rights, but not both. The third was that human rights are a zero sum game, so that rights for the majority can only be secured by
sacrificing the rights of the minority suspected of terrorism.
Driven by fear, many in Europe accepted these arguments. Offered a chance
to trade away those rights to assuage their fear, people willingly did so, especially
when the rights at risk were not, or did not seem to be, theirs.
The Place of Migrants and Minorities
Intolerance towards migrants and minorities in Europe is widespread. Polling
data from 2010 shows that a majority in eight EU states shared the view that
there are too many immigrants, with as many as half concluding the same
of Muslims.
Fears about loss of culture, terrorism, crime, and competition for economic
resources all help explain rising intolerance in Europe. Europe’s current economic
and financial crisis and resulting austerity is likely to exacerbate the
intolerance.
Europe’s Muslims and Roma experience persistent hostility and discrimination
across the region, as an EU Fundamental Rights Agency survey from 2009
showed. Undocumented African migrants face significant problems, including
discrimination and violence. While individual attacks are common in the
region, in some cases this has spilled over into mob violence, including in
Italy (against African migrants and Roma), in Greece (against migrants), and
in Eastern Europe (against Roma).
European governments have responded in ways that are deeply corrosive of
respect for universal rights. Rather than emphasizing that Europe’s history
has been shaped by migration, pointing to the many contributions made by
minorities and migrants and forcefully condemning racism and intolerance,
they have played on these fears.
Cultural and religious practices can of course violate human rights, and those
who engage in discriminatory or abusive conduct must be held to account.
But what is happening in Europe goes far beyond concern with the conduct of
specific individuals.
The response has included blaming marginalized communities for the conduct
of a handful of people (as with Roma in Italy); seeking to close Europe’s
borders at the EU and national levels; restrictive and abusive asylum procedures
and abusive migrant detention conditions (notably in Greece), with
unaccompanied migrant children at particular risk; and in the name of integration,
telling migrants (even second or third generation) that they must
embrace majority culture, and if they do not, face sanction, or leave (in
Germany, the Netherlands, Denmark and elsewhere).
Muslims in Europe have borne the brunt. Fears of so-called home-grown terrorism
after the Madrid and London bombings, a string of alleged terrorism
plots, and concerns over loss of culture prompted by the more visible presence
of observant Muslims have put the continent’s diverse Muslim communities
under scrutiny, their loyalty implicitly challenged.
Fear of Muslims has impacted wider policy debates about “integration,” a
byword for a whole basket of anxieties and concerns about the place in society
of migrants, especially Muslim migrants, and has led to calls for action.
At heart the anxiety about the place of Muslim migrants in Europe, as a recent
report by the think tank Chatham House pointed out, is cultural. The headscarf
and face-covering niqab, and to some degree minarets and mosques,
have played such an important role in these debates because they are visual
reminders that Muslims live in Europe and are here to stay.
Fear of the place of Muslims in Europe did not begin with al Qaeda’s attacks
on September 11, 2001. What changed that day was the characterization of
Bangladeshi, Pakistani, Moroccan, and Turkish migrants in Europe. While
many European officials sought to draw a clear distinction between the acts
of a small group and Muslim communities as a whole, policy responses and
debates about how to counter the home-grown threat frequently created the
impression that Muslim communities were suspect.
The impact on human rights in Europe is real. On a practical level, forced integration
and a concept of integration that requires no accommodation by the
wider society is doomed to fail. When policymakers play into public fears
about loss of culture and pursue policies that increase rather than lessen
xenophobia, they put the rights of European minority communities at risk.
Perhaps worse, they reinforce the dangerous zero-sum conception of rights—
minorities must be forced to accept majority culture (or “Christian values” as
the German chancellor suggested in 2010) and if they refuse to do so their
rights must be set aside for the greater good.
Among Roma, Europe’s largest minority, the picture on human rights is bleak.
At the EU level there is recognition that the persistent discrimination and marginalization
experienced by Roma requires positive intervention and support,
and officials have devised a strategy to that end. But Roma continue to be
stigmatized at national levels across the EU. And like migrant communities,
Roma are likely to be disproportionately affected by austerity measures.
The experience of Roma migrants from Eastern to Western Europe and the
problematic policy responses to them have some parallels with those faced
by Muslims, but with fears of a purported epidemic of crime taking the place
of fears of terrorism, and with economic rather than cultural concerns predominating.
Forced evictions and expulsions of Eastern European Roma, who
are EU citizens, by France and Italy exemplify the impact of these fears.
Forced evictions remain a common feature of Roma policy across the EU.
Further east, in Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, and
Slovakia, the situation is even more alarming, with violent attacks and anti-
Roma rhetoric and little progress towards ending housing and school segregation
despite hundreds of millions of euros of EU funding and rulings of the
European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR, a Council of Europe court that binds
EU states).
This is bad news for Roma. But it is also bad news for human rights in general.
Once again, policymakers in Europe prefer to yield to, and in some cases exacerbate, public concerns at the expense of an unpopular minority rather
than saying loud and clear that Europe’s values demand rights for all.
Populist Extremism
The failure of leadership and negative rhetoric by European governments is
connected to a third worrying trend: the rise of populist extremist parties.
The terrorist act in July 2011 by Anders Breivik that left 77 Norwegians dead
was a stark reminder that extremism and political violence are not confined
to those acting in the name of Islam. Breivik’s twisted manifesto cited with
approval populist extremist parties across Europe, though the decision to
engage in terrorism was his alone.
The growing success of these parties at ballot boxes across the continent is
having a profound impact on mainstream politics. Where populist extremist
parties form part of ruling coalitions (as in Italy and Switzerland), or formally
support minority governments (as in the Netherlands), the impact on mainstream
politics is immediately evident. More generally, mainstream parties
have responded to the growing electoral share of populist extremist parties in
ways that move away from human rights-respecting policies.
In Western Europe, extremist parties have put the place of Muslims and their
alleged threat to European culture at the forefront. Some, like Italy’s Northern
League, also focus on migrant communities more generally.
The focus on Muslims and fears of terrorist attacks allows these parties to
more easily resist accusations of racism and xenophobia (some even distinguishing
“good” minority communities from Muslim minority communities)
and to present the views held by conservative Muslims on women’s rights
and homosexuality as illustrative of the threat even though conservative
Christians with similar views have not faced the same vilification.
Populist extremist parties in the eastern part of the EU are more focused on
Roma than Muslims. Examples include Jobbik, the third largest party in
Hungary’s parliament, which has links to a paramilitary group implicated in attacks on Roma, and the Slovak National Party, part of the ruling coalition,
whose leader recently called for the creation of a separate Roma state.
At a time of growing voter anger over austerity measures and mass unemployment,
these messages risk attracting greater support.
Many in Europe continue to defend the rights of migrants and minorities and
the importance of universality. But rather than standing up against populist
extremism, mainstream parties have responded with co-option through coalition
politics, adopting watered-down versions of the same policies or rhetoric,
or in the case of some centre-left parties, with paralysis and silence.
In some cases, it is argued that the electoral success of the parties mean
that it would be undemocratic for mainstream parties not to take account of
their views.
Far from neutralizing the political challenge posed by populist extremist parties,
these strategies have served instead to legitimize them and make them
respectable, sending a message to voters that xenophobic, anti-Muslim, or
anti-Roma sentiment is acceptable rather than a cause for shame.
The growth of populist extremist parties poses a real challenge for human
rights in Europe. It engenders divisive politics. It reinforces the idea that the
rights of the majority can only be upheld and respected if those of the minority
are set aside, moving us further away from universality. And it legitimizes
abusive policies on democratic grounds.
Declining Leverage
There is always a risk in a democracy that without responsible leadership the
majority will support measures that harm the interests of the minority. This
dilemma helps explain why human rights protections, which are designed in
part to protect against “tyranny of the majority,” are more essential than ever.
It is particularly alarming then that Europe’s human rights tools and institutions
are proving ineffective in tackling these negative trends.
One often valuable tool—naming and shaming—only works when the government
being identified is embarrassed by the disclosure that it is not playing
by the rules. But the state of politics in many EU states today means governments
are no longer embarrassed to pursue abusive policies, arguing that
doing otherwise would risk losing ground to populist extremist parties.
Criticisms of abusive policies and rhetoric from human rights NGOs, from the
Council of Europe, from the United Nations, from religious leaders, and even
in some cases from EU institutions, are brushed aside. Examples include
France’s forced evictions and expulsions of Roma, Spain’s incommunicado
detention of terrorism suspects, Italy’s interdiction and pushbacks of
migrants to Libya under Gaddafi, and Greece’s abusive detention of migrants.
The perceived domestic political benefits of engaging in these kinds of policies
frequently outweigh the inconvenience caused by international or regional
condemnation.
Two institutions remain hard to ignore: the ECtHR and the EU’s European
Commission.
The ECtHR still has real clout, although EU governments (notably Italy on terrorism
expulsions) have begun to ignore some of its interim rulings and the
court faces more general political attacks (particularly in the UK) for “straying”
into domestic issues.
The European Commission has long had the power to hold EU states to
account for breaking EU law. And after the Lisbon treaty, that includes human
rights, with a dedicated fundamental rights commissioner.
France’s expulsion of Roma in the summer of 2010 showed the commission’s
potential. Having ignored UN, Council of Europe, and European Parliament
criticism of its policy, Paris reacted with fury when the commission took it to
task.
Sadly, the commission eventually backed down, accepting in August 2011
legislative changes that did not address the fundamental discrimination motivating
the expulsions. Its approach to Hungary’s media law and to Greece’s broken asylum system demonstrated a similar half-heartedness. In both
cases, commission enforcement action was initiated but later discontinued or
put on hold without adequately addressing the triggering problems.
Human rights are supposed to be integral to the European project. If the commission
does not find more courage to hold member states to account when
they break the rules, Europe’s downward slide on rights looks set to continue.
Conclusion
Europe’s declining respect for human rights has not gone unnoticed.
Governments around the world have seized on abusive counterterrorism
measures, attacks on migrants, Roma, and other minorities, and hostility
towards Muslims both as justification for their own abusive policies and to
undercut criticism by the EU. The European Parliament noted in 2009 the
damage to the credibility of EU external human rights policy as a result.
Above all, Europe’s human rights crisis matters for its own sake. If these dangerous
ideas—that some deserve fewer rights than others, and that the democratic
will of the majority can choose to set aside rights for minorities—are
left unchecked, the ideals of those who tore down the Berlin Wall will be
betrayed, and the loss incalculable.
Benjamin Ward is deputy director of the Europe and Central Asia Division at
Human Rights Watch.