European Union
Attacks and foiled plots in the United Kingdom, Germany, Denmark, and Spain
underscored the ongoing threat of terrorism, some of it homegrown. The state
response continues to weaken rights and the rule of law.
National security removals of persons remain an important tactic, but with inadequate
safeguards against return to abuse, including the use of unreliable diplomatic
assurances against torture. EU states show an increasing willingness to
categorize as terrorism actions only remotely connected to the planning and commission
of violent attacks, with damaging consequences for expression, privacy,
and in some cases liberty.
Migration and asylum policy remain largely driven by border control rather than
protection concerns. Removals without proper safeguards continue, including
under agreements with countries that lack the capacity to protect migrants.
Interdiction at sea, including through the EU border agency, largely focuses on
keeping asylum seekers and migrants outside EU territory rather than protecting
them.
Counterterrorism Measures and Human Rights
In February the European Parliament adopted the final report of a special committee
tasked with investigating EU member states complicity with the US Central
Intelligence Agency (CIA) in the illegal detention and transfer of terrorism suspects
to risk of torture and ill-treatment. The report criticized many EU countries
including Germany, Italy, Sweden, and the UK for allowing their airspace to be
used by the US agency for the practice, known as extraordinary rendition. The
report called on EU states to launch independent national investigations, seek
the return of citizens and residents held illegally by US authorities, and compensate
victims.
A joint declaration issued after the October 2007 G6 meeting of interior ministers
from France, Germany, Italy, Poland, Spain, and the UK identified diplomatic
assurances against torture and ill-treatment as an effective way forward for the
forced removal of national security suspects. Austria, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Sweden, and the UK have all sought to rely on such assurances,
despite evidence that they fail to protect persons against abuse on return, and
criticism from United Nations and European human rights bodies.
A committee of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) confirmed
in a June report that the CIA operated illegal prisons for terrorism suspects
in Poland and Romania in 2003-2005 in which prisoners were subjected to interrogation
techniques tantamount to torture. The Polish and Romanian governments
continue to deny that such centers existed. The PACE report also deplored
obstruction to its investigation by EU governments including Germany, Italy,
Poland, and Romania.
Common EU Asylum and Migration Policy
The EU continues to pursue the externalization of its migration and asylum policy,
notably through readmission agreements with third countries and coordinated
naval patrols in the Mediterranean Sea, to the detriment of access to asylum and
protection against return to risk of abuse.
The EU External Borders Agency FRONTEX conducted joint naval operations with
Senegal and Mauritania in their territorial waters to intercept and turn back boats
heading for the Canary Islands before they reached international waters. The EU
pursued the participation of Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco, and Libya in similar joint
patrols. The operations lacked clear guidelines to ensure access to asylum, and
there was disagreement among states over responsibility when boats are intercepted
in international waters, and among EU and other Mediterranean states
over who should bear responsibility for rescuing shipwrecked migrants.
The EU signed readmission agreements with five western Balkan countries in
September, and continued to negotiate agreements with other countries, including
Morocco, Algeria, and Turkey. Agreements have already been reached with
Ukraine, Sri Lanka, Albania, Hong Kong, and Macao. Under the agreements,
states outside the EU accept the return of migrants from third countries who have
transited their territory en route to the EU. Readmission agreements raise concerns
that persons in need of protection will be removed to countries that lack effective asylum systems or protection against return to risk of human rights
abuse.
In June the European Commission launched a consultation process on the common
European asylum system with the publication of a green paper examining
ways to increase and harmonize protection. The European Court of Justice concluded
hearings on the European Parliaments petition to annul widely criticized
provisions in the Asylum Procedures Directive establishing common lists of safe
countries of origin and safe third countries. In the first step to a decision, the
Courts advocate general issued an opinion in September recommending the provisions
be annulled.
Iraqis now represent the largest number of asylum applicants in the EU, with
19,375 asylum applicants in 2006 and 18,205 in the first half of 2007. Over half of
the latter were in Sweden. Germany, the recipient of the third largest number of
Iraqi asylum seekers in the first half of 2007 (820), continued to revoke the status
of Saddam Hussein-era Iraqi refugees, citing changed circumstances. About
18,000 Iraqi refugees have had their status revoked since 2003.
There are continuing concerns over a draft directive proposed by the Commission
establishing common EU standards and procedures for returning irregular
migrants. As drafted, it would allow member states to detain migrants pending
deportation for up to 18 months. At this writing the European Parliament has yet
to debate the directive.
Human Rights Concerns in EU Member States
France
The new government of President Nicolas Sarkozy proposed new immigration legislation
in September. Adopted by Parliament at the end of October, the law tightens
the rules on family reunification and creates an in-country appeal for failed
asylum seekers detained at the border; the latter is in response to a critical April
ruling by the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) that the French asylum system
lacks effective safeguards. Parliament failed to improve procedural safeguards
for others at risk of return to human rights abuse, including asylum seekers
under accelerated procedures and terrorism suspects subject to expulsion. Inadequate safeguards were also highlighted in a May decision by the UN
Committee Against Torture (CAT) that France had violated the torture convention
when it expelled Adel Tebourski. The French-Tunisian dual national had been
stripped of his French citizenship prior to his release from prison on terrorism
charges and expelled to Tunisia in August 2006, before French courts and the CAT
had fully examined his appeal alleging risk of torture on return.
Also in May 2007 the appellate court in Paris increased prison sentences for nine
of the thirteen defendants in the so-called Chechen Network trial. A lower court
had convicted 24 people, 16 of them foreign nationals, of the broad offense of
criminal association in relation to a terrorist undertaking in June 2006. The
court ordered 11 of the 16 foreigners to be deported upon completion of their sentences.
A 12th man was expelled in February 2007 on order of the Interior
Minister.
The forced removal of irregular migrants topped the agenda for the newly created
Ministry of Immigration, Integration, National Identity and Development, which
imposed a quota of 25,000 expulsions by years end.
Germany
In June a Munich court ordered the arrest of 13 CIA operatives for their involvement
in the 2003 kidnapping of Khaled el-Masri, a German citizen of Lebanese
descent apprehended in Macedonia and flown to Afghanistan, where he was
imprisoned for five months and tortured. The chief prosecutor for Bavaria formally
requested that the German federal government seek to have the 13 extradited to
Germany for trial, but in September the Ministry of Justice dropped the extradition
effort because of non-cooperation from the US government.
A July report by the Council of Europe human rights commissioner accused the
German government of assisting in el-Masris abduction and noted that a German
intelligence officer visited el-Masri in Kabul in May 2004. Foreign Minister Frank-
Walter Steinmeier denied Germany had played a role in el-Masris kidnapping.
In August prosecutors reopened an investigation into allegations that two German
soldiers interrogated and mistreated Murat Kurnaz, a German-born Turkish citizen,
at a detention camp in Afghanistan in 2002. Kurnaz later spent almost five years at Guantanamo Bay. He was released without charge in 2006 and repatriated
to Germany. Prosecutors dropped the charges against the soldiers in May 2007
due to lack of evidence, but reopened the case against them in August with plans
to question two new witnesses detained with Kurnaz in Afghanistan.
A German parliamentary panel continued its investigation into possible human
rights violations during counterterrorism operations by the German intelligence
services, including in the el-Masri and Kurnaz cases.
The arrest of two academics in July raised questions about academic freedom and
free speech in the context of counterterrorism. The federal police arrested Andrej
Holm, a professor from the University of Humboldt, and another academic identified
only as Mattias B., citing their academic writings and accusing them of
being intellectual supporters of a militant left-wing faction allegedly responsible
for a series of arson attacks since 2001. Neither of the men is a suspect in the
arson investigation, but Holm is accused of meeting with one of the suspected
arsonists earlier in 2007. Holm was detained and placed in solitary confinement
until bail was granted in August. Charges of membership in a terrorist organization
are pending against both men.
The German government tabled a draft law in September criminalizing acts of
preparation of violent terrorist attacks, following the arrests earlier that month of
three alleged Islamic militants. The offense would cover training in a terrorist
camp or flight training, but would apply only where there is intent to carry out a
terrorist attack. Another proposed offense, instructions for an act of violence,
would apply to anyone distributing instructions over the internet on building
bombs for use in an attack, or to anyone downloading such instructions.
Opponents argue that criminalizing internet use infringes privacy rights.
Italy
The trial of 26 US citizens (25 alleged CIA agents and a US air force officer) and
six Italians accused of abducting Muslim cleric Hassan Mustafa Osama Nasr
(known as Abu Omar) was suspended in June so the Constitutional Court could
consider a complaint by the government of Romani Prodi that Milan prosecutors
violated state secrecy during their investigations. At this writing the Constitutional Court has not ruled on the complaint. The Italian government failed to forward the
prosecutors request for extradition of the US citizens, who will instead be tried in
absentia, represented by court-appointed attorneys. Abu Omar, kidnapped in
Milan in February 2003 and rendered to Egypt, remains there following his release
from custody in February 2007.
Italy continued to expel terrorism suspects under an expedited procedure that
explicitly denies the right to an in-country appeal. The UN CAT expressed concern
in May that the procedure lacked effective protection against return to risk of torture
and ill-treatment. In January Fouad Cherif Ben Fitouri was expelled to Tunisia
where he was held incommunicado for 12 days and allegedly tortured. He was
later charged with terrorism offences and at this writing awaited trial in prison.
Interior Minister Giuliano Amato said in March that 30 expulsion orders had been
made under the expedited procedure since its introduction in August 2005.
The ECtHR Grand Chamber was due to rule by the end of the year in the case of
Nassim Saadi, a Tunisian man the Italian government sought to expel on the
basis of unreliable diplomatic assurances of humane treatment upon return. Italy
argued before the Grand Chamber in July (with support from the UK government,
which intervened in the case) that the absolute prohibition on returns to ill-treatment
under the European Convention on Human Rights should be reconsidered
to allow a national security exception.
In October the Italian government adopted an emergency decree for the immediate
expulsion of EU citizens considered threats to public security. By mid-
November authorities had moved to expel more than 150 Romanians, and at this
writing Parliament is considering improved safeguards for such cases. The emergency
decree followed a brutal crime in October allegedly committed by a Roma
man from Romania.
According to the Interior Ministry, 12,419 irregular migrants reached Italy by sea in
the first eight months of 2007, a slight decrease from 2006. Migrants continue to
die attempting the crossing in unseaworthy boats: according to one estimate, 491
people had died in the Strait of Sicily by September. In a development that risked
discouraging rescues at sea, seven Tunisian fishermen were prosecuted for abetting
illegal immigration after they rescued 44 migrants and brought them to Lampedusa, an island off Sicily, in August. No verdict has been handed down at
this writing.
Malta
Malta continued to be criticized for its failure to rescue migrants in distress at sea
and unwillingness to allow ships carrying migrants rescued at sea to enter its
ports. In May a Maltese fishing vessel refused to rescue a group of 27 shipwrecked
African migrants, leaving them clinging to fishing nets for three days. The
Maltese government declined to rescue the group on the grounds that they were
outside its search and rescue area, and that it was Libyas responsibility to do so;
the migrants were eventually rescued by an Italian military vessel. Days later the
government refused to allow a Spanish fishing vessel carrying 26 migrants rescued
at sea to enter Malta, again pointing to Libya. The migrants were subsequently
admitted by Spain.
Irregular migrants who enter Malta are subject to mandatory detention in closed
centers for up to 18 months (one year in the case of asylum seekers), unless they
are pregnant women or minors in which case the maximum detention is six
weeks. Detention conditions remain poor, with overcrowding, malnutrition, insufficient
access to health care, poor sanitary conditions, and inadequate exercise.
In September the government established an independent board of visitors to
monitor detention centers.
The Netherlands
A new government took power in February. In June parliament approved the governments
plan to grant amnesty to up to 30,000 failed asylum seekers who had
applied for asylum prior to 2001. The move was seen as a clear break from the
policies of the former government.
The asylum system remained problematic. The UN CAT expressed concern in May
2007 that the accelerated asylum procedure under the Aliens Act of 2000 could
result in people being returned to risk of torture. The committee criticized the procedures
48-hour timeframe for not providing an asylum seeker enough time to
adequately access counsel; allowing only marginal scrutiny of appeals against rejected claims; and restricting the opportunity to submit additional documentation
and information.
A new law expanding state powers to investigate and prosecute terrorist acts
came into effect in February. The law lowers the standard upon which special surveillance
powers, including wire-tapping, can be invoked from a reasonable suspicion
to indications that a terrorist act is being planned; permits a public
prosecutor to designate preventive cordons within which persons can be
searched; and increases the maximum period of pretrial detention in terrorism
cases from 90 days to two years. Human rights groups expressed concern that the
new measures could violate the rights to privacy, liberty and security of person,
and fair trial.
A bill aimed at preventing acts of terrorism passed the House of Representatives
in March and is pending before the Senate at this writing. It contains provisions
limiting the freedom of movement and the right to privacy of persons suspected
of being connected to or supporting terrorist activities, including bans on residence
in a defined part of the Netherlands and association with specific persons,
and periodic reporting to the police. The bill has been criticized by rights groups
for failing to define specifically what constitutes a terrorist activity or support
for such activity. There is no requirement that a judge authorize the measures,
and judicial supervision would only be triggered if an appeal is lodged.
Poland
The opposition Civic Platform party won early parliamentary elections in late
October 2007 and formed a coalition with the Polish Peasants Party a month
later. The outgoing government blocked the EUs adoption of October 10 as the
European Day against the Death Penalty. The day was subsequently proclaimed
by the Council of Europe.
In April the European Parliament adopted a resolution that referred to the climate
of state-sponsored homophobia in Poland. In May the ECtHR ruled that the
Warsaw mayors decision to ban the 2005 Equality Parade contravened free
assembly and association under the European Convention. In June the Council of
Europe human rights commissioner criticized Polands policies towards lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender communities in a report on Polands compliance
with the European Convention.
Spain
In June 2007 the violent Basque separatist group ETA officially declared an end to
the unilateral ceasefire it had announced in March 2006. ETA claimed responsibility
for a car bomb explosion at Madrids Barajas airport in December 2006 that
killed two men. Spanish and French authorities arrested numerous suspected ETA
members during 2007, including its alleged top explosives expert and its logistics
chief. In October authorities arrested 21 alleged members of Batasuna, the
banned Basque separatist political party, on charges of belonging to a terrorist
organization.
In January the Supreme Court designated as a terrorist organization a Basque
youth group involved in street violence in the Basque autonomous region, overturning
a lower courts ruling. In May the National Court said the terrorism prosecution
of seven former staff at the Basque-language newspaper Egunkaria could
go to trial despite the prosecutors December 2006 recommendation that all
charges be dismissed. The decision reflects the involvement of two victims rights
organizations as civil parties in the case. The 16-month mass trial of over 50
members of organizations accused of providing support to ETA ended in March
2007. No verdict has been announced at this writing.
In October 2007 the National Court convicted 21 men of involvement in the
Madrid train bombings in March 2004. Three men were sentenced to between
34,000 and 42,000 years in prison for hundreds of counts of murder, while 18
others were sentenced to between three and 23 years on other charges, including
collaboration with a terrorist organization. Seven others were acquitted.
The regime that allows terrorism suspects to be held in incommunicado detention
for up to 13 days remains in effect despite ongoing international criticism. In a
July report on Spain, the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT)
recommended improving safeguards, including access to a lawyer from the outset
of detention, increased judicial oversight, and prompt and effective investigations into allegations of mistreatment. The government responded that existing
safeguards are sufficient.
There was a marked drop in arrivals by sea of irregular migrants9,400 people in
the first eight months of 2007 compared to 24,300 in the same period the previous
year. Interception at sea, including by FRONTEX, and increased forced
removals by Spain provide part of the explanation. By the end of August over
8,000 migrants had been removed. In July the Interior Ministry adopted new
guidelines allowing for the use of straightjackets and helmets to restrain migrants
resisting removal, after a Nigerian man died on a commercial flight while handcuffed
and gagged.
A March agreement with Morocco on readmission of unaccompanied migrant children
failed to include safeguards to protect children from potential harm and to
ensure their best interests. Hundreds of unaccompanied migrant children continued
to be housed in crowded emergency centers in the Canary Islands, where
they were subjected to undue restrictions on freedom of movement, lack of
access to public education, obstacles in applying for asylum, and instances of
abuse and neglect by staff. The CPT included one of these centers in a September
visit to Spain.
United Kingdom
Prime Minister Gordon Brown, who assumed office in June, was immediately tested
by failed terrorist attacks in England and Scotland. Two men drove a burning
car loaded with gas cylinders into the main terminal at Glasgow international airport
on June 30. A day earlier, police discovered two car bombs in central London
that had failed to explode. Of the seven people arrested in the UK in connection
with the attacks, three were charged, three were released without charge, and
one suspect died of burns sustained during the Glasgow attack. An eighth suspect
was arrested in Australia but later released when Australian prosecutors
dropped all charges.
In July the Brown government detailed new counterterrorism proposals, renewing
the attempt to extend pre-charge detention beyond 28 days, already the longest
in the EU. Other proposals included relaxing the prohibition on using intercept evidence in court, widening the already broad definition of terrorism, and enhancing
sentences for ordinary criminal offenses when committed for a terrorist purpose.
At this writing a bill has yet to be presented to Parliament.
Britains highest court, the House of Lords Judicial Committee (Law Lords), ruled
in October on four appeals relating to the system of control orders for terrorism
suspects. The court held that orders based solely on secret evidence not properly
disclosed to defendants violate the right to a fair hearing. It affirmed that orders
confining suspects to their homes for 18 hours a day breached the right to liberty,
but upheld the overall lawfulness of the control order regime, ruling that shorter
periods are acceptable, and rejected arguments that the orders are criminal punishments.
Government figures showed that as of March more than half of all terrorism suspects
arrested since September 2001 were released without charge. Nonetheless,
several high-profile terrorism prosecutions ended in convictions in 2007. In July
four men were sentenced to life imprisonment for conspiracy to murder in the
failed attacks on Londons transport system on July 21, 2005, while a fifth plotter
was sentenced to 33 years in November. Five others were convicted in April and
also sentenced to life for plotting to use fertilizer bombs against different targets.
In June seven members of an alleged terrorist cell pled guilty to conspiracy to
murder in 2006 and were sentenced to terms ranging from 15 to 26 years in
prison.
Some prosecutions raised concerns about improper restrictions on free expression.
In trials concluding in July, two men each tried separately and a group of
five students tried together were sentenced to prison terms ranging from two to
nine years for possession of terrorism-related documents. At this writing, two 17-
year-olds face similar charges in ongoing cases. In the first trial of its kind in the
UK, three men were given sentences, also in July, ranging from six-and-a-half to
ten years after pleading guilty to inciting terrorism over the internet. Two men
received eight and six-year jail terms, in October and November respectively, for
distributing terrorist material and other terrorism offenses. In November the first
woman to be convicted under the Terrorism Act was found guilty of possessing
articles likely to be useful for terrorism, including the Al Qaeda Manual.
Three men convicted in separate trials between November 2006 and July 2007 of
soliciting to murder and incitement to racial hatred during a protest outside the
Danish Embassy in London in February 2006, over the publication of offensive
cartoons depicting the Prophet Muhammad, were each sentenced in July to six
years in prison. A fourth man, convicted in February of incitement to racial hatred,
was sentenced to four years.
UK efforts to deport foreign terrorism suspects on the basis of diplomatic assurances
of humane treatment were delayed by challenges in the courts, with mixed
results. In February the Special Immigration Appeals Commission (SIAC) ruled
that Omar Othman (known as Abu Qatada) could be returned safely to Jordan
under the terms of a memorandum of understanding negotiated with the UK in
2005. SIAC approved the deportation of another Jordanian in November on the
same grounds, despite fresh evidence of torture in Jordan. The same court ruled
in April, however, that two Libyan terrorism suspects risked torture and a complete
denial of due process if deported, notwithstanding a similar 2005 memorandum
agreed between London and Tripoli.
In July the Court of Appeal ordered the SIAC to reconsider its prior decisions to
allow the deportation of three Algerians. The men were not permitted in court and
the reasons for granting their appeals are secret, but the Court of Appeal accepted
the SIACs conclusion that diplomatic assurances from Algeria would be effective.
The SIAC ruled again in November that the men could be safely returned.
In a welcome reversal of policy, in August the UK officially requested the release
from detention at Guantanamo Bay and return to the UK of Jamil al-Banna, a
Jordanian with refugee status in the UK, and four other former UK residents.
Another former UK resident, Bisher al-Rawi, was released and returned to the UK
in April, after four years in Guantanamo.