Filling the Leadership Void:
Where is the European Union?
By Kenneth Roth
What government is today’s champion of human rights? Washington’s potentially
powerful voice no longer resonates after the US government’s use of detention
without trial and interrogation by torture. The administration of President George
W. Bush can still promote “democracy”—the word it uses to avoid raising the
thorny subject of human rights—but it cannot credibly advocate rights that it
flouts.
As America’s influence wanes, China’s waxes. Yet China is hardly a leader on
human rights. Its growing economic power has enhanced its global influence, but
it remains at best indifferent to the human rights practices of others. Unwilling to
permit political pluralism or the rule of law at home, Beijing pretends that human
rights are an internal affair when dealing with others abroad.
Russia, with its internal crackdown on independent voices and its dirty war in
Chechnya, is going down the same perverse path. Its goal seems to be rebuilding
a sphere of influence, especially among the nations of the former Soviet Union,
even if that means embracing tyrants and murderers. Attempting to deflect criticism,
President Vladimir Putin went so far as to dismiss human rights as “artificial
‘standards.’”
In this bleak environment, the European Union and the world’s emerging democracies
could provide potential sources of human rights leadership. Each has
made important contributions, but none is performing with the consistency or
effectiveness needed to fill the leadership void.
With Washington’s voice diminished, the European Union today should be the
strongest and most effective defender of human rights. It is founded on human
rights principles and aspires to greatness in global affairs. But as the EU grapples
with its enlarged membership, it is punching well below its weight. Its effort to
achieve consensus among its diverse members has become so laborious that it
yields a faint shadow of its potential. Union was supposed to enhance Europe’s influence. Instead, when it comes to promoting human rights, the whole has been
less than the sum of its parts.
The democracies of Latin America, Africa, and Asia, some long established but
many new and insecure, have begun to stand up for human rights in certain international
dealings. Despite moments of promise, however, these governments
have yet to cooperate across regional boundaries to find an effective common
voice. Too often, they show greater allegiance to their regional blocs than to their
human rights ideals, greater solidarity with neighboring dictators than with the
people whose rights they have pledged to uphold. This tendency played a particularly
pernicious role in the United Nations’ new Human Rights Council, which, far
from improving on the discredited Commission on Human Rights, is threatening
to repeat its disappointing ways, damaging the credibility of the entire UN system.
Every government these days seems to have a ready excuse for ignoring human
rights. High-minded pronouncements occasionally ring from capitals or from
ambassadors to the United Nations, but without the sustained follow-through
needed for real leadership or change. Commitments are crabbed by caveats,
engagements by escape clauses. Whether it is the lack of punitive consequences
for Sudan’s criminal campaign in Darfur, the EU’s requirement of consensus
before taking collective action, China’s proclaimed deference to national sovereignty,
Washington’s preoccupation with Iraq and terrorism, or the developing
world’s sacrifice of human rights principles to regional solidarity, the excuses for
inaction overwhelm the imperative of decisive action.
The trend is bleak, but not irreversible. Whether Washington’s credibility gap is
the temporary consequence of a particularly lawless administration or a long-term
problem that will plague US standing for years depends in part on the new
Congress—and whether it repudiates past abuses, presses for policy change, and
seeks accountability for those responsible. No one pretends that such a turnaround
will be easy when the architects of those abuses still control the executive
branch, but it is essential if the United States is to redeem its tarnished reputation
as a defender of human rights.
Leadership will also be needed to steer China and Russia toward more responsible
behavior. To a large extent, Beijing and Moscow are the beneficiaries of low
expectations. As long as few insist that they uphold international standards at
home or abroad, they have little incentive to do so. Their new economic
strength—China’s booming market, Russia’s energy reserves—only reinforces
their ability to resist what meager pressure is directed their way while discouraging
other governments from even exerting such pressure. Meanwhile, China’s
growing foreign aid program creates new options for dictators who were previously
dependent on those who insisted on human rights progress. Changing this
dynamic depends on treating China and Russia like countries that aspire to global
leadership—on insisting that they respect human rights in their treatment of their
people and their peers, and holding them accountable if they fall short. They
must be convinced that the route to influence and respect is not through callousness
and thuggery but through responsible global citizenship. But they can hardly
be expected to improve if other governments’ commitment to human rights is so
cheaply sold for energy contracts or investment opportunities.
In Latin America, while a few countries have actively resisted human rights scrutiny,
others have played an increasingly important role in promoting the application
of international standards. Rare glimmers of hope can be found in Africa and
Asia as well. The world needs a true Southern defender of human rights—a nation
that rejects reflexive regionalism as an anachronism, a throwback to an era in
which authoritarian governments joined hands to deflect human rights pressure.
Today, as a growing number of governments stand for periodic election and speak
for the aspirations of their people, they should be guided in their dealings with
other governments by concern for the same rights that their own citizens
embrace.
As for the European Union, many of its members recognize the paralysis and are
searching for solutions. The European experiment has helped to bring peace and
prosperity to those lucky enough to live inside its borders, but the EU is falling
woefully short of its promise as a defender of rights around the world. Some
needed changes might be relatively straightforward and swiftly implemented,
such as modifying the flurry of rotating six-month presidencies to permit better
accumulation of expertise and pursuit of long-term strategies. Some would
require a change in tradition and bad habits, such as making EU institutions more transparent in order to minimize the gap between popular values and governmental
action. Some changes are more fundamental, such as easing the requirement
of unanimity for collective action in the sphere of human rights, to permit more
timely and effective action around the world. All require EU governments to recognize
that the status quo reflects an unacceptable abdication of leadership at a
time when such leadership is in dangerously short supply.
The Human Rights Challenges
There is no shortage of serious challenges to human rights requiring more effective
global leadership. As recently as September 2005, the governments of the
world, in an historic declaration, embraced the doctrine of the responsibility to
protect people facing mass atrocities. That commitment has rung hollow, however,
as Darfur remains synonymous with mass murder, rape, and forcible displacement
while the international community has managed little more than to produce
reams of unimplemented UN resolutions. The usual political cowardice when it
comes to military deployments to prevent mass murder accounts for some of the
inaction, but there has also been far too little pressure on the Sudanese government
to accept a real protection force. Predictably, Khartoum responds to such
spinelessness with rejectionism. As this report went to press in November, there
were signs that the Sudanese government might relent somewhat, partly in
response to new and welcome pressure from China, but it remained far from clear
that Khartoum would permit the deployment of troops with sufficient mandate
and capacity to stop the killings or that it would end its own murderous policies.
Part of the problem is that the US invasion of Iraq and the Bush administration’s
belated attempts to justify it as a humanitarian intervention made it easier for
governments like Sudan’s to build opposition to any forceful effort to save the
people of Darfur. Similarly, the promotion of democracy, a central human rights
goal, risks being discredited by the administration’s equating it with regime
change through military force.
Meanwhile, the importance of bringing mass murderers to justice is under attack,
particularly in Uganda, where the murderers are trying to trade impunity for an
end to their killing. Terrorism—the dangerous view that civilians can be legitimately
murdered for political ends—remains acceptable in too many parts of the world. Iraq has degenerated into massive sectarian blood-letting, with civilians
the principal victims. Ruthlessly repressive governments impose enormous cruelty
on their people in North Korea, Burma, and Turkmenistan. Closed dictatorships
persist in Vietnam, Saudi Arabia, and Syria. China is slipping backwards. Russia
and Egypt are cracking down on nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and Peru
and Venezuela are considering similar steps. Iran and Ethiopia are silencing dissident
voices. Uzbekistan is crushing dissent with new vigor while refusing to allow
independent investigation of its May 2005 massacre in its eastern city of Andijan.
In Zimbabwe, President Robert Mugabe would rather drive his country to ruin
than tolerate a political opposition. Civil war is reigniting in Sri Lanka, intensifying
in Afghanistan, continuing in Colombia, and threatening in Nigeria. Israel
launched indiscriminate attacks in Lebanon during its war with Hezbollah, while
Hezbollah often targeted Israeli cities with no military objective in sight.
The intergovernmental institution devoted to addressing these problems—the
new UN Human Rights Council—has yet to show any real improvement over its
ineffectual predecessor, the Commission on Human Rights. A central duty of the
council is to pressure highly abusive governments to change. That requires a
series of graduated steps that can lead to the deployment of human rights monitors
or public condemnation. Yet in a mockery of the high principles of its founding,
the council has so far failed to criticize any government other than Israel. The
most it has managed to muster is an “interactive dialogue” with UN investigators
and a planned “peer review,” forsaking its most powerful tool—collective condemnation
by fellow governments. This failure threatens to call into question
whether the United Nations is capable of upholding global human rights standards.
Proponents of “coalitions of the willing”—the antithesis of the UN ideal of
universal standards—will have gained the upper hand unless remedied by governments
supportive of human rights.
The US Government: Compromised Credibility
In the past, many would have looked to the United States to take the lead in
addressing these challenges. Though never a consistent promoter of human
rights, Washington has been a prominent and influential one. Yet its voice now
rings hollow—an enormous loss for the human rights cause. Quite apart from the
fallout of its ill-fated Iraq invasion, its credibility as a proponent of human rights has been tarnished by the abuses it practices in the name of fighting terrorism.
Few US ambassadors dare to protest another government’s harsh interrogations,
detention without trial, or even “disappearances,” knowing how easily an interlocutor
could turn the tables and cite US misconduct as an excuse for his government’s
own abuses. The cheapness of that excuse does not diminish its embarrassing
effectiveness. Nor can consolation be taken in the fact that the United
States is far from the world’s worst rights violator. The abuses it has committed
have done damage enough.
The last year dispelled any doubt that the Bush administration’s use of torture
and other mistreatment was a matter of policy dictated at the top rather than the
aberrant misconduct of a few low-level interrogators. The administration claimed
to foreswear torture but refused to classify mock execution by drowning—the classic
torture technique now known as water-boarding—as prohibited torture.
Despite the absolute treaty prohibition on cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment,
the administration claimed it could impose such abuse so long as the victim
was a non-American held outside the United States—a position it abandoned
only after the US Congress adopted the Detainee Treatment Act of 2005 by a vetoproof
majority. Perhaps the low point came in September 2006, when President
Bush offered a full-throated defense of torture, referring to it euphemistically as
“an alternative set of [interrogation] procedures.”
In the face of these developments and of growing resistance to these illegal techniques
by the uniformed members of the US military, the Pentagon in September
adopted a new Army Field Manual on Intelligence Interrogation which prohibits
coercive interrogation by its own forces. Yet the administration continues to insist
on granting Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) interrogators the power to use these
coercive techniques. The Military Commissions Act, adopted by Congress in
September, reaffirmed the absolute ban on cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment
but undermined enforcement by denying detainees the right to challenge
their detention and treatment in court.
Of parallel concern is the administration’s continued use of arbitrary detention as
a tool of counterterrorism. It has distorted beyond all proportion the traditional
power of warring parties to detain enemy combatants until the end of an armed
conflict. Wielding the concept of a “global war on terrorism,” the administration claims the power to detain, without judicial supervision, any non-American anywhere
in the world as an “enemy combatant” and to hold him without charge or
trial as long as it wants—even until the end of his life. The administration denies
the need to establish any link between the detainee and actual participation in
an armed conflict—a traditional restraint on this wartime power to limit due
process rights. The most basic rights are in jeopardy when a government asserts
such extraordinary power.
Indeed, the administration’s arrogation of power extends even to the claimed
authority to “disappear” people—to seize them surreptitiously without any
acknowledgment, any lawyer, any Red Cross visit, any contact with the outside
world. This odious practice, widely and correctly condemned by the United States
in the past when practiced by other governments, leaves friends and family
guessing why their loved one has disappeared and whether he or she is even
alive.
These abuses committed in the name of counterterrorism have only aggravated
the terrorist threat. The use of torture and arbitrary detention spurs terrorist
recruitment in communities that identify with the victims. It alienates those communities
from law enforcement officials who are trying to reach out to them for
tips about suspicious activity—a far more important source of intelligence than
statements squeezed abusively from a suspect. And it sacrifices the moral high
ground while eroding the principle that laudable ends cannot justify despicable
means.
This catastrophic path has left the United States effectively incapable of defending
some of the most basic rights. The United States can still promote freedom of
expression, association, or religion—where it largely practices what it preaches.
But when it comes to such fundamental rights as freedom from torture and arbitrary
detention, the hypocrisy renders effective advocacy all but impossible.
Chinese President Hu Jintao’s April 2006 visit to Washington made this limitation
evident. In a rare exception to his usual practice, President Bush mentioned the
phrase “human rights,” but he quickly specified that he meant “the freedom to
assemble, to speak freely, and to worship”—all worthy goals, all freedoms that 
the United States itself respects, but hardly a direct confrontation of the Chinese government’s use of arbitrary detention and abusive prison conditions to enforce
its grip on power.
One might hope that this effective silencing of America’s voice on human rights
would be short-lived—the product of a particular administration’s contempt for
any constraint on its power. Much will depend on steps taken by a new Congress
to remedy the administration’s worst excesses and by a successor administration
to reverse and punish them.
But the damage done is also more fundamental. Abusive governments now conveniently
equate the advancement of human rights with “regime change” and the
invasion of Iraq—an equation that Sudan has used with deadly effect to ward off
pressure regarding Darfur. Some Americans are doing the same. Sustaining
American will and capacity to promote human rights will require divorcing the militarism
of the neo-conservative vision from the laudable quest for democratic governance.
Popular support for defending human rights is likely to depend on separating
the administration’s imperial indifference to national boundaries—ostensibly
in the name of human rights but in situations that fall far short of those justifying
humanitarian intervention—from the essential duty to stand up for victims
of political repression and other abuses.
China
As US credibility on human rights diminished, China has often made matters
worse. Its burgeoning economy and thirst for natural resources have led it to play
a more assertive international role, but it has studiously avoided using that influence
to promote human rights. Instead, it insists on dealing with other governments,
in the words of President Hu Jintao, “without any political strings.”
Indeed, China’s position on human rights ranges from indifference to hostility.
Concerns about hypocrisy and blowback might lie behind China’s reluctance to
defend rights that it routinely violates at home—such as those that sustain an
independent civil society and the rule of law. Yet there are areas where such fears
are less acute and should not constrain China. At least since the repression of the
Tiananmen Square democracy movement, China has eschewed mass murder, let
alone mass ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. China thus could credibly defend people facing such severe oppression, such as the people of
Darfur or ethnic minorities in Burma. Yet it has done too little too late. Part of the
explanation is its expressed ideological discomfort with what it calls “interference
in the internal affairs” of other countries. Part is prioritization of its own quest for
natural resource over the survival of people whose land yields those resources.
Whatever the balance of considerations, China has done far less than it should.
There are signs that on certain matters, not always involving human rights,
China’s reluctance to meddle in others’ affairs might be easing somewhat. In
September, China seemed temporarily to suspend oil deliveries to North Korea
because of Pyongyang’s testing of a long-range missile. In October, after North
Korea’s first nuclear test, China reportedly threatened additional fuel suspensions
until Pyongyang returned to the negotiating table. In November China’s permanent
representative to the UN, Wang Guangya, applied some, though insufficient,
pressure on Sudan to agree to the deployment of a UN peacekeeping force in
Darfur. China is also increasing the number of troops it offers to UN peacekeeping
efforts.
Yet even though a UN Security Council resolution authorizing the deployment of a
protection force in Darfur was premised on Khartoum’s consent, China could
bring itself only to abstain on the resolution, not support it. It is bad enough that
China joined with other council members to reduce the international “responsibility
to protect”—a doctrine aimed at preventing mass atrocities—to asking the
murderers’ permission to protect their victims. But China has made matters worse
by refusing to use, or blocking, key sources of leverage to secure that consent.
Because China purchases a reported two-thirds of Sudan’s oil exports and is the
largest investor in its oil industry, Sudan’s economy is booming, emboldening
Khartoum to pursue its slaughter in Darfur and leaving it flush with funds to purchase
arms (sometimes Chinese) for the fighting. Cutting off that revenue would
make Khartoum far more susceptible to pressure to stop the killing in Darfur and
allow the deployment of a protection force. Yet while China has now shown itself
willing to invoke oil sanctions with respect to North Korea, it is not known to have
done anything of the kind for Darfur. Indeed, it has allowed the UN Security
Council only to ban travel and freeze assets for four individuals—two rebel commanders,
a Janjaweed militia leader, and a former army officer—none of them a senior government official. If China wants to avoid the impression that it is more
interested in continuing the flow of oil to its growing economy (some 4 to 7 percent
of which comes from Sudan) than in staunching the flow of blood in Darfur, it
should step up its public efforts to press Khartoum to cooperate.
The problem extends beyond Darfur:
• China remains a source of investment and military supplies for Zimbabwe
despite President Mugabe’s war on his people—the mass eviction of some
700,000 urban poor perceived as potential supporters of the political
opposition, the bulldozing of their homes, the routine arbitrary detention
and torture of opposition supporters, and the destruction of the country’s
economy. By disrupting their access to treatment, the evictions have had a
particularly devastating impact on tens of thousands of people living with
HIV/AIDS.
• By making some US$5 billion in no-strings-attached loans to Angola, China
effectively undermined efforts by the International Monetary Fund to promote
greater budgetary transparency to stop the government’s looting of
the national treasury—some $4 billion from 1997 to 2002, the equivalent
of Angola’s entire budget for social programs during that period.
• After Uzbekistan’s government forces massacred hundreds of demonstrators
in Andijan in May 2005, China greeted the country’s president, Islam
Karimov, with a 21-gun salute and announced a US$600 million oil deal. In
2006 China participated in joint military exercises with Uzbekistan and
signed a two-year cooperation protocol.
• China is more concerned about stemming the flow of refugees from North
Korea than stopping the grave threats to their lives caused by the ruthless
and economically incompetent government of Kim Jong Il. Despite North
Korea’s pervasive repression, China pretends that those fleeing North
Korea are all economic migrants and refuses even to cooperate with the
UN special rapporteur investigating human rights conditions in North
Korea or to allow the UN High Commissioner for Refugees access to
refugees congregating near the North Korean border. There is no evidence that China has exerted pressure on Pyongyang for its repression comparable
to the pressure apparently exerted with respect to its nuclear and longrange
missile tests. China does look the other way as some refugees flee
through it to third countries, but it could do much more.
• China is the most generous supporter of the Burmese military government,
showing more interest in securing access to a deep water port and
Burmese natural resources than in supporting the rights of the long-suffering
Burmese people. In many parts of southeast Asia, China is showering
aid on rights-abusing governments.
China is not the first government to place its own economic and political interests
above those of the world’s poor and unfortunate. Imperial powers have long done
the same and worse. But the Chinese Communist Party is, at least in theory, built
on an ideology of looking out for everyone’s basic needs. Beijing cultivates a profile
of friend to the developing world. It prides itself on creating jobs and relieving
poverty. Increasingly it is contributing foreign assistance. But some of its behavior
runs counter to those principles.
The repressive governments it supports are crushing and impoverishing their people.
Newly rich oil magnates in Khartoum may toast the Chinese from their posh
cafes along the banks of the Nile, but the uprooted and destitute people of Darfur
do not. Robert Mugabe may thank the Chinese government for his ability to cling
to power, but the hundreds of thousands of Zimbabweans rendered homeless by
his Operation Clean the Filth do not. The Burmese military, with Chinese help, is
building a splendid new capital and enjoys access to a vast array of weapons, but
the Burmese people live in squalor and fear. If China is to gain the international
respect it craves, it must shun—not subsidize—these governments.
It is hard to believe that the Chinese government wants to be known as the supporter
of tyrants, the exploiter of the impoverished. We would hope a government
that eagerly sought the symbol of international fair play and cooperation—the
Olympic Games—would not dispense with international solidarity when it comes
to the victims of its tyrannical partners. But change will come only if China is
called to task for its ugly actions. For decades, the Chinese government was so
repressive, its global role so limited, that few looked for anything from Beijing but hostility toward human rights. China did not disappoint. Today, we can hardly
expect better if no government is willing even to ask.
When pointedly confronted on human rights, the Chinese government has made
some concessions. At his meeting with President Bush in April, President Hu said
that, “on the basis of mutual respect and equality,” the Chinese government
would be “ready…to promote the world’s cause of human rights.” By abstaining
on Darfur, China allowed passage of UN Security Council resolutions authorizing
the deployment of a UN protection force in Darfur and the investigation of atrocities
by the International Criminal Court. It also, as noted, has applied some limited
pressure on Khartoum.
Yet governments that are the traditional proponents of human rights are so busy
cutting their own trade deals with China that they rarely voice concern about
Beijing’s inhumane behavior at home or abroad. If they were true to their principles,
they would condemn China’s rising role in global repression. Only by ensuring
that China pays with its reputation for its misconduct is there any chance of
encouraging better behavior.
Russia
Russia has followed a similar trajectory. After the collapse of the Soviet Union,
Russia was in too much disarray at home to play much of a role abroad. But as
the value of its gas and oil reserves has soared and President Putin has consolidated
power by neutralizing most other domestic centers of power, the Kremlin is
flexing its muscles. Determined to reassert its dominance within the former Soviet
Union, Putin’s Russia has cozied up to entrenched dictators such as Uzbekistan’s
Islam Karimov, Belarus’s Alexander Lukashenko, and Turkmenistan’s Saparmurat
Niazov, and done much to undermine democratic government in Ukraine and
Georgia.
For example, on the eve of the first anniversary of Uzbekistan’s Andijan massacre,
President Putin demonstrated his political support of President Karimov by inviting
him to Putin’s holiday residence. At about the same time, the lower house of
the Russian parliament ratified a military alliance treaty with Uzbekistan. 
Similarly, despite its considerable influence, Russia has not lifted a finger to ease
repression in Turkmenistan, even when the victims are Russian citizens.
This behavior abroad is matched by Putin’s conduct at home. He presides over
military forces in Chechnya that continue to use pervasive torture and to “disappear”
more people than security forces in just about any other country. He has
the power to rein in his Chechen proxies who are behind most of these abuses,
but instead he supports them unconditionally and heaps praise on their leader.
His Kremlin has transformed most competing centers of power—the Duma, the
provincial governors, the electronic media, the business community—into pliant
partners. Nongovernmental organizations, one of the few remaining independent
sectors, are threatened by new regulations that invite meddling and closures.
Unidentified assailants have murdered high-profile independent journalists, such
as Anna Politkovskaia, who was investigating atrocities in Chechnya, without any
successful prosecution of the perpetrators.
Like China, Putin has paid little price for dancing with dictators. Few other governments
refer publicly to his misdeeds. Their occasional grumbling is barely heard
over their groveling for energy deals.
Russia will persist in its misconduct if it continues to get away with it. The Russian
government aspires to global citizenship. Its membership in the G8 matters to it.
But the world’s most powerful democracies have not insisted that it earn its seat
at the table. They rewarded Russia with the G8 chairmanship in July and let it host
the G8 summit in St. Petersburg without any positive movement on its human
rights record at home or abroad. Its desire to join the World Trade Organization,
which seemed to be nearing fulfillment as this report went to press, depends on a
willingness to play by global economic rules. But it is wrong for the world to
accept Russia as a closed, authoritarian country so long as its markets are open.
Turning Russia around will hardly be easy, but it will be impossible if no one even
tries, and those in a position to speak out remain mute.
Democracies in the Global South
One potential source of human rights leadership might be some of the democracies,
both new and established, in the global South. Because these governments are non-Western, their rights advocacy could help to reinforce the fact that human
rights are universal values. Because they often live in the neighborhood of abusive
governments, their proximity could give them added clout. And because
many have emerged from periods of extreme repression, whether colonialism,
apartheid, or dictatorship, they could have special moral authority on human
rights. Some Southern governments have begun to live up to their leadership
potential, but principled stands for human rights have been too sporadic to fill
the leadership void.
Latin American countries have generally supported efforts to strengthen international
human rights mechanisms. Nearly all countries in the region ratified the
Rome statute and joined the International Criminal Court, and many have resisted
intense US pressure, including the threatened loss of substantial US assistance,
to sign bilateral agreements that exempt US citizens from the ICC’s jurisdiction.
More recently several countries, most notably Argentina, Chile, and Mexico,
actively supported the creation of the UN’s new Human Rights Council. Mexico
was then chosen to serve as the council’s first president, largely because of the
vocal role it has played in recent years in the international promotion of human
rights. The Mexican government has been a forceful advocate for protecting
human rights while fighting terrorism, drafting a resolution on the issue that the
UN General Assembly unanimously adopted and pressing successfully for the creation
of a post on human rights and terrorism within the Office of the UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights. Argentina has also supported human rights protections
within the UN system, using its seat on the Security Council to address
human rights crises in Darfur and Burma.
However, there are important exceptions in Latin America. Cuba has categorically
rejected all efforts to hold it accountable for its dismal human rights record. The
Colombian government has campaigned aggressively to undercut the authority of
the representative in Colombia of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Venezuela has championed the view that national sovereignty trumps international
human rights obligations.
Positive developments in Africa include Liberian President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf’s
call for the surrender for trial on charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity
of former Liberian President Charles Taylor, to which Nigeria’s President Olusegun Obasanjo ultimately acquiesced; and Senegal’s President Abdoulaye
Wade’s belated agreement, at the request of the African Union, to begin moving
toward prosecution for systematic torture of former Chadian President Hissène
Habré. The African Union—an institution built on a commitment to democracy,
human rights, and the rule of law—has also played an important role in Darfur,
although its protection force of 7,000 was inadequate to the task without UN help
which Khartoum has blocked. In addition, in June the African Peer Review
Mechanism of the New Economic Partnership for Africa completed a report that
was surprisingly critical of several aspects of Rwanda’s poor human rights
record—the beginning of what is supposed to be regular African commentary on
African human rights problems. Ghana’s human rights record has also been
reviewed.
In Asia, South Korea has emerged as a consistent supporter of human rights
efforts, so long as they are not directed toward North Korea, where Seoul seems
more interested in averting a governmental collapse than precluding crushing
repression of the North Korean people. Even there, in a significant shift, Seoul
voted in November in favor of a UN General Assembly resolution on human rights
in North Korea.
However, these governmental efforts on behalf of human rights remain the exception
rather than the rule. At the Human Rights Council, an outdated sense of
regional loyalty led several African and Asian governments that are ostensibly
committed to human rights—Ghana, Mali, Senegal, South Africa, as well as India
and Indonesia—to allow their positions to be dictated by the likes of Algeria and
Pakistan.
India, the world’s largest democracy and a potential leader, remains mired in a
Cold War-era antipathy to the promotion of human rights abroad. It has not forcefully
condemned Burma’s dismal human rights record. It went so far, during a
summit with China in November, to order Tibetan refugees not to publicly protest
on pain of deportation. However, on the positive side, India overcame its longstanding
allergy to outside involvement in South Asia and supported the deployment
of a successful UN human rights monitoring mission which helped halt
Nepal’s slide toward disaster.
South Africa, having seemingly forgotten that it was the beneficiary of strong
public campaigns against apartheid, continues to insist that only quiet diplomacy
is appropriate for addressing Robert Mugabe’s devastation of Zimbabwe’s people.
Mugabe himself was a strong opponent of apartheid, but South African
President Thebo Mbeki seems to be putting respect for his former political ally
ahead of respect for the human rights principles they fought for.
In sum, while democracies of the global South should be key partners in protecting
human rights, they have yet to show themselves ready to fill the leadership
void.
The European Union
With the United States having largely disqualified itself from human rights promotion,
China and Russia effectively undermining the effort, and the global South
not yet bearing its share of the burden, it is imperative that the European Union
rise to the occasion and assume a leadership role. After all, the EU is the world’s
leading collection of democracies, founded on a commitment to human rights
and the rule of law. Yet the sad truth is that the EU is nowhere near picking up the
leadership mantle. All too often, when the EU musters a statement about a
human rights problem, it is delivered by a Brussels bureaucrat or takes the form
of a written EU Presidency press release rather than a forceful public pronouncement
by a head of state or foreign minister. Such statements are rarely followed
by firm action or pressure to protect human rights. Due in part to structural problems
and in part to a lack of political will, the EU’s underperformance on human
rights has left a gaping leadership hole.
The EU role at the UN Human Rights Council illustrates the problem. The United
States did not even seek election to the council, a decision apparently based in
large part on fear that it would lose. Much of the burden for making the new council
live up to its ideals thus rests on the EU and its closest partners—governments
like Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Norway, and Switzerland.
The council is evenly divided between traditional supporters and opponents of
human rights enforcement, with several democracies in Asia and Africa holding
the swing votes. By working with Latin American governments to join forces with these undecided voters, European governments could muster a working majority
to address such problems as the crimes against humanity in Darfur, the Uzbek
government’s murderous impunity, and Sri Lanka’s reviving civil war. But the sad
truth is that the spoilers—the abusive governments that, despite pledges to the
contrary, seem to have joined the council to undermine it—have run circles
around the Europeans and their allies. In a seeming daze, the supporters of
human rights offered mainly defeatism and feeble excuses.
The EU and other governmental supporters of human rights never put forward a
compelling vision for the council’s treatment of abusive governments. They never
did the needed outreach and lobbying to dissuade swing voters from following
their spoiler-led regional blocs rather than their own stated human rights principles.
They never called for a special session on Darfur or the deteriorating situation
in Sri Lanka to expand the spoilers’ fixation on Israel. Many supporters went
so far as to take up the spoilers’ refrain, “cooperation, not condemnation,” as if
the threat of condemnation for gross abuses had nothing to do with securing governmental
cooperation in overcoming them. For these and other reasons, the
council left an awful first impression.
Making Decisions
The EU’s clumsiness can be attributed in part to its cumbersome decision-making
process. The need to cobble together a consensus among its 25 members (due to
be 27 when this appears in print) tends to yield delays and a lowest-commondenominator
position. It takes only one government with deeply felt parochial
interests—Cyprus on Turkey, Germany on Russia, France on Tunisia—to block an
effective EU position.
For example, Germany’s new Ostpolitik is undermining a strong EU human rights
position on Central Asia. In November 2006 Germany succeeded in its aggressive
push to ease even the modest sanctions imposed on Uzbekistan following the
Andijan massacre of May 2005 even though the Uzbek government took no meaningful
steps to meet the conditions originally set for lifting the sanctions. Rather
than allow an independent investigation into the massacre, as required,
Uzbekistan has offered only “dialogue” and an “expert seminar” on Andijan.
Meanwhile, its crackdown on those who dare to voice their dissent has been ruthless, with a dozen human rights defenders convicted and imprisoned on
politically motivated charges in 2006 alone.
To support its stance toward Uzbekistan, a country with huge gas reserves and a
useful airbase to German troops in Afghanistan, Germany has argued that sanctions
had failed to produce positive results—despite Germany having done everything
in its power to undermine the sanctions from the moment of their adoption.
The EU travel ban on high-ranking Uzbek government officials had barely been
announced when Berlin permitted entry into Germany for medical treatment one
of the architects of the Andijan massacre—former Uzbek Interior Minister Zokir
Almatov—who topped the EU’s travel-ban list. When several of his victims’ families
sought his prosecution at great personal risk, the German federal prosecutor
refused to arrest him and would not even open a criminal investigation. Nothing
that Uzbekistan has done justifies Germany’s capitulationist approach, yet
Germany seems to be dragging the EU along, despite resistance from a sizeable
group of member-states.
Germany has also taken the lead in presenting a weak EU position on Kazakhstan
by lending unequivocal support to the country’s bid to chair the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe in 2009, rather than using Kazakh President
Nursultan Nazarbaev’s desire for the leadership post as an opportunity to press
for long-overdue, concrete reforms.
Similarly in Nepal, following the February 2005 royal coup, the Nordic governments
wanted to condemn the coup forcefully and stop the military government
from using EU aid. While Denmark in particular played a positive role, other EU
governments, including France and Germany, weakened the EU consensus.
Britain also pursued an independent, at times accommodationist policy, citing a
historic relationship with Nepal. The result was that in the immediate aftermath of
the coup the EU adopted a less than vigorous stance that left Nepali civil society
feeling unsupported and discouraged.
The EU’s tilt toward the lowest common denominator reflects a preference for
unity over effectiveness. Achieving a common position is understandably important
for building a community of European nations. In addition, by banding
together, EU governments have more clout, and face less risk of retaliation, than if they proceed individually. But if the EU never acts beyond the wishes of its
most reluctant member, it will most often end up doing little or nothing. Some
more nimble and reasonable decisional process is needed. One option would be
to allow a supermajority rather than unanimity to achieve a common foreign policy.
But that would require each EU government giving up its prized veto over EU
action and the sovereign prerogative that it implies. Yet the status quo also
exacts a high price in terms of the repressed people of the world whose pleas for
help the EU leaves unanswered.
Even within the requirement of unanimity, improvements are possible. For one, at
the Human Rights Council, the EU seems to demand a consensus at an absurdly
petty level. Rather than signing off on a strategy and having faith in EU representatives
to pursue it wisely, EU members insist on signing off on each proposed
resolution word by word. This micromanagement makes it impossible for the EU
to respond effectively to changing circumstances or to engage in the quick diplomatic
give-and-take needed to build majority alliances.
When human rights are at stake, the EU could also treat its common position as a
floor rather than a ceiling. It is appropriate to insist that no government do less
than the common EU position on key human rights issues, but why should no
government—or group of governments—do more? There is no formal bar, and
occasionally it happens, for example with respect to treaties on the International
Criminal Court, anti-personnel landmines, and enforced disappearances.
Denmark even suggested this approach with respect to Darfur. But too often EU
governments use the lack of a strong common position to justify the lack of a
strong national one. That may make sense on, say, a tax or trade issue, but to preclude
national action for human rights, or action by a group of nations, beyond a
minimal consensus is callous—a prioritization of the collective over the effective.
It suggests that the EU, despite its ideals, despite its lofty pledges, has ultimately
decided that a weak uniform defense of human rights is more important than a
vigorous varied one.
One welcome exception to the unanimity rule was the decision in November 2006
by 14 EU member-states to co-sponsor a resolution on Uzbekistan at the UN
General Assembly after attempts to reach an agreement among all 25 failed. More
such initiatives are needed.
Our aim is not to return to a pre-EU era of 25 separate foreign policies. There is
strength in numbers. The relative weakness of the European presence in
Afghanistan—where many governments pursue their own bilateral projects without
the leverage and reinforcement that would come from a more coordinated
approach—highlights the costs of such disarray. Although the EU mission in Kabul
is well informed, its member-states hardly use it. As a result, Germany’s police
reform was not coordinated with Italy’s judicial reform (the latter ended in 2006).
Governments with provincial reconstruction teams do not synchronize their development
work. EU participants in NATO’s military operations impose their own
bilateral restrictions—German troops will not directly engage insurgents to protect
civilians, British troops will not take action against drug runners even if they are
supporting the insurgency, Dutch troops are reluctant to hold detainees—that
stymie efforts to provide a secure environment for the Afghan people. Yet there
are times when strong action by few would be better than weak or no action by
many.
Even when a common position is reached, the EU’s insistence on speaking and
working almost exclusively through its “presidency” often undermines its clout.
At the Human Rights Council, the tradition of the EU speaking once through its
presidency, rather than allowing member governments to chime in to second the
common position, leaves spoiler nations who have learned the value of repetition
to dominate the debate.
More fundamentally, it is difficult to imagine a less effective way to maintain continuity
or build expertise than the EU’s rotating blur of six-month leaders.
Sometimes, as in the case of Finland’s presidency during the critical first six
months of the Human Rights Council, the government seems to be in over its
head and to view its job as consensus-forging rather than leadership. Other
times, better resourced governments take the reins, but even they must squeeze
an agenda into an abbreviated six-month period. The tradition of the incoming
presidency as well as the European Council and Commission maintaining a role in
a presidential “troika” mitigates this self-imposed handicap somewhat, but not
nearly enough. Leadership rotation reaffirms the equality of all EU members, but
the refusal to assign long-term responsibility to governments—thus undercutting
the possibility of their developing expertise and long-term strategies—is a recipe
for dysfunction. In some cases, such as negotiations with Iran over its nuclear program, the EU has taken steps to overcome this disability by appointing a permanent
strong troika of Britain, France, and Germany to represent the EU. But
similar steps have not been taken with respect to important human rights issues.
To overcome this liability, the EU should recognize that its diverse membership
could be an asset rather than a procedural problem. Its 25 members have a diversity
of experiences and relations with the rest of the world which could be harnessed
through long-term “troikas of expertise” or “troikas of effectiveness”
rather than rotating “troikas of the recently arrived.” The EU’s clout would be
greatly enhanced if, rather than sending a new generation of fresh faces every six
months, the same three governments kept showing up at a trouble spot year after
year, representing a continuity of concern and a determination to follow through.
EU effectiveness on human rights is also hampered by a lack of transparency. The
promotion of human rights will often bump up against other governmental interests.
Developing and pursuing a human rights strategy in the back room makes it
difficult for the public to know how the EU resolves such clashes—particularly
since so many key decisions are taken in Brussels rather than national capitals,
and so few involve open parliamentary debate. Governments may find it convenient
to avoid embarrassing public scrutiny, but the consequences are felt in the
EU’s weak human rights commitments and mediocre performance.
These procedural failings cannot fully explain the EU’s failure of leadership on
human rights. Much of the problem is due to a simple lack of political will.
Promoting human rights can be costly and difficult, and many governments do
not want to bother—at least beyond lip service. But whether procedure or commitment
is to blame, the EU’s credibility as a principled promoter of human rights
is at stake.
To examine EU leadership on human rights in more detail, it is useful to look at its
response to several sets of challenges: the major powers of China, Russia, and
the United States; crises such as Darfur; other human rights problems; and
human rights issues within the EU itself.
On China
With respect to China, the EU has steadily muted its human rights critique, relegating
most public comments to bland written statements that are easily ignored.
The EU maintains a periodic human rights “dialogue” with China, but mid-level
officials carry it out, headed each time by a representative of a new presidency,
with no apparent benchmarks to measure progress from meeting to meeting, and
no tangible results. By contrast, Beijing has developed a team of dialogue specialists
to deflect criticism and obstruct any impetus for reform. As a result, dialogue
remains ensconced in the foreign ministry without the public airing that
might jeopardize China’s reputation and spur change.
The dialogue’s insignificance was highlighted at the time of the most recent EUChina
summit, held in Helsinki in September 2006, with Chinese Prime Minister
Wen Jiabao in attendance. On behalf of the EU presidency, Finland’s ambassador
to Beijing, Antti Kuosmanen, stated that human rights would “not be a dominant
point” at the summit and that human rights were a “sensitive and delicate issue
... because we are dealing with values.” In a stroke, the EU relegated universal
human rights standards to the realm of subjectivity. Predictably, business and
security issues dominated the agenda, as they did during Wen’s later visits with
British Prime Minister Tony Blair and German Chancellor Angela Merkel, as well as
French President Jacques Chirac’s subsequent visit to Beijing.
Similarly, in October the EU’s External Relations Commissioner Benita Ferrero-
Waldner and Trade Commissioner Peter Mandelson urged a “comprehensive
reframing” of the EU’s relations with China but never mentioned human rights.
Their proposal could be summed up as putting profits ahead of principles.
One area where this lack of pressure on human rights has been felt is internet
freedom. With no help from the EU (or, for that matter, the United States) to resist
Chinese pressure, internet companies have engaged in a race to the bottom,
doing the Chinese government’s dirty work as web censors.
There have been a few bright spots in EU-China relations on human rights.
German Chancellor Merkel, in Beijing for her first summit with Chinese leaders,
took time out to meet with Chinese activists addressing the problems and unrest
of the countryside. Despite Chinese lobbying, the EU resisted lifting its arms embargo on China imposed after the bloody crackdown in Tiananmen Square in
1989—a rare case in which the consensus rules facilitated a strong human rights
position because the embargo, originally imposed without an end date, requires
a common position to lift. But with China eager to have the embargo ended
before the 2008 Olympic Games, the EU still has not articulated the conditions
that must be met—such as a transparent and credible investigation into the
Tiananmen killings—and thus has squandered a potential source of influence.
On Russia
EU policy toward Russia is dominated by Germany, which will assume the EU
presidency in the first half of 2007. Berlin’s new Ostpolitik reflects an apparent
determination to engage at any cost, with no strings attached. As Russia’s most
important and respected interlocutor, the German government squanders its
influence by seeming to assume that achieving energy security—a major
European priority—is incompatible with challenging Russia’s disturbing human
rights record. German reluctance to engage critically with the Russian government
may also be influenced by feelings of guilt due to the millions of Russians who
died because of the German invasion of World War II, although why today’s victims
of Russian oppression should suffer because of their ancestors’ plight is
never explained. The EU has held semi-annual human rights “consultations” with
Russia, also at a low diplomatic level, but human rights have not featured prominently
on the broader EU-Russia agenda. As with China, the EU periodically
responds to individual cases or events such as the new Russian law on NGOs, but
human rights rarely enter the public discourse of senior officials. Atrocities in
Chechnya have essentially been forgotten, with no public demands for accountability
or even a word on the fate of the “disappeared.”
As during her trip to China, German Chancellor Merkel made a point of visiting
Russian human rights defenders at the time of her first summit with President
Putin. She has also spoken about the importance of human rights and the rule of
law in Russia. But no other European leader matched her statements or gestures,
and they were not reflected in any common EU position. France’s President Chirac
even awarded Putin the Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor. By contrast, on four
occasions in 2006, the European Court of Human Rights found Russia responsible
for violating the right to life because of the role of Russian troops and their proxies in the forced disappearance of people in Chechnya. European leaders are
missing an enormous opportunity presented by these court rulings to press
Russia to curb abuses and end impunity.
On the United States
As for the United States, the EU has a mixed record. US detainee operations in
Europe made European governments complicit in torture, arbitrary detention, and
forced disappearance. Evidence suggests that Poland and Romania allowed the
secret detention of “disappeared” suspects on their soil. While the US Congress
did nothing to investigate these operations, the European Parliament launched
an inquiry. The temporary parliamentary committee (TDIP) found it “utterly
implausible” that these activities could have occurred without the knowledge of
European intelligence or security services. It found similar official complicity in
the apprehension of suspects on European soil and their rendition to governments
that systematically torture, while also finding the US Central Intelligence
Agency “clearly responsible.” But Poland has stonewalled in the face of revelations
of its complicity, refusing to cooperate with various investigations into the
secret detention centers.
An Italian court, by contrast, has been more vigorous, issuing arrest warrants for
CIA agents and their Italian accomplices who were allegedly responsible for the
2003 abduction of Osama Mustafa Hassan Nasr, known as Abu Omar, and his
rendition to torture in Egypt. In November, in what it described as a “natural rotation,”
the new government of Prime Minister Romano Prodi replaced the head of
the military intelligence services SISMI, who is under investigation for his role in
the abduction. But the real test for Italy will be whether the government forwards
the court’s extradition requests to the United States, and whether it releases
information regarding its possible prior knowledge of the kidnapping.
As for US conduct outside of Europe, the EU has not offered any high-level public
comment on the findings of the UN Committee against Torture about US complicity
in torture and other abusive interrogation. And it took the EU years—not until
the EU-US summit in June 2006—to call collectively for the closure of the US
detention facility at Guantanamo Bay. That appeal was preceded by similar ones
from Britain, Germany, and Spain. Yet the EU has refused to make the humanitarian gesture of taking in Guantanamo detainees whom the US is willing to release
but who cannot be returned to their native lands for fear that they might be tortured
there. It was only non-EU member Albania that ultimately agreed to resettle
five Uighur detainees who were freed from Guantanamo but could not safely be
returned to China, as well as allowing Egyptian, Algerian, and Uzbek detainees.
On Darfur
In addressing the enormous crisis in Darfur, the EU likes to trumpet the funds it
has sent to support the underequipped and understaffed African Union force
(AMIS). However, it has done little to persuade Khartoum to accept the better
equipped and staffed UN protection force that the UN Security Council approved
in August. The EU imposed an arms embargo on Sudan during the north-south
civil war, but has done nothing to enforce the embargo since the Darfur conflict
began. Preferring engagement, EU members have resisted freezing assets and
banning travel for senior Sudanese officials responsible for the Darfur slaughters.
Far from matching US trade sanctions toward Sudan, the EU has seen its, and particularly
France’s, trade with Sudan increase sharply. That Khartoum has made no
progress in disarming the murderous Janjaweed militias or holding accountable
those responsible for atrocities, as the EU and UN have demanded, has done
nothing to spur the EU to a more vigorous response.
Part of the problem is that Britain and France, as permanent members of the UN
Security Council, have insisted that EU policy on Darfur be set in New York rather
than Brussels. To its credit, the EU—especially Germany and France—played the
key role in the Security Council’s establishment of a commission of inquiry to
examine atrocities in Darfur and the later referral of Darfur to the International
Criminal Court. But the important task of achieving justice for victims is no substitute
for immediate action to stop today’s murder, rape, and forced displacement.
As for enlisting others to pressure Khartoum, the EU raised Darfur with China in
advance of the China-Africa summit in November 2006, and German Chancellor
Merkel discussed Darfur in her meetings with Chinese and Russian leaders, but
the effort to enlist China and Russia in pressing Khartoum to accept a UN protection
force and reverse its brutal policies in Darfur has not been sufficiently sustained
or intensive to make a difference on the ground, where Khartoum and its
Janjaweed proxies persist in attacking civilians with impunity.
On Other Human Rights Issues
There are many other countries where the EU has dropped the ball on human
rights. Sometimes business interests have played an important role.
• In Burma, the EU provides assistance to the democracy movement in exile.
It is also a critic of the Burmese government and has imposed limited
sanctions. However, several EU members—Britain, France, Germany, the
Netherlands—have sizeable trade and investment interests in Burma, a
disturbing fact given the Burmese military’s use of forced labor in many
sectors of the economy. At a time when Burma’s neighbors have become
outspoken critics, many powerful EU states are relatively passive. EU countries
even saw fit to invite the Burmese foreign minister to the Asia-Europe
(ASEM) summit in September.
• In Thailand, the EU responded firmly to the military coup in September
2006 that overthrew Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra. But during
Thaksin’s five-year tenure, the EU expressed concern only quietly about
deteriorating rights conditions—including some 2,500 extrajudicial executions
in Thaksin’s war on drugs, the suppression of media freedom, abrutal
counter-insurgency in the south, and the downgrading of refugee protection.
Meanwhile, the EU sought a free trade agreement with Thailand.
• In the Middle East, the EU, which has human rights clauses in its trade
and cooperation agreements with most countries, should have played a
more active role on human rights. The main exception has been its support
for an international investigation into the 2005 car-bombing murder of
former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri.
• In Ethiopia, the EU strongly protested government abuses in the course of
the hotly contested 2005 elections in Ethiopia. It also backed those words
with some action, withholding or re-channeling more than US$375 million
in direct multilateral budget support to the Ethiopian government.
However, there has been no visible EU follow-up in addressing Ethiopia’s
continuing major human rights problems such as the repression of political opponents and the beating, rape, and extrajudicial killing of members
of the Anuak ethnic group in the Gambella region of Ethiopia.
• The EU played a positive role in pressing Nigeria to surrender former
Liberian President Charles Taylor for trial before the Special Court for Sierra
Leone, based on charges that he committed war crimes and crimes against
humanity by supporting the murderous Revolutionary United Front in
Sierra Leone. But when the Special Court for Sierra Leone asked that the
trial be moved to The Hague because of security concerns associated with
Taylor’s being held in Freetown—a concern seconded by Liberia—the EU
dawdled. The International Criminal Court promptly offered its facilities,
and the Netherlands agreed on the condition that another government
commit to detain Taylor if convicted. But at a time of potential instability in
West Africa, Taylor’s transfer was held up for weeks while the EU sought
such a government. Britain finally stepped forward.
• The government of Tunisia, intolerant of any entity that criticizes its record,
has for years blocked a series of grants that the EU approved to the independent
Tunisian Human Rights League, as well as grants that the EU
wishes to make to other independent organizations. Yet the EU has failed
to publicly protest this ongoing practice except in the mildest terms.
None of this is to deny that sometimes the EU plays a positive role, especially
when it comes to fielding operational missions.
• It has played a key part in forging a peace agreement in Aceh and mobilizing
a monitoring team, although it has not pressed the Indonesian government
to leave open the option of bringing those responsible for atrocities
during the war to justice.
• A European force sent to the Democratic Republic of Congo in advance of
the October 2006 elections provided an important boost to the efforts of
the UN peacekeeping force to maintain security, although Germany’s insistence
on bringing soldiers home for Christmas risked reducing troop
strength at a time when political tensions over disputed election results remained high. The risks were underscored by a new revolt in eastern
Congo at the end of November 2006.
• In October 2006 a European Parliament committee rejected a proposal put
forward by the European Commission for an interim trade agreement with
Turkmenistan, stressing that the parliament would approve such an agreement
only when “clear, tangible, and sustained progress on the human
rights situation is achieved” in Turkmenistan.
• Six thousand EU troops keep the peace in Bosnia, where the EU is expected
to take sole responsibility for a scaled-down international civilian presence
in mid-2007.
• In Kosovo, the EU is planning to take the lead in the international civilian
mission that is expected to deploy in 2007 when the territory’s status is
determined. Its focus will include justice and policing.
Similarly, the EU can be a strong force for human rights through the accession
process, where the requirement of unanimity for action tends to raise the bar for
the candidate state—since any EU member can object that the candidate has not
done enough to improve its human rights record—rather than stymie the projection
of EU influence. That positive influence was felt most forcefully over the past
year in the Balkans, notwithstanding Brussels’s failure to focus sufficiently on
domestic accountability for war crimes in the region. In the recent past, it has
been felt in Turkey as well, although the increasing reluctance of several EU governments
to admit Turkey on any terms has now undermined much of the power
of the stated human rights criteria for accession.
But these positive exceptions do not substitute for the lack of policy coherence
that handicaps the EU’s response to some of the most important human rights
challenges of our time. Finding a firmer and more consistent voice on human
rights is essential if the EU is to play a much-needed global leadership role.
On Human Rights at Home
Policy on human rights issues within the EU has been particularly disappointing
when it comes to the treatment of migrants and asylum seekers. The EU’s determination
to stem the flow of migrants at all costs has led it to ignore migrants’
rights and narrow their right to seek asylum in Europe from persecution in their
homelands. In January 2006, the Asylum Procedures Directive entered into force
with its requirement that all member-states turn back asylum seekers from an EU
list of “safe countries of origin.” Lack of consensus about which countries should
figure on the list—many of the proposed ones offer dubious safety—has so far
held up implementation, but several member-states already follow their own
national lists of safe countries.
In its effort to “internationalize” migration management, the EU has allied itself
with repressive regimes such as Libya, a launching pad for thousands of migrants
seeking protection and work in Europe. Libya-EU cooperation on migration is onedimensional,
focusing exclusively on blocking access to Europe, with little concern
for the rights or refugee claims of migrants. On the eastern border, the EU
signed a readmission agreement with the Ukraine in October requiring it to readmit
third-country nationals seeking protection in the EU, despite continuing concerns
about Ukraine’s abusive detention practices and barely functioning asylum
system. The two-year “grace period” before such returns commence is hardly
enough time to set the Ukraine’s beleaguered system right. Spain, which in 2006
received the lion’s share of arrivals by sea, is pursuing readmission agreements
with countries such as Senegal and Mauritania.
Most EU governments appropriately address terrorism offenses through the normal
criminal justice system, but their cutting away at procedural guarantees for
terrorism suspects risks damaging the entire edifice of the rule of law. The UK
passed a law that increased pre-charge detention from 14 to 28 days, and is
debating whether to try again to increase it to 90 days. The Netherlands, in pending
counterterrorism legislation, is poised to increase its pre-charge detention
from three to 14 days. As of January 2006, terrorism suspects in France may be
held up to six days in police custody with extremely limited access to counsel
while police interrogators can question detainees at will.
Some EU members seek to avoid criminal prosecutions at home by deporting or
extraditing terror suspects, often to places where they are at risk of torture. The
UK has insisted on detaining suspects without charge and attempting to send
them back to countries such as Libya and Jordan on the basis of flimsy promises
of humane treatment from those governments. It justifies this breach of international
law as necessary to fight terrorism, yet it has not empowered its prosecutors
to introduce court-authorized wiretap evidence at trial—one of only two
Western democracies (the other being Ireland) to take this extreme view. The
British government has never explained why the sacrifice of fundamental rights
should be considered before widely accepted law enforcement tools are even
tried.
The Netherlands continues to seek to extradite certain terrorism suspects to
Turkey, based on similarly unreliable promises against ill-treatment. Other governments,
including Switzerland, are now poised to adopt this dubious practice. It is
ironic that while the European Parliament rightly investigates European complicity
in CIA renditions to countries presenting a risk of torture, some EU memberstates
have embraced transfers to similar countries as a counterterrorism measure
at home.
Conclusion
Governments the world over will always be tempted to sidestep human rights,
whether in their treatment of their own people or their relations with other governments.
If their own values and institutions do not restrain them, external pressure
is needed. Those who indulge this temptation must be made to pay a price
until human rights are respected at home and find their proper place in the conduct
of foreign policy.
But unless a new leader emerges in this time of diminished US credibility, the
tyrants of the world will enjoy free rein. Both EU members and democratic governments
of the developing world have found safety in numbers, the ease of hiding
in the pack when the going gets rough. EU governments retreat behind consensus
rules, other democratic governments behind regional networks. Neither technique
for evading the burdens of leadership should be accepted, particularly at a time
when China and Russia are mostly leading in the wrong direction.
It is time to transcend these excuses. New leadership on human rights could
come from visionary governments of the developing world, a more nimble
European Union, or if the new Congress finds its voice, a US government that
recovers its ideals. One way or the other, the people of the world need meaningful
leadership on human rights. The urgency of this need should not be underestimated—
if the great treaty commitments of the twentieth century are not to give
way to hypocrisy and empty promises in the twenty-first.
This Report
This report is Human Rights Watch’s 17th annual review of human rights practices
around the globe. It summarizes key human rights issues in more than 70 countries
worldwide, drawing on events through mid-November 2006.
Each country entry identifies significant human rights issues, examines the freedom
of local human rights defenders to conduct their work, and surveys the
response of key international actors, such as the United Nations, European
Union, Japan, the United States, and various regional and international organizations
and institutions.
This report reflects extensive investigative work undertaken in 2006 by the
Human Rights Watch research staff, usually in close partnership with human
rights activists in the country in question. It also reflects the work of our advocacy
team, which monitors policy developments and strives to persuade governments
and international institutions to curb abuses and promote human rights. Human
Rights Watch publications, issued throughout the year, contain more detailed
accounts of many of the issues addressed in the brief summaries collected in this
volume. They can be found on the Human Rights Watch website, www.hrw.org.
As in past years, this report does not include a chapter on every country where
Human Rights Watch works, nor does it discuss every issue of importance. The
failure to include a particular country or issue often reflects no more than staffing
limitations and should not be taken as commentary on the significance of the
problem. There are many serious human rights violations that Human Rights
Watch simply lacks the capacity to address.
The factors we considered in determining the focus of our work in 2006 (and
hence the content of this volume) include the number of people affected and the
severity of abuse, access to the country and the availability of information about
it, the susceptibility of abusive forces to influence, and the importance of
addressing certain thematic concerns and of reinforcing the work of local rights
organizations.
The World Report does not have separate chapters addressing our thematic work
but instead incorporates such material directly into the country entries. Please
consult the Human Rights Watch website for more detailed treatment of our work
on children’s rights, women’s rights, arms and military issues, business and
human rights, HIV/AIDS and human rights, international justice, terrorism and
counterterrorism, refugees and displaced people, and lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender people’s rights, and for information about our international film festivals.
Kenneth Roth is executive director of Human Rights Watch.