FIFD P8K<IE8C@JD KF D@>E@KP:
Respecting the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
By Shantha Rau Barriga
Good intentions do not always make for good policy.
That is particularly true for people with disabilities, who are often stripped of
the most fundamental of human rights—the right to make choices about their
own lives—under the guise of “protecting” them from the challenges of decision-
making and living independently.“It happens to all persons with disabilities,”
Jennifer, a woman with a physical disability in northern Uganda, told
Human Rights Watch. “It is as if we weren’t human.”1
In Croatia, for example, Human Rights Watch found that more than 70 percent
of persons with intellectual or mental disabilities living in nine institutions
that we visited were there without their consent or the opportunity to challenge
the decision to keep them there. Living out grim and regimented days,
they cannot even take a shower in private and are deprived of the ability to
make even basic decisions, including what to eat and what time to sleep.
Many residents have been there for most of their lives. As one young woman,
Marija, told us, “Once you enter, you never leave.”
Meanwhile in Peru the government excluded more than 23,000 people with
intellectual and mental disabilities from the voter registry before the April
2011 national election. The decision was based on assumptions that people
with such disabilities cannot make decisions on their own, and that the government
was “protecting” individuals with disabilities from being penalized
for not voting.2 Pressured by local disability rights advocates and the
Ombudsman’s Office, the government invited people with disabilities to register.
But with limited time and poor communication regarding the about-turn
in policy, fewer than 60 people with disabilities were added back to the roster
before the election.
As these examples show, restrictions on legal capacity are based on law, policy,
accepted state practices, or arbitrary decision-making by state officials.
Government laws and policies restricting or removing legal capacity of persons
with disabilities reflect an understanding of disability as a medical
issue. As Human Rights Watch’s country-specific research has shown over the
last two years, deprivation of legal capacity profoundly impacts people with
disabilities, for example, when it comes to the right to health, political participation,
access to justice, and freedom from arbitrary detention. Indeed in
many countries, national laws recognize persons with disabilities as unequal
citizens, sometimes allowing them fewer rights than children.
The Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD)—the most
recent comprehensive human rights treaty—reaffirms that persons with disabilities
have rights, and challenges the inequality and discrimination inherent
in laws that infantilize individuals with disabilities.3 Disability is
described as long-term physical, mental, intellectual, or sensory impairments
that—because of physical, communication, and attitudinal barriers—limit
inclusion and full participation in society.4 Respect for inherent dignity, independence,
individual autonomy including the freedom to make one’s own
choices, and non-discrimination are among the CRPD’s core principles.5
The convention compels us to start with the premise that people with disabilities
have the same rights and equal recognition under the law as all others.
The CRPD also acknowledges that persons with disabilities may, in certain situations,
need support exercising their rights.
However, the convention does not spell out how the right to legal capacity
and supported decision-making should be implemented. As a result, disability
advocates, legal experts, and governments find themselves trying to interpret
the scope of these provisions, while providing rights-affirming alternatives
to old patterns of guardianship and substituted decision-making.
Disabled peoples’ organizations (DPOs) and persons with disabilities, who
were key actors in advocating for and drafting the treaty, must be engaged
and take the lead in this process. Indeed, the CRPD itself requires that states involve DPOs and experts with disabilities in implementing and monitoring
the treaty.
The Impact of Legal Capacity Restrictions
Losing one’s legal capacity can be devastating. For example, Milica, a
woman with an intellectual disability in Croatia, was stripped of her legal
capacity by a court decision and forced to live in an institution for approximately
20 years.6 She even had to ask her sister for permission before
marrying her husband.7
In Peru, Roberto, a 37-year-old man with a mild intellectual disability, went to
a regular school and now has a job, yet was denied the chance to open a
bank account because of an arbitrary decision of bank officials. His national
identity card is labeled “mentally disabled” on the back. His father told us,
“The bank staff looked at him strangely. He understood. He felt bad, I felt
bad.… Roberto doesn’t need to wear a sign on his chest [that he has a
disability].”8
In the United States, some immigrants with mental disabilities are unjustifiably
detained for years on end, sometimes with no legal limits.9 Why?
Because they do not get the support they need, such as legal representation,
to make claims against their deportation.
Despite the protections outlined in the CRPD, most countries still maintain a
system of guardianship for those deprived of legal capacity. Guardians are
usually appointed by a court and make decisions on behalf of the individual.
With such power comes plenty of opportunity for abuse, emotionally, financially,
sometimes even physically. What we once considered well-intended
protection for persons with disabilities often resulted in abuses in access to
justice.
To combat these abuses inherent in the guardianship system, governments
must adapt their laws to ensure that an individual’s rights, will, and preferences
are respected. So far no government has completed the complex transition
from substituted decision-making to a system of autonomous decisionmaking with adequate support mechanisms, as the CRPD requires. Some
countries have set out on the right track, and others should benefit from
these experiences.
Living in the Community
Persons with disabilities are at particular risk of arbitrary deprivation of liberty.
This is because their compulsory placement and confinement in an institution
may not be considered as “detention” under domestic law, especially
when—as in a number of countries—it is done under the decision of a
guardian.
“There, I was free,” Marija, a young woman with mild intellectual and mental
disabilities told Human Rights Watch about her experience living in a home in
the community.10 She now lives in an institution.
The CRPD recognizes the right to live in the community on an equal basis as
others, including the choice of residence and development of a supportive
and independent living arrangement.11 There are a number of examples of
how it can be done: Senada, who lived in an institution in Croatia for more
than seven years, has lived in the community since 2006. Although she initially
needed support from staff in her community living program, she now
lives alone, has her own key, buys her own food, and cooks. She has a job
and decides how she spends the money she earns.12 In other words, she lives
just like others.
Even long-term residents of institutions have shown they can successfully
transition into community life. For example, Milica and her husband, whom
she met in the institution, are able to cook, go to the market together, and
take care of their daily living needs.13 But because Milica has difficulty with
numbers, she receives assistance with financial matters such as paying her
bills and buying groceries.14 Based on interviews with former residents of
Croatian institutions, it is clear they took particular pride in their ability to live
in the community, even if they did need support to make that possible. For them, independent living has led to a better, more productive life and given
them a purpose and reason to live.
Political Participation
Disenfranchisement of people with disabilities, as seen in Peru, is not
uncommon. However, Peru is also an example of where local disability groups
and the Ombudsman’s Office used the CRPD to advocate for change. In
October 2011 the government reversed its policy and pledged to take prompt
action to reinstate voting rights to the more than 20,000 persons with disabilities
who were unable to vote in the presidential elections.15 However, the victory
was not complete as Peru’s civil code still limits the rights of some people
with disabilities to participate in the political process.
The practice of excluding those perceived as lacking the capacity to vote has
a long history, and currently most democratic countries have capacity-related
qualifications for voting.16 In Germany, for example, the electoral law prevents
some citizens from voting based on disability, including if someone is
“not eligible to vote owing to a judicial decision, … a custodian has been
appointed … and he or she is accommodated in a psychiatric hospital...”17
The constitutions of Thailand, Kenya, India, and Ghana limit the right to vote
for people with “unsound mind.” In Hungary the new constitution adopted in
June 2011 states that no one should be discriminated against based on disability,
but also permits a judge to remove the right to vote from those with
“limited mental ability.” Similarly, the Council of Europe’s advisory body on
constitutional matters, known as the Venice Commission, has been considering
amendments to protect the right to political participation of persons with
disabilities, yet to date has deemed acceptable laws and practices that
enable judges to restrict their right to vote.
The CRPD, however, requires governments to “ensure that persons with disabilities
can effectively and fully participate in political and public life on an
equal basis with others, directly or through freely chosen representatives,
including the right and opportunity for persons with disabilities to vote and
be elected.”18 The convention allows for no exceptions. The CRPD’s treaty body has recently said that disability-based discrimination should be prohibited
in all laws, “particularly those governing elections” and that “urgent
adoption of legislative measures to ensure that the right of persons with disabilities,
including persons who are currently under guardianship or trusteeship,
can exercise their right to vote and to participate in public life on an
equal basis with others.”19
There is not, and cannot be, a clear and objective measure of knowledge
related to participating in an electoral process. Already in any election, people
vote for a range of reasons, including preference for a candidate’s agenda
or their image. Some publicly state their intention to vote for candidates randomly
or to write in fictional candidates. En masse exclusion of persons categorized
as “disabled” clearly violates the right of political participation.
Especially when read together with its provisions on non-discrimination and
legal capacity, the CRPD makes clear that there should be no case-by-case
restrictions on this right on the grounds of disability. Governments can and
should do much more to honor the right of citizens with disabilities to participate
in the political process and provide them the necessary support to exercise
this basic right.
Informed Consent
Free and informed consent is one of the pillars of the right to health and to
legal capacity. For people with disabilities, this principle is often violated and
undermined by paternalistic attitudes and actions. For example, Human
Rights Watch found that women and girls with disabilities in Argentina are
infantilized in the reproductive health system, and stripped of their capacity
to make decisions about available services. One woman told Human Rights
Watch that some doctors thought her incapable of remembering to take her
daily contraceptive pill because she is blind.
The coerced sterilization of women and girls with disabilities is another issue
of serious concern. In Nepal, women and girls with intellectual disabilities
were sterilized without their free and informed consent. In these cases, the
decision to perform the sterilization was made by the parents in consultation with a doctor.20 Dr. Lalitha Joshi, mother of a young man with Down’s
Syndrome in Nepal, told Human Rights Watch: “If parents and society really
care for children with disabilities, there’s no need to sterilize them. We can
train them to look after themselves.”21
It is particularly common in institutions and other closed settings to deny
people with mental or intellectual disabilities the right to consent to decisions
that impact their lives. In visits to two psychiatric institutions in Peru,
for example, staff told Human Rights Watch that if residents refuse to take
their medications, they simply disguise the medications in meals or inject
them with the drugs.22 In some cases, as noted by the United Nations special
rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment, forced medical treatment can amount to torture and ill-treatment
without the person’s free and informed consent.23
The Way Forward
Legal capacity is a most fundamental right: it is what makes a human being a
subject in the legal system, rather than a mere object of the law. It is no coincidence
that the CRPD calls on governments and communities not only to
guarantee the rights of people with disabilities, but also to guarantee their
human dignity.
In transitioning to community-based services and independent living programs,
all relevant stakeholders—including governments, development agencies,
society, and legal and health professionals—should share the experiences,
models, and lessons they have learned. The continued leadership of
individuals with disabilities is critical to this effort, as is the activism of local,
regional, and international advocacy organizations. After all, the call to protect
the rights and dignity of people with disabilities is never more powerful
than when it comes from the very people who experience these injustices
themselves.
Shantha Rau Barriga is researcher and advocate in the Health and Human
Rights Division at Human Rights Watch.
1 Human Rights Watch, “As if We Weren’t Human”: Discrimination and Violence against Women
with Disabilities in Northern Uganda, August 2010, p.8,
http://www.hrw.org/reports/2010/08/24/if-we-weren-t-human
2 Human Rights Watch interview with Malena Pineda Angeles, chief, Program for the Defense and
Promotion of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, July 26, 2011, Lima, Peru. Jorge Yrivarren
Lazo, “DERECHOS PARA TODOS, Los derechos de las personas con discapacidad,” El
Comercio, October 18, 2011 http://elcomercio.pe/impresa/notas/derechos-personas-discapacidad/
20111018/1319463
3 Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), adopted December 13, 2006, G.A.
Res. 61/106, Annex I, U.N. GAOR, 61st Sess., Supp. (No. 49) at 65, U.N. Doc. A/61/49 (2006),
entered into force May 3, 2008.
4 Ibid, art. 2.
5 Ibid, art. 3.
6 Human Rights Watch “Once You Enter, You Never Leave”: Deinstitutionalization of Persons with
Intellectual or Mental Disabilities in Croatia, ISBN: 1-56432-686-1, September 23, 2010,
http://www.hrw.org/reports/2010/09/23/once-you-enter-you-never-leave-0
7 Ibid.
8 Human Rights Watch interview with Marcelino Velazco, father of three young men with intellectual
disabilities, Lima, Peru, October 22, 2011.
9 Human Rights Watch, Deportation by Default: Mental Disability, Unfair Hearings, and Indefinite
Detention in the US Immigration System, ISBN: 1-56432-665-9, July 25, 2010,
http://www.hrw.org/reports/2010/07/26/deportation-default-0
10 Human Rights Watch, “Once You Enter, You Never Leave,” p.1.
11 CRPD, art. 19.
12 Human Rights Watch, “Once You Enter, You Never Leave,” p.49.
13 Ibid.
14 Ibid.
15 RENIEC (Registro Nacional de Identificación y Estado Civil), Resolución Jefatural Nº 508-2011-
JNAC/RENIEC )October 10, 2011),
http://www.reniec.gob.pe/portal/TransparenciaAdm?id=005&anno=&valorInicial=16&valorMen
u=13 (accessed November 16, 2011).
16 Marta Mendiondo, Pamela Teaster and Susan Lawrence, “Public Guardianship: In the Best
Interests of Incapacitated People?,” August 10, 2011, ISBN: 0313378274.
17 Federal Electoral Law (Bundewahlgesetz, BGW), s. 1. art. 13.
18 CRPD, art. 29a.
19 Concluding observations of the UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
regarding Tunisia; Fifth session, April 11-15, 2011, paras. 13 and 35.
20 Human Rights Watch, Futures Stolen: Barriers to Education for Children with Disabilities in
Nepal, August 2011, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2011/08/24/futures-stolen.
21 Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Lalitha Joshi, gynecologist and president of the Down’s
Syndrome Association, Kathmandu, Nepal, March 30, 2011.
22 Human Rights Watch interview with staff members at Hospital Hermilio Valdizan, Lima, Peru,
October 25, 2011. Human Rights Watch interview with a nurse at Hospital Victor Larco Herrera,
Lima, Peru, October 26, 2011.
23 Report of the special rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment,
Manfred Nowak. A/63/175, July 28, 2008.