Georgia
Georgia’s human rights record remained uneven in 2010. The government evicted
hundreds of internally displaced persons (IDPs) from state-owned collective centers
in Tbilisi, the capital, often leaving them homeless or without adequate compensation.
State actors hindered activists’ right to assembly and attacked and
harassed journalists and opposition newspapers. Municipal elections on May 30
largely met international standards, but observers also identified significant
shortcomings.
More than two years after the August 2008 Georgian-Russian conflict over South
Ossetia, the government has not effectively investigated international human
rights and humanitarian law violations. Russia strengthened its military presence
in and effective control over Georgia’s breakaway regions. The European Union
started negotiations with Georgia to deepen economic and political ties.
Forced Evictions of Internally Displaced People
Since June the authorities have evicted hundreds of IDPs from state-owned temporary
collective centers in Tbilisi, supposedly to provide them with durable housing
solutions. The authorities failed to respect international standards regarding
evictions: they did not engage in genuine consultation with IDPs, did not provide
reasonable advance notice of eviction, and failed to provide adequate alternatives.
Some IDPs received no alternative housing; others were sent to homes in
remote regions, some of which had damaged roofs or lacked electricity or gas.
Georgia has some 246,000 IDPs as a legacy of conflicts in the 1990s and in 2008.
Over 40 percent live in 1,658 state or private collective centers, 515 of which are
in Tbilisi.
In June officials gave IDPs verbal warnings five days prior to eviction. August 2
amendments to Ministry of Interior Decree No. 747 abolished the five-day warning
requirement. Thereafter some IDPs received only a few hours’ warning prior to
eviction. The evictions violated Georgia’s Law on the Internally Displaced, which
prohibits the removal of IDPs without written consent and the placement in
homes inferior to their current residences.
The Ministry of Refugees and Accommodation says it offered those evicted in
August either financial compensation or housing in rural areas. Many IDPs
refused to relocate to rural areas citing lack of employment opportunities. They
received no financial compensation and became homeless after eviction.
Freedom of Assembly and Police Violence
The authorities interfered with peaceful assembly and failed to meaningfully
investigate past excessive use of force by law enforcement. On August 14, police
arrested Georgian activists and writers Irakli Kakabadze, Shota Gagarin, and
Aleksi Chigvinadze as they peacefully protested on George W. Bush Street in
Tbilisi. Police charged the three with disobeying police orders and released them
the next day after a court fined each of them GEL400 (US$220). At the closed
hearing, the judge heard only police evidence and refused to watch video showing
the men cooperating with police at the moment of arrest. Kakabadze alleged
that police verbally and physically abused him in the police car. An
Ombudsman’s representative visited Kakabadze in detention and confirmed
injuries on his shoulder and arm.
On November 23, 2009, police arrested Dachi Tsagauri, Jaba Jishkariani, and Irakli
Kordzaia– activists from a pro-opposition youth group–as they protested government
policies near the parliament. At the time of arrest police told the activists
that they had violated the law on rallies, which bans holding rallies in a 20-meter
radius from the Parliament building. However, the arrest protocol indicated that
the protestors stood 30 meters away from the building. The Tbilisi City Court
found the men in violation of rules for holding a rally and for resisting police and
fined each GEL500 (US$280). The court did not consider video footage from journalists
present at the rally showing that the activists had not obstructed movement
of pedestrians and had obeyed police orders at the moment of arrest.
On August 19, 2010, police detained two opposition activists allegedly for resisting
police orders also outside parliament, where IDPs and others peacefully
protested the spate of evictions. The protestors had informed the city municipality
about the rally in advance and did not block the road. The Tbilisi City Court
fined the activists GEL400 (US$220) each for resisting police orders.
The government has refused to launch a comprehensive investigation into events
of November 7, 2007, when police used excessive force against largely peaceful
demonstrations in Tbilisi, resulting in at least 500 injured. The authorities have
also failed to conduct an effective investigation into a June 15, 2009 police attack
against 50 opposition supporters outside the police headquarters, when at least
17 demonstrators were injured. The government has also failed to conduct a thorough
investigation into the March 2006 operation to quell a riot in Tbilisi Prison
No. 5, which left seven prisoners dead and dozens injured.
Municipal Elections
National municipal elections took place on May 30, 2010 to elect 63 local councils,
including the mayor of Tbilisi, who was directly elected for the first time. The
ruling National Movement party won an overwhelming majority in all municipalities.
International observers concluded that the polls marked progress towards
international standards, but significant shortcomings remained, including legal
deficiencies, unlimited campaigning and the use of administrative resources by
some public officials, and isolated cases of election-day fraud.
Lack of Accountability for Laws of War Violations
Over two years since the Georgian-Russian conflict over South Ossetia, Georgian
authorities have yet to ensure a comprehensive investigation into and accountability
for international human rights and humanitarian law violations by their
forces.
During the war the Georgian military used indiscriminate force, including firing
multiple rocket launchers, an indiscriminate weapon that should not be used in
civilian areas. The military also used cluster munitions against the Russian military,
including in civilian-populated Georgian territories adjacent to the administrative
border with South Ossetia.
The Office of the Prosecutor at the International Criminal Court—to which Georgia
is a party—continued with its preliminary examination of the situation and sent
delegations to Russia in March and to Georgia in June 2010 to obtain additional
information on domestic proceedings.
Some 20,000 ethnic Georgians from South Ossetia remain displaced.
Media Freedom
The media environment remains mixed, with diverse print media, but nationwide
television broadcasting limited to the state-owned Public Broadcaster and progovernment
Rustavi 2 and Imedi stations. Transparency of media ownership
remains a concern.
Several journalists alleged pressure and attacks. On June 25, police assaulted
Gori-based Trialeti television journalist Lado Bichashvili and cameraman Imeda
Gogoladze as they filmed the removal of a Stalin statue from the city center.
About eight policemen beat the journalists and confiscated their camera, which
they later returned with materials deleted.
In July Vakhtang Komakhidze, a long-time Georgian investigative journalist,
received asylum in Switzerland, citing threats by the authorities. The threats
allegedly intensified after Komakhidze started work on an investigative film
regarding the August 2008 war in South Ossetia.
In February the opposition newspaper Guria News, published in Western Georgia,
alleged that local authorities threatened and intimidated the private distributors
who distribute the newspaper. On February 8, police briefly detained Guria News
correspondent Irakli Dolidze as he photographed a police official, confiscating his
photo camera and cell phone temporarily.
On November 25, 2009, the Ministry of Interior’s Special Operations Department
called in Tedo Jorbenadze, head of the investigations unit at the independent
Batumi-based weekly newspaper Batumelebi, and threatened to publish photos
of near-naked men, Jorbenadze allegedly among them, if he refused to cooperate
with intelligence services.
Criminal Justice System
Prison overcrowding remains a problem, leading to poor conditions. Courts’ low
number of acquittals is a key factor in overcrowding. In September the Council of
Europe’s Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment published a report on its February visit to Georgia, noting
a number of positive developments, but expressing concern regarding little or
no progress on overcrowding in Georgian prisons and lack of meaningful activities
for prisoners.
In February Georgia restored the minimum age of criminal responsibility to 14,
after reducing it to 12 in 2008, making it consistent with the country’s international
commitments. In 2009 the state trained 430 investigators in juvenile interrogation
techniques and made the presence of a lawyer and a legal guardian mandatory
during interrogation.
Key International Actors
The United States and the EU deepened their engagement and economic ties with
Georgia. Meanwhile, Russia continued to occupy Georgia’s breakaway regions of
South Ossetia and Abkhazia and strengthened its military presence in the region
by establishing a military base and placing an advanced surface-to-air missile
system in Abkhazia.
In July US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton visited Georgia and met with women
leaders from civil society and government. She also met President Mikheil
Saakashvili to emphasize the US commitment to Georgia’s territorial integrity and
pledging support for democracy and economy. Working groups met in Tbilisi and
Washington in 2010 to discuss the implementation of the U.S.-Georgia Charter on
Strategic Partnership, signed in January 2009, envisaging increased cooperation,
including on strengthening human rights.
The April 2010 European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) Action Plan progress report
commended Georgia for improvements in judicial reform and fighting corruption,
but raised concerns on several issues including: prison overcrowding, minority
rights, and media transparency. In July 2010 Georgia and the EU began negotiations
for an Association Agreement, which enhances the ENP, aiming at strengthened
economic and political relations.
A report on Georgia by the Council of Europe’s European Commission against
Racism and Intolerance issued in June expressed concern about discrimination against ethnic and religious minorities and the absence of mechanisms for
addressing abuses.
In September Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights Thomas
Hammarberg published a report on disappearances during and after the August
2008 armed conflict, calling for impartial investigations by both sides. In October
Hammarberg published another report on human rights issues following the conflict,
including the right to return, rights of displaced persons to care and support,
and protection and release of detainees.
In August the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees expressed concern
about forced evictions of IDPs in Tbilisi.