G<FI>@8
Georgia’s human rights record remained uneven in 2011. The government used
excessive force to disperse anti-government protests in Tbilisi, the capital, in
May, and prosecuted dozens in misdemeanor trials without full respect for due
process rights. The authorities failed to effectively investigate these events and
past instances of excessive use of force. Other concerns include restrictions on
freedom of association and media, as well as forced evictions of internally displaced
persons (IDPs) living in state-owned temporary housing.
The United States and the European Union deepened their political and economic
ties with Georgia but failed to use their leverage to secure human rights
improvements.
Freedom of Assembly and Police Violence
As in past years, the authorities interfered with freedom of assembly. On May
26, 2011, police used water cannons, tear gas, and rubber bullets to disperse
anti-government protests in Tbilisi, 15 minutes after the rally permit expired.
Police pursued fleeing demonstrators, detaining some 160, and beating many,
including those who offered no resistance. Police also interfered with the work
of Georgian and foreign journalists, verbally and physically assaulting at least
ten and detaining two. Police also took some journalists’ press cards and damaged
or confiscated several reporters’ equipment.
In summary trials the Tbilisi city court convicted over 90 of the protestors
detained on May 26 of disobeying police orders, sentencing them to up to 30
days administrative detention. In most cases, the court relied exclusively on
police testimonies to convict demonstrators and did not take any action in
response to defendants’ visible injuries.
In July a closed Ministry of Interior internal investigation into the May 26 events
led to administrative punishments for 16 police officers including dismissal of
four for excessive use of force. The authorities did not investigate allegations of
ill-treatment by police.
Authorities’ failure to fully address excessive use of force by police was further
tainted by the continued lack of effective investigations into past instances of
abuse, including the events of November 7, 2007, when police used excessive
force against largely peaceful protestors in Tbilisi, injuring at least 500, and the
June 15, 2009 police attack against 50 opposition supporters outside police
headquarters, in which at least 17 demonstrators were injured.
Administrative (Misdemeanor) Detentions
In 2010 the government increased the maximum misdemeanor sentence from
30 to 90 days. Although the sentence is equivalent to a criminal penalty,
detainees do not have access to full due process rights. Although defense
counsel is permitted, some detainees had difficulties accessing a lawyer in part
because they are not allowed to inform their families of their detention. Lawyers
who act for those facing administrative charges have inadequate time (sometimes
as little as 10 to 15 minutes) to prepare a defense. Defendants also often
cannot present evidence or call witnesses in court. In 2010 the authorities
decreased the appeal period for administrative sentences from ten to two days,
although court records become available only three days after a trial.
Administrative detainees stay in Ministry of Interior holding cells, which are
unsuitable for detention over 72 hours, with inadequate access to exercise and
hygienic and medical care.
Forced Evictions of Internally Displaced People
Beginning in June 2010 the authorities evicted thousands of IDPs from stateowned
temporary collective centers in Tbilisi, supposedly to provide them with
durable housing solutions. The authorities failed to respect international standards
regarding evictions: they did not engage in genuine consultation with
IDPs and failed to agree on adequate alternative housing or compensation prior
to eviction. Georgia has some 246,000 IDPs as a legacy of conflicts in the
1990s and in 2008.
In late 2010, in consultation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the government adopted guidelines on eviction procedures, which resulted in some improvements, but the process still failed
to meet international standards.
The authorities evicted hundreds of families in February and August 2011. Many
families refused resettlement to remote areas, fearing limited employment
opportunities, but were still forced out of collective centers.
Labor Rights Violations
In August 2011, 147 workers of the Kutaisi Hercules Steel plant, a Georgian-
Indian joint venture in western Georgia, formed a trade union and elected union
representatives. On September 13 the union launched a strike to demand better
working conditions and higher salaries. Although the strike was in accordance
with Georgian law, two days later police detained over a dozen strikers demonstrating
near the front of the plant. Police released the strikers several hours
later, but some reported being forced to sign a statement that they would not
participate in further protests.
On September 18, police stopped three union members in various parts of the
city and insisted that they each take a drug or alcohol test. The men refused,
were arrested for disobeying police orders, and sentenced to 10 days administrative
detention. The workers believe the charges were an attempt to intimidate
them and other workers.
The government abolished the labor inspectorate in 2006, apparently to limit
government interference with business, and no other supervisory agency has
been created to ensure compliance with labor laws.
Lack of Accountability for Laws of War Violations
Over three years after the Georgian-Russian conflict over South Ossetia,
Georgian authorities have yet to ensure a comprehensive investigation into,
and accountability for, international human rights and humanitarian law violations
by their forces. During the war the Georgian military used indiscriminate
force including firing multiple rocket launchers, an indiscriminate weapon that
should not be used in civilian areas.
The Office of the Prosecutor at the International Criminal Court—to which
Georgia is a party—continued with its preliminary examination of the situation.
Freedom of Media
The media environment remains mixed, print media is diverse, but nationwide
television broadcasting is limited to the state-owned Public Broadcaster and
pro-government Rustavi 2 and Imedi stations. In a positive step, parliament
passed a bill in April mandating that broadcasting companies make ownership
information public.
In July police arrested four photo journalists—Zurab Kurtsikidze, a European
Press Agency photographer; Giorgi Abdaladze, a contract photographer with the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs; Irakli Gedenidze, President Mikhail Saakashvili’s
personal photographer; and Gedenidze’s wife Natia—on espionage charges
related to passing sensitive information to Russia. The case was classified as
“secret” and the evidence never declassified. Local and international groups
considered the charges politically motivated, allegedly in retribution for coverage
of the May 26 events. Two weeks later a court released the journalists on
conditional sentences of up to three years, in plea bargain deals with prosecutors.
In June the Ministry of Finance started simultaneous unannounced tax audits of
several firms owned by Georgia’s largest media group, Media Palitra, which
also owns numerous newspapers, including the popular weekly Kviris Palitra, a
radio station, eleven magazines, the news agency Interpressnews and the
online Palitra TV. Media and civil society groups believed the audits were
designed to harass Media Palitra in retaliation for its media outlets’ extensive
coverage of the May 26 crackdown. In August the audit was suspended indefinitely.
Criminal Justice System
Overcrowding in prisons remains a problem, leading to poor prison conditions.
The Ombudsman’s Office documented numerous cases of ill-treatment in prisons.
In prison No. 2 in Kutaisi, inmates are forced to spend up to 24 hours in an empty two to three square meter cell wearing only their underwear as punishment
for prison rules violations. The ombudsman called on the prosecutor’s
office to investigate.
In a June report, Thomas Hammarberg, Council of Europe commissioner for
human rights, welcomed the government’s efforts to reform the justice system,
but urged the authorities to adopt a more human rights oriented criminal justice
policy.
Key International Actors
The US and the EU deepened their engagement and economic ties with Georgia.
While both actors raised human rights concerns, neither used the process
toward upgraded relations to secure concrete human rights improvements.
The US, the EU, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE),
and other governments and institutions called on the Georgian authorities to
investigate police conduct during the May 26 protests.
Dunja Mijatovic, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe representative
on freedom of the media, expressed concern about abuse, detention,
and questioning of journalists during the May protests.
The Democracy Working Group of the US-Georgia Charter on Strategic
Partnership met in Tbilisi in April to discuss progress and cooperation on democratic
reforms in Georgia. The US committed over US$90 million to support
democracy and good governance in Georgia.
In an April resolution on Georgia’s fulfillment of its obligations as a Council of
Europe member, PACE welcomed the “significant progress” Georgia had made
to meet its obligations, but expressed concern about the administration of justice
and fair trial norms.
In its May European Neighborhood Policy progress report, the EU commended
Georgia for judicial reforms, but expressed concerns about failures to guarantee
political and media pluralism and protection of labor rights and freedom of
association.
In July the European Commission adopted the Annual Action Programme for
Georgia, committing over € 50 million ($ 70 million) to support the country’s
criminal justice system, conflict resolution efforts, and IDPs.