Georgia
Georgia’s new president, Mikheil Saakashvili, was elected in January
2004, after campaigning on a platform of radical reform. His predecessor,
Eduard Shevadnadze, was ousted in November 2003, as a result of
peaceful mass demonstrations against fraudulent parliamentary elections.
In March 2004, a coalition of parties aligned with Saakashvili won
a landslide victory in repeat parliamentary elections. With this strong
mandate, the new government began a campaign against corruption and
for territorial integrity.
The government’s reform agenda is delivering mixed results on human
rights. The environment for religious freedom—a long standing concern—
has improved. However, torture and ill-treatment in pre-trial
detention remain widespread. Chechen refugees also remain vulnerable
to state discrimination and abuse by Georgian security forces.
Mixed Results on Reform
In February, the new government rushed several constitutional changes
through Parliament. One change empowered the president to appoint
and dismiss judges. This change—which contravenes international
human rights norms—increases the president’s influence over a judiciary
which already lacked independence. There have been incidents of police
violence towards peaceful demonstrators, creating an environment less
conducive to freedom of assembly than under Shevadnadze. The media
remains relatively free, although media previously aligned to the opposition
now support the government, as does the state owned media,
leaving very few outlets without a pro-government orientation. In a
positive move, the government appointed Sozar Subeliani, a human
rights activist and former journalist, to the Ombuds office on
September 15. The post had been empty for twelve months.
The government is engaged in a highly publicized fight against corruption,
with frequent arrests of high profile figures. Georgian nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) and others are concerned that the authorities
are selectively targeting individuals for political reasons, and that
the law is not being applied equally to all. Allegations of due process
violations are common, and some of those detained for corruption
allege torture and ill-treatment.
Georgia’s Regions
During the first months of 2004, tensions over tax and customs revenues,
political freedoms, and law and order issues, between the central
government and Aslan Abashidze, the autocratic leader of the
autonomous republic of Adjara, escalated almost to the point of armed
conflict. The human rights situation in Ajara deteriorated, with regular
reports of beatings, detentions, and harassment of those critical of
Abashidze and his government. In May, after negotiations led by Russia,
Abashidze backed down and left Ajara. Since then, reports of abuses in
Ajara have declined dramatically, particularly those concerning freedom
of the press and freedom of association. Tension between Georgia and
the breakaway republic of South Ossetia also worsened during 2004,
resulting in sporadic armed clashes. Negotiations in August between
Georgia, South Ossetia, and Russia calmed the situation, at least temporarily.
Both sides accuse the other of torturing members of their security
forces who were taken prisoner. Human Rights Watch has insufficient
information to substantiate the claims.
Religious Freedom
During the last four years of the Shevadnadze government, Georgia
experienced an increase in religious intolerance towards non-traditional
religious groups, including Baptists, Jehovah’s Witnesses, and
Evangelists. These groups faced hate speech and violent attacks by
organized groups of Orthodox Christian vigilantes. The state failed to respond adequately, and sometimes even cooperated in the attacks,
which consequently became more frequent and pervasive. The attacks
and hate speech subsided prior to the November 2003 elections, leading
to speculation about how closely the government controlled the violence.
In 2004, there were some reports of intimidation and violence
against religious minorities, although at significantly reduced levels to
previous years. This decrease has improved the environment for freedom
of religion.
In a positive move against impunity, the police arrested Vasili
Mkalavishvili and seven of his followers in March. Mkalavishvili has led
many violent attacks on religious minorities. However, the police used
excessive force during the arrest, which was broadcast on television. At
this writing, Mkalavishvili remained in custody awaiting trial. The new
government has failed to bring to justice the perpetrators of scores of
other attacks, and at times, appears to fuel religious intolerance through
the use of nationalist rhetoric aimed against “alien influences,” a veiled
reference to non-traditional religious groups.
Torture
Torture in detention and due process violations remain widespread in
Georgia. There are continuing reports of the practice of isolating
detainees in circumstances that amount to incommunicado detention,
and restricting access to defence counsel. Judges sometimes ignore torture
allegations. There were reports of several deaths in custody under
suspicious circumstances, an increase from previous years. Reports of
torture in detention include beatings, cigarette burns, threats of rape,
and the use of electric shock. The authorities prosecute the perpetrators
of torture in some cases. However, in many cases, the perpetrators are
not brought to justice.
In a case that exemplifies the more troubling aspects of the government’s
fight against corruption, the former chair of the State Audit Agency, Sulkhan Molashvili, alleged he was subject to torture in pretrial
detention following his arrest in April on corruption charges. An
independent forensic expert confirmed signs of torture on Molashvili’s
body after his arrest, including cigarette burns, and injuries consistent
with the use of electric shocks. The Tbilisi city prosecution office
opened an investigation into the torture allegations on July 5, 2004. In
mid-July the Tbilisi city prosecutor stated that the investigation showed
that the wounds had been inflicted either by Molashvili himself or other
prisoners. At the time of writing, the investigation is on-going.
In October, in response to increasing reports of torture, Minister of
Internal Affairs Irakli Okruashvili discussed with NGOs and the
Ombuds office a plan to set up independent monitoring groups to
supervise arrests and detention facilities. At this writing, the plan was
yet to be implemented.
Chechen Refugees
Chechen refugees in Georgia remain vulnerable to abuse. They lack
adequate housing, medical care, and employment opportunities. The
refugees are subject to police harassment and threats of refoulement.
Georgian authorities suspect some refugees of involvement in terrorism,
and abuses take place during counter-terrorism operations. In May,
Chechen refugees in the Pankisi Valley went on a hunger strike for over
a week, protesting police harassment, including unauthorized and
intimidating house searches. In August, following Russia’s unilateral closure
of the border and pressure from Moscow about the presence of
“terrorists” in the Pankisi Valley, masked Georgian security forces carried
out raids against homes occupied by refugees and Kists (ethnic
Chechens from Georgia). Up to twelve men were detained and accused
of illegally entering Georgia. All were released within several days without
charge.
In February 2004, two Chechens, Khusein Alkhanov and Bekhan
Mulkoyev, were released from custody after a Georgian Court refused
to extradite them to Russia on terrorism charges, citing the fact that
Alkhanov is a refugee and a dispute about Mulkoyev’s identity. The men
went missing soon after their release, and later appeared in Russian custody.
Human rights groups in Georgia suspect that Georgian authorities
aided the Russian security forces’ detention of these men, in breach of
Georgian law and international standards prohibiting return in cases
where there is a risk of torture.
Key International Actors
The World Bank and European Commission co-sponsored a donors’
conference in June 2004. In a move illustrative of the huge international
support enjoyed by Georgia, the international community pledged U.S.
$1billion in aid over the next two years at the meeting. The donors stated
that the aid was to promote economic reform, improve governance,
and combat poverty.
In June, the European Union (E.U.) pledged to double its financial
assistance to Georgia over the next three years and announced the
inclusion of Georgia in its European Neighborhood Policy. The policy
offers financial benefits subject to Georgia’s compliance with jointly
negotiated political and economic criteria.
In May 2004, the Council of Europe Committee for the Prevention of
Torture visited Georgia, completing a trip interrupted by the upheaval
in November 2003. Members of the Committee found that prison conditions
were disastrous and encouraged the authorities to develop a plan
to improve them.
The relationship between the U.S. and Georgia continues to strengthen.
In May 2004, Georgia was deemed eligible to apply for a further
large aid package under the Millennium Challenge Account. In November, Saakashvili stated that as a result of Georgia’s engagement
in peacekeeping operations, the U.S. would fund a new, large scale military
assistance program. Just prior to this, Georgia agreed to increase
the number of Georgian troops in the coalition forces in Iraq from 159
to 850. The U.S. reconfirmed a commitment to combat terrorism in
Georgia. A State Department spokesperson claimed that past U.S. military
assistance had been successful in reducing a terrorist threat in the
Pankisi Valley, but failed to mention human rights concerns associated
with past operations there. In 2002, the U.S. assisted in training
Georgian security services for counter-terrorism operations in the
Pankisi Valley. That year, Georgian security services carried out operations
there that breached international human rights standards.
In the wake of the Beslan atrocity in North Ossetia, Russia has stepped
up pressure on Georgia over Chechens seeking refuge in the Pankisi
Valley, claiming that they are operating terrorist bases there. In
October, Georgian Minister of Internal Affairs Irakli Okruashvili agreed
to hand over a list of all residents in the Valley to unspecified Russian
officials. Russia remains a key player in the negotiations over the status
of the breakaway republics of South Ossetia and Abkhazia.