Georgia
Since the Rose Revolution at the end of 2003, the government has had an
uneven record on human rights. In 2005, it continued to prioritize its campaign
against corruption and for territorial integrity. Its ambitious reform
agenda is supported by the international community. However, at times it
carries out reforms hastily, without broad and open consultation and without
the thoroughness or detail necessary to eradicate entrenched human rights
problems. As a result, human rights abuses continue unchecked in many
spheres, following patterns established under former governments.
On a range of issues, including religious and political freedom and independence
of the judiciary, government reforms are producing mixed results.
Although the media is now relatively free, it has become less critical and
there are signs of increasing government influence on media content. The
government has taken some positive steps to prevent torture but torture and
due process violations continue to be reported. Refugees remain vulnerable
to abuse.
Mixed Results on Reform
Constitutional amendments adopted in 2004 increased the president’s influence
over the judiciary, further eroding judicial independence. In April 2005,
after months of uncertainty, a presidential decree changed the Tbilisi court
structure and led to the dismissal of significant numbers of judges. The
decree, administered by the High Council of Justice, a body headed by
President Saakashvili, did not set out criteria for deciding which judges
would be removed from their positions. The arbitrary decision-making
process heightened the sense of executive prerogative.
The environment for religious freedom has significantly improved since the
change in government when violent attacks against minority religions began
to subside, suggesting that the attackers were somehow linked to the former
government. In a positive move the authorities arrested Vasili Mkalavishvili,
the leader of many of the attacks, and in January 2005, he was convicted and
sentenced to six years in prison. In another positive step, the parliament passed amendments to the civil code in April 2005 making it easier for religious
organizations to be registered. Discrimination against unregistered religious
groups had been a major obstacle to religious freedom in Georgia.
Torture
Torture, impunity, and denial of due process remain serious problems in
Georgia. By 2005, the government had begun to acknowledge these longstanding
concerns and took some steps to combat them.
Legislative amendments to criminal laws in 2005 made out-of-court statements
inadmissible as evidence unless confirmed in court and reduced pretrial
detention time limits (to take effect from 2006). Further, the authorities
prosecuted several police officers for torture or other ill-treatment and
helped to set up a monitoring system for police stations under the framework
of the Public Defender’s Office. According to Georgian nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) and those involved in the monitoring program, by
mid-2005 there had been a reduction in the number of complaints of torture
in the capital, Tbilisi. They told Human Rights Watch, however, that there
had been a corresponding increase in police violence at the time of arrest and
during transportation to the police stations. They also said that the widespread
problem of torture in other parts of the country remained largely
unaffected by government measures, in part because resources were lacking
to monitor effectively police stations in the regions.
Media Freedom
Since the Rose Revolution, the government has improved legislative protections
for freedom of expression, including by decriminalizing libel, but the
media has become more pro-government and less critical than it was during
the Shevardnadze era. Newspapers remain relatively free of government
pressure. However, major television channels are biased in favor of the government
in their news and current affairs coverage. Journalists, NGOs, and
representatives of international organizations have told Human Rights Watch
that the government uses its influence with the owners of the major television
channels to control the content of their programs. The owners give little editorial independence to staff and sometimes censor programs that are critical
of the government.
On April 3, 2005, the owner of Imedi television, Badri Patarkatasishvili,
ordered the station not to broadcast a story on police corruption on the
weekly television program Droeba (Time). The next day, Patarkatasishvili
explained why he had refused to allow the program to be broadcast, saying
“if I want to tell something to the government, I can tell it personally and
directly.” NGOs and representatives of international organizations told
Human Rights Watch that the presidential administration sometimes directly
contacts chief editors, telling them how to cover certain issues. Journalists,
however, are reluctant to speak publicly about government interference with
or efforts to influence the content of their work. There are reportedly few
protections against unfair dismissal, and journalists are rarely willing to risk
their positions by speaking out publicly.
Refugees
Chechen refugees remain vulnerable to abuse in Georgia. They lack adequate
housing, medical care, and employment opportunities. Refugees are subjected
to police harassment and threats of refoulement.
In March 2005, two Kists (ethnic Chechens from Georgia), who were
Russian citizens, reportedly went to the Ministry of Refugees and Housing in
Tbilisi, seeking asylum. Officers from the Ministry of Interior arrested them
and took them to the border with Azerbaijan, where Azerbaijani authorities
reportedly refused them entry unless they agreed to return to Russia. They
spent several weeks in the neutral zone between the Georgian and
Azerbaijani borders before returning to Georgia. On May 28, 2005, Russian
authorities organized the repatriation of eighteen Chechen refugees from
Georgia. Although no force was used, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees did not consider the repatriation voluntary due
to the lack of access to objective and accurate information about conditions
in the country of origin.
Although Georgia passed amendments to its refugee law in April 2005 and
has ratified the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, its laws
and practice in refugee determination and protection do not comply with
international standards. For example, pre-screening mechanisms prevent registration
of asylum claims, and there are insufficient protections against
refoulement for refugees and for those who may have been excluded from
refugee status, but who would risk torture or ill-treatment if returned.
Human Rights Defenders
Although the government works closely with a number of human rights
NGOs, it has excluded some of the country’s most critical human rights
defenders from important initiatives, such as the monitoring of prison facilities
and police stations. In December 2004, unidentified persons made several
threatening calls to the offices of an NGO called “Former Political
Prisoners for Human Rights,” and in 2005, representatives of the Human
Rights Information and Documentation Center told Human Rights Watch
that government officials had telephoned their offices and warned them to
stop work on particular cases.
Key International Actors
The European Union (E.U.), pursuant to its European Neighbourhood
Policy, decided to go ahead with plans to prepare “action plans” for countries
of the south Caucasus, including Georgia. This is the first time that the E.U.
has offered Georgia closer economic, political, and cultural relations in
exchange for measurable human rights progress. As such, it marks a significant
opportunity for the E.U. to encourage human rights improvements in
Georgia. The potential of the initiative to trigger meaningful reforms will
depend, however, on the nature and specificity of the human rights benchmarks
included in the final action plan document, which was still being negotiated
between the Georgian government and the E.U. at this writing.
In 2005, the Council of Europe extended deadlines for Georgia’s compliance
with its commitments and obligations, due to the change of government after
the Rose Revolution. Council of Europe experts continue to provide opinions on how proposed legal reforms comply with European and international
human rights standards. However, the government does not always take into
account their recommendations. In June 2005, the Council of Europe recommended
that the government address the problem of discrimination against
the Azerbaijani minority in Georgia.
U.S. backing of President Saakashvili’s government has led to a less critical
attitude toward human rights abuses in the country. In a speech during his
highly publicized visit to Georgia in May 2005, President Bush claimed that
Georgia is a place where free speech flourishes, the rights of minorities are
respected, and a vigorous opposition is welcomed, ignoring significant evidence
to the contrary. In his speech, Bush did not raise any human rights
concerns. The U.S. provides substantial support to Georgia through its assistance
and military cooperation programs. In 2005, the U.S. approved
U.S.$300 million in aid to Georgia over the next five years under the
Millennium Challenge Account. Georgia has 850 troops serving in Iraq.
In 2005, relations with Russia remained difficult due to increased tensions
over the breakaway republics of South Ossetia and Abkhazia, Georgia’s joint
initiatives with Ukraine to promote democracy within the region, and intense
negotiations over the withdrawal of Russian military bases, which ended in
agreement and a timetable for withdrawal.