Georgia
President Mikheil Saakashvili faced a political crisis as thousands of opposition
supporters took to the streets in the capital, Tbilisi, in early April 2009 demanding
his resignation and early presidential elections. Protests lasted for two
months, before opposition unity faded. During the protests, human rights groups
documented a suspicious pattern of attacks on opposition activists by unidentified
assailants, and police used excessive force against and detained protestors,
and attacked journalists.
More than a year after the August 2008 Georgian-Russian conflict over South
Ossetia, the government has not investigated comprehensively international
human rights and humanitarian law violations committed by the Georgian military.
Russia continued to exercise effective control over South Ossetia and another
breakaway region, Abkhazia, preventing international observers’ access and
vetoing international missions working there. A European Union-funded international
inquiry into the 2008 conflict highlighted the dramatic lack of accountability.
Freedom of Assembly and Police Violence
Thousands of opposition supporters demanding Saakashvili’s resignation
blocked Tbilisi streets from April to early June. Although the government tolerated
protracted protests, police used excessive force against demonstrators and journalists,
and dozens of activists were arrested, some later claiming ill-treatment in
custody. Moreover, in a spate of attacks in April and early May, unidentified men
in civilian clothes, often armed with rubber truncheons and wearing masks, beat
and threatened a number of individual demonstrators leaving protests at night;
civil society groups and the ombudsman reported dozens of similar incidents. The
authorities opened over 50 individual cases, but failed to meaningfully investigate—
suggesting acquiescence or support for such attacks.
On May 6 three young activists, including one minor, were taken into custody on
alleged hooliganism charges. All three claimed they were beaten and threatened
before being released a day later on bail. Following these activists’ detention, an
opposition leader illegally entered the Tbilisi police headquarters compound by
climbing over a fence. A confrontation between police and opposition supporters ensued. Although some protestors wielded sticks at police, police failed to
exhaust less violent crowd control means before firing rubber bullets without
warning into the crowd at close range, resulting in serious head injuries for several
demonstrators.
On June 15, police attacked about 50 opposition supporters again gathered outside
the police headquarters protesting the detention of youth activists the day
before. Without warning, police chased and beat demonstrators with rubber truncheons,
resulting in at least 17 demonstrators being injured. Police claimed that
opposition supporters blocked the main entrance and road. They detained 38
demonstrators, releasing 33 after imposing fines and sentencing 5 to 30 days’
administrative detention. Many of those released reported abuse in police custody.
Police also assaulted several journalists and confiscated their cameras;
although police later released the equipment, several journalists claimed that
video and photo images had been deleted.
Police apologized for impeding the work of the media during the June 15 incident,
yet conducted no independent investigation. Several officers (whose identities
were not disclosed) received reprimands following an internal inquiry only. No
meaningful investigation was conducted into the police use of excessive force.
Apparently in response to the protests, in July parliament adopted regressive
amendments to the Administrative Code, increasing administrative detention,
including for minor hooliganism and defying police orders, from 30 to 90 days.
The measure appears excessive given that pretrial detention for criminal charges
is only 60 days. July amendments to the Law on Assemblies and Manifestations
banned full or partial blocking of roads during rallies unless the rally cannot be
held elsewhere due to the number of participants.
Despite repeated calls from key international actors, the government has refused
to launch a comprehensive investigation into events of November 7, 2007, when
police used excessive force against largely peaceful political demonstrations in
Tbilisi, resulting in at least 500 injured.
Lack of Accountability for Laws of War Violations
Well over a year since the Georgian-Russian conflict over South Ossetia, Georgian
authorities have yet to ensure a comprehensive investigation into and accountability
for international human rights and humanitarian law violations by their
forces (see also Russia chapter).
During the war the Georgian military used indiscriminate force, including firing
multiple rocket launchers—an indiscriminate weapon that should not be used in
civilian areas. The military also used tanks and machine-guns to fire at buildings
in Tskhinvali, the capital of South Ossetia, including at apartment buildings
where civilians sheltered; South Ossetian forces had fired on Georgian forces
from at least some of these buildings. The military also used cluster munitions
against Russian military, including in civilian-populated Georgian territories adjacent
to the administrative border with South Ossetia.
Some 20,000 ethnic Georgians from South Ossetia still remain displaced.
Criminal Justice System
Prison overcrowding leading to poor conditions remains a problem, despite construction
of new prisons and several presidential pardons and amnesties.
Although official statistics showed a decrease in the use of pretrial detention, the
total number of prisoners increased to 19,504 by June 2009, a more than 50 percent
increase since 2006. The frequent use of consecutive custodial sentencing is
largely responsible for this increase. Allegations of deliberate ill-treatment of prisoners
continue, including at the newly-built prison near Tbilisi.
In two judgments, the European Court of Human Rights found a violation of the
prohibition on torture and inhuman or degrading treatment for the government’s
failure to provide adequate conditions or medical care in prisons. In Ghavtadze v.
Georgia, the European Court also concluded that despite logistical and financial
problems, Georgia is obliged to ensure dignified conditions in prisons.
The government has failed to conduct a thorough investigation into the March
2006 operation to quell a riot in Tbilisi Prison No. 5, which left seven prisoners
dead and dozens injured.
The government maintains the minimum age of criminal responsibility at 12, in
defiance of a June 2008 United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child recommendation
to reinstate it at 14. However, the government continued a moratorium
on criminal charges against those under 14 until the creation of a separate
juvenile justice system, which was planned for mid-2008 but has not been completed.
Media Freedom
The media environment remains mixed, with diverse print media, but nationwide
television broadcasting limited to the state-owned public broadcaster and progovernment
Rustavi 2 and Imedi stations. Transparency of media ownership
remains a concern. On June 15, 2009, two Tbilisi-based pro-opposition television
stations, Maestro and Kavkasia, briefly suspended broadcasting after their journalists
were attacked and their equipment confiscated during the clash at the
police headquarters. On May 30 the local cable network in Rustavi, near Tbilisi,
removed Maestro from its lineup, allegedly under pressure from local authorities.
In October a local court ordered Channel 25, the only independent regional television
station in the Ajara Autonomous Republic, to pay a US$166,000 tax debt.
The station’s owners dispute the fine, alleging that it is intended to close the station
ahead of upcoming local elections.
Print media outlets, although vibrant, depend on newsstand sales and advertising
for revenue. Claims by Tbilisi municipal leaders in September that newsstands
tarnish the city’s image raised concerns about newsstands’ potential removal, a
move that would threaten many print outlets’ existence.
Several journalists alleged pressure and attacks. Nato Gegelia, a journalist for the
regional newspaper Guria News, was assaulted in a police station on June 10 in
Chokhatauri, in western Georgia, as she investigated an opposition activist’s
detention.
Key International Actors
The United States and the European Union deepened their engagement and
financial backing of Georgia, but failed to make full use of their leverage to ensure meaningful human rights improvements. Meanwhile, Russia continued to occupy
Georgia’s breakaway regions South Ossetia and Abkhazia, and barred access to
international observers. In December 2008 Russia blocked an extension of the
mandate of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe mission in
Georgia, and in June 2009 vetoed the UN Observer Mission working in Abkhazia.
A 1,129-page report released in September by the EU-funded international inquiry
into the August 2008 conflict found that international human rights and humanitarian
law violations were committed by all sides, and highlighted a dramatic lack
of accountability. The International Criminal Court—to which Georgia is a party—
continued to keep under analysis crimes committed by all parties to the conflict.
In May 2009 Georgia signed a Declaration on New Eastern Partnership with the
European Union, providing for additional assistance and cooperation. Georgia is
already part of the European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP), which pledged over
€120 million through 2010 plus an additional €500 million following the August
2008 war. The April 2009 ENP Action Plan progress report commended Georgia
for progress in certain areas, but raised concerns about media freedom. The first
round of a structured human rights dialogue between the EU and Georgia was
held the same month. The EU extended the mandate of 200 unarmed EU
observers in Georgia; Russia continued to block their access to the breakaway
regions.
The US and Georgia signed a Charter on Strategic Partnership in January 2009,
envisaging increased cooperation, including on strengthening human rights. As
part of a US$1 billion pledge to support Georgia’s recovery following the 2008
war, in May the US released US$53.3 million, including US$20 million for good
governance, civic participation, and election and media reform. In a show of political
support, US Vice President Joe Biden visited Tbilisi in July.
The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe adopted several resolutions
on the Humanitarian Consequences of the War between Georgia and Russia, calling
on all sides to conduct meaningful investigations into the violations during
the conflict. The Council of Europe Human Rights Commissioner issued a report in
May on human rights following the conflict, also emphasizing the need for meaningful
accountability.