Georgia
Although the Georgian government takes pride in its stated commitment to the
rule of law and human rights protection, it continues to have an uneven human
rights record. Restoration of territorial integrity and the fight against organized
crime remain the priorities of the government’s agenda. Beginning in December
2005, the government stepped up its fight against crime and sought to break the
power of organized crime bosses, including within the prison system, which
resulted in more frequent use of force to subdue or punish detainees. Impunity
for the actions of law enforcement officers remains a serious problem; effective
investigations are rare. The executive wielded strong influence over the judiciary
and took several steps to restrict freedom of expression. Some human rights
groups reported government harassment.
Prison Conditions, Use of Lethal Force, and Torture and Ill-
Treatment
The majority of Georgia’s prisoners—some 63 percent of whom are held in pretrial
detention—live in overcrowded, poorly ventilated, filthy cells. They receive
inadequate nutrition and substandard medical care, have limited access to information
and family visits, and in 2006 some went for weeks or months without an
opportunity to leave their cells for exercise or fresh air. In some cases the conditions
of detention amount to degrading treatment.
Since December 2005 there has been a marked increase in the use of violence by
law enforcement officers in prison facilities. Inmates report periods of frequent
beatings and degrading treatment such as repeated strip searches. This treatment
has at times constituted torture. Security forces repeatedly used force to suppress
prison disturbances. On March 27, 2006, special forces used automatic gunfire in
Tbilisi Prison No. 5 to suppress a disturbance, resulting in the deaths of at least
seven inmates.
A number of suspects were killed by Georgian law enforcement officers during
special operations and at the time of arrest, continuing a trend begun in 2005. In
2006, 17 suspects were killed; in one instance, over 50 bullet wounds were
recorded on the suspect’s body.
The government has failed to confront the long-standing problem of impunity for
excessive use of force by law enforcement agents. Senior officials, including
President Mikheil Saakashvili and the minister of the interior have made public
statements condoning the use of lethal force and praising the professionalism of
law enforcement agents. In late November the prosecutor general’s office reported
that it was investigating the deaths of 13 people killed in the course of special
operations, though at this writing it was not possible to determine the effectiveness
of these investigations. For three months the General Prosecutor’s Office
failed to open an investigation into the actions of law enforcement officers during
the March 27 special operation in Tbilisi Prison No. 5, and instead the Ministry of
Justice investigated the planning of the alleged riot only. Investigations into torture
and ill-treatment in the prison system are not prompt, do not meet international
requirements for effectiveness, or are not opened at all.
Following a dispute with senior Ministry of Interior officials in a Tbilisi cafe on
January 27, 2006, the body of 28-year-old Sandro Girgvliani, head of the United
Georgian Bank’s international relations department, was found on the outskirts of
Tbilisi bearing beating signs. In July, four Ministry of Interior employees were convicted
of causing the injuries that resulted in Girgvliani’s death, and were sentenced
to prison terms. However, many believe that the senior Ministry officials
involved in the disagreement with Girgvliani had ordered his kidnapping and
beating but escaped prosecution.
Independence of the Judiciary
Constitutional amendments in early 2004 increased the Georgian president’s
authority to dismiss and appoint judges. The government then began an effort to
address corruption in the judiciary, but the procedures for removing allegedly corrupt
judges have lacked transparency and due process. In 2005 the authorities
told a number of judges that they should either resign or face disciplinary hearings;
21 of 37 Supreme Court judges resigned under this pressure. Nine refused to
resign but were then made subject to disciplinary proceedings in December 2005,
were found guilty, and were suspended from office. The proceedings addressed
matters related to the judges’ interpretation of law rather than issues of ethics or
conduct subject to disciplinary evaluation. On August 10, 2006, the Disciplinary
Chamber of the Supreme Court upheld the decision against the judges. These steps have had a chilling effect on new and remaining judges, who may legitimately
see their positions as tenuous and their decisions as subject to executive
approval.
Freedom of Expression
On June 29, five activists from the NGO Equality Institute peacefully protested the
trial of two journalists by standing outside the Appeals Court in Tbilisi and making
statements in support of the accused. Court guards detained the men and forced
them into the court building, causing injuries to two of them. The five activists
were charged with disrupting court proceedings and were immediately sentenced
to 30 days’ administrative arrest. Ten days after his release, one of the activists,
Lasha Chkhartishvili, was again arrested following a peaceful protest, allegedly
for swearing at police, and sentenced to two days’ detention. Video footage of the
incident did not reveal any violations by Chkhartishvili during the protest.
Eka Khoperia, an anchor of a popular political talk show on the Rustavi-2 television
channel, announced during a live program on July 6 concerning the
Girgvliani murder that she was resigning to protest government authorities’
requests to alter that program’s format.
On August 26 Rustavi-2’s owner, reportedly a close friend of Defense Minister
Irakli Okruashvili, fired the station’s director general and replaced her with Koba
Davarashvili, who previously headed an advertising company with links to the
government and is reportedly a close friend of the chief of the presidential administration.
In response, many of the station’s journalists immediately went on
strike, and on September 8 six resigned, citing their commitment to independence
in reporting. In November, Rustavi 2’s owner sold the station, reportedly
under pressure, and Okruashvili resigned soon thereafter.
On July 29, police arrested former Security Minister and current leader of the
Forward Georgia opposition movement Irakli Batiashvili on charges of failing to
report a crime and assisting a coup attempt by providing “intellectual support” to
Emzar Kvitsiani, the leader of an illegal militia. While it remains unclear whether
Batiashvili committed a crime, the evidence against Batiashvili includes public statements he made on television, some or all of which may be legitimate and
protected speech.
Human Rights Defenders
Several human rights defenders reported harassment at the beginning of 2006. In
January top government officials, including the defense minister, publicly accused
the current leadership of the Georgian Young Lawyers’ Association (GYLA, a professional
lawyers’ association) of being politicized and of misusing US$12 million
in funding. The officials, who are themselves GYLA members, called for the resignation
of the organization’s chairperson. GYLA claimed that this was in retaliation
for its criticism of government policies.
On February 1 and 2, Ministry of Interior officials visited the office of the Human
Rights Information and Documentation Center (HRIDC), claiming they wanted to
learn about the organization’s activities. They threatened several of the organization’s
employees. On February 7, an official from the Ministry’s Counterterrorism
Department requested that HRIDC director Ucha Nanuashvili go to the ministry to
discuss the organization with senior officials. When Nanuashvili requested a formal
summons, the official refused to provide one and threatened to bring him to
the ministry by force. Nanuashvili did not go to the ministry and did not face any
repercussions.
Key International Actors
On January 24, 2006, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE)
adopted a resolution on Georgia, concluding that despite some legislative
reforms, Georgia had yet “to produce concrete results in most areas.” The PACE
specifically called on Georgia to prioritize ratifying the European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages, guaranteeing judicial independence, eliminating
torture in prisons, and applying a policy of zero tolerance for impunity for torture
and ill-treatment. The Council of Europe commissioner for human rights visited
Georgia in July and made prison conditions one of his key areas of focus.
The United Nations Committee against Torture reviewed Georgia in May. The committee
noted some progress but found many shortcomings, including the use of excessive force, torture, and other forms of ill-treatment by law enforcement officials,
and the low number of convictions for those crimes; it also expressed concern
about prison conditions. The committee called for investigations of all allegations
of torture and ill-treatment and for implementation of policies to reduce
prison overcrowding.
The European Union and Georgia signed the European Neighborhood Policy
Action Plan, which will serve as the primary framework guiding EU-Georgian relations
for the next five years. The plan sets out steps that the Georgian government
should take in numerous fields including the rule of law, democracy, economic
and business development, trade, energy, and resolution of internal conflicts.
The United States continued to offer the Georgian government strong public support.
President Saakashvili visited the United States in July and September. On
the occasion of these visits, US President George Bush praised the Georgian government
for its commitment to democracy and economic reform, and expressed
support for Georgia’s NATO membership aspirations.