Georgia
The October 2013 presidential election completed a peaceful transition of
power in Georgia after difficult cohabitation between Prime Minister Bidzina
Ivanishvili and his political rival President Mikheil Saakashvili. Investigations
into torture and ill-treatment in custody were slow and lacked transparency.
Investigations into past abuses raised some concerns regarding selective justice
and politically motivated prosecutions. Police did not adequately respond
to several violent incidents against religious minorities and lesbian, gay, bisexual,
and transgender (LGBT) people.
Georgia deepened its political and economic ties with the European Union
through the Eastern Partnership process, which was closely tied to progress in
governance and human rights.
Presidential Election
International observers, led by the Organization for Security and Co-operation
in Europe, positively assessed the October 27 presidential election, highlighting
respect for fundamental freedoms of expression, movement, and assembly.
However, observers also noted allegations of political pressure, “including on
United Nations Movement (UNM) representatives at local self-government institutions.”
In July 2013 violent mobs attacked UNM campaign events in Zugdidi and
Batumi. Police detained over a dozen assailants; courts convicted them on
administrative charges, fined them, and released them.
Torture and Ill-Treatment, Prison Conditions
In June 2013, courts convicted 14 former prison officials implicated in beatings
and torture in prison revealed in videos released in 2012. Six received prison
terms ranging from three to six years; eight plea-bargained, receiving sentences
ranging from six months to five years. However, the prosecutor general fully
released from criminal responsibility Vladimer Bedukadze, who provided information
about the torture in which he was also involved. Many local and international
observers criticized the move.
In July, a court acquitted five former police officers who faced multiple charges,
including ill-treatment and rape of a detainee, leading to an exchange of accusations
between the Prosecutor’s Office and the judiciary. The former claimed
that it provided forensic examinations, victim and witness statements, and
other evidence at trial, while the latter asserted that some evidence was contradictory
and the prosecution failed to substantiate the charges.
In July, Mamuka Mikautadze, 36, was found hanged a day after police interrogated
and then released him regarding drug possession. According to his wife,
Mikautadze complained that police had beaten and forced him to sign false
testimony incriminating his friend. Local rights groups alleged that police were
slow to respond to Mikautadze’s family’s allegations. The investigation was
ongoing at time of writing.
In January, parliament adopted a broad prison amnesty, leading to the release
of over 8,000 inmates. This alleviated severe overcrowding, a chronic problem
in Georgian prisons.
Investigations into Past Abuses
In response to over 20,000 complaints about alleged past abuses, the authorities
charged 35 former officials from a variety of ministries with, inter alia,
abuse of office, embezzlement, and false arrest; 14 of them were in custody at
time of writing. The authorities did not explain the criteria they used to determine
which cases of past abuses to investigate, and while investigating past
abuses prosecutors questioned over 6,000 persons, mostly UNM party
activists. Both factors caused the opposition to allege its activists were subject
to politically motivated pressure.
Among those arrested was Vano Merabishvili, the UNM’s secretary general and
former interior minister, who faces charges including embezzlement and abuse
of office for obstructing a high-profile murder investigation. Merabishvili’s prosecution,
ahead of the presidential election, raised concern among some
observers that it was politically motivated.
On June 27, financial police briefly detained 23 Tbilisi municipal officials,
including many UNM members. The authorities claimed they were interrogated
as witnesses, but handcuffed the officials and provided neither prior notification to appear nor a court order required to forcefully bring witnesses before
investigation. Four of the officials, including a deputy mayor, were later arrested
in connection with an ongoing embezzlement investigation.
Right to Privacy
In September 2013, officials destroyed over 181 hours of secret video recordings
of individuals’ private lives, mostly of a sexual nature, obtained in recent
years through illegal government surveillance. Opposition politicians, journalists,
and civil society activists had been particular targets.
In May, a deputy interior minister leaked one of the videos involving a journalist
who had been fiercely critical of senior officials. The deputy minister was dismissed
and is awaiting trial on charges of illegal use or distribution of private
information.
Other illegal, secret recordings have not been destroyed. In July, parliament
adopted an amnesty bill exempting from criminal responsibility those who had
been involved in illegal surveillance, and those who were in possession of such
recordings but voluntarily handed them over by November 20.
The Interior Ministry maintains surveillance equipment on the premises of
telecommunication operators, giving it automatic access to all communications
without judicial oversight.
Freedom of Religion
Since November 2012, Orthodox Christian communities in several villages prevented,
at times violently, Muslims from holding religious services in houses
converted into mosques. Although the prime minister made several public
statements condemning the violence, little action was taken to hold the offenders
accountable.
In August 2013, local authorities in western Georgia forcefully removed a
minaret from a mosque, leading to a clash between local Muslim residents and
police. Officials claimed they wanted to inspect the minaret because it allegedly
lacked the proper import license. Several days later, the authorities returned
the minaret but did not reinstall it due to protests by the local Christian community.
In April three drunk military police officers verbally assaulted residents in a village
in Adjara region—which has a significant Muslim population—arbitrarily
stopping cars and searching people, calling them “Tatars” and demanding they
show crosses around their necks. The Defense Ministry sacked the officers, and
police arrested at least two of them.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
On May 17, 2013, a peaceful gathering to mark International Day Against
Homophobia was violently disrupted by thousands of counter-demonstrators,
including some Orthodox clergy. The day before, the patriarch of the Georgian
Orthodox Church publicly urged the authorities not to allow the gathering, calling
it an “an insult” to Georgian traditions.
Police had to evacuate the LGBT activists to safety, but they failed to contain
the mob, which attacked a van carrying the activists, throwing stones and other
objects; one journalist was hit on the head and briefly hospitalized. Authorities
charged two Orthodox priests and three other men with obstructing freedom of
assembly and petty hooliganism. The Tbilisi City Court ordered that charges be
dropped against one priest. At time of writing, the trials against the others were
ongoing.
Identoba, a local LGBT rights group, reported 34 incidents of violence and
intimidation against LGBT people during and after the May 17 incident. The
group noted that many victims do not report homophobic violence due to fear
of retribution and police failure to investigate adequately.
Freedom of Assembly
On February 8, hundreds of protesters gathered in front of the Tbilisi National
Library, where President Mikheil Saakashvili planned to hold his annual State
of the Nation address. The protesters verbally insulted and physically attacked
several UNM members and the Tbilisi mayor. The public defender criticized
police for failing to proactively ensure the safety of the UNM members, despite
the fact that they had accurate information on the protesters’ numbers,
demands, and mood. A court convicted two protesters of petty hooliganism and
released them after imposing a fine.
Freedom of Media
Georgia has a diverse print and broadcast media. In spring 2013 parliament
approved a package of amendments to media laws, supported by a coalition of
media organizations. The amendments envisage a more democratic composition
of the board of Georgia Public Broadcaster (GPB), greater financial transparency
of television companies, and a requirement that cable networks and
satellite content providers broadcast all television stations that carry news.
Previously, they were required to do so only for 60 days before elections.
Eka Kvesitadze and Davit Paichadze, the hosts of two GPB policy talk shows,
alleged that the GPB’s decision not to renew their contracts in September 2013
was politically motivated. Although the station director’s written order attributed
the non-renewal to the start of the new television season, he told one of
the journalists it was because he “did not like their tone.”
Key International Actors
The European Union closely engaged with the new Georgian government to
monitor the rights record and urge much-needed reforms. It created and funded
an expert position to advise the government on legal and constitutional and
human rights, and appointed to the post former Council of Europe
Commissioner for Human Rights Thomas Hammarberg.
In September—after regular visits to Georgia and extensive consultations with
officials, the political opposition, and civil society—Hammarberg published a
report with recommendations to the government to address religious intolerance,
independence of the judiciary, prison conditions, ill-treatment and torture,
illegal surveillance, minority rights, and other human rights issues.
In its March European Neighborhood Policy (ENP) progress report, the EU noted
that Georgia “acted on most …. [of the ENP’s] key recommendations,” but also
highlighted the need to ensure the independence of the judiciary, avoid selective
justice, and increase accountability and democratic oversight of law
enforcement agencies.
In its annual human rights report in April, the United States Department of State
flagged concerns about shortfalls in the rule of law and lack of judicial independence,
as well as restrictions on freedom of association and assembly.
The International Criminal Court prosecutor continued to monitor local investigations
into crimes committed during the 2008 Georgia-Russian conflict over
South Ossetia, while noting in a November 2012 report that these investigations
had yet to yield any results.