Globalization Comes Home:
Protecting Migrant Domestic Workers’ Rights
By Nisha Varia
I decided to migrate for work because my parents do not have a
home, we do not have any land of our own…. I just really want to
build a house like my friend and give happiness to my family.
—Sumiyatun, a 24-year-old woman waiting to board a ferry to
Singapore, where she had secured a job as a domestic worker,
Batam, Indonesia, May 23, 2006
Introduction
Imagine working sixteen hours a day, every single day, for years, or perhaps getting
one day off per month. Then, imagine being rarely allowed to leave your
workplace, where you also sleep.
Suppose that to get this job, you will forgo seeing your family for months or years
at a time. Furthermore, that you are forced to turn over the first ten months of
your salary to pay off the expenses your employer incurred in recruiting you, or
else spend years paying off loans with interest rates as high as 100 percent.
Welcome to life as a migrant domestic worker. In the hopes of earning money for
a better life, and with few other alternatives, millions migrate to big cities or
across borders to work as live-in nannies, caretakers for the elderly, and housecleaners.
Domestic workers around the world, predominantly women and girls,
lack basic labor protections that most governments guarantee for other workers.
Domestic workers are typically excluded from standard labor protections such as
a minimum wage, regular payment of wages, a weekly day off, and paid leave.
The movement of people across borders promises new opportunities and has
become extremely lucrative: the US$167 billion that migrant workers from developing
nations sent home in 2005 exceeded foreign aid in many countries—and
much of this money directly reaches poor households. Yet this money has often
come at a profound human cost. Governments and employers interested in “flexible” labor have been quick to take advantage of a transnational workforce.
But they often have turned their backs on labor and immigration protections for
migrants and done little to establish a safety-net to address widespread abuses.
The situation of migrant domestic workers is a particularly stark illustration of the
need for transnational governance in an era of globalization.
In 2006, Hawazi Daipi, Singapore’s Senior Parliamentary Secretary for Manpower,
chose to celebrate International Women’s Day by reiterating in Parliament his
rejection of decent minimum employment terms for foreign domestic workers.
Such labor protections would lead to “inconvenience for many households,” he
claimed.
Many employers treat their domestic workers well. But as Human Rights Watch
investigations in countries as diverse as the United States, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Saudi Arabia, Morocco, Indonesia, and Malaysia demonstrate, far too
many others take advantage of inadequate labor protections to exploit domestic
workers isolated behind the walls of private homes. Despite regional variations in
domestic work, migration patterns, and recruitment systems, striking similarities
exist among the abuses confronted by domestic workers around the world. The
examples in this essay draw primarily on Asia and the Middle East.
Criminal abuses such as physical and sexual violence, food deprivation, and trafficking
into forced labor take place with disturbing frequency. Moreover, labor
recruitment systems and punitive immigration laws leave many workers highly
indebted, out of legal status, and afraid to report abuse. These problems are
made more difficult to address in the case of domestic workers by deep-seated,
discriminatory norms about gender roles and the value of tasks considered to be
women’s work.
Despite this long catalog of abuses, however, concrete and feasible measures
exist that could dramatically improve the working conditions of most migrant
domestic workers. Many governments have argued that it is impossible to treat
private homes like a workplace. Yet labor legislation in Hong Kong and South
Africa has set positive examples: domestic workers have the right to a minimum
wage, overtime pay, a weekly day of rest, maternity leave, and paid annual leave.
While the domestic workers in these countries are not immune from abuse, they have legal remedies available, unlike their counterparts elsewhere. Combined
with the freedom to form associations and trade unions, many of these domestic
workers have greater awareness of their rights, an ability to negotiate better working
conditions, and avenues for reporting labor exploitation.
Other important reforms include enhancing local economic and educational
opportunities so that domestic workers can migrate based on informed choice;
setting standards for and monitoring transnational labor recruitment systems,
which are often a determining factor in how such migrants fare; amending restrictive
immigration policies that leave such workers particularly at risk of exploitation;
and promoting international cooperation between sending and receiving
states to prevent and respond to abuse.
While some governments have already started making meaningful reforms to help
domestic workers work in greater safety and dignity, others are pursuing superficial
changes that fail to address the root causes of exploitation and abuse.
Governments around the world have choices to make about the route they will
take; this essay identifies some of the positive options available.
Migration Based on Informed Choice
I’m crying inside my heart…. If I can solve my financial problems
this time, I will never migrate again…. If we have no money, we
have no other choice but to go abroad. We have to get rid of this
poverty.
—Chandrika Malkanthi, a 45-year-old woman preparing to
migrate to the Middle East as a domestic worker for the ninth
time, Kurunegala, Sri Lanka, November 4, 2006
One of the most overlooked and critically important responses to promoting safe
migration is offering the choice of not migrating at all. While it is equally important
that discriminatory restrictions not be placed on women’s mobility, more can
be done in countries of origin to provide migrants with alternatives to leaving
their families behind and embarking on journeys that often involve a considerable
gamble in terms of safety and success. Such a response includes creating
viable local employment opportunities and providing children with accessible,
quality education.
The numbers are astounding—and growing. Fifty to seventy-five percent of the
legal migrants leaving Indonesia, the Philippines, and Sri Lanka are women, most
of them hoping to earn money as domestic workers in the Middle East and other
parts of Asia. The International Labor Organization (ILO) estimates there are more
girls under age sixteen employed in domestic service than in any other form of
child labor. Some of these children start working as domestics at the age of six or
seven. In Indonesia alone, there are approximately 700,000 child domestic workers.
Access to education carries many important consequences for internal and international
migration into domestic work. Prohibitive schooling costs and the need
to supplement their families’ incomes are key reasons for girls entering domestic
work. Many international migrant domestic workers cite earning enough to provide
their children or siblings with a decent education as one of the top reasons
they chose to work abroad—an emotional sacrifice, since to do so, they must live
apart from these family members for years. More could also be done to improve
women’s and girls’ entrance into higher education and vocational training programs
that would improve their skill sets and qualify them for better-paying jobs.
Current government policies often actively promote urban and international
migration in order to relieve rural unemployment and generate income from remittances.
For example, Indonesia sets targets of the numbers of migrant workers it
hopes to send abroad in its five-year national economic development plans. Its
target rose from 100,000 in 1979–84 to 2.8 million in 1999–2003.1 Similarly,
many other countries have started setting a target for the numbers of workers
they hope to “export,” arguably without a similar emphasis on how to create
livelihoods at home.
The responsibility does not lie only with countries of origin. Foreign investment
from wealthy countries has often focused on the exploitation of natural resources
and labor without building local capacity or links to other domestic industries.
International trade agreements have often failed to include adequate protections
for workers’ rights; for example, freedom from workplace discrimination. Such
policies may particularly affect women’s local employment opportunities and
their pay. Destination countries often rely heavily on migrant labor without doing their part to ensure transparent and fair recruitment practices, or equal access to
the law once migrants begin working.
Labor-sending governments, enamored with the promises of migration, must
remember that it may involve profound social costs and that poorly-regulated sectors
such as domestic work pose a wide range of risks. Governments should do
more to ensure that migration occurs not out of desperation, but out of choice, in
safety, and with full information and informed consent. Governments and international
institutions have a responsibility to promote fair trade regimes, invest in
education, and foster local employment opportunities so that potential migrants
have real alternatives.
Good Business: Monitoring Labor Recruitment Systems
The broker brought me to the training center in Tanjung Pinang
by ship…. I only paid 100,000 rupiah [US$12] to the broker but
afterwards they deducted my full wages for four-and-a-half
months [to repay what they said were up-front costs]…. I had to
spend two months at the training center though I had expected
to wait only a few days…. We were never allowed outside, there
was a very high gate and it was always locked. They treated us
poorly, always calling us names like “dog.”
—Widyaningsih, a 35-year-old woman recently returned from
Malaysia describing conditions she had faced while being
recruited in Indonesia, East Java, Indonesia, May 21, 2006
Recruiting migrant domestic workers has become a profitable industry, with hundreds
and sometimes thousands of licensed and unlicensed labor agencies and
brokers in many countries. Local recruiters trawl through villages, painting rosy
pictures of success in urban centers or rich countries abroad. They may promise
women the income to help them build new homes for their families or girls the
opportunity to continue their education. Labor recruiters and agencies undergo
scant monitoring, and in most countries, few regulations exist to contain the
recruitment fees charged to workers.
What happens during recruitment can influence a worker’s fate heavily. If she is
lucky, she will know how to discern a licensed agent from an unlicensed one, obtain a copy of her employment contract, and learn about her rights before she
leaves home. More likely, she will become heavily indebted due to huge recruitment
fees, be promised certain working conditions but encounter something
markedly different when she begins working, have her passport held by her
agent, and never even see an employment contract in her own language.
Deception or coercion used during the recruitment process sets workers up for
abuse, and if they end up in extremely exploitative working conditions, these
cases rise to the level of trafficking into forced labor.
Taking advantage of migrants’ desperation to find work, agents and employers
have shifted the burden of recruitment fees, including airfare, visas, and administrative
fees on to the workers themselves, while employers pay nominal fees. This
has led to an unreasonable debt burden on international migrant domestic workers.
Many Indonesian domestic workers migrating to Persian Gulf countries take
out loans from local moneylenders with interest rates as high as 100 percent to
pay these fees, while those traveling to Asia typically use a “fly now, pay later”
scheme. In Singapore and Hong Kong, Indonesian migrant domestic workers
often spend up to 10 months out of a two-year contract without a salary since
they must turn over these wages to repay their recruitment fees. The resulting
financial pressure makes it difficult for workers to report abuse for fear of losing
their jobs and having no way to pay off their debts.
International labor recruitment is a fast-growing industry that requires more stringent
licensing requirements and more rigorous monitoring. If migrant domestic
workers are to have a chance, governments need to acknowledge the unequal
bargaining power between potential migrants, employers, and labor agents and
shift the burden of recruitment costs back to employers. Reforming current practice
means tough measures, including unannounced inspections of labor recruitment
agencies and real penalties for those committing violations.
These steps have the added benefit of probably doing more to combat human
trafficking than many other steps taken to date as they address the heart of what
puts individuals at risk: misinformation from labor recruiters, heavy debts, passport
confiscation, and improper immigration processing.
obtain a copy of her employment contract, and learn about her rights before she
leaves home. More likely, she will become heavily indebted due to huge recruitment
fees, be promised certain working conditions but encounter something
markedly different when she begins working, have her passport held by her
agent, and never even see an employment contract in her own language.
Deception or coercion used during the recruitment process sets workers up for
abuse, and if they end up in extremely exploitative working conditions, these
cases rise to the level of trafficking into forced labor.
Taking advantage of migrants’ desperation to find work, agents and employers
have shifted the burden of recruitment fees, including airfare, visas, and administrative
fees on to the workers themselves, while employers pay nominal fees. This
has led to an unreasonable debt burden on international migrant domestic workers.
Many Indonesian domestic workers migrating to Persian Gulf countries take
out loans from local moneylenders with interest rates as high as 100 percent to
pay these fees, while those traveling to Asia typically use a “fly now, pay later”
scheme. In Singapore and Hong Kong, Indonesian migrant domestic workers
often spend up to 10 months out of a two-year contract without a salary since
they must turn over these wages to repay their recruitment fees. The resulting
financial pressure makes it difficult for workers to report abuse for fear of losing
their jobs and having no way to pay off their debts.
International labor recruitment is a fast-growing industry that requires more stringent
licensing requirements and more rigorous monitoring. If migrant domestic
workers are to have a chance, governments need to acknowledge the unequal
bargaining power between potential migrants, employers, and labor agents and
shift the burden of recruitment costs back to employers. Reforming current practice
means tough measures, including unannounced inspections of labor recruitment
agencies and real penalties for those committing violations.
These steps have the added benefit of probably doing more to combat human
trafficking than many other steps taken to date as they address the heart of what
puts individuals at risk: misinformation from labor recruiters, heavy debts, passport
confiscation, and improper immigration processing.
providing them opportunities to form associations and trade unions and greater
access to meaningful legal remedies in cases of abuse.
In the name of labor reform, many governments have begun introducing standard
employment contracts for domestic workers. Although these represent a step forward
by setting forth the terms of work, the elaborated conditions rarely meet the
minimum standards guaranteed to other workers. These contracts also do not
have the enforceability of provisions protected under labor laws.
While labor law reform can do much to address the labor exploitation confronted
by migrant domestic workers, strong criminal laws and law enforcement are also
essential to combat physical, psychological, and sexual abuse, forced labor, and
forced confinement. In increasing the criminal penalties for certain abuses
against migrant domestic workers by a factor of 1.5, Singapore has rightly
acknowledged the particular risks faced by these workers. Good laws become
meaningful when accompanied by public awareness campaigns and training of
law enforcement, labor, and immigration officials. Laws that could be used to protect
child domestic workers, such as Indonesia’s Child Protection Act as well as
minimum age for employment laws in most countries, are rarely invoked.
The domestic violence movement illustrates an important lesson learned: governments
have an obligation to prevent and respond to abuses taking place in the
private sphere. Currently, monitoring of workplace conditions—a critical element
in enforcing domestic workers’ rights—remains weak to non-existent in most
countries, in part due to restrictions on the ability of labor inspectors to enter private
households. Lawmakers should reform such policies and ensure that accessible
complaint mechanisms and support services such as health care, shelter,
and legal aid are available to survivors of abuse. These mechanisms and services
should be especially sensitive to the needs of child domestics, whose age and
curtailed education often make it even harder for them to escape abusive
employers and gain access to the assistance they need.
Why Fair Immigration Policies Matter
Countries with a highly-educated, highly-skilled workforce often have difficulty
finding local workers for low-paying jobs and have created special immigration
schemes for domestic workers.
Despite the contributions these workers are making to destination countries,
immigration policies may exacerbate conditions that put migrants at risk of
abuse. For example, several countries impose “security bonds” on employers,
penalizing them if their migrant domestic worker runs away. Such bonds appear
to have little impact on the stated policy goal of staunching undocumented
migration, whereas employers use the bonds as justifications for confining
domestic workers to the workplace, holding their passports, and withholding
their wages—conditions that are abusive and may rise to the level of forced labor.
In several countries, migrant domestic workers lose their legal status once they
leave their employers, since their visas are tied to their employer. This makes it
difficult for them to run away from abusive situations, change employers, or to
negotiate their conditions of employment. The consequences may be dire: in
Malaysia, punitive immigration laws mean that migrants can face up to five years’
imprisonment, heavy fines, caning, and indefinite detention for an immigration
offense.
Immigration policies often strip migrants of some of their fundamental civil and
political rights—including the right to marry and the right to form associations.
Inadequate government intervention with respect to labor rights pair with overly
intrusive policies on other rights. The Singaporean government imposes a lifetime
ban on foreign domestic workers marrying Singaporean citizens, even after they
have finished their employment. Although exceptions to this policy can be made
on application, the government treats these requests like job interviews. Those
with less marketable skills and education may be rejected. As Mr. Hawazi Daipi
explained, “Those who are financially self-reliant or who are better qualified
should have no problem in securing permission to get married.”
For those migrant domestic workers who enter the country as undocumented
workers, or who lose their legal status while abroad, access to redress may
become unattainable. Governments should promote immigration rules that permit migrants to report abuse without fear of imprisonment or criminal penalties.
Coordination between labor and immigration ministries is essential.
Governments should tackle the links between poverty, unsafe migration, and
inadequate labor standards by reforming immigration policies that drive migrants
underground to unlicensed recruiters and smugglers. Anti-trafficking programs
monitoring borders and women’s mobility also threaten to compound the problem.
Rather than restricting women’s and girls’ right to migrate and seek work,
the real challenge lies in creating the guarantees for them to do so safely and
with dignity.
Rights-Based International Cooperation
An increasingly mobile labor force is an ineluctable consequence of globalization.
Humane treatment of such workers, however, requires that governments agree on
ground rules and work together to enforce them. International treaties, like the
Convention to Protect the Rights of Migrant Workers and Their Families and several
ILO conventions, already embody the outlines of an international regulatory
framework. But these instruments will only become more effective with widespread
ratification and enforcement. Countries that host migrant workers have
been particularly slow to ratify these conventions and have often used their positions
of greater bargaining power to negotiate bilateral labor agreements that
have largely avoided human rights protections.
More could be done for migrant domestic workers, for instance, multilateral
agreements that establish minimum standards for recruitment and working conditions.
Such agreements are needed to avoid a “race to the bottom,” in which
labor-sending countries compete for jobs by lowering their protections for their
workers. The United Nations can support such efforts. To do so, it must expand
from the politically cautious focus on the money migrants bring to economic
development through their remittances, highlighted in the September 2006 UN
High-Level Dialogue on Migration and Development. Instead it should centralize a
rights-based approach to migration that seeks to end the abuses migrants confront
and incorporates the kinds of ideas sketched here. A good time to start
would be the next global meeting of governments on migration due to take place
in Belgium in March 2007.
Conclusion
Millions of migrants labor as domestic workers—most of them women and girls.
Rather than receiving the respect due them and a proper recognition of the critical
role they play in supporting families and providing care for the young and elderly,
such workers are met with disregard and, too often, neglect and abuse.
Remedies are known and feasible, but action requires political will.
Experience shows that governments gain, not lose, by providing protections for
such workers. Large-scale labor migration is a prominent feature of globalization
today, but this force is best harnessed to serve economic growth through rules
that respect the dignity and protect the basic rights of the workers, whatever job
they perform.
Extending and enforcing the protections of existing labor laws, monitoring the
labor recruitment industry, and reforming immigration policies are steps that successful
governments are already taking which can be usefully emulated by others.
Such changes not only encourage safe migration and safe work, but help reduce
human trafficking and undocumented migration. Protecting the migrants’ right to
form associations and raising public awareness among employers can also facilitate
passage of needed reforms and generate public pressure for accountability.
Domestic workers should not have to gamble with their rights.
Nisha Varia is a senior researcher with the Women’s Rights Division at Human
Rights Watch.