Equatorial Guinea
Corruption, poverty, and repression continue to plague Equatorial Guinea under
President Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, who has been in power since
1979. Vast oil revenues fund lavish lifestyles for the small elite surrounding the
president, while a large proportion of the population continues to live in poverty.
Mismanagement of public funds and credible allegations of high-level corruption
persist, as do other serious abuses, including arbitrary detention,
secret detention, and unfair trials.
The period surrounding legislative elections in May 2013 was marked by the
denial of fundamental freedoms. The government blocked planned protests by
political opponents and arrested the organizers. The ruling party gained an
overwhelming victory in the election, but the poll lacked credibility because of
biased electoral processes and restrictive conditions for international
observers.
The new government that formed in September maintained a system that lacks
effective checks on the powers of President Obiang. Obiang appointed his eldest
son and possible successor, “Teodorin,” to one of 15 senate seats he personally
selects, under 2011 constitutional changes. Obiang retained Teodorin
as second vice president, an appointed post not contemplated in the constitution.
Obiang and his government strongly defended Teodorin against allegations of
corruption and money laundering, which are the focus of foreign law enforcement
investigations in France and the United States. Although several legal
decisions went in Teodorin’s favor in August, notably a California judge’s dismissal
of part of a case against him, followed by Interpol’s unexpected withdrawal
of an international arrest warrant against him in a separate case filed in
France, intensive investigations in both countries continue and a Europe-wide
warrant issued at France’s request remains in effect.
Economic and Social Rights
Equatorial Guinea is the third largest oil producer in sub-Saharan Africa and
has a population of approximately 700,000 people. According to the United Nation’s 2013 Human Development Report, the country has a per-capita gross
domestic product of US$32,026, which is the highest wealth ranking of any
African country and one of the highest in the world, yet it ranks 136 out of 187
countries in the Human Development Index. As a result, Equatorial Guinea has
by far the largest gap of all countries between its per-capita wealth and its
human development score.
Despite the country’s abundant natural resource wealth and government’s obligations
to advance the economic and social rights of its citizens, it has directed
little of this wealth to meet their needs. Figures released by the International
Monetary Fund in early 2013 showcase the government’s spending priorities:
while half of Equatorial Guinea’s capital spending in 2011 was used to build
infrastructure and another 22 percent was spent on public administration,
health and education together accounted for only 3 percent of capital spending.
About half of the population lacks clean water or basic sanitation facilities,
according to official 2012 statistics. A large portion of the population also lacks
access to quality health care, decent schools, or reliable electricity. The government
does not publish basic information on budgets and spending, and citizens
and journalists lack the freedom to monitor the use of the country’s natural
resource wealth.
Freedom of Expression and Association
Equatorial Guinea is notorious for its poor record on press freedom. Local journalists
are unable to criticize the government or address issues the authorities
disapprove of without risk of censorship or reprisal. Only a few private media
outlets exist in the country, and they are generally owned by persons close to
President Obiang; self-censorship is common. Foreign news is available to the
small minority with access to satellite broadcasts and the Internet; others have
access only to limited foreign radio programming.
Freedom of association and assembly are severely curtailed in Equatorial
Guinea, greatly limiting the effectiveness of civil society groups. The government
imposes restrictive conditions on the registration and operation of nongovernmental
groups. The country has no legally registered independent
human rights groups. The few local activists who seek to address human rights
related issues face intimidation, harassment, and reprisals.
Political Parties and Opposition
Only two political parties offered candidates independently in the May legislative
elections. The other 10 officially recognized political parties aligned with
the ruling party, which benefited from a virtual monopoly on power, funding,
and access to national media. The May vote, like prior elections in the country,
were marked by serious human rights violations and a denial of fundamental
freedoms, including arbitrary arrests and restrictions on freedom of assembly.
The National Election Commission is controlled by the ruling party and is headed
by the interior minister, a prominent member of the governing party.
Requests by political activists and opposition political parties to hold peaceful
demonstrations were denied. Protests planned for May and June were blocked
and the organizers of the May event were arrested. At least 10 activists were
arrested in May, following calls for a peaceful demonstration on May 15 to call
for government reforms and to protest a government decision denying registration
to a new political party, Partido Democrático de la Justicia Social
(Democratic Party for Social Justice). Clara “Lola” Nsegue Eyí and Natalia Angue
Edjodjomo, the party’s co-founders and coordinators of the demonstration,
were arrested on May 13 in Malabo and transferred to the city of Mongomo.
They were both released after three weeks, but Nsegue was subsequently rearrested
in Malabo and flown to Mongomo, an inland city, more than 200 miles
away, where she remained in custody without charge from late June until her
release in October.
Jerónimo Ndong, secretary general of the opposition party Unión Popular
(People’s Union), was arrested on May 13 and held for several days, also in connection
with the planned protest. He went into hiding after his release, but
turned himself in when the authorities arrested his wife and brother to force
him to emerge from hiding. Ndong was then rearrested and held for another
seven days.
A number of people were arrested on their way to the planned May 15 protest
and later released, including Salvador Bibang Ela, a leader of the Convergencia
Social Democrática Popular (CPDS, People’s Social Democratic Convergence)
opposition party. The protest was not held, due to these arrests and the heavy
presence of security forces in the streets.
In June, security forces surrounded the CPDS headquarters in Malabo and several
party leaders were briefly arrested in a successful effort to block a planned
demonstration against alleged election fraud. The party’s earlier request for a
permit for the protest was denied.
On September 22, Weja Chicampo, coordinador of the Movimiento para la
Autodeterminación de la Isla de Bioko (MAIB, Movement for the Self-
Determination of Bioko Island), was deported to Spain from the Malabo airport
as he returned from a visit to there. Chicampo had previously lived in exile in
Spain, following repeated arrests and prison terms in Equatorial Guinea, but
had moved back to Equatorial Guinea. He remained in Spain at time of writing.
Torture, Arbitrary Detention, and Unfair Trials
Due process rights are routinely flouted in Equatorial Guinea and prisoner mistreatment
remains common. Many detainees are held indefinitely without
knowing the charges against them. Some are held in secret detention. Lawyers
and others who have visited prisons and jails indicate that serious abuses continue,
including beatings in detention that amount to torture.
President Obiang exercises inordinate control over the judiciary, which lacks
independence. The president is designated as the country’s “chief magistrate.”
Among other powers, he chairs the body that oversees judges and appoints the
body’s remaining members.
Judicial processes are used to intimidate or punish those perceived as disloyal
to those in power. In July, Roberto Berardi, a business associate of Teodorín,
was convicted of theft of company property and given a two-and-a-half year
sentence, following a brief trial at which Berardi’s family said no evidence was
presented. Beradi had been in government custody in Bata since January.
According to his family, Berardi’s arrest came after he asked Teodorin about a
suspicious bank transfer to a US account. They also allege that he was held in
secret detention for several weeks and subjected to torture.
Eleuterio Esono, an Equatoguinean citizen who returned to the country from
exile in Sweden in early 2013, was held without charge in a Malabo jail from
March 12 until the end of April. He was arrested without warrant in connection
with an alleged conspiracy against the state.
Agustín Esono Nsogo, a teacher arrested in October 2012 for an alleged plot to
destabilize the country, remained in custody without charge or trial.
Key International Actors
The US is Equatorial Guinea’s main trading partner and source of investment in
the oil sector. The US government openly criticized the May legislative elections
in Equatorial Guinea, citing “serious concerns” about arbitrary detentions, limits
on free speech and assembly, and the opposition’s severely restricted ability
to access the media and the Internet-based social networks.
Spain, the former colonial power, also applied some pressure on Equatorial
Guinea to improve its human rights record by publicly criticizing the May vote.
In a speech during the G20 summit and subsequently, United Kingdom Prime
Minister David Cameron prominently used Equatorial Guinea as an example of
the so-called resource curse: a corrupt, poorly governed country with great
wealth that does not benefit the majority of its people.
President Obiang continued to seek international attention as a statesman,
hosting a summit with African and Latin American leaders in March and accepting
from North Korea in July the International Kim Jong-il Prize “for his commitment
to justice, development, peace and harmony.”