Equatorial Guinea
Equatorial Guinea remains mired in corruption, poverty, and repression under the
leadership of Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, the country’s president for over
30 years. Vast oil revenues fund lavish lifestyles for the small elite surrounding
the president, while the majority of the population lives in dire poverty. The government
regularly engages in torture and arbitrary detention. It also continues a
practice of abducting perceived opponents abroad and holding them in secret
detention. Journalists, civil society, and members of the political opposition face
heavy government repression.
President Obiang, who overwhelmingly won re-election in November 2009 in a
deeply flawed vote, unsuccessfully sought to enhance his international image by
announcing purported human rights reforms. Several prominent Obiang initiatives,
including a the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) prize in his honor, were blocked due to widespread concern
over well-documented corruption and abuse in his administration.
Economic and Social Rights
Significant oil revenues and the country’s small population make Equatorial
Guinea’s per capita gross domestic product among the highest in the world, and
the highest in sub-Saharan Africa. Nevertheless, socioeconomic conditions for
the country’s population of approximately 600,000 remain dismal. One study
published in The Lancet found that the country had the world’s highest child mortality
rate, though a second study in the same publication found that the country
did see progress in reducing maternal mortality.
The government has failed to utilize available resources to progressively realize
the social and economic rights of the population. Given its high oil revenues, it
has invested only paltry sums in health, education, and other social services. As
reported by the International Monetary Fund in May, after a four-year delay,
Equatorial Guinea in 2010 began to disburse “small” amounts for those purposes
through its Social Development Fund. The government, instead, has prioritized
investments in projects, such as an ultra-modern hospital, that have little benefit for the poor who lack access to basic health services. An anti-malaria campaign
largely funded by Western oil companies has lowered the incidence of malaria.
In February a United States Senate investigation revealed that President Obiang’s
eldest son and presumed successor—known by the nickname Teodorín—who
serves as minister of agriculture and forestry, bypassed money-laundering controls
and used suspect funds to finance expensive purchases in the US. The son’s
spending on luxury goods from 2004-2007 was nearly double the Equatoguinean
government’s 2005 budget for education. The US Senate also reported that
Teodorín is under criminal investigation in the US. In response to this negative
publicity, he hired a Washington communications firm to polish his image, selecting
the same firm used by his father. President Obiang also hired a new US lobbyist,
replacing the firm he retained after a 2004 US Senate investigation exposed
his improper personal spending from national oil accounts.
Freedom of Expression and Association
Equatorial Guinea remains notorious for its lack of press freedom; its ranking by
Reporters Without Borders fell to 167th out of 178 countries in 2010. A few nonstate-
controlled media outlets publish erratically and are tightly restrained.
Journalists from the state media are not permitted to criticize the government.
According to international press freedom groups, in January the government fired
four reporters from the state radio and television broadcaster for “lack of enthusiasm.”
In February a journalist with state-run radio was arrested and held for three
days after he reported on-air that seven bodies were found at a trash dump in
Bata, the largest city on the country’s mainland. In April the sole foreign correspondent
in Equatorial Guinea, an Agence France-Presse reporter, was detained
and held for several hours when he attempted to cover the arrival of foreign dignitaries
at the airport in Malabo, the capital.
Freedom of association and assembly are also severely curtailed, infringing on
the development of civil society. The government imposes restrictive conditions
on the registration and operation of nongovernmental groups. As a result, there is
not one legally registered independent human rights organization in the country.
The few local activists who openly promote needed reforms are vulnerable to intimidation, harassment, and reprisals. The government is also intolerant of critical
views from abroad, frequently characterizing those who expose President
Obiang’s autocratic and corrupt rule as racist and colonialist. It also regularly
denies visas to foreign journalists.
Political Parties and Political Opposition
Contrary to President Obiang’s claims that “my country is democratic,” free and
fair elections are denied to its people. In the lead-up to the November 2009 presidential
vote, which President Obiang won with 95.4 percent of the ballot, the government
stifled and harassed the country’s beleaguered political opposition,
denied the opposition equal access to the media, and imposed serious constraints
on international observers.
The ruling Democratic Party (PDGE) maintains a monopoly over political life. Only
two of the four other political parties with candidates running in the election—the
Convergence for Social Democracy (CPDS) and the People’s Union (UP)—actively
oppose the ruling party and Obiang. Opposition parties are silenced through the
use of criminal prosecution, arbitrary arrest, and harassment. Freedom House
named Equatorial Guinea as one of the “worst of the worst” countries for the
harsh repression of political rights and civil liberties, as it has for several previous
years.
In July Teodorín was elected to head the ruling party’s youth wing. That role automatically
confers on the younger Mr. Obiang the vice-presidency of the PDGE and
presumably ensures that he is next in line to replace his father.
Abduction, Arbitrary Detention, Torture, and Unfair Trials
There is no independent judiciary in Equatorial Guinea. The government commonly
employs arbitrary detention and arrests without due process. Detainees continued
to be held indefinitely without knowing the charges against them. Basic fair
trial standards are disregarded. Torture remains a serious problem despite a
national law prohibiting it. Equatorial Guinea’s security services have kidnapped
more than a dozen perceived opponents abroad, including at least four in 2010.
Amnesty International reported that Equatorial Guinea abducted four nationals
living in exile in Benin in January 2010, held them in secret detention where they
were tortured and forced to confess to participating in a February 2009 attack on
the presidential palace, and then executed them in August following a military
trial that violated international human rights standards and the country’s own
laws.
The government had earlier arbitrarily detained and accused 10 opposition politicians
and scores of Nigerian citizens, including fisherman and traders, of involvement
in the same attack on the presidential palace. In March, after more than a
year in detention, seven of the Nigerian citizens were prosecuted in an unfair
civilian trial and each sentenced to 12 years in prison, while two Equatoguinean
opposition members were first acquitted by the civilian court and then retried in
August by a military court, receiving sentences of 20 years.
Key International Actors
At its review under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism of the UN Human
Rights Council in December 2009, and during a follow-up session in March 2010,
Equatorial Guinea accepted over 100 recommendations to improve its human
rights record, including commitments to end torture and arbitrary and secret
detentions. In June President Obiang announced a reform plan at the Global
Forum in Cape Town, South Africa, pledging that he would make his country’s oil
revenues fully transparent, increase social spending, institute legal reforms, protect
human rights, and preserve the environment. Although President Obiang
hired a “reform adviser” to help promote these purported improvements, the various
pledges were consistently belied by his government’s action.
In April the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, a global initiative promoting
openness on petroleum and mining revenues, expelled Equatorial Guinea for
failing to meet its most basic criteria. In July, the Community of Portuguese-
Speaking Countries deferred Equatorial Guinea’s application to join, also in the
wake of controversy over President Obiang’s record. (Although Portuguese is not
spoken in the former Spanish colony, President Obiang declared it Equatorial
Guinea’s newest national language.) In August the US government, as well as a
UN working group and others, sharply criticized the unfair trial and executions that took place that month in Equatorial Guinea. In October, after stalling a decision
several times, UNESCO indefinitely suspended an award named after—and
funded by—President Obiang. UNESCO’s executive board acted after a global civil
society campaign generated an international uproar over the planned “dictator
prize” that threatened to seriously taint the organization.
The US is Equatorial Guinea’s main trading partner and US companies dominate
the country’s oil sector. The US government took some steps to hold Equatorial
Guinea to global standards, notably taking a strong stance at UNESCO against the
Obiang prize.
Spain could play an important role as the former colonial power, but it generally
has declined to apply pressure on Equatorial Guinea regarding human rights
issues. The Spanish government, however, also opposed the UNESCO prize.
In addition to the reported criminal inquiry against Teodorín Obiang in the US,
legal challenges are proceeding in France, Spain, and before the African
Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights alleging misuse of Equatorial
Guinea’s oil funds.