Guatemala
More than a decade after the end of Guatemalas brutal civil war, impunity
remains the rule when it comes to human rights violations. Ongoing acts of intimidation
threaten to reverse the little progress that has been made toward promoting
accountability in recent years.
The country continues to face high levels of violence associated with both electoral
politics and common crime. Guatemalas weak and corrupt law enforcement
institutions have proven incapable of containing the powerful organized crime
groups that, among other things, are believed responsible for continuing attacks
on human rights defenders.
Impunity
Guatemala continues to suffer the effects of an internal armed conflict that ended
in 1996. A truth commission sponsored by the United Nations estimated that as
many as 200,000 people were killed during the 36-year war and attributed the
vast majority of the killings to government forces.
Guatemalans seeking accountability for these abuses face daunting obstacles.
The prosecutors and investigators who handle these cases receive grossly inadequate
training and resources. The courts routinely fail to resolve judicial appeals
and motions in an expeditious manner, allowing defense attorneys to engage in
dilatory legal maneuvering. The army and other state institutions fail to cooperate
fully with investigations into abuses committed by current or former members.
The police do not provide adequate protection to judges, prosecutors, and witnesses
involved in politically sensitive cases.
Of the 626 massacres documented by the truth commission, only two cases have
been successfully prosecuted in the Guatemalan courts. In 1999, a Guatemalan
court sentenced three former civil defense patrol members to prison for the murders
of two of the 177 civilians massacred in Rio Negro in 1982. In addition, in
October 2005, the Supreme Court of Justice upheld the 2004 sentencing of a lieutenant
and 13 soldiers to 40 years in prison for the 1995 Xaman massacre in
which 11 civilians were killed.
By contrast, the prosecution of former military officers allegedly responsible for
the 1982 Dos Erres massacre, in which at least 162 people died, and the trial of
six other civil defense patrol members, alleged to be complicit in the Rio Negro
massacres, have been held up for years by dilatory defense motions.
The few other convictions obtained in human rights cases have come at considerable
cost. In the case of Myrna Mack, an anthropologist who was assassinated in
1990, it took more than a decade to obtain the conviction of an army colonel,
Valencia Osorio, for his role in orchestrating the killing. During that time, a police
investigator who gathered incriminating evidence was murdered, and two other
investigatorsas well as three witnessesreceived threats and fled the country.
Osorio, meanwhile, escaped police custody and has not served his sentence.
In April 2007, Guatemalas Constitutional Court confirmed the lower courts sentencing
of Colonel Byron Disrael Lima Estrada, Captain Byron Lima Oliva, and
priest Mario Orantes Njera to 20 years in prison on charges of being accomplices
in the 1998 murder of Bishop Juan Gerardi Conedera.
The July 2005 discovery of approximately 70 to 80 million documents of the disbanded
National Police, including files on Guatemalans who were murdered and
disappeared during the armed conflict, could play a key role in the prosecution
of those who committed human rights violations during the conflict. Yet there is
no legal framework in place to ensure adequate long-term management of the
archive, nor to regulate public access to its files.
In July 2007, a Guatemalan appellate court ordered the declassification of military
documents from the 1980s. These documents may also provide crucial evidence
for use in future human rights trials.
Impunity remains a chronic problem with common crimes as well. According to
the National Civilian Police, 5,885 people were murdered in 2006. This is the
highest number of murders reported in the last 10 years. The Guatemalan Human
Rights Ombudsmans Office estimates that convictions are only obtained in
approximately 6 percent of all criminal cases; the conviction rate drops to less
than 3 percent in cases involving murders of women and children.
On February 19, 2007, three Salvadoran representatives from the Central American
Parliament and their driver were murdered near Guatemala City. On February 22,
four Guatemalan policemen were arrested as suspects in the crime, but were murdered
several days later while in prison awaiting legal proceedings. At this writing,
no trial date had been set for the suspects arrested in either of these two
cases.
Frustration with the lack of justice in Guatemala has undoubtedly contributed to
acts of vigilantism in the last several years. Public lynching is a common problem,
with 40 lynching cases reported between January and August 2007. The majority
of lynching victims were suspected of having committed a crime, but there have
also been lynching cases in the past few years which were motivated by other factors,
such as disputes over land or water.
Electoral Violence
The September 9, 2007, presidential, congressional, and municipal elections and
the November 4 run-off presidential election were preceded by a wave of violence
against political candidates and members of political parties. The Guatemalan
Human Rights Ombudsmans Office reported 55 attacks and threats against political
candidates and members of political parties in 2007, resulting in 26 deaths.
Excessive Use of Force
Members of the national police still sometimes employ excessive force against
suspected criminals and others. The perpetrators are often poorly trained police
officers. In addition, the UN Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary, or
arbitrary executions has reported that there is strong evidence that members of
state security forces have engaged in acts of social cleansing, including the execution
of gang members, criminal suspects, and other social undesirables.
Human Rights Defenders
Attacks and threats against human rights defenders remain commonplace. In
February 2007, for example, an employee of the Center for Legal Action in Human
Rights (Centro para la Accion Legal en Derechos Humanos, CALDH) was briefly kidnapped and several other members of CALDHs legal team received written
and oral threats in connection with their work for the organization. Members of
the Guatemalan Foundation for Forensic Anthropology (Fundacion de
Antropologia Forense de Guatemala, FAFG) continued to receive death threats in
2007 in connection with their work exhuming bodies buried in clandestine cemeteries
throughout the country.
Others involved in human rights prosecutions are also routinely threatened or
attacked, including justice officials, forensic experts, plaintiffs, and witnesses.
Journalists, labor activists, and others who have denounced abuses by the
authorities are also subject to violence and intimidation. Guatemalan human
rights organizations report that 158 such acts of violence or intimidation were
reported between January and August 2007.
There is widespread consensus among local and international observers that the
people responsible for these acts of violence and intimidation are affiliated with
private, secretive, and illegally armed networks or organizations, commonly
referred to in Guatemala as clandestine groups. These groups appear to have
links to both government officials and organized crimewhich give them access
to considerable political and economic resources. The Guatemalan justice system,
which has little ability even to contain common crime, has so far proven no
match for this powerful and dangerous threat to the rule of law.
Key International Actors
In September 2007 the UN secretary-general appointed a former Spanish prosecutor
and judge to lead the newly-created Commission Against Impunity in
Guatemala (Comision Internacional de Investigacion contra la Impunidad en
Guatemala, CICIG). The commission will be composed of international and national
experts, who will work in conjunction with the Guatemalan Attorney Generals
Office to investigate, prosecute, and dismantle the clandestine groups responsible
for ongoing violence against human rights defenders.
In a landmark ruling, Spains Constitutional Court held on September 26, 2005,
that in accordance with the principal of universal jurisdiction, cases of alleged
genocide committed during Guatemalas internal armed conflict could be prosecuted in the Spanish courts, even if no Spanish citizens were involved. On July 7,
2006, Spanish Judge Pedraz issued international arrest warrants for eight
Guatemalans and the Spanish government requested their extradition in late
2006. Although Guatemalan courts have authorized the arrests of four of the
accused, at this writing only Germn Chupina Barahona, the former director of the
National Police, and ngel Anbal Guevara Rodriguez, the former minister of
defense, are in police custody in Guatemala. Extradition proceedings have been
delayed due to the defendants numerous appeals.
The UN High Commissioner for Human Rights opened an office in Guatemala in
2005 to provide observation and technical assistance on human rights practices.
In February 2007 the office issued a report on Guatemala, expressing its concern
over human rights violations and urging the government to take a number of
steps in order to combat violence and impunity, such as providing the National
Civilian Police with human rights training and with the human and financial
resources required to function effectively.
The Inter-American human rights system continues to provide an important venue
for human rights advocates seeking to press Guatemala to accept responsibility
for past abuses.