GL8K<D8C8
Guatemala’s weak and corrupt law enforcement institutions have proved incapable
of containing the powerful organized crime groups and criminal gangs
that contribute to one of the highest violent crime rates in the Americas. Illegal
armed groups are believed to be responsible for ongoing threats and targeted
attacks against civil society actors and justice officials.
Although impunity remains the norm for human rights violations, there were
significant advances for accountability in 2011, including convictions of four former
officers for a notorious massacre in 1982 and the first arrest of a top-ranking
official for human rights violations.
Public Security, Police Conduct, and the Criminal Justice System
Illegal armed groups and criminal gangs significantly contribute to violence and
intimidation, which they use to further political objectives and illicit economic
interests, including drug-trafficking.
Powerful and well-organized youth gangs, including the Mara Salvatrucha and
Barrio 18, have also contributed to escalating violence. The gangs use lethal
violence against those who defy their control, including gang rivals, former
gang members, individuals who collaborate with police, and those who refuse
to pay extortion money. They are believed responsible for the widespread
killing of bus drivers targeted for extortion. According to local media, 183 bus
drivers or their assistants were murdered in 2010, and 105 in the first eight
months of 2011.
Mexican drug cartels, in particular the Zetas, have added to violence and lawlessness
in Guatemala. In December 2010 President Alvaro Colom declared a
state of siege and martial law in Alta Verapaz, a department near Guatemala’s
northern border with Mexico, claiming the Zetas’s criminal activities had made
the region ungovernable. The state of siege, which was renewed for a further
month in January, enabled the security forces to prohibit meetings and carry out
arrests and searches without warrants. However, violence by the Zetas continued.
In May 2011 the group claimed responsibility for a massacre at a ranch in neighboring Petén department, in which 27 peasants were murdered in cold
blood and all but two were beheaded.
Guatemala’s justice system has proved largely incapable of curbing violence
and containing criminal gangs and mafias. According to official figures, there
was 95 percent impunity for homicides in 2010. Deficient and corrupt prosecutorial
and judicial systems and police, as well as the absence of an effective
witness protection system, all contribute to Guatemala’s alarmingly low prosecution
rate. In addition, members of the judicial system are routinely subject to
attacks and intimidation. Despite these enormous obstacles, there were a number
of successful prosecutions in 2011, due partly to the work of Attorney
General Claudia Paz y Paz, and the key role played by the United Nations’s
International Commission against Impunity in Guatemala (CICIG).
Police have used repressive measures to curb gang activity, including arbitrary
detentions and extrajudicial killings. As part of an investigation into police
involvement in extrajudicial executions in 2010 and 2011, CICIG assisted in the
prosecution of two former members of the National Police’s criminal investigation
division, who were sentenced in June 2011 to 25 years in prison for the
enforced disappearance of an alleged extortionist in October 2009.
Accountability for Past Abuses
Guatemala continues to suffer the effects of its 36-year civil war. A UN-sponsored
Commission on Historical Clarification (CEH) estimated that as many as
200,000 people were killed during the conflict. The CEH attributed 93 percent
of the human rights abuses it documented to state security forces and concluded
the military had carried out “acts of genocide.”
Very few of those responsible for the abuses have been prosecuted. However,
2011 saw the first arrest of a top-ranking official for human rights violations. In
June Gen. Héctor Mario López Fuentes, former defense minister in the de facto
government of Gen. Oscar Humberto Mejía Victores, was detained for his
alleged role in massacres committed in 1982 to 1983. A judge also issued a
warrant for the arrest of Mejía Victores, who seized power in a coup in 1983, but as of October 2011 he was in the hospital after having suffered a stroke, according
to his lawyer.
In August 2011 a court sentenced four other former army officers to a total of
6,050 years in prison for participating in a brutal massacre in 1982 in Dos Erres,
in which more than 250 people, including children, were murdered. Of 626 documented
massacres, the Dos Erres case was only the fourth to have led to a
conviction.
Guatemala’s first conviction for the crime of enforced disappearance occurred
in August 2009, when an ex-paramilitary leader was sentenced to 150 years in
prison for his role in “disappearing” individuals between 1982 and 1984. The
verdict was made possible by a landmark ruling by the country’s Constitutional
Court in July 2009, which established that enforced disappearance is a continuing
crime that is not subject to a statute of limitations, as long as the whereabouts
or fate of the victims are still unknown.
The discovery in July 2005 of approximately 80 million documents of the disbanded
National Police, including files on Guatemalans killed or “disappeared”
during the conflict, could play a key role in prosecutions for past human rights
violations. Documents from the archive led to the arrest in March 2009 of two
former National Police agents for their participation in the “disappearance” in
1984 of student leader and activist Edgar Fernando García. In October 2011 a
court sentenced both men to 40 years in prison for the crime. Jorge Alberto
Gómez—the former head of a unit that coordinated police and army counterinsurgency
operations, who was arrested in April 2011—and ex-Col. Héctor Bol de
la Cruz—the National Police’s former director, who was arrested in June—are
currently facing trial for their alleged responsibility for García’s “disappearance.”
In September 2008 Congress passed the Law of Access to Public Information,
which prohibits “information related to investigations of violations of fundamental
human rights or crimes against humanity” from being classified as confidential
or reserved under any circumstances. In March 2009 President Colom
created the Military Archive Declassification Commission, tasked with sorting
and declassifying military documents from 1954 to 1966. In June 2011 the government made 12,287 declassified documents publicly available. According to a
commission member, 55 were kept secret on national security grounds, but
could be consulted by a court if required.
Labor Rights and Child Labor
Freedom of association and the right to organize and bargain collectively are
endangered by a high level of anti-union violence, including attacks on trade
union offices and threats, harassment, and killings of trade unionists. The
International Trade Union Confederation reported the killing of 16 trade unionists
in 2009 and 10 in 2010. In May 2011 two unidentified men on a motorcycle
shot and killed Idar Joel Hernández, finance secretary of the Izabal Banana
Workers’ Union (SITRABI). In April Oscar González—another SITRABI official who
worked at a Del Monte subsidiary in Morales, Izabal—was shot to death.
Guatemala has one of the highest rates of child labor in the Americas. The
International Labour Organization reported in 2008 that 16.1 percent of children
aged five to fourteen are obliged to work, many in unsafe conditions. Some of
these children are employed in the construction, mining, and sex industries.
Gender-Based Violence
Violence against women is a chronic problem in Guatemala and most perpetrators
are never brought to trial. According to the UN special rapporteur on extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions, investigations into crimes against
women are often inadequate and obstructed by investigating police operating
with a gender bias.
Palliative Care
Available palliative care is very limited in Guatemala, even though more than
10,000 people die of cancer or HIV/AIDS each year, many in severe pain. The
government has not made oral morphine available in most of the country and
has failed to ensure health care workers are adequately trained in modern pain
treatment methods. Guatemala has some of the most restrictive regulatory policies
in the region, discouraging doctors from prescribing pain medication and preventing patients in severe pain from accessing treatment. As a result, thousands
of Guatemalans unnecessarily suffer from severe pain and other distressing
symptoms every year.
Human Rights Defenders
Attacks and threats against human rights defenders are common, significantly
hampering human rights work throughout the country. There is a routine failure
to prosecute those responsible. In a rare exception, in July 2011 a court handed
down a three-year prison sentence to a man found guilty of repeatedly threatening
Norma Cruz Córdoba, director of the Fundación Sobrevivientes, a group that
supports women who are victims of violence, and her coworker Gloria Ayala
Pinto. The sentence was commuted to a fine.
In August 2011 four forensic experts from the Guatemalan Forensic
Anthropology Foundation (FAFG) received death threats after giving evidence in
the Dos Erres case. Four days earlier someone had slashed the tire of a pickup
truck belonging to FAFG’s director while he was waited in traffic in Guatemala
City. As of October the Attorney General’s Office had not identified those
responsible for these threats.
Key International Actors
The CICIG, established in 2007, plays a key role in assisting the Guatemalan
justice system in prosecuting violent crime. The commission’s unique mandate
allows it to work with the Attorney General’s Office, the police, and other government
agencies to investigate, prosecute, and dismantle the criminal organizations
operating in Guatemala. The CICIG can participate in criminal proceedings
as a complementary prosecutor, provide technical assistance, and promote
legislative reforms. As of September 2011 it had initiated 62 investigations,
and was directly participating in 20. The Office of the UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights has maintained an office in Guatemala since
2005 that provides observation and technical assistance on human rights practices.
In January 2011 Jorge Sosa Orantes, a former army officer who faces charges in
Guatemala as the commander responsible for the Dos Erres massacre, was
detained in Calgary, Canada, after fleeing from the United States where he was
accused of lying in an immigration application. Both Guatemala and Spain
sought Sosa’s extradition on war crimes charges. In September a Calgary judge
ordered that he be extradited to the US to be tried for immigration fraud.