Guatemala
Guatemala’s weak and corrupt law enforcement institutions have proved incapable
of containing the powerful organized crime groups and criminal gangs that
contribute to Guatemala having one the highest violent crime rates in the
Americas. Illegal armed groups, which appear to have evolved in part from counterinsurgency
forces operating during the civil war that ended in 1996, are
believed to be responsible for targeted attacks on civil society actors and justice
officials. More than a decade after the end of the conflict, impunity remains the
norm when it comes to human rights violations. The ongoing violence and intimidation
threaten to reverse the little progress that has been made toward promoting
accountability.
Guatemala ranks third lowest in the United Nations Human Development Index in
all of Latin America, and is also one of the most unequal countries in the region
in terms of wealth distribution.
Public Security, Police Conduct, and the Criminal Justice System
Guatemala has one of the highest homicide rates in the hemisphere, reaching 48
per 100,000 inhabitants in 2008. Numbers for the start of 2009 indicate that the
rate may grow even higher.
The existence of clandestine security structures and illegal armed groups or
organizations is an important factor contributing to this violence. These groups
employ violence and intimidation in pursuing both political objectives and illicit
economic interests, including drug trafficking. Maintaining links with state officials,
they consistently obstruct anti-impunity initiatives.
Powerful and well-organized youth gangs, including the “Mara Salvatrucha” and
“Barrio 18,” have also contributed to escalating violence in Guatemala. The gangs
use lethal violence against those who defy their control, including gang rivals and
former members, individuals who collaborate with police, and those who refuse
to pay extortion money. The gangs are believed to be responsible for the widespread
killings of public transit operators targeted for extortion: in 2008, 165 drivers
were murdered, and the killings have continued throughout 2009.
Police have used repressive measures in attempting to curb gang activity, including
arbitrary detentions and extrajudicial killings. Investigations by the Human
Rights Ombudsman’s Office and NGOs have found police involvement in “social
cleansing”—killings intended to eliminate alleged gang members and criminals.
The Guatemalan justice system has so far proved largely incapable of curbing violence
and containing these criminal mafias and gangs. According to official figures
and data from NGOs, 98 percent of all crimes in the country go unpunished.
Deficient and corrupt police, prosecutorial, and judicial systems, and the absence
of a systematic witness protection program all contribute to Guatemala’s alarmingly
low prosecution rate. Moreover, members of the justice system are routinely
subjected to attacks and acts of intimidation: Lawyers’ Rights Watch Canada
(LRWC), an NGO, documented the murder of 40 judges and lawyers in Guatemala
between 2005 and July 2009, including four in the first seven months of 2009.
Accountability for Past Abuses
Guatemala continues to suffer the effects of the 36-year civil war. A UN-sponsored
Commission on Historical Clarification (CEH) estimated that as many as 200,000
people were killed. The CEH attributed 93 percent of the human rights abuses it
documented to state security forces and concluded that the military had carried
out “acts of genocide.” Very few of those responsible for grave human rights violations
during the civil war have been held accountable. Of the 626 massacres
documented by the commission, only three cases have been successfully prosecuted
in the Guatemalan courts. Guatemala’s first conviction for the crime of
enforced disappearance occurred in August 2009, when an ex-paramilitary leader
was sentenced to 150 years in prison for his role in “disappearing” individuals
between 1982 and 1984. The verdict was made possible by a landmark ruling by
the country’s Constitutional Court in July 2009, which established the permanent
character of the crime of enforced disappearance.
Guatemalans seeking accountability for past abuses face daunting obstacles.
Prosecutors and investigators receive grossly inadequate training and resources.
The courts routinely fail to resolve judicial appeals and motions in a timely manner,
allowing defense attorneys to engage in dilatory legal maneuvering. The army
and other state institutions resist cooperating with investigations into abuses committed by current or former members. And the police regularly fail to provide
adequate protection to judges, prosecutors, and witnesses involved in politically
sensitive cases.
The July 2005 discovery of approximately 80 million documents of the disbanded
National Police, including files on Guatemalans who were killed or “disappeared”
during the conflict, could play a key role in the prosecution of past human rights
abuses. Documents in the archive led to the March 2009 arrest of two ex-agents
of the National Police for their alleged participation in the 1984 “disappearance”
of student leader and activist Edgar Fernando Garcia. President Álvaro Colom has
ordered the archives transferred to the institutional authority of the Ministry of
Culture, and the process of opening the files to the public is underway.
In February 2008 President Colom announced that he would open the military
archives spanning the civil war. Following a Constitutional Court ruling in favor of
releasing military archives, in September 2008 Congress passed the Law of
Access to Public Information, which orders that “in no circumstances can information
related to investigations of violations of fundamental human rights or crimes
against humanity” be classified as confidential or reserved. The Guatemalan military,
however, has only released a small portion of its archives.
Human Rights Defenders and Journalists
Attacks and threats against human rights defenders are commonplace, significantly
hampering human rights work throughout the country. The Protection Unit
of Human Rights Defenders (UDEFEGUA), an NGO, reported 220 attacks on human
rights defenders in 2008, and 171 attacks in the first six months of 2009.
According to the UN special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary, or arbitrary
executions, there were 12 reported killings of human rights defenders in 2008.
Journalists, especially those covering corruption, drug trafficking, and accountability
for abuses committed during the civil war, face threats and attacks for their
work. The Center for Informative Reports on Guatemala (CERIGUA) reports that in
2008 three journalists were killed, 13 were assaulted, and 10 others received
death threats. In April 2009 gunmen killed Rolando Santis, a reporter investigating
the murder of a suburban bus driver.
Labor Rights and Child Labor
Freedom of association and the right to organize and bargain collectively are
endangered by an increase in anti-union violence, including attacks on union
offices, threats, harassment, and killings of trade unionists. The International
Trade Union Confederation reports that nine trade unionists were killed in 2008,
the second highest total in the Americas. According to UDEFEGUA, there were 49
attacks on trade unionists between January and June 2009, including five killings.
Workers pressing for their rights in labor cases must rely on labor courts, whose
work is stymied by dilatory legal measures, lengthy backlogs, and an inability to
enforce rulings. Employers routinely ignore court orders for the reinstatement of
illegally fired workers. The lack of enforcement paves the way for employers to circumvent
labor code provisions, especially in the export processing zones (EPZs)
where “maquilas” (export-processing factories) are located. According to a 2008
United States Department of State report, only two out of the 216 companies
operating in the EPZs had recognized labor unions, and none had a collective bargaining
agreement. Abuses and sex discrimination against women working in the
maquila sector are commonplace.
Guatemala has one of the highest rates of child labor in the Americas. The
International Labour Organization reported in 2008 that 16.1 percent of children
ages five to fourteen are obliged to work, many in unsafe conditions.
Sexual and Gender-Based Violence
Violence against women is a chronic problem in Guatemala, and the vast majority
of perpetrators are never brought to trial. An estimated 722 women were murdered
in Guatemala in 2008. The Human Rights Ombudsman’s Office reports that
approximately 14 percent of victims show signs of torture, and about 13 percent
show signs of sexual abuse. According to the UN special rapporteur on extrajudicial,
arbitrary, and summary executions, investigations into crimes against
women, including transgender women, are often inadequate and obstructed by
investigating police who act with a gender bias.
Key International Actors
In September 2007 the UN secretary-general appointed a Spanish former prosecutor
and judge to lead the newly-founded Commission Against Impunity in
Guatemala (CICIG). The commission’s unique mandate allows it to work with the
Guatemalan Attorney General’s Office, the police, and other government agencies
to investigate, prosecute, and dismantle the criminal organizations operating in
Guatemala. The CICIG can partake in criminal proceedings as a complementary
prosecutor, provide technical assistance, and promote legislative reforms. As of
September 2009 the commission has undertaken 39 investigations and is participating
in eight prosecutions. In July the Guatemalan Congress ratified the extension
of the CICIG’s mandate until September 2011.
The UN High Commissioner for Human Rights has maintained an office in
Guatemala since 2005 that provides observation and technical assistance on
human rights practices in the country.
In a landmark ruling, Spain’s Constitutional Court held in September 2005 that, in
accordance with the principal of “universal jurisdiction,” cases of alleged genocide
committed during Guatemala’s civil war could be prosecuted in the Spanish
courts. In July 2006 a Spanish judge issued international arrest warrants for former
military dictator Gen. Efraín Ríos Montt and seven other Guatemalan officials
on charges of terrorism, genocide, and torture. In December 2007 the Guatemalan
Constitutional Court held that the arrest and extradition requests issued by Spain
were invalid. The Spanish court has pushed ahead with the case by collecting evidence
and testimony in Spain. However, in November 2009 the Spanish government
enacted legislation to limit the application of universal jurisdiction by
Spanish courts. At this writing it is unclear what the impact of this legislation
would be on the Guatemala case.