Guatemala
Eighteen years after the return of civilian rule and eight years after the
signing of peace accords, Guatemala has made little progress toward
securing the protection of human rights and the rule of law, essential
features of a functioning democracy. Ongoing acts of political violence
and intimidation threaten to reverse the little progress that has been
made in recent years. With the United Nations concluding its ten-year
verification mission at the end of 2004, efforts to establish new forms of
international collaboration on human rights issues face strong opposition
from powerful sectors within the country, as well as legal hurdles
created by the Constitutional Court’s highly restrictive interpretation of
the Guatemalan constitution.
Impunity
Guatemala is still suffering the effects of an internal armed conflict that
was, in many respects, the region’s most brutal. A U.N.-sponsored truth
commission estimated that as many as 200,000 people were killed during
the thirty-six-year war that ended in 1996. Government forces were
responsible for the vast majority of the killings.
Guatemalans seeking accountability for these abuses face daunting
obstacles. One is the weakness of a justice system that relies on prosecutors
and investigators who receive grossly inadequate training and
resources. The courts routinely fail to resolve judicial appeals and
motions in an expeditious manner, allowing defense attorneys to engage
in dilatory legal maneuvering. The army and other state institutions fail
to cooperate fully with investigations into abuses committed by current
or former members. The police do not provide adequate protection to
judges, prosecutors, and witnesses involved in politically sensitive cases.
Of the 626 massacres documented by the truth commission, only one
case has been successfully prosecuted in the Guatemalan courts. In 2004, a lieutenant and thirteen soldiers were found guilty of the 1995
Xamán massacre in which eleven civilians were murdered; they were
sentenced to 40 years in prison each. By contrast, the prosecution of
former military officers allegedly responsible for the 1982 Dos Erres
massacre, in which 162 people died, has been held up for years by dilatory
motions by the defense.
The few other convictions obtained in human rights cases have come at
considerable cost. In the case of Myrna Mack, an anthropologist who
was assassinated in 1990, it took over a decade to obtain the conviction
of an army colonel, Valencia Osorio, for his role in orchestrating the
killing. During that time, a police investigator who gathered incriminating
evidence was murdered, and two other investigators—as well as
three witnesses—received threats and fled the country. The conviction
was subsequently overturned by an appeals court in 2003, only to be
reinstated by the Supreme Court in 2004. However, Osorio was able to
escape police custody and has not served his sentence.
Clandestine Groups
Over the past three years, there have been an alarming number of
attacks and threats against Guatemalans seeking justice for past abuses.
The targets have included human rights organizations, justice officials,
forensic experts, plaintiffs, and witnesses involved in human rights cases.
They have also included journalists, labor activists, and others who have
denounced abuses of authority.
There is a widespread consensus among local and international
observers that the people responsible for these acts of intimidation are
affiliated with private, secretive, illegally armed networks or organizations,
commonly referred to in Guatemala as “clandestine groups.”
These groups appear to have links to both state agents and organized
crime—which give them access to considerable political and economic
resources. The Guatemalan justice system, which is ill-prepared to contain common crime, has so far proven no match for this powerful and
dangerous threat to the rule of law.
Excessive Use of Force
While political violence is no longer carried out as a matter of state policy,
members of the national police still sometimes employ excessive
force against suspected criminals and others. These cases usually entail
the abuse of authority by poorly trained police officers.
In August 2004, for instance, national police used excessive force against
workers who had occupied Nueva Linda, a private plantation on the
Pacific coast, according to the National Human Rights Ombudsman.
After the workers resisted police efforts to evict them from the property,
a gun battle erupted, killing eleven people, including four police.
Journalists who witnessed the confrontation reported that the police
carried out several extrajudicial executions. They also reported being
threatened and beaten by police.
Workplace Discrimination
Women and girls working in Guatemala’s two female-dominated industries—
the export-processing (maquiladora) and live-in domestic worker
sectors—face widespread sex discrimination at the hands of private
employers and the government. Domestic workers are denied key labor
rights protections, including minimum wage guarantees and an eighthour
workday, and have only limited rights to paid national holidays.
Younger women and girls, in particular, sometimes face sexual harassment
and violence in the homes where they work.
Women and girls working in the maquiladora sector, though formally
protected under the law, encounter persistent sex discrimination in
employment based on their reproductive status, with little hope for government
remedy. Guatemalan maquiladoras, many of which are suppliers for well-known South Korean and U.S.-based corporations, discriminate
against women workers in a number of ways—including requiring
women to undergo pregnancy tests as a condition of employment; denying,
limiting, or conditioning maternity benefits to pregnant women;
denying reproductive health care to pregnant workers; and, to a lesser
extent, firing pregnant women.
Key International Actors
The United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala (MINUGUA)
was scheduled to close its operations at the end of 2004. In preparation
for that date, MINUGUA sought to strengthen the capacity of key state
institutions to promote the goals of the 1996 peace accords and train
young Guatemalan professionals as verifiers and promoters of the
accords. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights reached an agreement with Guatemala to establish an
in-country office that would provide observation and technical assistance
following MINUGUA’s departure. However, the agreement,
which still had not been ratified by the Guatemalan Congress at this
writing, has faced significant opposition from some legislators.
The United Nations has also entered into an agreement with
Guatemala to establish a special commission to investigate and promote
the prosecution of the “clandestine groups.” The Commission for the
Investigation of Illegal Groups and Clandestine Security Organizations
(CICIACS) grew out of a proposal developed by the Guatemalan government
and local human rights groups, in consultation with members
of the international community. Both the U.S. and European diplomatic
corps have supported the creation of the CICIACS and expressed their
intention to help finance its operations. The agreement has not been
ratified by the Guatemalan Congress, however, and its prospects for ratification
have been greatly diminished by a finding of the Constitutional
Court that several of its articles were unconstitutional. The government
has said it would propose modifications to the initiative that would make it consistent with the court’s restrictive interpretation of the constitution.
The Inter-American human rights system has provided an important
venue for human rights advocates seeking to press the state to accept
responsibility for abuses. In 2004, Guatemala accepted state responsibility
for several cases brought before the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights, including the 1990 murder of anthropologist Myrna
Mack and the 1982 Plan de Sánchez massacre.