Guatemala
A dozen years after the end of Guatemala’s brutal civil war, impunity remains the
norm when it comes to human rights violations. Ongoing violence and intimidation
threaten to reverse the little progress that has been made toward promoting
accountability. Guatemala’s weak and corrupt law enforcement institutions have
proved incapable of containing the powerful organized crime groups that, among
other things, are believed to be responsible for attacks on human rights defenders,
judges, prosecutors, and others.
Impunity for Civil War Crimes
Guatemala continues to suffer the effects of an internal armed conflict that ended
in 1996. A United Nations-sponsored truth commission estimated that as many as
200,000 people were killed during the 36-year war, and attributed the vast majority
of the killings to government forces.
Guatemalans seeking accountability for these abuses face daunting obstacles.
Prosecutors and investigators receive grossly inadequate training and resources.
The courts routinely fail to resolve judicial appeals and motions in a timely manner,
allowing defense attorneys to engage in dilatory legal maneuvering. The army
and other state institutions resist cooperating fully with investigations into abuses
committed by current or former members. And the police regularly fail to provide
adequate protection to judges, prosecutors, and witnesses involved in politically
sensitive cases.
Of the 626 massacres documented by the truth commission, only three cases
have been successfully prosecuted in the Guatemalan courts. The third conviction
came in May 2008, when five former members of a paramilitary “civil patrol” were
convicted for the murders of 26 of the 177 civilians massacred in Rio Negro in
1982.
The July 2005 discovery of approximately 80 million documents of the disbanded
National Police, including files on Guatemalans who were murdered and “disappeared”
during the armed conflict, could play a key role in the prosecution of
those who committed human rights abuses during the conflict. By October 2008 the country’s Human Rights Ombudsman’s Office had processed seven million of
those documents, primarily related to cases presently under active investigation.
The office plans to open the first part of the archive in 2009.
In February 2008 President Álvaro Colom announced that he would open the military
archives spanning Guatemala’s civil war. However, the minister of defense
has since delayed handing over the files, arguing that the constitution protects
the confidentiality of documents related to national security. A new law passed in
September 2008 challenges this argument: article 24 of the Law of Access to
Public Information orders that “in no circumstances can information related to
investigations of violations of fundamental human rights or crimes against
humanity” be classified as confidential or reserved. The military archives remain
closed, however.
Impunity for Present-Day Crimes Including Attacks on Civil
Society
Impunity is not only the norm for crimes committed during the war, but also a
problem that persists for present-day crimes. In 2007 an average of 16 people
were killed each day in Guatemala, yet less than 3 percent of murder cases were
resolved, according to a study of police data by a respected think tank. No recent
case better illustrates the corrosive spread of violence and impunity in Guatemala
than the murder of three Salvadorean representatives from the Central American
Parliament and their driver in February 2007. Days after the crime, four
Guatemalan policemen were arrested as suspects and moved to prison, but all
four suspects were murdered while awaiting legal proceedings. In July 2008 the
chief prosecutor in the case, Juan Carlos Martinez, was assassinated. A former
mayor was arrested in August in connection with the killings, but at this writing,
no one has been found guilty of any of the murders.
Attacks and threats against human rights defenders are commonplace, and pose
a significant obstacle to their work. Others involved in human rights prosecutions
are also routinely threatened or attacked, including forensic experts, plaintiffs,
and witnesses. The Human Rights Ombudsman’s Office documented nearly 200
attacks and threats against human rights defenders in 2007.
The case of Amilcar de Jesus Pop Ac, a lawyer who has been assisting an indigenous
community in a dispute with a cement company, is representative. In August
2008 two armed men threatened to kill Pop, asking him why he continued to help
the community. Prior to this, Pop had received multiple death threats, which he
reported to the police and the public prosecutor, but neither had taken steps to
protect him.
The Protection Unit of Human Rights Defenders, an NGO, reported 37 attacks on
workers’ advocates in the first half of 2008, an alarming increase from the previous
year’s total of 13 such attacks. In March, Miguel Ángel Ramírez Enríquez—cofounder
of a trade union that represents banana pickers—was murdered in his
home. A month earlier, Ramírez’s daughter had been abducted and gang-raped
by four men who asked questions about her father’s organizing work. No one has
been prosecuted for either crime.
Journalists, especially those covering corruption, drug trafficking, and accountability
for abuses committed during the civil war, face threats and attacks for their
work. Five journalists have been killed in Guatemala since 2006. In May 2008 a
reporter who had been investigating government ties to drug traffickers died after
being shot four times in the head, a crime for which no one has been prosecuted.
From January to June 2008 four public prosecutors, a judge, and a magistrate
were assassinated, and dozens more were threatened. Most of the victims were
involved in trying cases of corruption or organized crime.
There is widespread consensus among local and international observers that the
people responsible for many of these acts of violence and intimidation are affiliated
with private, secretive, and illegally armed networks or organizations, commonly
referred to in Guatemala as “clandestine groups.” These groups appear to
have links to both government officials and organized crime, which give them
access to considerable political and economic resources. The Guatemalan justice
system has so far proved no match for this powerful threat to the rule of law.
Excessive Use of Force
Members of the national police sometimes employ excessive force against suspected
criminals and others. In September 2007 police officers arrested five men suspected of being members of a violent drug gang in Guatemala City. The bodies
of the men showed up on a ranch several days later, and two police officers are
currently standing trail for their murders.
Death Penalty
Guatemalan law allows for the death penalty, but it has not been applied since
2000. In February 2008 Congress passed a decree that would have restored the
practice, but the following month President Colom vetoed the decree. At this writing,
Guatemala’s moratorium on the death penalty continues.
Key International Actors
In September 2007 the UN secretary-general appointed a Spanish former prosecutor
and judge to lead the newly-created Commission Against Impunity in
Guatemala (CICIG). The commission’s mandate is to work with the Guatemalan
Attorney General’s Office to investigate, prosecute, and dismantle the “clandestine
groups” responsible for ongoing violence against human rights defenders. In
its first year, the commission has taken on 15 cases, which are seen as representative
of the most entrenched problems of impunity. Yet as the CICIG acknowledged
in its 2008 annual report, it has also been “systematically obstructed” at
times by the very corruption it seeks to root out.
In a landmark ruling, Spain’s Constitutional Court held in September 2005 that, in
accordance with the principal of “universal jurisdiction,” cases of alleged genocide
committed during Guatemala’s civil war could be prosecuted in the Spanish
courts. In July 2006 a Spanish judge issued international arrest warrants for eight
Guatemalans and the Spanish government requested their extradition in late
2006. However, in December 2007 the Guatemalan Constitutional Court ruled that
two of the accused could not be extradited to Spain. Nevertheless, the Spanish
court has pushed ahead with the case: in February, May, and October 2008 it collected
testimony from witnesses, victims, and experts on the conflict. Meanwhile,
in Guatemala, the case continues to be held up by defense motions, while witnesses
and experts are subjected to harassment and threats.
Guatemala was reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism of the
UN Human Rights Council in May 2008. At that time, Guatemala pledged to ratify
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and the International
Convention on the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, and to
accept article 14 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination (which allows individual petition to the ICERD committee).
In June Guatemala ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and in
September it ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
The UN High Commissioner for Human Rights has maintained an office in
Guatemala since 2005 that provides observation and technical assistance on
human rights practices in the country. The Inter-American human rights system
provides an important venue for human rights advocates seeking to press
Guatemala to address past and ongoing abuses.
Guatemala is a member of the Dominican Republic-Central America Free Trade
Agreement (DR-CAFTA) between the United States and several countries in Central
America. In April 2008 six Guatemalan unions and the US trade union federation
AFL-CIO filed a complaint with the US Department of Labor’s Office of Trade and
Labor Affairs alleging violations of national and international labor laws. The complaint—
the first of its kind under DR-CAFTA—was accepted by the US in June and
is currently being investigated.