HIV/AIDS AND HUMAN RIGHTS
In July, Human Rights Watch established its own program dedicated to
addressing the problem of HIV/AIDS and human rights. The program will
document violations related to HIV/AIDS and advocate for legal and policy protections.
The program will work in partnership with NGOs around the world to
produce original research on AIDS-related human rights abuses, including in the
areas of women’s rights, children’s rights, rights of migrants and refugees, discrimination
on the basis of HIV status, and rights of prisoners.
The prominence of the human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune deficiency
syndrome (HIV/AIDS) pandemic on the global policy and aid agendas
reached a peak in 2001, but the world’s appreciation of AIDS as a human rights crisis
still had a long way to go. Human rights abuses that aggravate the HIV/AIDS
epidemic were highly prevalent across the globe in 2001, as they have been since the
early days of the disease. Addressing AIDS-related human rights abuses remained
an undersupported part of national HIV/AIDS programs, compromising the overall
effectiveness of national programs. By December 2000, HIV/AIDS had claimed
22 million lives globally, and 36 million persons were infected with the disease, over
70 percent of them in sub-Saharan Africa.
HIV/AIDS is fueled by discrimination and repression in many ways. The subordinate
status of women and girls in many settings makes them unable to refuse
unsafe or coercive sex.They frequently have less access than their male counterparts
to appropriate and accurate information about HIV transmission and the care of
persons with AIDS. They also face a variety of legal and cultural impediments to
treatment of sexually transmitted disease other than AIDS,which in turn increases
their biological vulnerability to HIV transmission. The United Nations Fund for
Women (UNIFEM) concluded in a 2001 statement that the HIV/AIDS epidemic
would never have attained its catastrophic proportions, especially in Africa, without
discrimination against and subordination of women.
Discrimination against gay men, injecting drug users, and sex workers in many
countries has marginalized these groups from the preventive services (condoms,
clean syringes for drug users, HIV testing and counseling, for example) and treatment
they need. Laws and policies favoring obligatory HIV testing and identification
of sex partners among some socially marginalized groups have served to drive
underground those who most need services. Drug users attempting to reduce their
risk of acquiring HIV by participating in needle exchange programs have faced
repression and violence in some countries.Prisoners in many parts of the world are
subject to sexual violence and are denied services that would help protect them
from HIV transmission through drug use.
HIV/AIDS has had particular impact in depriving children of their rights.AIDS
preferentially claims the lives of sexually active adults in the prime of their productive
lives, many of whom are parents. In Africa alone, over 13 million children
under age fifteen have lost a mother or both parents to AIDS, according to the
United Nations. This social crisis also has severe human rights consequences as
children orphaned by AIDS and those with ill parents are often forced to leave
school and become breadwinners, sometimes in hazardous jobs, and frequently
face abandonment, disinheritance and abuse as AIDS also ravages the extended
family members who would otherwise support them.
The course of the AIDS epidemic continues to be determined by people’s ability
to realize their right to treatment and preventive services. AIDS is no longer a leading
cause of death for young adults in North America and Western Europe, largely
because of access to costly antiretroviral drugs in these regions. The same treatment
remains largely out of reach in developing countries.
KEY GLOBAL DEVELOPMENTS
Following the historic U.N. Security Council session in January 2000 on
HIV/AIDS as a security threat, the General Assembly committed itself to holding a
special session on HIV/AIDS in 2001.The special session in June 2001 was an occasion
for highlighting the human rights dimension of the AIDS crisis, to which the
conference’s final declaration referred in general terms. The process of composing
the declaration, however, graphically illustrated human rights challenges that
remain. In the deliberations over the wording of the declaration, a number of countries,
principally Middle Eastern countries and the United States, objected to the
naming of men who have sex with men, injecting drug users, and sex workers as
high-risk groups with respect to HIV/AIDS. In spite of support from many other
countries for explicit inclusion of these groups to highlight the need for programs
to reach them, in the end they were not named in the final document. The declaration,
therefore, became an unwitting example of the stigmatization that persons in
these groups face every day and that impedes their access to services and support.
The year 2001 saw a dramatic strengthening of the global civil society movement
in favor of the right to treatment for HIV/AIDS. Pressure from non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) across the world was credited with contributing to the withdrawal
in April of a lawsuit brought against the government of South Africa by
thirty-nine multinational pharmaceutical companies. The drug companies had
challenged the implementation of a 1997 South African law that would have facilitated
the country’s production and importation of cheaper generic antiretroviral
drugs.While the dropping of the suit did not stir the government of South Africa
to increase AIDS drug access, legislative action followed quickly in Kenya and was
pending in several other countries, to enable a greater flow of cheaper drugs to persons
with AIDS.
The government of Brazil was in the global spotlight in 2001 as its national program
on AIDS continued to make locally produced antiretroviral drugs widely
available in the country. AIDS activists in Brazil pointed out that flaws remained in
the program, but the dramatic reduction in deaths from AIDS in the country and the more widespread use of preventive services because people knew that treatment
was available were testimony to the effectiveness of the government’s approach.The
legal foundation of Brazil’s AIDS program is a national law by which patents are not
honored in the country if the holder of the patent does not begin manufacturing
the product in Brazil within three years of the awarding of the patent. In May 2000,
the United States initiated an action against Brazil in the World Trade Organization
(WTO), asking the WTO to review Brazil’s patent laws.Under considerable public
pressure, just two months after the withdrawal of the pharmaceutical industry’s law
suit in South Africa, the office of the U.S. Trade Representative announced in June
2001 that it would drop its action against Brazil if Brazil agreed to notify U.S.-based
patent holders when it planned to manufacture generic versions of their drugs.
Brazil presented a resolution to the U.N. Commission on Human Rights in
March, asserting the human right of all persons with HIV/AIDS to treatment that
includes antiretroviral drugs. The resolution passed unanimously over the abstention
of the U.S. The WTO ministerial meeting in Qatar in November resulted in a
consensus of member states that the WTO agreement on global patent rules “does
not and should not prevent members from taking measures to protect public
health.” Although developing countries had sought a statement of even stronger
support for putting public health before patents, treatment access advocates
praised the Qatar consensus as a step forward and said they would work in 2002 for
more concrete language on patents and public health emergencies.
In April and May,United Nations Secretary-General KofiAnnan spearheaded an
effort to establish a global fund to which public and private donors could contribute
as part of a strengthened multilateral response to HIV/AIDS. Some treatment
access advocates had been pushing for an international funding mechanism
to draw in new resources to improve AIDS drug access for the poor. It was unclear
whether the new global fund would serve this purpose as its mandate will include
HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria, and the United States, among others, has
expressed its preference that the AIDS focus of the fund be mainly prevention.
Many questions remained about how the fund would be administered, how the
interests of persons with AIDS would be represented in its decision-making, and
especially whether the fund would ever have the U.S. $7 to $10 billion per year in
resources envisioned by KofiAnnan.The Bush Administration’s pledge ofU.S. $200
million to the fund was widely criticized as inadequate. Pledges to the fund totaled
about U.S. $1.4 billion in October 2001.
CHALLENGES BY REGION
Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa is the epicenter of HIV/AIDS. The disease constitutes a
humanitarian emergency, having killed about 18 million persons since the mid-
1980s, more than all of Africa’s wars over that period.With historically unimaginable
numbers of deaths of adults in their productive years, health and education
services and economic productivity overall have deteriorated as a result of AIDS, along with the erosion of the extended family and community-based institutions.
Silence and denial have characterized the response of many African leaders to this
catastrophe. Although more African leaders are beginning to speak out about
HIV/AIDS, including those who gathered for an African summit on AIDS in Abuja,
Nigeria in April 2001, programs, policies and resources remain inadequate to the
task of stemming the crisis.
Africa is the only region where women and girls outnumber men and boys
among persons living with AIDS. In nearly all of the heavily affected countries of
eastern and southern Africa, the rate of HIV infection among girls aged fifteen to
nineteen years is four to seven times higher than that of boys. In most countries,
girls are also more likely than boys to be pulled out of school when a parent
becomes ill, and they frequently have to become the breadwinners of the family.
AIDS-affected children, including large numbers of girls, continued to swell the
numbers of street children in certain countries, with NGOs reporting that girls
orphaned by AIDS increasingly find themselves having to engage in prostitution to
survive, putting them at high risk of HIV transmission. The subordinate status of
women and girls in the region had clearly facilitated the epidemic’s rapid spread
and destructive impact.
Lack of access to treatment has been a defining feature of the African AIDS crisis.
In August, Nigeria and Cameroon both contracted with Cipla, an India-based
generic drug manufacturer, to supply large-scale treatment programs for persons
with AIDS. The humanitarian NGO Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) also
launched large pilot treatment programs in seven African countries. These initiatives
will be examined closely for lessons on good practices to ensure wider-scale
treatment access on the continent.
Eastern Europe
The fastest growing AIDS epidemic in the last few years has been in eastern
Europe and the former Soviet states. It is fueled largely by the widespread use of
injected drugs, a phenomenon that has grown with poverty, high unemployment
and other aspects of the economic transition in the region as well as the easy availability
of narcotic drugs. Access to services such as needle exchange and treatment
for opportunistic infections remains very limited in many parts of the region.
According to the Open Society Institute, which has been a leader in establishing
AIDS-related services in the region, injecting drug use is highly prevalent among
sex workers, homeless youth, and prisoners—–groups likely to face stigmatization,
marginalization and even abuse by the authorities in some settings.
Asia
It is feared that the numbers of persons infected and living with AIDS in Asia will
surpass even the huge totals in Africa in the coming years. The epidemic in India,
already well established in some states, is facilitated by subordination of women
and discrimination against gay men and sex workers. Extremely high rates of infection
among injecting drug users and sex workers in parts of Southeast Asia are driving a rapidly accelerating epidemic. Steep rises in infection rates in some parts of
China, in some cases apparently fueled by the use of unsterilized needles in health
facilities or blood sales centers, came to light in 2001. Public alarm over local media
accounts of AIDS “outbreaks” reportedly led to incarceration of HIV-positive persons
by local authorities and other drastic measures.
Caribbean and Latin America
The Caribbean basin contains several countries that have the highest rates of
HIV infection outside sub-Saharan Africa. Policies and legal protections against
AIDS-related discrimination have not caught up with the pace of the epidemic in a
number of Latin American countries. Discrimination against HIV-positive gay
men and sex workers and many instances of forced HIV testing of these groups and
others have been reported in the media. In addition, with a fairly well developed
capacity for generic drug production in some countries, the right to AIDS drugs has
become a focus of civil society action. The national AIDS program in Brazil set a
high standard in making locally produced generic drugs widely available to persons
with AIDS. The proposed Free Trade Agreement for the Americas discussed at the
regional summit in Quebec, Canada in May would afford even greater protection
to patent-holding drug companies than they already enjoy under the terms of the
WTO’s intellectual property rules.
WIDENING RANGE OF ABUSES
Even as some aspects of the fight against AIDS have become better established,
the range of human rights abuses linked to all stages of HIV/AIDS epidemics
around the world has widened. In eastern and southern Africa, where HIV infection
is so prevalent that it is no longer meaningful to stigmatize minority or “highrisk”
groups, stigmatization of persons seeking AIDS-related care, especially
women and girls, continues to drive the epidemic.Women have reported to health
workers in several countries that they are aware of the risk of transmitting HIV to
their infants through breastfeeding, but feel they have to take that risk because not
breastfeeding will highlight their HIV-positive status and subject them to hostile
and even violent reprisals from their husbands or partners. Denial of AIDS as a
cause of death remains the rule rather than the exception even in the highest-prevalence
countries, contributing to the stigmatization of those courageous enough to
speak openly about their illness.
Children have a right to, and a life-and-death need for, access to good information
on HIV transmission and care for persons with AIDS. Formal education, especially
at the primary level, is an ideal vehicle for meeting this need. In many
countries, however, AIDS education in school has been strongly opposed by religious
groups and others who have alleged that sex education in schools encourages
promiscuity. In Africa, this denial of children’s and young people’s right to information
is compounded by the inability of many AIDS-affected children to stay in
school.When a parent or other adult in the household is ill with AIDS, children are withdrawn from school to provide care, to earn income for the family, or because a
family encumbered by the cost of treating a sick person can no longer afford to keep
a child in school. A Human Rights Watch investigation in Kenya in February and
March showed that children are further disadvantaged and entrenched in poverty
by a lack of protection of their inheritance rights. Kenya is not the only country in
Africa in which the state authorities have failed to institute legal to protect the rights
of the hundreds of thousands of children who now find themselves without relatives
to help protect their property.
Human rights protections continue to be the weakest part of generally feeble
responses to AIDS on the part of many African governments. Kenya again illustrates
an alarming pattern. The head of state did not even mention HIV/AIDS in
public until late 1999, by which time about 14 percent of the adult population was
already infected. In July 2001 he announced that he would urge parliament to institute
capital punishment for persons who transmit HIV intentionally and portrayed
this measure as an effective means of protecting women from AIDS.While intentional
transmission of HIV,where it can be demonstrated, should be punishable by
law, Kenya is one of many countries where an estimated 90 to 95 percent of HIVpositive
persons do not even know their HIV status. It is unlikely, therefore, that
focusing on “intentional” transmission would do much to curtail the epidemic.
Meanwhile, policies and programs that could go a long way to improving access of
women and girls to information and services remain non-existent or grossly underfunded.
HIV/AIDS in war was the object of international attention during the year. Soldiers
in many armed conflicts were thought or in some cases known to have very
high rates of HIV infection. To the extent that sexual coercion and sexual violence
directed toward the civilian population are instruments of war, HIV/AIDS renders
them more lethal. In January, as part of a Security Council session on HIV/AIDS,
the United Nations Joint Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and the U.N.’s
Department of Peacekeeping Operations undertook a joint project to reduce the
likelihood that U.N. peacekeepers would contract or transmit HIV as part of their
operations.The declaration of the U.N. special session on HIV/AIDS called on governments
to improve HIV/AIDS awareness and prevention activities targeted at
their armed forces.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
In the Shadow of Death: HIV/AIDS and Children’s Rights in Kenya, 6/01
No Escape: Male Rape in U.S. Prisons, 4/01
Scared at School: Sexual Violence Against Girls in South African Schools, 3/01