Honduras
Political upheaval in Honduras in 2009, which culminated with the military’s
removal of the democratically elected Honduran President Manuel Zelaya in June,
led to widespread human rights abuses by security forces during the demonstrations
that followed the coup. The de facto government led by Roberto Micheletti
sought to consolidate control of the country through repressive measures.
Facing international pressure to step down, the de facto government responded
by continuing to abuse protestors and issuing decrees suspending basic liberties.
It also applied the law selectively in what looked like a campaign to persecute
opponents, doing serious damage to human rights and the rule of law. In addition,
the government turned a blind eye to other human rights problems, including
the ongoing abuse of transgender people by police forces.
Excessive Force and Arbitrary Detentions
Following the military coup the de facto government imposed an immediate curfew
and issued a decree suspending key civil liberties, including freedoms of the
press and assembly. It also gave the military broad authority to quell protests. In
the ensuing days the military occupied opposition media outlets, temporarily
shutting down their transmissions, as well as government institutions and government-
run companies such as the telecommunications company, Hondutel.
Protests soon followed. The vast majority of demonstrations were peaceful, and
there were no reports of protestors carrying or using lethal weapons, although
there were scattered reports of protestors throwing rocks and other debris at
security forces, and several businesses were looted. Police and military personnel
responded with excessive force in cases where marchers posed little or no threat
to others.
The excessive use of force resulted in at least four deaths. Isis Obed Murillo
Mencías died after being shot in the head while participating in a demonstration
outside Tegucigalpa’s Toncontin Airport on July 5. The body of Pedro Magdiel
Muñoz, which bore signs of torture, was found on July 25 in the department of El
Paraíso. Witnesses told the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights that Muñoz had participated in a rally in front of military roadblocks that day and had
been arrested by the military. Roger Vallejos Soriano, a teacher, was shot in the
head during a protest in Comayagüela on July 30. Pedro Pablo Hernández was
shot in the head by a soldier at a military roadblock in the valley of Jamastran on
August 2, according to testimony collected by the Commission. Local rights advocates
identified several more homicides that they believe may have also been the
result of excessive force by Honduran security forces.
Security forces also repeatedly used wooden batons, metal tubes, and chains to
beat protestors who had been taken into custody or subdued. There were numerous
reports from local human rights organizations of continued physical and verbal
abuse in police posts and detention centers. According to human rights
organizations who visited the detention centers, police posts, and jails, the security
forces did not always register detainees or accuse them of any criminal activity.
While many detained protesters were charged with destruction of public property
and theft, prosecutors also filed charges against approximately 70 persons for
“sedition.” In one case, the judge sought to keep the accused, a teacher and sister
of a prominent Zelaya supporter, in jail, even while the judge released a man
accused of the same crime on the same day in the same place. The accused
woman was later released on bond, but the “sedition” charges remained.
Obstruction of Human Rights Investigations
Following the coup, the small human rights unit in the Attorney General’s Office
began investigations into some killings, illegal and arbitrary detentions, and
cases of alleged excessive use of force by security officials. The unit also filed a
motion objecting to the decree limiting freedoms of the press and assembly,
which the de facto government had used to bar two media outlets from broadcasting.
But the unit met with resistance from their superiors in the Attorney
General’s Office, delays by the Supreme Court in ruling on motions, and acts of
obstruction, including direct threats from members of the armed forces.
During one investigation an army officer threatened one member of the unit,
telling him, “I wish I were in the Cold War, the days of Pinochet, the days when  you could just disappear [someone].” The prosecutor interpreted this as a direct
threat. Two other members of the unit were barred from entering an army battalion
to work on a case. The attorney general also began a new practice of vetting
the unit’s motions before the Supreme Court.
Media Freedom
On September 27, six days after Zelaya secretly returned to Honduras and sought
refuge in the Brazilian embassy, de facto President Micheletti publicly declared
that two opposition media outlets, Canal 36 television and Radio Globo, would
face charges of “media terrorism.” In the early morning of September 28 the military
took control of both stations, as well as a radio affiliate owned by Canal 36.
Soldiers also confiscated the media outlets’ equipment. The government’s communications’
commission, CONATEL, justified these government interventions by
saying that both stations were inciting violence and injurious acts by calling on
Zelaya supporters to protest the coup.
On October 5, on the verge of a visit from the Organization of American States to
facilitate dialogue between the sides, the de facto government announced it
would withdraw the decree suspending constitutional freedoms, including freedom
of the press. But it did not publish an official withdrawal of the decree, and
the media that had been shut down on September 28 remained closed. On the
same day, the government announced a second decree further limiting freedom
of the press. On October 19, Radio Globo and Canal 36 returned to the air hours
after the government officially published its decision to rescind the first decree.
However, the second decree specifically limiting the press was not revoked, and
the threat of closure continued to hang over the media. Journalists working for
mainstream publications in Honduras told Human Rights Watch that they were
engaging in self-censorship due to fear they would lose their programs or jobs, or
be otherwise harassed. A number of journalists and photographers reported suffering
injuries or attacks while covering protests.
Violence against Transgender Persons
In May 2009 Human Rights Watch issued a report detailing a surge in rape, beatings,
extortion, and arbitrary detention of transgender persons in Honduras by
law enforcement officials. At least 17 travestis (as many transgender people are
called) were killed in public places in Honduras between 2004 and early 2009,
including leading transgender rights activist Cynthia Nicole on January 9, 2009.
None of these killings were subject to an effective investigation which would have
resulted in prosecution or conviction of the perpetrators.
The situation only worsened after the coup with non-governmental organizations
in Honduras reporting that six transgender people were killed between July and
mid-November. They also reported having discovered a clandestine prison used
by municipal police to “disappear” individuals, detainees and transgender persons
among them, were held, beaten, and released without any official record of
them ever having been arrested or detained.
Key International Actors
The United States government exerts the most influence on the key political, military,
and economic actors in Honduras. The US is Honduras’ principal trading
partner. The US military has a long-established relationship with the Honduran
armed forces, part of which includes use of the Soto Cano air force base where
the US has 500 troops stationed.
Following the overthrow of Zelaya, the US condemned the coup and called for
Zelaya to be restored to power. However, the US waited several weeks before
imposing key sanctions (including freezing the visas of military, economic, and
political actors) to pressure the de facto government to restore Zelaya to office. At
this writing, US efforts to broker a resolution to the political crisis appeared to
have stalled.
The Organization of American States (OAS) also denounced the coup and sanctioned
the de facto government by suspending its OAS membership. It also
sought unsuccessfully to broker a resolution to the political crisis. The Inter-
American Commission of Human Rights of the OAS was critically important during
this crisis. It sent a fact-finding delegation that shed light on human rights abuses—including deaths, mass detentions, and excessive force by security forces in
Honduras—following the coup.
The United Nations also increased its attention to the country. On October 1 the
UN Security Council authorized the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights to produce a report on human rights abuses since the coup.