Croatia
As Croatia moved closer to European Union integration, expected in July 2013,
human rights protection dipped. Croatian authorities took a significant step
towards improving domestic war crimes trials. Abuses against persons with disabilities
continue. A housing program aimed at Serbs stripped of property rights
during the war helped only two out of more than a thousand households that
were eligible, while the asylum system remains unable to cope with growing
arrivals, mainly from Afghanistan and Somalia.
Accountability for War Crimes
In November, the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
appeals chamber overturned the 2011 convictions of two Croatian generals,
Ante Gotovina and Ivan Cermak, for war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed against Serbs in the Krajina region in 1995.
The trial at the ICTY of Croatian Serb wartime leader Goran Hadzic charged with
the killing and deportation of Croats and other non-Serbs began on October 17.
Hadzic is the last of 161 indictees to be brought before the tribunal as it winds
down its operations.
Fifteen domestic war crimes prosecutions were transferred in late 2011 and early
2012 from local county courts to four courts designated for war crimes cases, with
only two remaining in local courts as of August, the most recent data available at
this writing. Following the transfer, the designated courts suspended several
cases, particularly those affecting Serbs, because the trials had been conducted
in absentia, a long-standing concern about war crimes cases heard in local
courts.
In March, five former Croatian armed forces soldiers were arrested on suspicion
of 1993 war crimes against Serbs during the Medak Pocket operation in the village
of Medak, eastern Croatia. Three were released the next day after questioning,
while the court released a fourth, Josip Krmpotic, in October pending a
prosecution review of the indictment against him for allegedly ordering executions of four prisoners of war. To date, General Mirko Norac remains the only
high-ranking official convicted of war crimes during the operation.
The presiding judge in the trial of Zeljko Gojak, convicted in February 2012 of
war crimes near Karlovac in 1991, ruled that Gojak’s military service would not
be used to reduce his nine-year sentence, a change to the judicial practice of
considering participation in the Croatian armed forces as a mitigating factor in
sentencing for war crimes.
The trial continued of Tomislav Mercep, the former police commander accused
of having command responsibility for—and in some cases ordering—the illegal
detention, torture, and killing of 53 Yugoslav Army soldiers in 1991. According to
Croatian nongovernmental organizations, the Croatian government is paying for
Mercep’s defense, totaling almost 400,000 Kuna (US$69,000) as of August, the
most recent data available. Mercep was released from detention on medical
grounds in July 2012.
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
In September, Ministry of Social Policy officials closed down a privately run
state-funded social care home for people with mental disabilities following findings
of severe abuse, including lack of food, use of solitary confinement, and
inadequate sleeping facilities. The ministry moved all 129 residents to other
institutions in Croatia.
There was virtually no progress implementing the government’s March 2011
master plan for deinstitutionalization. The number of people with intellectual or
mental disabilities living in institutions remained steady at around 9,000, with a
small increase in the number of places in community-based housing and support
services (up to 425 from about 300 in 2010) for all people with disabilities.
According to disability rights NGOs in Croatia, the government has directed
greater resources to foster families for adults with disabilities, placements that
may still amount to institutionalization.
Efforts by Croatia’s parliament to amend the country’s guardianship laws continued.
But the proposed changes were limited to children, despite the need for reforms for almost 19,000 adults deprived of legal capacity at the end of 2011,
including more than 16,000 deprived of all ability to make major life decisions.
Return and Reintegration of Serbs
Only 128 Serbs returned to Croatia during the last 6 months of 2011 and the first
6 months of 2012, down significantly from the 479 returns during the same period
a year previously. According to the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), there were 2,059 internally displaced persons (IDPs) in
Croatia as of the end of 2011, but most IDPs are now settled in their new homes
or are in the process of being settled.
More than two years after the start of a program permitting Serbs stripped of
tenancy rights during the 1991-1995 war to buy apartments at discounts of up to
70 percent, only 2 out of a total 1,317 eligible households had completed a purchase
as of September. The UNHCR attributed the low up-take to onerous application
and administrative procedures. Work on a regulation to better implement
the program, begun in July, was ongoing at this writing.
The government made some progress in providing public housing for returnees.
Of 8,930 approved requests for such housing, 8,047 units had been allocated at
the end of June 2012. There were 237 new applications approved from
November 2011 to June 2012, the vast majority of which were from Serb families.
There was some progress in processing Serb pension eligibility claims for recognition
of wartime work in formerly rebel-held areas. According to the UNHCR,
27,090 requests had been processed (up from 23,568 a year earlier) at the end
of June, although only 55 percent were resolved positively (down from 57 percent).
Despite a ruling from the Croatian Constitutional Court broadening the
standard for admissible evidence to prove years of working service, the High
Administrative Court, which adjudicates final appeals in such cases, continued
to require registration in a pension fund as evidence of employment.
Asylum and Migration
The number of people seeking asylum in Croatia increased as the country
moved closer to EU membership. There were 704 asylum applications in the first
9 months of 2012, compared to 807 applications in 2011. Croatia had granted 11
people asylum in 2012 and 6 subsidiary protection during that period, bringing
the total granted international protection since 2004 to 64.
Croatia continued to lack sufficient reception accommodation for asylum seekers.
The state does not provide free legal aid in first instance proceedings. But
the main issues facing asylum-seekers and new refugees in Croatia continues to
be the lack of services available for their employment, education, and integration,
according to the UNHCR.
Systems to provide special assistance to the growing number of unaccompanied
migrant children (173 in the first nine months of 2012) remained inadequate.
Guardians appointed to all unaccompanied migrant children upon arrival in
Croatia lack capacity and guidance on how to secure the best interests of their
wards, with no provision for interpreters or legal assistance (other than for asylum
appeals).
Freedom of Media
On September 14, the Dubrovnik County Court approved the extradition of
Vicdan Özerdem, a Turkish journalist wanted on terrorism charges in Turkey, following
her arrest in Dubrovnik. The Croatian human rights ombudsman wrote to
the Ministry of Justice in September calling on it to halt the extradition, citing
violations of the UN Convention Against Torture because of the risk Özerdem
would be tortured if returned to Turkey. An appeal against the extradition order
was pending at this writing.
In May, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) representative
on freedom of media and the European Federation of Journalists
expressed concerns about public television and radio station HRT conducting
disciplinary proceedings and possibly dismissing Elizabeta Gojan, a journalist
and Croatian Journalists’ Association board member. HRT’s actions followed an interview Gojan gave on German broadcaster Deutsche Welle criticizing the
state of media freedom in Croatia.
Human Rights Defenders
In July 2012, the Human Rights Center and the People’s Ombudsman’s Office
merged, after a law passed in 2011 to merge Croatia’s five national human
rights institutions. The three other national human rights institutions (the
ombudspersons’ offices for gender equality, children, and persons with disabilities)
will remain separate until at least 2014 following a decision by the new
government.
The Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender (LGBT) Pride March in Split went
ahead in June without incident, after the 2011 march was marred by violence by
anti-gay protesters.
Key International Actors
In January, the OSCE ended its Croatia presence after more than 15 years, following
several years of winding down operations in the country, leaving a significant
monitoring gap related to domestic war crimes accountability.
Croatia continued to proceed in negotiations to join the EU, slated for July 2013.
The October 2012 EU monitoring report noted that Croatia needed to intensify
efforts to tackle impunity for war crimes, protect Serb and Roma minorities, and
ensure LGBT rights.
The Council of Europe’s (CoE) European Commission against Racism and
Intolerance (ECRI) released its fourth report on Croatia in September, noting
positive developments in the impartiality of war crimes trials and investments
related to property and pensions to promote the return and reintegration of
Serbs. It noted that many Roma still lack citizenship or registration papers in
Croatia, few attend secondary schools, and migrants and refugees face many
barriers to integration.