Croatia
The election in January of a new president pledging to promote human rights, and
the opening of a crucial chapter on European Union membership talks in June,
put human rights on the agenda in Croatia. But the gap between commitments
and progress remained. There was little movement towards deinstitutionalizing
persons with intellectual or mental disabilities, and questions about access overshadowed
a long-awaited program to benefit Serb former tenancy rights holders.
In absentia trials and concerns over fairness undercut domestic war crimes prosecutions,
and the EU called into question Croatia’s commitment to freedom of
expression and information.
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
More than 9,000 persons with intellectual or mental disabilities remained in institutions
as of September, with numbers rising. A master plan for deinstitutionalization
and extensive social welfare reforms, both expected in 2010, have yet to
be published at this writing. There were also few advances in creating communitybased
housing and support programs, such as personal assistants and other help
with daily activities that would allow people to leave institutions.
There was no progress in reforming the legal capacity system, which routinely
results in persons with intellectual or mental disabilities being denied the ability
to make decisions and exercise rights, contributing to their institutionalization.
In September the State Attorney’s Office in Rijeka brought criminal charges
against the former director of Lopaca Psychiatric Hospital for 2008 abuses
against Ana Dragicevic, who was forcibly institutionalized because of her sexual
orientation, and four other unnamed patients.
The Croatian government and parliament again failed to amend the official
Croatian translation of article 19 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, which erroneously allows confinement in a residential institution to
be categorized as a “community living option.”
Return and Reintegration of Serbs
In September Croatian authorities issued a decision to permit former tenancy
rights holders to buy apartments at discounts of up to 70 percent. The decision
could remove a long-standing obstacle to Serbs returning to urban areas,
although the United Nations High Commisioner for Refugees (UNHCR) noted that
application deadlines and evidential requirements could impede access. The program
has yet to commence at this writing.
In the first six months of 2010, 203 refugees—all ethnic Serbs—returned to
Croatia. UNHCR estimates that 10,000-15,000 of the approximately 70,000 registered
Croatian Serb refugees might consider returning to Croatia if problems with
housing and pensions are addressed. As of June there were 2,246 internally displaced
persons in Croatia, of whom approximately 1,600 were Serbs.
There were ongoing delays in government-sponsored social housing programs for
returnees. As of June, 7,456 of the 13,187 families who applied had been allocated
housing, of which 4,623 were Serbs. Around 3,300 families were still waiting for
eligibility decisions.
The slow process of recognizing wartime work by Serbs in formerly rebel-held
areas for pension eligibility continued. As of May, 18,848 of approximately
22,000 requests had been processed, although only 56 percent were resolved
positively, in part because of disputes about admissible evidence. In some
regions, positive outcomes were as low as 30 percent, compromising the financial
security of returnees.
War Crimes Accountability
The trial of Croatian generals Ante Gotovina, Ivan Cermak, and Mladen Markac at
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for war crimes
and crimes against humanity against Serbs concluded in September, with a decision
expected at the end of 2010. At the request of Croatian Prime Minister
Jadranka Kosor, the Croatian government created a task force in October 2009 to
search for documents related to the case that the ICTY prosecutor alleged were in
the government’s possession. The trial concluded without these documents.
In March 2010 the Croatian Supreme Court confirmed the acquittal of General
Rahim Ademi, and reduced the sentence of General Mirko Norac for war crimes
against Serb civilians from seven to six years, relying on his service in the
Croatian Armed Forces as mitigation. It remained the only case transferred from
the ICTY to Croatia.
Croatian investigations into war crimes committed by members of the Croatian
Armed Forces increased in 2010. In the first nine months of the year, Croatian
authorities issued new war crimes indictments against 25 individuals, 11 of whom
were Serbs. But Serbs remained the majority of defendants in domestic war
crimes prosecutions. Ten trials, involving 13 Serb and 5 other defendants were
completed in the same period, 16 of whom were convicted. Another 17 trials
involving 29 Serbs and 14 Croats were still ongoing. In absentia war crimes trials
remained a problem, with 23 Serbs and 7 others not present to defend themselves.
In September the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina enforced a Croatian war
crimes conviction and eight-year sentence against former Croatian MP Branimir
Glavas, following a request from the Croatian Justice Ministry. Glavas, a Bosnian
citizen, fled to Bosnia in May 2009 on the same day he was convicted in the
Zagreb district court. Bosnian police arrested him after the court ruling which,
barring a successful appeal, will see Glavas serve his sentence in Bosnia.
Asylum and Migration
Croatia passed amendments to its asylum legislation in July 2010, requiring
quicker judicial review of detention decisions of asylum seekers and increased
support to those granted asylum or subsidiary protection, in an effort to move
closer to European and international standards. But there were continuing problems
with its practices, including delays in processing claims and a lack of access
to a state-funded lawyer at first instance and for those seeking to challenge their
detention. The refugee recognition rate remained below 10 percent in the second
half of 2009 and the first half of 2010.
Croatia lacked a strategy to respond effectively to the increasing numbers of
unaccompanied migrant children (160 in 2009, with very few in previous years).
Key problems included an overstretched guardianship system, the absence of a
tracking system (with some children disappearing), and lack of access to a statefunded
lawyer for children who do not claim asylum.
Media Freedom
Journalists faced government pressure because of their reporting. Sergej Trajkovic
and Tomislav Kukec, two journalists from the newspaper Jutarnji List, faced government
attempts to block publication of reports about commercial abuses within
the meat industry, including lack of government oversight in regulating the industry.
In April police in Zagreb interrogated and searched the home of Marko Rakar, a
prominent blogger, after he published a leaked list of registered war veterans. The
government had resisted efforts to release the list, which civil society activists
believe contains people fraudulently receiving pensions as war veterans.
The trial of six suspects in the double murder in 2008 of prominent journalist Ivo
Pukanic and his marketing director Niko Franjic ended in November, with the conviction
of all six for first degree murder. Sentences ranged from 15 to 40 years.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders in Croatia remained free to operate but reported difficulties
accessing information from Croatia’s national and local authorities.
In May, for the third successive year, Croatia’s parliament examined but then
failed to adopt the People’s Ombudsman’s annual human rights report.
Parliament offered no explanation for its decision.
Key International Actors
The EU remained the most influential international actor in Croatia. The opening
of the justice and fundamental rights chapter in June offered encouragement to
Croatia, although the challenges of closing the chapter were highlighted in the
European Commission progress report released in November, which identified domestic war crimes accountability, freedom of expression, deinstitutionalization
of persons with disabilities, and treatment of the Serb and Roma minorities as
ongoing areas of concern.
The UN Human Rights Council conducted its first universal periodic review of
Croatia in November, calling on Croatia to address concerns about the fairness of
domestic war crimes trials and improve its treatment of persons with disabilities
and the Serb and Roma minorities.
During a visit to Croatia in April, the Council of Europe commissioner for human
rights Thomas Hammarberg identified the importance of addressing housing and
other obstacles to return of IDPs and refugees; the need to improve fairness in
war crimes proceedings; and the need to tackle access to housing, employment,
education, and statelessness of Roma.
After her July visit to Croatia the UN special rapporteur on the right to housing
identified the need for available and transparent post-war housing programs for
Serb returnees as a key challenge.