Croatia
Croatias human rights record saw modest improvement in 2007, linked in part to
its candidacy for European Union membership. Key continuing problems relate to
the legacy of Croatias 1991-95 war. There was insufficient progress in removing
the remaining obstacles to the return and reintegration of refugee Serbs. There
was some movement toward genuine accountability for wartime abuses, but the
impartiality and effectiveness of domestic prosecutions remains in question.
Return and Reintegration of Serbs
There was limited progress toward resolving the ongoing obstacles to the return
and reintegration of displaced and refugee Serbs. As of July 2007 around 125,000
of the 300,ooo to 350,000 Serb refugees who fled the conflict were registered as
having returned to Croatia. Around 60 percent of those who return stay permanently
in Croatia. Figures from the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) indicate that 1,745 Serbs returned between January and
September 2007. More than 80,000 refugees in neighboring countries have yet to
decide about their future.
Serbs, particularly returnees, continue to suffer violence and intimidation,
although at a lower rate in 2007 than in previous years. Police showed improved
efficiency in the apprehension of perpetrators of inter-ethnic criminal incidents.
However, prosecutions frequently drag, with resolution long separated from incidents
and attacks rarely qualified as hate crimes.
In the most serious incident of the year, in July 2007 a Serb father and his son
who were returning to Gornji Vrhovci village were beaten in their home following
an alleged land dispute. Their assailants then locked them in a room and set fire
to the house, but the victims escaped. At this writing, three suspects await trial
on charges of attempted murder. In February the Serb Orthodox Church in Sibenik
reported a series of attacks on church property and Serb returnees in the Kistanje
area, and in October six Serb-owned reconstructed houses in the Zadar area were
damaged. At this writing, three juveniles have been charged with criminal damage.
In April seven members of Serbias national hockey team were assaulted by
a group of about 20 young men in Zagreb.
Serbs continued to face practical difficulties repossessing occupied homes,
despite court judgments in their favor. Some cases were delayed in lengthy court
proceedings. Access to reconstruction assistance for wartime damage is available
to Serbs, but applications are frequently refused on procedural grounds and at
least 9,000 appeals are pending. There remains no effective remedy for those
seeking the return of occupied agricultural land.
There was little progress toward a viable solution for Serbs stripped during the
war of the right to occupy socially-owned property (tenancy rights), an issue
linked to the return of Serbs. Delays and flawed procedures mean that the number
of Serb former tenancy-right holders allocated social housing remains small.
As a result, a June 2007 decision allowing people allocated social housing in previously
war-affected areas to buy their homes at below market prices is unlikely to
benefit many Serbs. No comparable right to buy exists in urban areas, where limited
housing stock further complicates access for Serb former tenancy-right holders.
There was no progress toward recognizing working time between 1991 and 1995
in Serb-occupied areas for the purposes of Croatian state pensions, compromising
the financial security of returnee and other elderly Serbs.
There was movement toward the implementation of minority rights legislation at
the national level in 2007, notably with the publication of the Central State
Administration Offices annual employment plan that included for the first time
statistics on minority employment and hiring targets at central and county level.
No such plan exists for hiring in the judiciary, however, and the Council for
National Minorities assessed that legal guarantees for minority representation in
state administration are not fully respected.
War Crimes Accountability
The conviction in June 2007 of Milan Martic by the International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for war crimes against Croats, for which he
received a 35-year sentence, was welcomed by Serbs and Croats alike. But the
October ruling by the court in the so-called Vukovar Three trial was criticized by
the Croatian parliament for lenience after Miroslav Radic was acquitted and Veselin Sljivancanin given five years imprisonment in a case dealing with the
1991 mass killing of Croats in Vukovar; the third defendant, Mile Mrksic, received
a 20-year sentence. The ICTY prosecutor appealed against the sentence and verdict
on Mrksic and Sljivancanin.
There were several high-profile trials of Croats in domestic courts in 2007, including
that of Branimir Glavas and six others for the wartime murder of Serb civilians
in Osijek, which began in October. The stripping of Glavass immunity as a member
of parliament in May 2006 had opened the way for proceedings against him.
The first case transferred to Croatia from the ICTY (in September 2005), that of
Rahim Ademi and Mirko Norac for the murder of Serb civilians in the Medak pocket,
went to trial in June 2007. Both of these trials are ongoing at this writing.
Serbs continue to make up the vast majority of defendants and convicted war
criminals in Croatia, a disproportion so large it suggests bias as a factor.
According to statistics released by the state prosecutors office in May, of 3,666
people charged with war crimes since 1991, 3,604 were prosecuted for involvement
in aggression against Croatia, while 62 were members of the Croatian
armed forces. The absence of an agreed threshold for determining when acts
should be prosecuted as war crimes may also provide part of the explanation for
the disparity. Prosecutors received evidence from the ICTY to facilitate the prosecution
of Tomislav Mercep for crimes in 1991 against Serbs, but at this writing the
trial has yet to begin. Serb victims of other wartime abuses, including the disappearance
of over 100 civilians in Sisak, continue to wait for justice. The Sisak
abuses were finally categorized as war crimes, allaying fears that they would be
subject to the 15-year statute of limitation applied to ordinary murders.
Many prosecutions and trials against Serbs remain of questionable standard, with
concerns relating to fairnessparticularly for those tried in absentia or prosecuted
in areas where the crimes occurredand about the effectiveness of the courtappointed
defense lawyers. In absentia trials are opposed by the prosecutors
office in Zagreb, but continue to take place for war crimes, defendants mostly
being Serbs: at the end of October 2007, 19 of the 23 defendants on trial in
absentia were Serbs.
Trials against Croats for wartime abuses were far more likely to result in acquittals.
In March the Karlovac County Court acquitted for the third time Mihajlo
Hrastov over the 1991 killing in the Karlovac area of 13 Yugoslav Army reservists
who had surrendered, the Supreme Court having overturned two previous acquittals.
The case highlighted the continued predominance of trials in local courts
where the crimes occurred, rather than the four courts designated to try war
crimes.
Efforts to improve Croatias cooperation with neighboring states as a way to overcome
barriers to prosecution posed by extradition rules bore fruit in May 2007,
when Croatias transfer of evidence to Serbia led to the latters arrest of 12 people
for crimes against Croats in Lovas, near Vukovar. However, as noted by the
Human Rights and Legal Affairs Committee of the Council of Europe in May, further
progress was required to lower barriers to inter-state judicial cooperation,
particularly in relation to the participation of refugee and other witnesses living
elsewhere. Securing the participation of Serb witnesses residing outside Croatia
proved difficult in the Ademi-Norac case.
Human Rights Defenders
Findings and requests for information to the government by the Human Rights
Ombudsman were routinely ignored by the authorities, in the absence of powers
to sanction for non-compliance. The institution was also compromised by a continuing
proliferation of specialized ombudsmen, including on children and gender,
rather than the development of a single institution with specialized departments
or deputies.
In January 2007 the head of the Office for Associations arranged for secret service
vetting of members of the state Civil Society Development Council. The government
rejected her claims that it had authorized the vetting, and she was subsequently
relieved of her post.
Key International Actors
The future of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE)
Mission to Croatia was called into doubt following signals from the OSCE chairman- in-office, the head of mission, and the United States government that it
should close at the end of 2007. At this writing the OSCE Permanent Council has
yet to take a decision. The uncertainty undermined the missions effectiveness,
particularly its engagement on Serb returns issues with recalcitrant local authorities.
As a candidate for membership of the European Union, Croatia is expected to
move toward meeting the EUs human rights criteria, although the willingness of
the EU to prioritize war legacy issues remains in question. The European
Commission annual report on Croatia published in November made reference to
the rights of Serbs and other minorities, including obstacles to the reintegration
the returning refugees and displaced persons, and domestic war crime prosecutions.