Croatia
In 2005, improved cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) earned Croatia a positive decision by the
European Union on opening negotiations on membership. There was little
progress, however, in the return of Serb refugees. With the majority of
defendants continuing to be ethnic Serbs, Croatia has yet to demonstrate that
its efforts to pursue war crimes suspects before domestic courts reflect a principled
commitment to justice over and above ethnic considerations.
A decade after the 1991-95 war in Croatia, tensions between the majority
Croat population and the Serb minority have eased. However, there were
some worrying trends in 2005 threatening to reverse the course. In the key
multi-ethnic towns of Knin and Vukovar, local boards of the Croatian
Democratic Union (HDZ) formed municipal governments in coalition with
ultra-nationalist Croat parties following the May 15 local elections, while
sidelining the centrist Independent Democratic Serb Party (SDSS). The
SDSS nevertheless continues to support the minority HDZ government at
the state level. Violent incidents directed at ethnic Serbs were more frequent
in 2005 than in previous years.
Refugee Returns
Between three hundred thousand and 350,000 Croatian Serbs left their
homes during the 1991-95 war, mostly for Serbia and Montenegro, and
Bosnia and Herzegovina. As of September 2005, the government had registered
122,000 Serb returnees. Croatian Serb associations and the
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) mission to
Croatia assessed the actual number of returnees as significantly lower—
between 60 and 65 percent of the registered figure—because many Croatian
Serbs had left again for Serbia and Montenegro or Bosnia and Herzegovina
after only a short stay in Croatia.
There was no tangible progress in 2005 on the issue of lost tenancy rights in
socially-owned property. Croatian authorities had terminated the tenancy
rights of up to thirty thousand Serb families after they fled their apartments during and after the war. In June 2003, the Croatian cabinet adopted a set of
measures to enable former tenancy rights holders in Zagreb and other big
cities to rent or purchase government-built apartments at below-market
rates. As of early November 2005, only a dozen former tenancy rights holders
had benefited from the two-year-old program. The absence of results
only exacerbated the skepticism among refugees that the program would
eventually deliver benefits. Only 3,628 former tenancy rights holders had
filed applications under the program as of September 2005.
The bleak prospects for receiving an adequate substitute for lost tenancy
rights made many refugees place their hopes in the European Court of
Human Rights (ECtHR). On December 15, 2004, the Grand Chamber of
the ECtHR agreed to re-hear a case decided four months earlier, in which
the ECtHR upheld Croatian court decisions terminating the tenancy rights
of a woman who had left Zadar shortly before the outbreak of hostilities in
1991 and had not returned to her apartment within the six-month period
specified by Croatian law at the time. The re-hearing of the case, Blecic v.
Croatia, took place in September, and a ruling was pending at this writing.
Limited economic opportunities for minority returnees, partly caused by
employment discrimination, also greatly impedes return. A December 2002
constitutional law on minority rights obliges the state to ensure proportionate
representation of minorities in the state administration and the judiciary,
as well as the executive bodies and administration of self-government units.
In most areas, there are no Serb returnees in the police, the judiciary, or the
regional offices of the state ministries. Private entrepreneurs, although not
bound by the law to hire Serbs, have proved to be more willing to do so than
government agencies.
Violent acts against ethnic Serbs suddenly increased during 2005. The May
18 killing of eighty-one-year-old Dusan Vidic in his house in Karin, near
Benkovac, was particularly shocking. Two months later, on July 19, two elderly
Serb returnees were beaten in front of their house in the village of
Ostrovica, also near Benkovac. In Pakostani, Benkovac and Zagreb, attackers
damaged vehicles with Serbian registration plates. Groups of young men
attacked or threatened Serbian bus passengers who were traveling through Rijeka and Delnice, as well as Serbian train passengers at the railway stations
in Vinkovci and Zagreb. Graffiti with the message “Srbe na vrbe!” (“[Hang]
the Serbs on the willow trees!”) appeared in Rijeka and Udbina. Two men
broke windows at the entrance of the Serb Orthodox Church in Drnis on
November 12. On May 21, a bomb exploded next to the premises of a Serb
political party in Vukovar, and the following night, unknown perpetrators
threw bombs at the municipal assembly buildings in the majority Serb villages
of Borovo Selo and Trpinja, near Vukovar. In all but a few cases the
police failed to apprehend the perpetrators.
Accountability for War Crimes
Ante Gotovina, a Croatian army general accused of crimes against Croatian
Serbs in 1995, remained at large four years after the issuing of his indictment
by the ICTY. Deputy Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor stated in January 2005
that if she came across Gotovina she would not report this to the police
because she “would not recognize him.” The statement, made during the
campaign for the presidential election, was broadly interpreted as an expression
of the benevolence with which key officials regarded Gotovina.
ICTY Chief Prosecutor Carla Del Ponte warned on several occasions during
the year that Croatia was not doing enough to apprehend Gotovina.
However, Del Ponte began to backpedal as the October 3 meeting of the
E.U. General Affairs and External Relations Council drew near. The meeting
was to decide on whether the European Union would open membership
negotiations with Croatia, and the assessment of Croatia’s cooperation with
the ICTY would be the crucial factor in the decision. In a report submitted
to the council on October 3, the ICTY prosecutor concluded that Croatia
was fully cooperating. Many observers remained unconvinced that Croatia
had indeed made significant progress in the previous months, and interpreted
the statement by Del Ponte as a bow to political pressure from some E.U.
member states.
The number of war crimes trials against ethnic Serbs (eleven) greatly outnumbered
trials of ethnic Croat indictees (six). Trials of ethnic Serbs also
tended to involve more defendants, making the contrast between the numbers of individuals standing trial from each ethnic group even starker. Most
notable among these were the Miklusevci case and the Lovas case before the
Vukovar District Court, and the Branjin Vrh case before the Osijek County
Court, all ongoing at this writing.
The absence, for the second consecutive year, of any new indictment against
accused Croats raises serious concerns about the sincerity of the Croatian
government’s accountability efforts. The six trials in 2005 were retrials of
cases from the 1990s or the early 2000s: Mihailo Hrastov (originally opened
in 1993, now re-tried for the third time); Pakracka poljana (1997); Bjelovar
group (2001); Virovitica group (2002); Lora (2002); and Paulin Dvor (2003).
Another remaining concern is the ability of the Croatian courts to conduct
trials in a fair and effective way, given the high number of reversals of first
instance judgments by the Croatian Supreme Court. Much progress is also
needed in the protection of witnesses and inter-state cooperation, in spite of
certain positive developments in those areas in 2005, related to the Lora
retrial.
Key International Actors
On October 3, 2005, the Council of the European Union decided to open
formal negotiations on membership with the Republic of Croatia. The allbut-
exclusive focus on the issue of ICTY cooperation has in the past prevented
the E.U. from using its unique position to vigorously demand greater
progress on other pressing issues such as refugee return, treatment of minorities,
and domestic war crimes trials. However, on October 9, European
Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn stressed to his hosts in Zagreb that
the issues of refugee return, minority rights, and the rule of law would be
critical in the European Commission’s assessment of the progress Croatia
made in meeting the criteria for E.U. membership. The same issues figured
prominently in the Accession Partnership document, issued by the commission
on November 9. The new emphasis is welcome, although it has probably
come several years too late to have any real impact—the process of
refugee return is gradually coming to a halt, the memory of war crimes witnesses is becoming unreliable, and the availability of evidence is becoming
increasingly problematic.
The OSCE mission to Croatia has continued to pursue a dialogue with the
government, while issuing valuable reports critical of its return-related practices,
minority rights record, and progress in domestic war crimes trials.
Nevertheless, political considerations have led the mission to sometimes
attenuate the criticism of Croatia’s human rights record. In a frank assessment
of the mission’s accomplishments in the past two years, the departing
head of mission, Peter Semneby, acknowledged in an April 2005 interview
that the return issue was being resolved less successfully than he had expected,
because “resistance ... proved to be more difficult than I had anticipated.”
On October 7, 2005, U.S. Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
Nicholas Burns reiterated that the U.S. would continue to block Croatia’s
efforts to join NATO until the capture of Ante Gotovina.
Various Council of Europe bodies—the Committee of Ministers, the
European Commission against Racism and Intolerance, and the Advisory
Committee on the Framework Convention on National Minorities—concluded
during the year that Croatia still needed to make substantial progress
regarding the return of refugees, especially in the matter of housing, fairness
in the administration of justice, and in tackling ethnic discrimination.