Haiti
Haiti’s already bad human rights conditions worsened in 2005, its second
year under an unelected interim government. Citing summary executions,
mob violence, torture and arbitrary arrests, the head of the human rights section
of the United Nations mission in Haiti told reporters in October that
the country’s human rights situation was “catastrophic.” It was far from clear,
as elections approached, whether free and fair polling would be possible.
Election Conditions
Presidential, legislative and local elections were supposed to take place before
the end of the year, but as of November 2005 the dates remained tentative.
They will be Haiti’s first elections since the February 2004 ouster of
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide. Delays in election preparations over the
course of 2005 led to multiple postponements in the electoral schedule, but
unelected Prime Minister Gerard Latortue continues to insist that the transfer
of power will take place as scheduled on February 7, 2006.
Irregularities in electoral preparations, including problems in the distribution
of voting materials, cast doubt on the reliability of the vote. There were also
suggestions that political bias had tainted the electoral process.
Violence, Lawlessness and Instability
With waves of violence engulfing the country, especially the capital, Port-au-
Prince, Haiti remains unstable and dangerous. In Port-au-Prince clashes
between rival criminal gangs, including some associated with former president
Aristide, result daily in civilian deaths. Armed groups of Aristide supporters
have sought to spread chaos and fear in hopes that the failure of the
interim government to stem the violence will lead to Aristide’s return. In the
provinces irregular armed groups, many made up of former members of the
Haitian military, exercise de facto governmental authority. Former soldiers
have set up barracks in police stations and abandoned buildings. They man
check points, conduct searches, seize weapons from civilians (and, at times, from police), make arbitrary arrests, and run their own makeshift prisons.
Because Haiti’s government institutions are largely dysfunctional and its
security forces are woefully inadequate, abuses go unpunished and violent
crime rates have soared.
The U.N. multinational peacekeeping force, mandated by the U.N. Security
Council to assist local authorities in maintaining order, has not succeeded in
stopping violent crime. But after an almost uncontrolled spike in violence in
May-June 2005, U.N. troops began taking more aggressive measures in Portau-
Prince that, to a limited extent, have helped alleviate the atmosphere of
insecurity. The strengthened U.N. presence has, for example, sharply
reduced kidnappings, which had reached epidemic levels. Allegations were
made, however, that U.N. forces used indiscriminate force, particularly in
sweeps of slum areas of Port-au-Prince.
Police Abuses
Police lawlessness is a major contributor to overall insecurity. Not only are
the Haitian National Police (HNP) largely incompetent in preventing and
investigating crime, they are responsible for frequent arbitrary arrests, torture,
beatings, and the excessive and indiscriminate use of force against
demonstrators. They also face credible allegations of extrajudicial executions
and of involvement in drug trafficking and other criminal activity. Untrained
and unprofessional, the police suffer from severe shortages of personnel and
equipment.
Police perpetrate abuses with almost total impunity. Human Rights Watch
knows of no members of the HNP who have faced criminal prosecution for
their abusive conduct. But in a welcome move, the head of the Haitian
National Police announced in early November 2005 that fourteen police officers
would be charged for their alleged responsibility in the August killings of
at least eleven people at a soccer game.
Justice and Accountability
Haiti’s justice system is hardly functional, suffering from corruption, politicization
and a lack of personnel, training and resources. In the provinces
judges complain there are no police to execute warrants and no prisons in
which to keep detainees; few crimes are even investigated. Where prisons
exist, their conditions are dire, with prisoners held in dirty and crowded
accommodation often lacking sanitary facilities.
Accountability for past abuses remains out of reach. Indeed, significant
regress occurred in 2005, as exemplified most dramatically by the case of
Louis Jodel Chamblain, formerly second in command of the paramilitary
Revolutionary Front for the Progress and Advancement of Haiti (Front
Révolutionnaire pour l’Avancement et le Progrès d’Haïti, FRAPH), responsible
for countless abuses during the de facto military government. He had
been convicted in absentia of the 1993 murder of a prominent Haitian businessman
and of the 1994 Raboteau massacre, but he surrendered to judicial
authorities in 2004 to exercise his right to a retrial. The convictions were
reversed, and although the Haitian authorities continued to detain him for a
few months on other allegations, they released him in August 2005. In a
related development in early May 2005, Haiti’s Supreme Court (Cour de
Cassation) quashed the sentences of fifteen other former soldiers and paramilitaries
who had been held responsible for the Raboteau massacre in a historic
2000 trial. The grounds for the Supreme Court ruling were extremely
flimsy.
The long-term imprisonment of former Prime Minister Yvon Neptune continues
to raise serious concerns. Although formal charges were finally
brought against Neptune in September 2005, the apparent political grounds
for Neptune’s detention undermines confidence in the validity of the charges
and in the fairness of any future trial.
Human Rights Defenders and Journalists
Human rights defenders, working in a dangerous, highly-politicized environment,
face threats and intimidation. Haiti is a dangerous country for journalists as well, who face threats and violence for their reporting. In June 2005,
after having received several kidnapping threats, prominent radio journalist
Nancy Roc left the country to go into exile. A few weeks later, in mid-July,
newspaper and television reporter Jacques Roche was abducted and brutally
murdered by unknown assailants. Roche’s body was found in a slum neighborhood
of Port-au-Prince; he had been tortured and shot several times.
U.N. envoy to Haiti Juan Gabriel Valdes reportedly said that Roche’s death
“has all the elements of a political murder.”
Key International Actors
The U.N. Security Council voted unanimously in late June 2005 to extend
the mandate of the U.N. Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) until
February 15, 2006, “with the intention to renew for further periods.” The
U.N. resolution also authorized the addition of more than one thousand soldiers
and civilian police to bulk up the thinly-staffed peacekeeping force. The
numbers mandated raised military troops to 7,500 and police to 1,897. But
MINUSTAH’s slow deployment of personnel and general lack of preparation
for urban warfare have plagued the mission’s efforts to restore security to
Haiti.
In November 2005, a group of human rights attorneys filed a complaint with
the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights alleging that U.N. peacekeeping
forces were involved in massacres in Haiti in July and August.
The United States is Haiti’s largest donor, having budgeted U.S.$407 million
for Haiti in 2004-05. Canada and the European Union are also major donors.
In mid-October, the E.U. unblocked ?72 million (U.S. $87 million) in aid to
support Haiti’s electoral process. The funds had been frozen several years
previously in protest over irregularities in the 2000 legislative elections.
Haitians continue to risk their lives attempting to sail overcrowded, often
leaky boats across the rough seas that separate Haiti from the United States.
Many boats are intercepted by U.S. Coast Guard cutters, but some number
of them are lost at sea. Haitians who reach the United States are subject to
mandatory detention and expedited removal procedures.