Haiti
Haiti made important progress in restoring democratic rule in 2006, successfully
holding national elections without any of the major security disturbances that had
prevented people from voting in past elections. The new government of President
René Préval faces entrenched lawlessness and chronic human rights problems,
including pervasive police violence and inhumane prison conditions.
Elections
Parliamentary and presidential elections were held in February 2006, after having
been postponed four times due to security concerns and logistical difficulties.
These were Haiti’s first elections since Jean-Bertrand Aristide was ousted from the
presidency in 2004. An electoral monitoring mission sent by the Organization of
American States considered the elections a success. Yet when initial results
showed that Préval had not won enough votes to avoid a run-off election, rumors
of fraud triggered street protests and riots, which only ended after a political compromise
was reached and Préval was officially declared president-elect.
Violence, Lawlessness, and Instability
Violent crime remains rampant in Haiti. Kidnappings for ransom of businessmen,
students, journalists, aid workers, and foreigners are commonplace. Criminal
gangs effectively control certain neighborhoods of the capital, most notably Cite
Soleil, and gang violence often results in civilian deaths. In July 2006, for example,
22 people, including children, were killed in Grand Ravine, a poor neighborhood
in Port-au-Prince.
The gangs have also clashed with the joint United Nations and Haitian security
forces. Three peacekeepers from the Brazilian battalion of the Haiti Stabilization
Mission (MINUSTAH) were shot and wounded in Cite Soleil in July 2006.
Police Abuses
Police lawlessness continues to be a major contributor to overall insecurity. The
Haitian National Police (HNP) are largely ineffective in preventing and investigating crime. Moreover, they are themselves responsible for arbitrary arrests, torture,
beatings, and the excessive and indiscriminate use of force. They also face credible
allegations of having committed extrajudicial executions and of involvement
in drug trafficking and other criminal activity. Untrained and unprofessional, the
police suffer from severe shortages of personnel and equipment. Police perpetrate
abuses with almost total impunity. Human Rights Watch knows of no members
of the HNP who have faced criminal prosecution for their abusive conduct.
Justice, Accountability, and Prison Conditions
Haiti’s highly dysfunctional justice system is plagued by corruption, politicization,
and a lack of personnel, training, and resources. In the provinces, judges complain
there are no police to execute warrants and no prisons in which to keep
detainees. Few crimes are investigated. Where prisons exist, conditions are dire,
with prisoners held in dirty and overcrowded cells often lacking sanitary facilities.
Arbitrary and long-term pretrial detention of suspects is commonplace. In several
prominent cases, people who had been imprisoned without proper trial were
released in 2006. For example, activist and folksinger Annette Auguste (known as
So Ann), as well as her co-defendants, Georges Honoré, Yvon Antoine (Zap Zap),
and Paul Raymond, were released in August 2006 after more than 27 months in
jail without formal charges. Similarly, former Prime Minister Yvon Neptune was
released in July 2006 after spending 25 months in prison, and his former interior
minister, Jocelerme Privert, was released in June of the same year after serving 26
months in prison. Both men were incarcerated without trial on allegations of participation
in the killing of 50 Aristide opponents in La Scierie, Saint-Marc in
February 2004.
Accountability for past abuses remains out of reach. While the release of Neptune
and Privert may have been warranted given the state’s failure to properly try
them, the La Scierie case was never fully investigated and the atrocities that the
two men allegedly committed remain unpunished. While Haiti took an important
step in 2005 by arresting 15 police officers for their alleged participation in a
Martissant soccer stadium massacre in August 2005, many of these men, including
two senior officers, were released from prison in 2006 by the judge handling
the case.
Persecution of Human Rights Defenders
Haitian human rights activists and journalists remain targets of acts of violence
and intimidation. Bruner Esterne, the coordinator of the Grand Ravine Community
Human Rights Council (CHRC-GR), was killed by unknown individuals on
September 21, 2006, as he was returning from a meeting concerning the July massacre
in Grand Ravine. Esterne had also witnessed the soccer stadium massacre
in August 2005, which had allegedly been carried out by the same criminal gang
that is believed to have been responsible for the Grand Ravine killing. Following
Esterne’s death, Evel Fanfan, a human rights lawyer who had worked closely with
Esterne, received death threats.
Key International Actors
The UN stabilization mission in Haiti has been heavily involved in efforts to support
and train the local police force to carry out its security functions. The UN
Security Council voted unanimously in August 2006 to extend MINUSTAH until
February 15, 2007. In mid-July 2006, the force, which was created by a Security
Council resolution in April 2004, included approximately 6,200 troops and 1,687
police. The new resolution supported an increase in personnel and called on
MINUSTAH to “reorient its disarmament, demobilization and reintegration efforts”
in Haiti and to focus on a community violence-reduction program.
The United States is Haiti’s largest donor and in 2006 made a new pledge of
almost US$210 million, to be allocated over a one-year period to aid in Haiti’s
economic recovery.
Canada, Haiti’s second-largest donor, continues in its efforts “to restore security
and stability” in the county. One hundred Canadian civilian police officers are currently
part of MINUSTAH and Canada has pledged more than $500 million to the
country which will be distributed over a five-year period.
In 2006, the European Union remained committed to the presence of UN forces in
Haiti and in June the European Commission’s President, José Manuel Barroso,
announced that the Commission’s aid to Haiti would “rise to 1233 million
(US$293 million) for the 2008-13 period, from the 1168 million set aside to cover
2002-7.”
In October 2006, a federal court judge in New York ordered Emmanuel “Toto”
Constant, the former leader of Haiti’s notorious death squad known as the FRAPH
who currently resides in New York City, to pay $19 million in damages to three
women who survived rape and torture committed by paramilitary forces under his
command from 1991 to 1993.
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Louise Arbour met with government and
civil society representatives during a visit to Haiti in October 2006.