Haiti
The bicentennial of Haiti’s independence, 2004 was a year of turmoil,
lawlessness, and humanitarian disaster. The interim government, which
took power in March, has been unable to impose its authority over large
swathes of the country or uphold the rule of law. With only a small,
demoralized, and poorly-trained police force, the government has had
to rely on the U.N.-mandated multinational force to maintain security,
but that force’s numbers are insufficient for restoring public order and
stability.
In responding to mounting violence, the Haitian police are responsible
for frequent illegal arrests and, in some instances, extrajudicial executions.
The justice system is in disarray, with even the most serious
crimes going unpunished. Prison conditions remain deplorable.
Haiti also suffered humanitarian tragedy in 2004, further impoverishing
and destabilizing the country. Tropical Storm Jeanne slammed through
Haiti in September, killing at least two thousand people, flooding certain
areas, and adding to the country’s litany of troubles. Armed gangs,
taking advantage of the lack of security, stole humanitarian assistance
meant for victims of the storm. Aid groups threatened to suspend operations
if their safety could not be protected.
Violence, Lawlessness, and Instability
In February 2004, rebel forces captured large sections of the country
and pushed President Jean-Bertrand Aristide from office. The rebels,
who began by taking over police stations in the northern city of
Gonaives, included a solid core of former officers and soldiers from the
county’s disbanded army, as well as former paramilitaries responsible for
innumerable atrocities during Haiti’s 1991-1994 military government.
Among their leaders was Louis Jodel Chamblain, one of the founders of
the Revolutionary Front for Haitian Advancement and Progress (Front révolutionnaire pour l’avancement et le progrès haïtien, FRAPH), who
had been sentenced in absentia to life in prison for the September 1993
murder of activist Antoine Izmery, as well as for involvement in the
1994 Raboteau massacre.
The scene of the greatest violence was Saint Marc, a town an hour
south of Gonaives. During much of February, the town was terrorized
by a violent pro-government death squad known as Bale Wouze, or
Clean Sweep. Family members of the dead gave Human Rights Watch a
list of twenty-four people who were killed in the violence, including
Kenol St. Gilles, who was burned alive by Bale Wouze members on
February 11.
Haiti’s violence and instability did not end with the establishment of an
interim government in March 2004. Despite the arrival of international
military forces mandated to reestablish a stable and secure environment,
much of the country remains under the control of irregular armed
groups. The Haitian National Police—a demoralized and discredited
force by the end of the Aristide presidency—is small, poorly trained,
and under-resourced. Its personnel are outnumbered and outgunned by
former soldiers, criminal gangs, and other irregular armed groups.
Although a few weak attempts at disarmament have been made, the
country remains awash with illegal weapons.
Former soldiers wanting back pay and the reinstatement of the army
occasionally threaten to rise up against the government to enforce their
demands. They have taken over police stations, former barracks, and
other buildings in several cities and towns, painting the buildings yellow,
the army’s traditional color. They frequently have manned checkpoints,
patrolled streets—sometimes in state vehicles—and taken over
other government functions.
Armed gangs, some of which claim affiliation with the political party of
former President Aristide, were responsible for a wave of escalating violence beginning in September 2004. Nearly two hundred people were
killed in the months of September and October. On September 30,
three police officers were reportedly shot to death in Port-au-Prince,
with two of them later found decapitated.
Police Abuses
In responding to the wave of violence in September and October 2004,
police arrested and detained people illegally, often carrying out arrests
without warrants and failing to bring detainees before a judge within
the forty-eight hour period mandated under Haitian law. Detainees
included Yvon Fuille, the president of the Haitian Senate, and two
other politicians associated with the Aristide government, who were
arrested on October 2 at Radio Caraibes in Port-au-Prince. Indeed,
hundreds of Aristide supporters were reportedly arrested on suspicion
of involvement in violence. Whether the police have evidence to justify
some of the arrests—like that of Father Gerard Jean-Juste, picked up on
October 13 at his parish in Port-au-Prince—is far from clear.
Beatings and extrajudicial executions by police have also been reported.
In November 2004, the National Coalition for Haitian Rights (NCHR),
a nongovernmental human rights group, called for the establishment of
an independent commission to investigate police responsibility for the
October 26 killing of seven to thirteen youths in Fort National, a poor
area of Port-au-Prince. According to reports received by NCHR, the
youths were tortured by a “commando unit” of masked police officers
before they were killed.
Justice
The justice system was essentially destroyed in February 2004, with
court buildings in several cities and towns looted, burned, or both, and
valuable court documents lost. The country’s prisons and jails were
entirely emptied.
The new government has promised to rebuild the justice system and
put an end to the impunity for which Haiti is notorious. Yet progress
has been slow. Although the government arrested a number of people
implicated in the February killings in Saint Marc, it has made few
advances in prosecuting the case. And in August 2004, in a critical setback
for justice, a jury acquitted former paramilitary leader Louis Jodel-
Chamblain and ex-military police Capt. Jackson Joanis of the 1993 murder
of Antoine Izmery. The trials were a hastily-conducted sham.
Prison and jail conditions are dire. Many detention facilities are still not
in functioning condition; those that do hold prisoners are generally
dirty and crowded, and often lack sanitary facilities.
Election Conditions
Interim Prime Minister Gerard Latortue has promised to hold elections
in 2005. Yet unless the government and U.N. forces succeed in stabilizing
the country, it is doubtful that Haiti will have the security conditions
necessary for free and fair elections. In October 2004, further
complicating progress toward elections, the chairwoman of the provisional
electoral council resigned after a dispute with the council’s treasurer
over the alleged misappropriation of funds.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders, working in a dangerous, highly-politicized
environment, face threats and intimidation. Anonymous death threats
were reported by Renan Hedouville, the head of the Lawyers
Committee for the Respect of Individual Liberties (Comite des Avocats
pour le Respect des Libertes Individuelles (CARLI)), and Mario Joseph,
a lawyer with the International Lawyers Office (Bureau des Avocats
Internationaux (BAI)).
Key International Actors
Multinational troops arrived in Haiti just after President Aristide
departed. In April 2004, the U.N. Security Council approved just over
8,300 peacekeeping troops for Haiti: 6,700 military personnel and 1,622
civilian police. The troop deployment in Haiti is headed by Brazil,
which is seeking a permanent seat on the U.N. Security Council.
Unfortunately, as of mid-October, the U.N. Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) had far fewer personnel than allotted: a mere
three thousand military troops and 650 civilian police. Besides Brazil,
the countries sending troops included Argentina, Chile, Nepal, Peru,
Sri Lanka, and Uruguay.
Despite Haiti’s dire human rights and humanitarian conditions, the
United States continues to deny Haitians on U.S. territory temporary
protection from deportation back to Haiti. It also intercepts Haitians
who flee their country and repatriates them immediately. In late
February 2004, in a clear violation of international refugee protections,
the U.S. Coast Guard dropped off hundreds of asylum seekers in the
main port in Port-au-Prince, the site of violence and widespread looting.
The Caribbean Community and Common Market (CARICOM), a fifteen-
member group of Caribbean countries, suspended ties with Haiti
after President Aristide went into exile. In November CARICOM leaders
decided to maintain the suspension, stating that it was based on
“fundamental principles of respect for human rights, due process and
good governance.”
In October, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
(IACHR) expressed grave concern over human rights conditions in
Haiti.