Haiti
Haiti made important progress in restoring democratic rule in 2006, electing
President Ren Prval after two years of postponed elections. Yet in 2007 internal
conflicts within Haitis electoral council led to the postponement of legislative
elections originally scheduled for November.
President Prvals government continues to face entrenched lawlessness and
chronic human rights problems, including pervasive police abuse, corruption,
inhumane prison conditions, and violence against journalists.
Violence, Lawlessness, and Instability
Violent crime remains rampant in Haiti. Gang violence, for example, resulted in 29
deaths in the Port-au-Prince neighborhood of Martissant in January 2007.
Kidnappings for ransom remain a serious problem, although they have decreased
considerably since 2006 when there were more than 400 reported cases, according
to the United Nations independent expert on human rights in Haiti. Lynching
cases have become increasingly common, with reports of 60 people killed by
lynching and 28 maimed or seriously injured in attempts during the first six
months of 2007.
The UN stabilization mission in Haiti (known by its French acronym,
MINUSTAH) and the Haitian National Police (HNP) have collaborated to infiltrate
criminal-gang strongholds and successfully regained state control over some of
Haitis most violent neighborhoods. Yet, according to the UN Security Council,
the security situation remains fragile.
Police lawlessness continues to contribute to overall insecurity. The HNP is largely
ineffective in preventing and investigating crime. HNP members are responsible
for arbitrary arrests, as well as excessive and indiscriminate use of force. They
also face credible allegations of involvement in criminal activity, including drug
trafficking, as indicated by the arrest of five HNP officers in a cocaine seizure in
May. Although the HNP has participated in some training sessions, the police
continue to suffer from severe shortages of personnel and equipment. Police perpetrate
abuses with impunity.
Justice and Accountability
Haitis highly dysfunctional justice system is plagued by corruption, politicization,
and a lack of personnel, training, and resources. According to Transparency
Internationals Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI), which serves as a recognized
standard for international corruption comparisons, Haiti ranked as the most corrupt
of the 163 countries surveyed in 2006.
Accountability for past abuses remains out of reach. For example, no one has
been successfully prosecuted for the killing of civilians in La Scierie, Saint-Marc in
February 2004.
Prison Conditions
Severe overcrowding plagues Haitis prison system, with more than 6,000
detainees being held in prisons with a combined total capacity of only 1,088
inmates. Conditions in those facilities are dire, with prisoners held in dirty and
overcrowded cells often lacking sanitary facilities. Violations of the right to health
abound, as reportedly 90 percent of inmates suffer from some form of scabies or
chronic itching. In Gonaives prisoners must take turns sleeping and standing due
to a lack of beds, and numerous prisoners attest that they do not receive daily
meals.
Arbitrary and long-term pretrial detention of suspects is commonplace. As of July
2007 fewer than 20 percent of prisoners had actually been tried and convicted for
the alleged crimes for which they were detained.
Attacks on Human Rights Defenders and Journalists
Haitian human rights activists and journalists remain targets of acts of violence
and intimidation. Freelance photojournalist Jean-Rmy Badio was gunned down
in January 2007 in Martissant, where he lived and had photographed gang conflicts.
Johnson Edouard, a correspondent for a Haitian weekly was shot dead
while sleeping in his home in Gonaives in April. Alix Joseph, a radio station manager
and host, was shot dead in Gonaives in May. A week later another radio show host, Franois Latour, was kidnapped at gunpoint in Port-au-Prince and later
shot dead.
In August two gang members were sentenced to life in prison for the July 2005
abduction and murder of Jacques Roche, cultural editor for the Haitian daily Le
Matin. Police made arrests in July for the murder of Joseph and in October for
another suspect in the murder of Roche.
In August 2007 a well known human rights advocate, Lovinsky Pierre-Antoine,
was abducted. At this writing his whereabouts remain unknown.
Key International Actors
MINUSTAH has been heavily involved in efforts to support and train the local
police force to carry out its security functions. The UN Security Council voted
unanimously in October 2007 to extend MINUSTAH until October 2008. At the end
of August 2007 the force, which was created by a Security Council resolution in
April 2004, included 7,054 troops and 1,771 police. The new resolution provides
for 7,060 troops and 2,091 police, as part of the gradual shifting of stabilization
capacity from the international forces to the Haitian police.
MINUSTAH conducted 19 security operations with the HNP in the Cit Soleil and
Martissant neighborhoods of Port-au-Prince between December 2006 and
February 2007. Six peacekeepers were injured in this process, continuing a history
of clashes between gangs and the joint United Nations and Haitian security
forces. Two peacekeepers from the Jordanian battalion of MINUSTAH were shot
and killed near Cit Soleil in November 2006.
With the agreement of the Government of Haiti, the UN Human Rights Council in
September 2007 decided to renew the mandate of the independent expert
appointed by the secretary-general on the situation of human rights in Haiti.
The United States is Haitis largest donor and in 2007 made a new pledge of
US$106 million, to be allocated over a one-year period to aid Haitis economic
recovery. Canada, Haitis second-largest donor, continues in its efforts to reestablish
security and stability in the country. Canadian civilian police officers
are currently part of MINUSTAH, and Canada has pledged more than C$550 million to the country to be distributed between 2006 and 2011. The European Union
signed an agreement granting 26 million in 2008-2009 to supplement the 233
million already allocated through 2012.
In February 2007 a US federal court judge in Miami ordered Carl Dorlien, a former
Haitian army colonel, to pay $4.3 million in damagesmostly out of the $3.2
million he won from the Florida lotteryto a former labor leader for torture and to
a widow for the death of her husband in the 1994 Raboteau massacre.
In May 2007 a New York state supreme court judge rejected a plea bargain in the
case of Emmanuel Toto Constant, a former leader of Haitis notorious FRAPH
death squad, held liable in 2006 in New York for $19 million in damages for rape
and torture committed by paramilitary forces under his command in Haiti from
1991 to 1993, and who currently faces criminal charges for mortgage fraud in the
US.