Haiti
Election delays, natural disasters, and the persistence of a deadly cholera epidemic
continue to hinder the Haitian government’s efforts to meet the basic
needs of its people and address long-standing human rights problems, such as
violence against women and inhumane prison conditions.
Postponement of national and local elections originally scheduled for 2011 continued
to foster political uncertainty and undermine the right to political participation.
As of October, one-third of Senate seats remained vacant and the fate
of another third was uncertain due to conflicting interpretations of a 2008 electoral
law. At the local level, terms for elected posts in 129 of the country’s 140
municipalities also expired in 2011. The administration of President Michel
Martelly filled these posts with political appointees in 2012. With prompting by
the United Nations and other international actors, Martelly convoked a special
session of Parliament on November 22 to consider a draft electoral law for regulating
the overdue elections. At time of writing, the session had not met.
A wave of anti-government protests beginning in October led to confrontations
between protestors and Martelly supporters, which raised concerns about the
resurgence of political violence in the country.
As of June 2013, 280,000 internally displaced persons (IDPs) were living in
camps established in the aftermath of the 2010 earthquake, according to the
UN. The International Organization for Migration estimated that of 71,000 displaced
households, 57,000 have no prospect of IDP sites, while at least 21,000
could face eviction. Nearly 1,200 households were evicted between January and
June, often with the involvement of the police or other government entities.
The three-year-old cholera epidemic continues to claim lives, with an estimated
8,500 people killed and 694,000 infected since October 2010. Damage caused
by Hurricane Sandy in October 2012 and droughts affected harvests, contributing
to high levels of food insecurity.
Deficiencies in the Criminal Justice System and
Detention Conditions
Haiti’s prison system remains severely overcrowded, in large part due to high
numbers of arbitrary arrests and prolonged pretrial detentions. Public health
efforts by the government and the UN Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
reduced the rate of inmate deaths in the first half of the year, which had spiked
in 2012.
The weak capacity of the Haitian National Police (HNP) contributes to overall
insecurity in the country. While the government and MINUSTAH have made
reforming the police a priority, there have been difficulties training sufficient
numbers of entry-level cadets. Oversight and accountability within the HNP
remain weak, and investigations made by the Inspectorate General of the police
into human rights abuses by police made little progress.
Accountability for Past Abuses
Former President Jean-Claude Duvalier returned to Haiti in January 2011 after
nearly 25 years in exile. He was charged with financial and human rights crimes
allegedly committed during his 15-year tenure as president. From 1971 to 1986,
Duvalier commanded a network of security forces that committed serious
human rights violations, including arbitrary detentions, torture, disappearances,
summary executions, and forced exile.
In 2012, the investigating judge in the case found, contrary to international
standards, that the statute of limitations prevented prosecuting Duvalier for his
human rights crimes. An appellate court heard testimony in a challenge to the
ruling over several months beginning in February. Duvalier appeared in court on
February 28 and answered questions posed by the court and victims’ attorneys.
At time of writing, the court had not issued its ruling.
Violence against Women
Gender-based violence is a widespread problem. Draft revisions to Haiti’s criminal
code, which at time of writing were awaiting approval of the Council of
Ministers before introduction to Parliament, include acts of gender-based violence,
such as rape and sexual assault, not currently in the code.
Women seeking accountability for sexual violence crimes encounter multiple
obstacles, including reproach by members of the public or threats. In one highprofile
case, a woman pressed charges against a former justice minister, claiming
he had raped her in 2012. She subsequently reported receiving multiple
death threats, which led her to withdraw her criminal complaint.
Violence Based on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Public statements by religious leaders in June led to a spate of protests and violence
targeting lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and intersex (LGBTI) people.
The Haitian nongovernmental organization SEROvie documented 47 cases
violence targeting LGBTI persons between July 17 and 24, including attacks with
knives, machetes, cement blocks, rocks, and sticks. At least three victims were
hospitalized. On July 21, the Haitian government issued a statement condemning
homophobic violence. Investigations into crimes against LGBTI persons
rarely progress, however, and police and justice officials lack training on issues
related to sexual orientation and gender identity.
Children’s Domestic Labor
Use of child domestic workers—known as restavèks—continues. Restavèks, the
majority of whom are girls, are sent from low-income households to live with
wealthier families in the hope that they will be schooled and cared for in
exchange for performing light chores. Though difficult to calculate, some estimates
suggest that 225,00 children work as restavèks. These children are often
unpaid, denied education, and physically or sexually abused. Haiti’s labor code
does not set a minimum age for work in domestic services, though the minimum
age for work in industrial, agricultural and commercial enterprises is set
at 15.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders face threats of violence. Patrick Florvilus, a pro bono
lawyer, reported receiving death threats since representing two men injured
(one later died) during a police intervention in an IDP camp in April. In August,
the court in Port-au-Prince summoned Florvilus in connection with a criminal arson case against him, which he alleged is frivolous and meant to intimidate
him.
The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights issued precautionary measures
in October 2012 for human rights lawyer Mario Joseph and considered
measures for two other lawyers, André Michel and Newton Saint Juste. On
October 22, 2013, police detained Michel, who has filed corruption charges
against members of Martelly’s family. The following morning his supporters
stormed the Port-au-Prince courthouse where he was due to appear, freed him,
and brought him to the offices of the powerful Port-au-Prince Bar Association.
The attempted arrest sparked a lawyers’ strike preventing courts in the capital
from functioning.
In August, unknown gunmen shot into the home of Malya Villard Apollon, codirector
of the Commission of Women Victims for Victims (KOFAVIV). In
September and October, unknown assailants harassed and threatened activists
working at KOFAVIV, and poisoned Apollon’s two dogs. In November, three
armed men attacked the offices of the LGBTI organization Kouraj, assaulted two
of its members, and stole computers and files containing confidential information
about people in the group. The incident followed months of anonymous
threats instructing organization leaders to cease advocacy on behalf of LGBTI
persons.
Key International Actors
The UN mission, MINUSTAH, has been in Haiti since 2004 and has contributed
to efforts to improve public security, protect vulnerable groups, and strengthen
the country’s democratic institutions.
In October 2010, allegations surfaced that a contingent of UN peacekeepers
was the source of the cholera epidemic. A 2011 UN independent investigation
found that the outbreak was caused by a South Asian strain of the cholera bacteria,
but stopped short of identifying peacekeepers as the source. However, in
July 2013, scientists from the UN panel stated that evidence presented by
numerous scientific studies now supported the conclusion that MINUSTAH soldiers
most likely had introduced the strain.
The Ministry of Public Health and Population continues to document hundreds
of cases of the illness weekly, resulting in dozens of deaths monthly: in August,
it reported that cholera had killed 8,173 people and infected 664,282 since
October 2010, with 258 deaths and 28,800 infections in the first half of 2013.
The UN reports the number of humanitarian organizations participating in the
cholera response, as well as medical stocks needed to treat projected cases,
has fallen significantly since 2012.
In October 2013, UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay publicly
stated that cholera victims should be provided compensation, although she did
not specify who should be responsible for funding the reparation. Also in
October, the Institute for Justice and Democracy in Haiti and the Bureau des
Avocats Internationaux filed a class-action law suit against the UN in a US federal
court in New York. The claim calls for the UN to pay US$2.2 billion for a
cholera eradication program and an unspecified amount in damages for
679,000 individual victims. At time of writing, plaintiffs had not affected service
of notice of the complaint on the UN; therefore the UN had not responded to
the claim in court.
The Institute for Justice and Democracy in Haiti and the Bureau des Avocats
Internationaux filed a claim directly with the UN in November 2011 on behalf of
5,000 cholera victims, alleging that MINUSTAH was the proximate cause of their
illness. The claim sought the installation of a national water and sanitation system,
financial compensation for individual victims, and a public apology from
the UN. In February 2013, the UN informed the victims by letter that the claims
were not “receivable,” citing the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities
of the UN.
According to UN figures, at least 81 allegations of sexual abuse or exploitation
have been made against MINUSTAH personnel in the last six years, including 16
in 2013, as of mid-November.
The UN Security Council extended MINUSTAH’s mandate through October 15, 2014.