Haiti
Despite some initial progress toward stabilization after the presidential election
of 2006 and the local elections that followed, Haiti continues to suffer from high
crime rates and chronic human rights problems, including inhumane prison conditions
and threats to human rights defenders.
The challenges facing Haiti were compounded by food riots in spring 2008 and an
exceptionally destructive hurricane season. At least five people were reportedly
killed in food riots in Port-au-Prince and Les Cayes in April. The unrest led to
Prime Minister Jacques Edouard Alexis’s dismissal that month, leaving the post of
prime minister vacant until Michèle Pierre-Louis took office in September. Haiti
was hit by four hurricanes in August and September, which left hundreds dead
and an estimated one million homeless or displaced and in dire need of humanitarian
assistance.
Violence and Weak State Institutions
Despite some improvements in the security situation, high levels of violent crime
persisted in 2008. In June United Nations police reported that 157 people had
been abducted in Haiti in the first six months of the year (a rate of about one person
per day). In the context of the overall high rate of kidnappings, the number of
child abductions has continued to rise at an alarming rate in urban areas. Most
girls who were abducted reported having been raped or sexually abused by their
captors. In one highly publicized kidnapping case, despite a ransom being paid,
a 16-year-old kidnapping victim was killed and his body was found on the streets
of Port-au-Prince bearing signs of torture.
Police lawlessness contributes to overall insecurity. The Haitian National Police is
largely ineffective in preventing and investigating crime. Reports of arbitrary
arrests as well as excessive and indiscriminate use of force by police continue.
There are also allegations of involvement of some police officers in criminal activity.
Although some police units have received training on human rights and arrest
procedures, the police continue to experience severe shortages of personnel,
equipment, and training.
Haiti also continues to suffer from an ineffective justice system plagued by politicization,
corruption, and a lack of personnel, training, and resources. In 2008
Haiti was ranked 177 out of 180 on Transparency International’s Corruption
Perceptions Index, which serves as a recognized standard for international corruption
comparisons. Perpetrators of abuses are rarely held accountable. Sexual
abuse of women and girls remains a serious problem, and those responsible are
typically not held to account.
Accountability for Past Abuses
Accountability for past abuses remains out of reach. For example, in February
2004 in La Scierie, Saint Marc, armed anti-government gangs took over a police
station, and government-linked forces responded with excessive force. There were
also reports of abuses by the anti-government gangs. Several killings, including
of civilians, resulted from clashes between the groups, but no one has been held
responsible for the deaths. Accountability also remains lacking in regard to the
1994 case involving the killing of civilians in Raboteau by soldiers and paramilitaries
during the time of the military government. In 2005 the Haitian Supreme
Court overturned the convictions of 15 former soldiers and paramilitaries in the
Raboteau case, basing its decision on extremely weak grounds.
Detention Conditions
The dysfunctional and politicized judicial system contributes to the severe overcrowding
that plagues Haiti’s prison system. Arbitrary long-term pretrial detention
of suspects is commonplace. Conditions in detention facilities are dire, with prisoners
held in dirty, crammed cells often lacking sanitary facilities. In September
2008 nearly 300 pretrial detainees were behind bars at a police station in
Gonaives, held in small cells with a total capacity of 75 people. Detainees in
some facilities take turns sleeping and standing due to a lack of space and beds,
and some complain that they do not receive daily meals. Reports of untreated
tuberculosis, malaria, scabies, and malnutrition are common in Haitian detention
centers.
Child Labor and Access to Education
Only about half of primary-school-age children attend school and less than 2 percent
of children finish secondary school, according to the United Nations
Children’s Fund. Although enrollment in public schools is supposed to be free,
the costs of uniforms, books and other school supplies are often too high for
many parents to meet.
The UN estimates there are at least 170,000 child domestic workers in Haiti.
Known in Haitian Creole as restavèks—from the French “rester avec” (to stay
with)—they form part of a long standing system by which parents from mostly
low-income rural areas send their children to live with other families, typically in
urban areas, in the hope that the receiving families will care for their children and
provide them with food, clothing, shelter, and schooling in exchange for the children
performing light chores. These children are often unpaid for their work,
denied an education, and physically and sexually abused.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders remain the targets of threats and attacks. Lovinsky
Pierre-Antoine, a well-known human rights advocate and former coordinator of
Fondasyon Trant Septanm—an organization that worked on behalf of victims of
the 1991 and 2004 coup d’états—was abducted on August 12, 2007, while serving
as an adviser to a delegation of human rights advocates from Canada and the
United States who were traveling in Haiti. His whereabouts remain unknown at
this writing. Wilson Mesilien, a Fondasyon Trant Septanm co-founder who was
serving as interim coordinator following Pierre-Antoine’s disappearance, reportedly
received threats and has gone into hiding with his wife and four children.
Frantzo Joseph, coordinator of the Grand Ravine Community Human Rights
Council (CCDH-GR), a community group working in the Grand Ravine neighborhood
of Port-au-Prince, reportedly received repeated threats and has also gone
into hiding with his family. The previous CCDH-GR coordinator, Bruner Esterne,
was shot dead by three unknown individuals in September 2006.
Investigations into these three human rights defender cases have not progressed.
On March 7, 2008, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights heard the case of
Fleury v. Haiti. Lysias Fleury is a human rights activist who was arbitrarily arrested,
beaten, and tortured by members of the Haitian National Police in 2002.
Key International Actors
In the wake of the 2008 hurricanes, Haiti received promises of humanitarian aid,
particularly from countries throughout the region and in Europe. The delivery of
humanitarian aid to areas most affected by the storms has been delayed, in part
due to the damage caused to the country’s infrastructure by the storms.
The UN Security Council voted in October 2008 to extend the mandate of the UN
stabilization mission in Haiti (known by its French acronym, MINUSTAH) to
October 15, 2009. The UN force, present in Haiti since 2004 and currently under
Brazilian command, contains 6,854 troops and 1,858 police officers. There have
been reports of serious abuses over the course of MINUSTAH’s mandate, including
by personnel from Brazil, Jordan, and Sri Lanka. In February 2008 the UN
Office of Internal Oversight Services issued conclusions from its investigation into
allegations of violations against children by the personnel of the 950-member Sri
Lankan troop contingent, finding that acts of sexual exploitation and abuse were
“frequent” and occurred “at virtually every location where the contingent personnel
were deployed.” Though reports of MINUSTAH abuses appear to have
decreased over the past year, problems remain. For example, in August 2008 witnesses
reported seeing MINUSTAH forces beating two plainclothes Haitian police
officers during a security operation in Cité Soleil.
In 2008, in its first ever judgment in a case against Haiti, the Inter-American Court
of Human Rights sharply criticized Haiti’s current and former governments for
their detention and mistreatment of former Prime Minister Yvon Neptune. It found
Haiti responsible for violating 11 different provisions of the American Convention
on Human Rights, including the right to physical integrity, the right to personal
liberty, and the right to a fair trial and judicial protection. Haiti was ordered to
adopt judicial reforms, improve prison conditions, quickly resolve Neptune’s criminal
case, and pay Neptune US$95,000 in damages and costs.