HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
INTERNATIONAL FILM FESTIVAL
The Human Rights Watch International Film Festival was created in 1988 to
advance public education on human rights issues and concerns using the
unique mediums of film and video. Each year, the festival exhibits the finest films
and videos with human rights themes in theaters throughout the United States and
several other countries, a reflection of both the scope of the festival and its increasingly
global appeal. The 2001 festival featured thirty-eight provocative films
(twenty-one of which were premieres), from fifteen countries.The festival included
feature-length fiction films, documentaries, and animation. In 2001, selected films
from the festival showcased in twenty-eight cities throughout the U.S.
In selecting films for the festival,Human Rights Watch concentrates equally on
artistic merit and human rights content.The festival encourages filmmakers around
the world to address human rights subject matter in their work and presents films
and videos from both new and established international filmmakers. Each year, the
festival’s programming committee screens more than five hundred films and videos
to create a program that represents a range of countries and issues. Once a film is
nominated for a place in the program, staff of the relevant divisions of Human
Rights Watch also view the work to confirm its accuracy in the portrayal of human
rights concerns.Though the festival rules out films that contain unacceptable inaccuracies
of fact,we do not bar any films on the basis of a particular point of view.
The 2001 festival was presented over a two-week period in New York as a collaborative
venture with the Film Society of Lincoln Center.The festival reached out
to a broader audience by co-presenting selected films with four important New
York festivals: the African Film Festival, Margaret Mead Film and Video Festival,
New York Latino Film Festival, and the New Festival/New York Lesbian and Gay
Film Festival, as well as several independent media organizations: the Association
of Independent Video and Filmmakers, DoubleTake, the Educational Video Center,
MediaRights.org, Pixelpress.org, and POV/The American Documentary. A
majority of the screenings were followed by discussions with the filmmakers,media
activists and Human Rights Watch staff on the issues represented in each work.
The festival’s presence on-line expanded greatly this year. In collaboration with
MediaRights.org, a community web site created by media activists,we co-presented
our first on line festival,“Media That Matters Online Film Festival.”This series featured
twelve short films and videos on U.S. (domestic) human rights issues for the
entire month of June. Audiences from around the world were able to view these
short works via the Internet and to then take immediate action by engaging in several
campaigns made available on-line.
In association with Pixelpress.org, the film festival sponsored the multimedia
presentation Juvenile Justice-a photograph and web site project which explores the
lives of five adolescents and their struggle with the California criminal justice system.
Award winning photographer Joseph Rodriguez drew on his own personal
history as an incarcerated youth and contrasts this with the lives and stories of his subjects in Northern California.Many of these youth are being judged in court as
adults. Juvenile Justice has encouraged on-line dialogue about several current
human concerns and issues and the power of art (as an agent for change), between
teens, parents, teachers, human rights activist, and artists.
The 2001 opening night celebration presented the U.S. premiere of the rerelease
of Hector Babenco’s, Kiss of a Spider Woman, the first independent film to
win an Academy Award for Best Actor and to be honored with four top Academy
nominations, including Best Picture.After a critically acclaimed, yet limited release
in 1986, the film virtually disappeared and was not again available to audiences
until June 2001. Babenco’s groundbreaking film set in a Latin American metropolis
in the mid-1970’s, explores the unlikely relationship that develops between two
prisoners: one political revolutionary, the other a flamboyant homosexual convicted
and imprisoned on “morality” charges. The film’s emotional drama remains
as strong today as fifteen years ago.
As part of the opening night program, the festival annually awards a prize in the
name of cinematographer and director Nestor Almendros, who was also a cherished
friend of the festival and Human Rights Watch. The award, which includes a
cash prize of U.S.$5,000, goes to a deserving and courageous filmmaker in recognition
of his or her contributions to human rights through film. The 2001 festival
awarded the Nestor Almendros Prize to the three Italian filmmakers of the documentary
Jung(War): In the Land of the Mujaheddin: Fabrizio Lazzaretti, Giuseppe
Pettito, and Alberto Vendemmiati. These filmmakers demonstrated enormous
courage filming in northern Afghanistan during war time, and their compassion for
the people of Afghanistan is strikingly evident in this intimate, accomplished film.
Responding to the tragedy on September 11, the festival began to distribute Jung
(War): In the land of the Mujaheddin on VHS format, free of charge, for community
organization and festival screenings. To date the festival has responded to over one
hundred requests with thirty screenings confirmed across the U.S. and Canada,
including a theatrical run at the Cinema Village in New York City which began at
the end of November.
In 1995, in honor of Irene Diamond, a longtime board member and supporter
of Human Rights Watch, the festival launched the Irene Diamond Lifetime
Achievement Award, presented annually to a director whose life’s work demonstrates
an outstanding commitment to human rights and film. Previous recipients
have included Costa Gavras, Ousmane Sembene, Barbara Kopple, and Alan J.
Pakula.This year, the award was presented to Haitian filmmaker Raoul Peck. Peck’s
exceptional body of documentary and fiction films focuses on the human rights situation
in Haiti over the past forty years. His newest work, Lumumba, a dramatic
portrait of legendary African leader Patrice Lumumba (and the first prime minister
of the Congo following its independence) premiered at this year’s New York festival
and continues to screen theatrically throughout the U.S. to sold out audiences.
Highlights of the 2001 festival included the world premiere of Stephanie Black’s
Life and Debt, an extraordinary documentary exploring the complexities and dangers
of economic globalization for Jamaica and developing countries around the
world. Musician Ziggy Marley gave a special musical introduction for our audiences
before the film screenings. Other highlights included; Promises, a moving 
insight into the Middle East conflict as seen through the eyes of seven children,both Palestinian and Israeli, growing up in Jerusalem today. The festival hosted its first
day of all youth programming-media by and for youth- about human rights issues.
Trembling Before G-d, Sandi Simcha Dubowski’s landmark documentary film
about Hasidic and Orthodox Jews who “come out” as gays and lesbians, closed this
year’s festival.
Each year the festival holds a series of special film screenings for high school students
and their teachers in an effort to encourage dialogue about human rights in
the classroom.Daytime screenings are followed by discussions among the students,
their teachers, visiting filmmakers, and Human Rights Watch staff. In 2001, in conjunction
with our newly launched San Francisco festival, we hosted a special
screening for public high school students of the documentary,Public Enemy,which
focuses on four key members of the Black Panthers. Bobby Seale, a protagonist in
the film and a co-founder of the Black Panthers, spent two hours in lively, heated,
and passionate post-screening discussion with the youth audience.
In 1996 the festival expanded to London. The 2001 London festival produced
with the Ritzy Theater in Brixton showcased the United Kingdom’s premiere of
Julian Schnabel’s magnificent and lush Before Night Falls. The film chronicles the
life of Cuban writer Reinaldo Arenas, one of the major artists to emerged from the
Latin American literary boom of the 1960s. Running afoul of the Castro regime as
both a political dissident and openly gay man, Arenas was harassed, imprisoned,
and physically abused-all the more so because he managed to smuggle out and publish
his works abroad. Schnabel capture’s Arenas’s extraordinary life with remarkable
honesty.
The London festival featured the timely screening of Caravan of Death, journalist
Isabel Hilton’s documentary on Judge Juan Guzman’s attempts to put former
Chilean military ruler General Augusto Pinochet on trial for crimes he committed
twenty-seven years ago. The festival also featured a special United Kingdom premiere
of Bamboozled, Spike Lee’s latest film, a blistering satire of network television’s
pitfalls and prejudices.
In a further effort to expand the festival’s scope, a selected package of traveling
films from the festival was created in 1994.The Traveling Festival is presented annually
in a growing number of sites and cities.As of November 2001, the showcase had
been presented in Salt Lake City, Utah; Portland, Oregon; Denver, Colorado; Seattle,
Washington; Chicago, Illinois; and Riverside, California. In an effort to expand
its capacity to raise awareness about human rights issues in the United States and
abroad, the film festival created a web site with numerous support materials and
links to Human Rights Watch’s work on a variety of topics.We have facilitated filmmaker
appearances at a number of traveling festival sites, which further enhances
the audience’s ability to discuss the films screened and analyze the issues they raise.
In addition, we produced full-scale film festivals in both Boston and the San Francisco
Bay Area for the first time where came together and discussed human rights
issues in a community-based setting. These two festivals were unique in their geographical
scope: the Boston festival was hosted at the Museum of Fine Arts in midtown,
the Coolidge Corner theater in Brookline and the International Institute in
downtown Boston. The Bay Area festival venues were equally broad: playing at The
Pacific Film Archive in Berkeley, the Yerba Buena Center in downtown San Francisco,
and the Rafael Film Center in Rafael, California.