WORLD REPORT | 2011
EV ENTS OF 2010
H U M A N
R I G H T S
W A T C H

H U M A N
R I G H T S
W A T C H
WORLD REPORT
2011
EV ENTS OF 2010
Copyright © 2011 Human Rights Watch
All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
ISBN-13: 978-1-58322-921-7
Front cover photo: Aung Myo Thein, 42, spent more than six years in prison in Burma for his
activism as a student union leader. More than 2,200 political prisoners—including artists,
journalists, students, monks, and political activists—remain locked up in Burma's squalid
prisons. © 2010 Platon for Human Rights Watch
Back cover photo: A child migrant worker from Kyrgyzstan picks tobacco leaves in
Kazakhstan. Every year thousands of Kyrgyz migrant workers, often together with their children,
find work in tobacco farming, where many are subjected to abuse and exploitation by
employers. © 2009 Moises Saman/Magnum for Human Rights Watch
Cover and book design by Rafael Jiménez
350 Fifth Avenue, 34th floor
New York, NY 10118-3299 USA
Tel: +1 212 290 4700
Fax: +1 212 736 1300
hrwnyc@hrw.org
1630 Connecticut Avenue, N.W., Suite 500
Washington, DC 20009 USA
Tel: +1 202 612 4321
Fax: +1 202 612 4333
hrwdc@hrw.org
2-12 Pentonville Road, 2nd Floor
London N1 9HF, UK
Tel: +44 20 7713 1995
Fax: +44 20 7713 1800
hrwuk@hrw.org
27 Rue de Lisbonne
75008 Paris, France
Tel: +33 (0) 1 41 92 07 34
Fax: +33 (0) 1 47 22 08 61
paris@hrw.org
Avenue des Gaulois, 7
1040 Brussels, Belgium
Tel: + 32 (2) 732 2009
Fax: + 32 (2) 732 0471
hrwbe@hrw.org
51 Avenue Blanc, Floor 6,
1202 Geneva, Switzerland
Tel: +41 22 738 0481
Fax: +41 22 738 1791
hrwgva@hrw.org
Poststraße 4-5
10178 Berlin, Germany
Tel: +49 30 2593 06-10
Fax: +49 30 2593 06-29
berlin@hrw.org
1st fl, Wilds View
Isle of Houghton
Boundary Road (at Carse O’Gowrie)
Parktown, 2198 South Africa
Tel: +27-11-484-2640, Fax: +27-11-484-2641
#4A, Meiji University Academy Common bldg. 7F, 1-1,
Kanda-Surugadai, Chiyoda-ku
Tokyo 101-8301 Japan
Tel: +81-3-5282-5160, Fax: +81-3-5282-5161
tokyo@hrw.org
Mansour Building 4th Floor, Apt. 26
Nicholas Turk Street
Medawar, Beirut, Lebanon 20753909
Tel: +961-1-447833, Fax +961-1-446497
www.hrw.org
Human Rights Watch is dedicated to protecting the
human rights of people around the world.
We stand with victims and activists to prevent discrimination,
to uphold political freedom, to protect people from inhumane
conduct in wartime, and to bring offenders to justice.
We investigate and expose human rights violations and hold
abusers accountable.
We challenge governments and those who hold power to end
abusive practices and respect international human rights law.
We enlist the public and the international community to
support the cause of human rights for all.
WORLD REPORT 2011
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
Human Rights Watch is one of the world’s leading independent
organizations dedicated to defending and protecting human rights.
By focusing international attention where human rights are violated,
we give voice to the oppressed and hold oppressors accountable for
their crimes. Our rigorous, objective investigations and strategic,
targeted advocacy build intense pressure for action and raise the cost
of human rights abuse. For over 30 years, Human Rights Watch has
worked tenaciously to lay the legal and moral groundwork for
deep-rooted change and has fought to bring greater justice and
security to people around the world.
Human Rights Watch began in 1978 with the founding of its Europe
and Central Asia division (then known as Helsinki Watch). Today, it
also includes divisions covering Africa, the Americas, Asia, and the
Middle East and North Africa; a United States program; thematic
divisions or programs on arms, business and human rights, children’s
rights, health and human rights, international justice, lesbian, gay,
bisexual and transgender rights, refugees, terrorism/counterterrorism,
and women’s rights; and an emergencies program. It maintains offices
in Amsterdam, Beirut, Berlin, Brussels, Cairo, Chicago, Geneva,
Johannesburg, London, Los Angeles, Moscow, New York, Paris,
San Francisco, Tokyo, Toronto, Washington DC, and Zurich, and field
presences in 20 other locations globally. Human Rights Watch is an
independent, nongovernmental organization, supported by contributions
from private individuals and foundations worldwide. It accepts no
government funds, directly or indirectly.
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
The staff includes Kenneth Roth, Executive Director; Michele Alexander, Deputy Executive
Director, Development and Global Initiatives; Carroll Bogert, Deputy Executive Director,
External Relations; Iain Levine, Deputy Executive Director, Program; Walid Ayoub,
Information Technology Director; Clive Baldwin, Senior Legal Advisor; Emma Daly,
Communications Director; Alan Feldstein, Associate General Counsel; Barbara Guglielmo,
Acting Operations Director; Peggy Hicks, Global Advocacy Director; Maria Pignataro Nielsen,
Global Human Resources Director; Dinah PoKempner, General Counsel; Aisling Reidy,
Senior Legal Advisor; James Ross, Legal and Policy Director; Joe Saunders, Deputy Program
Director; and Minky Worden, Director of Global Initiatives.
The division directors of Human Rights Watch are Brad Adams, Asia; Joseph Amon,
Health and Human Rights; John Biaggi, International Film Festival; Peter Bouckaert,
Emergencies; Rachel Denber (acting), Europe and Central Asia; Richard Dicker,
International Justice; Boris Dittrich (acting), Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Rights;
Bill Frelick, Refugee Policy; Arvind Ganesan, Business and Human Rights; Liesl Gerntholtz,
Women’s Rights; Steve Goose, Arms; Joanne Mariner, Terrorism/Counterterrorism;
Alison Parker, United States; Rona Peligal (acting), Africa; José Miguel Vivanco, Americas;
Lois Whitman, Children’s Rights; and Sarah Leah Whitson, Middle East and North Africa.
The advocacy directors of Human Rights Watch are Philippe Bolopion,
United Nations–New York; Juliette De Rivero, United Nations–Geneva; Jean-Marie Fardeau,
Paris; Lotte Leicht, European Union; Wenzel Michalski, Berlin; Tom Malinowski,
Washington DC; and Tom Porteous, London.
The members of the board of directors are James F. Hoge, Chair, Susan Manilow, Vice-Chair,
Joel Motley, Vice-Chair, Sid Sheinberg, Vice-Chair, John J. Studzinski, Vice-Chair,
Bruce J. Klatsky, Treasurer, Karen Ackman, Jorge Castañeda, Tony Elliott, Hassan Elmasry,
Michael G. Fisch, Michael E. Gellert, Betsy Karel, Wendy Keys, Robert Kissane,
Joanne Leedom-Ackerman, Oki Matsumoto, Barry Meyer, Pat Mitchell, Joan R. Platt, Amy Rao,
Neil Rimer, Victoria Riskin, Amy L. Robbins, Shelley Rubin, Kevin P. Ryan,
Jean-Louis Servan-Schreiber, Darian W. Swig, John R. Taylor, and Catherine Zennström.
Emeritus board members are Robert L. Bernstein, Founding Chair, 1979-1997,
Jonathan F. Fanton, Chair, 1998-2003, Jane Olson, 2004-2010, Lisa Anderson, David M. Brown,
William D. Carmichael, Vartan Gregorian, Alice H. Henkin, Stephen L. Kass,
Marina Pinto Kaufman, Josh Mailman, Samuel K. Murumba, Peter Osnos, Kathleen Peratis,
Bruce Rabb, Sigrid Rausing, Orville Schell, Gary Sick, and Malcolm B. Smith.
WORLD REPORT 2011
Acknowledgments
A compilation of this magnitude requires contribution from a large
number of people, including most of the Human Rights Watch staff.
The contributors were:
Pema Abrahams, Brad Adams, Maria Aissa de Figueredo, Setenay Akdag, Brahim Alansari,
Chris Albin-Lackey, Yousif al-Timimi, Joseph Amon, Amy Auguston, Leeam Azulay,
Clive Baldwin, Neela Banerjee, Shantha Barriga, Jo Becker, Fatima-Zahra Benfkira,
Nicholas Bequelin, Andrea Berg, Carroll Bogert, Philippe Bolopion, Tess Borden,
Amy Braunschweiger, Sebastian Brett, Reed Brody, Christen Broecker, Jane Buchanan,
Wolfgang Buettner, Maria Burnett, Elizabeth Calvin, Haleh Chahrokh, Anna Chaplin,
Grace Choi, Sara Colm, Jon Connolly, Adam Coogle, Kaitlin Cordes, Zama Coursen-Neff,
Emma Daly, Philippe Dam, Kiran D’Amico, Sara Darehshori, Juliette de Rivero, Kristina
DeMain, Rachel Denber, Richard Dicker, Boris Dittrich, Kanae Doi, Corinne Dufka, Andrej
Dynko, Jessica Evans, Elizabeth Evenson, Jean-Marie Fardeau, Guillermo Farias, Jamie Fellner,
Bill Frelick, Arvind Ganesan, Meenakshi Ganguly, Liesl Gerntholtz, Alex Gertner,
Neela Ghoshal, Thomas Gilchrist, Allison Gill, Antonio Ginatta, Giorgi Gogia, Eric Goldstein,
Steve Goose, Yulia Gorbunova, Ian Gorvin, Jessie Graham, Laura Graham, Eric Guttschuss,
Danielle Haas, Andreas Harsono, Ali Dayan Hasan, Leslie Haskell, Jehanne Henry,
Eleanor Hevey, Peggy Hicks, Saleh Hijazi, Nadim Houry, Lindsey Hutchison, Peter Huvos,
Claire Ivers, Balkees Jarrah, Rafael Jiménez, Preeti Kannan, Tiseke Kasambala, Aruna Kashyap,
Nick Kemming, Elise Keppler, Amr Khairy, Nadya Khalife, Viktoria Kim, Carolyn Kindelan,
Juliane Kippenberg, Amanda Klasing, Kyle Knight, Soo Ryun Kwon, Erica Lally, Mignon Lamia,
Adrianne Lapar, Leslie Lefkow, Lotte Leicht, Iain Levine, Diederik Lohman, Tanya Lokshina,
Jiaying Long, Anna Lopriore, Linda Louie, Drake Lucas, Lena Miriam Macke, Tom Malinowski,
Noga Malkin, Ahmed Mansour, Joanne Mariner Edmon Marukyan, Dave Mathieson,
Géraldine Mattioli-Zeltner, Veronica Matushaj, Maria McFarland, Megan McLemore,
Amanda McRae, Wenzel Michalski, Kathy Mills, Lisa Misol, Marianne Mollmann, Ella Moran,
Heba Morayef, Mani Mostofi, Priyanka Motaparthy, Rasha Moumneh, Siphokazi Mthathi,
Jim Murphy, Samer Muscati, Dipika Nath, Stephanie Neider, Rachel Nicholson,
Agnes Ndige Muriungi Odhiambo, Jessica Ognian, Erin O’Leary, Alison Parker, Sarah Parkes,
Elaine Pearson, Rona Peligal, Sasha Petrov, Sunai Phasuk, Enrique Piraces, Laura Pitter,
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Dinah PoKempner, Tom Porteous, Jyotsna Poudyal, Andrea Prasow, Marina Pravdic,
Mustafa Qadri, Daniela Ramirez, Ben Rawlence, Rachel Reid, Aisling Reidy, Meghan Rhoad,
Sophie Richardson, Lisa Rimli, Mihra Rittmann, Phil Robertson, Kathy Rose, James Ross,
Kenneth Roth, Faraz Sanei, Joe Saunders, Ida Sawyer, Max Schoening, Jake Scobey-Thal,
David Segall, Kathryn Semogas, Kay Seok, Jose Serralvo, Anna Sevortian Vikram Shah,
Bede Sheppard, Robin Shulman, Gerry Simpson, Emma Sinclair-Webb, Peter Slezkine,
Daniel W. Smith, Ole Solvang, Mickey Spiegel, Xabay Spinka, Nik Steinberg, Joe Stork,
Judith Sunderland, Steve Swerdlow, Veronika Szente Goldston, Maya Taal, Tamara Taraciuk,
Letta Tayler, Carina Tertsakian, Elena Testi, Tej Thapa, Laura Thomas, Katherine Todrys,
Simone Troller, Wanda Troszczynska-van Genderen, Farid Tukhbatullin, Bill Van Esveld,
Gauri Van Gulik, Anneke Van Woudenberg, Elena Vanko, Nisha Varia, Rezarta Veizaj,
Jamie Vernaelde, José Miguel Vivanco, Florentine Vos, Janet Walsh, Ben Ward,
Matthew Wells, Lois Whitman, Sarah Leah Whitson, Christoph Wilcke, Daniel Wilkinson,
Minky Worden, Riyo Yoshioka.
Joe Saunders edited the report with assistance from Ian Gorvin, Danielle Haas, Iain Levine,
and Robin Shulman. Brittany Mitchell coordinated the editing process. Layout and production
were coordinated by Grace Choi and Rafael Jiménez, with assistance from Anna
Lopriore, Veronica Matushaj, Jim Murphy, Enrique Piraces, and Kathy Mills.
Leeam Azulay, Adam Coogle, Guillermo Farias, Alex Gertner, Thomas Gilchrist,
Lindsey Hutchison, Carolyn Kindelan, Kyle Knight, Erica Lally, Adrianne Lapar, Linda Louie,
Stephanie Neider, Erin O’Leary, Jessica Ognian, Marina Pravdic, Daniela Ramirez,
Jake Scobey-Thal, David Segall, and Vikram Shah proofread the report.
For a full list of Human Rights Watch staff, please go to our website:
www.hrw.org/about/info/staff.html.
WORLD REPORT 2011
This 21st annual World Report is dedicated to the memory
of our beloved colleague Ian Gorvin, who died of cancer on
November 15, 2010, at age 48. Ian, senior program officer at
Human Rights Watch, edited the World Report for most of the
past decade, was an expert on human rights issues in Europe
and around the world, and made lasting contributions to the
human rights movement through his work with Amnesty
International and the Organization for Security and
Co-operation in Europe as well as Human Rights Watch.
An experienced activist, Ian brought good judgment as well
as linguistic savvy and an unerring eye for detail to his
editing. And he never lost sight of our mission: to tell the
stories of victims of human rights violations with dignity and
compassion and to press for justice to ensure that others
do not suffer the same fate. He was ever the voice of calm,
sensible advice, with an understated but potent sense of
humor. We miss him enormously.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
WORLD REPORT 2011
Table of Contents
A Facade of Action
The Misuse of Dialogue and Cooperation with Rights Abusers 1
by Kenneth Roth
Whose News?
The Changing Media Landscape and NGOs 24
by Carroll Bogert
Schools as Battlegrounds
Protecting Students, Teachers, and Schools from Attack 37
by Zama Coursen-Neff and Bede Sheppard
Photo Essays
Burma, Kyrgyzstan, Kuwait, Kazakhstan, and The Lord’s Resistance Army 51
Africa 75
Angola 76
Burundi 83
Chad 92
Côte d’Ivoire 97
Democratic Republic of Congo 103
Equatorial Guinea 111
Eritrea 116
Ethiopia 121
Guinea 127
Kenya 133
Liberia 142
Nigeria 148
Rwanda 154
Sierra Leone 160
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Somalia 165
South Africa 171
Sudan 176
Uganda 185
Zimbabwe 194
Americas 203
Argentina 204
Bolivia 210
Brazil 215
Chile 222
Colombia 227
Cuba 233
Ecuador 238
Guatemala 243
Haiti 248
Honduras 252
Mexico 256
Peru 263
Venezuela 268
Asia 275
Afghanistan 276
Bangladesh 282
Burma 288
Cambodia 295
China 303
India 315
WORLD REPORT 2011
Indonesia 321
Malaysia 331
Nepal 337
North Korea 343
Pakistan 348
Papua New Guinea 355
The Philippines 359
Singapore 365
Sri Lanka 370
Thailand 376
Vietnam 384
Europe and Central Asia 391
Armenia 392
Azerbaijan 398
Belarus 404
Bosnia and Herzegovina 410
Croatia 415
European Union 420
Georgia 437
Kazakhstan 443
Kyrgyzstan 449
Russia 456
Serbia 463
Tajikistan 474
Turkey 479
Turkmenistan 485
Ukraine 491
Uzbekistan 497
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Middle East and North Africa 505
Algeria 506
Bahrain 511
Egypt 517
Iran 523
Iraq 530
Israel/Occupied Palestinian Territories 536
Jordan 545
Kuwait 551
Lebanon 556
Libya 562
Morocco and Western Sahara 568
Saudi Arabia 576
Syria 584
Tunisia 591
United Arab Emirates 597
Yemen 602
United States 609
2010 Human Rights Watch Publications 629

INTRODUCTION
1
A Facade of Action:
The Misuse of Dialogue and Cooperation
with Rights Abusers
By Kenneth Roth
In last year’s World Report, Human Rights Watch highlighted the intensifying
attacks by abusive governments on human rights defenders, organizations,
and institutions. This year we address the flip side of the problem–the failure
of the expected champions of human rights to respond to the problem, defend
those people and organizations struggling for human rights, and stand up
firmly against abusive governments.
There is often a degree of rationality in a government’s decision to violate
human rights. The government might fear that permitting greater freedom
would encourage people to join together in voicing discontent and thus jeopardize
its grip on power. Or abusive leaders might worry that devoting
resources to the impoverished would compromise their ability to enrich themselves
and their cronies.
International pressure can change that calculus. Whether exposing or condemning
abuses, conditioning access to military aid or budgetary support on
ending them, imposing targeted sanctions on individual abusers, or even calling
for prosecution and punishment of those responsible, public pressure raises
the cost of violating human rights. It discourages further oppression, signaling
that violations cannot continue cost-free.
All governments have a duty to exert such pressure. A commitment to human
rights requires not only upholding them at home but also using available and
appropriate tools to convince other governments to respect them as well.
2
WORLD REPORT 2011
No repressive government likes facing such pressure. Today many are fighting
back, hoping to dissuade others from adopting or continuing such measures.
That reaction is hardly surprising. What is disappointing is the number of governments
that, in the face of that reaction, are abandoning public pressure.
With disturbing frequency, governments that might have been counted on to
generate such pressure for human rights are accepting the rationalizations
and subterfuges of repressive governments and giving up. In place of a commitment
to exerting public pressure for human rights, they profess a preference
for softer approaches such as private “dialogue” and “cooperation.”
There is nothing inherently wrong with dialogue and cooperation to promote
human rights. Persuading a government through dialogue to genuinely cooperate
with efforts to improve its human rights record is a key goal of human
rights advocacy. A cooperative approach makes sense for a government that
demonstrably wants to respect human rights but lacks the resources or technical
know-how to implement its commitment. It can also be useful for face-saving
reasons–if a government is willing to end violations but wants to appear to
act on its own initiative. Indeed, Human Rights Watch often engages quietly
with governments for such reasons.
But when the problem is a lack of political will to respect rights, public pressure
is needed to change the cost-benefit analysis that leads to the choice of
repression over rights. In such cases, the quest for dialogue and cooperation
becomes a charade designed more to appease critics of complacency than to
secure change, a calculated diversion from the fact that nothing of consequence
is being done. Moreover, the refusal to use pressure makes dialogue
and cooperation less effective because governments know there is nothing to
fear from simply feigning serious participation.
Recent illustrations of this misguided approach include ASEAN’s tepid
response to Burmese repression, the United Nations’ deferential attitude
INTRODUCTION
3
toward Sri Lankan atrocities, the European Union’s obsequious approach to
Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan, the soft Western reaction to certain favored
repressive African leaders such as Paul Kagame of Rwanda and Meles Zenawi
of Ethiopia, the weak United States policy toward Saudi Arabia, India’s pliant
posture toward Burma and Sri Lanka, and the near-universal cowardice in confronting
China’s deepening crackdown on basic liberties. In all of these cases,
governments, by abandoning public pressure, effectively close their eyes to
repression.
Even those that shy away from using pressure in most cases are sometimes
willing to apply it toward pariah governments, such as North Korea, Iran,
Sudan, and Zimbabwe, whose behavior, whether on human rights or other
matters, is so outrageous that it overshadows other interests. But in too many
cases, governments these days are disappointingly disinclined to use public
pressure to alter the calculus of repression.
When governments stop exerting public pressure to address human rights violations,
they leave domestic advocates–rights activists, sympathetic parliamentarians,
concerned journalists–without crucial support. Pressure from
abroad can help create the political space for local actors to push their government
to respect rights. It also can let domestic advocates know that they
are not alone, that others stand with them. But when there is little or no such
pressure, repressive governments have a freer hand to restrict domestic advocates,
as has occurred in recent years in Russia, Ethiopia, Rwanda, Cambodia,
and elsewhere. And because dialogue and cooperation look too much like
acquiescence and acceptance, domestic advocates sense indifference rather
than solidarity.
4
WORLD REPORT 2011
A Timid Response to Repression
In recent years the use of dialogue and cooperation in lieu of public pressure
has emerged with a vengeance at the UN, from Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
to many members of the Human Rights Council. In addition, the EU seems to
have become particularly infatuated with the idea of dialogue and cooperation,
with the EU’s first high representative for foreign affairs and security policy,
Catherine Ashton, repeatedly expressing a preference for “quiet diplomacy”
regardless of the circumstances. Leading democracies of the global South,
such as South Africa, India, and Brazil, have promoted quiet demarches as a
preferred response to repression. The famed eloquence of US President Barack
Obama has sometimes eluded him when it comes to defending human rights,
especially in bilateral contexts with, for example, China, India, and Indonesia.
Obama has also not insisted that the various agencies of the US government,
such as the Defense Department and various embassies, convey strong
human rights messages consistently–a problem, for example, in Egypt,
Indonesia, and Bahrain.
This is a particularly inopportune time for proponents of human rights to lose
their public voice, because various governments that want to prevent the vigorous
enforcement of human rights have had no qualms about raising theirs.
Many are challenging first principles, such as the universality of human rights.
For example, some African governments complain that the International
Criminal Court’s current focus on Africa is selective and imperialist, as if the
fate of a few African despots were more important than the suffering of countless
African victims. China’s economic rise is often cited as reason to believe
that authoritarian government is more effective for guiding economic development
in low-income countries, even though unaccountable governments are
more likely to succumb to corruption and less likely to respond to or invest in
people’s most urgent needs (as demonstrated by the rising number of protests
in China–some 90,000 annually by the government’s own count–fueled by
INTRODUCTION
5
growing discontent over the corruption and arbitrariness of local officials).
Some governments, eager to abandon long-established rules for protecting
civilians in time of war or threatened security, justify their own violations of
the laws of war by citing Sri Lanka’s indiscriminate attacks in its victory over
the rebel Tamil Tigers, or Western (and especially US) tolerance of torture and
arbitrary detention in combating terrorism. Governments that lose their voice
on human rights effectively abandon these crucial debates to the opponents
of universal human rights enforcement.
Part of this reticence is due to a crisis of confidence. The shifting global balance
of power (particularly the rise of China), an intensified competition for
markets and natural resources at a time of economic turmoil, and the decline
in moral standing of Western powers occasioned by their use with impunity of
abusive counterterrorism techniques have made many governments less willing
to take a strong public stand in favor of human rights.
Ironically, some of the governments most opposed to using pressure to promote
human rights have no qualms about using pressure to deflect human
rights criticism. China, for example, pulled out all stops in an ultimately unsuccessful
effort to suppress a report to the UN Security Council on the discovery
of Chinese weaponry in Darfur despite an arms embargo. Sri Lanka did the
same in an unsuccessful effort to quash a UN advisory panel on accountability
for war crimes committed during its armed conflict with the Tamil Tigers. China
also mounted a major lobbying effort to prevent the awarding of the Nobel
Peace Prize to imprisoned Chinese writer and human rights activist Liu Xiaobo,
and when that failed, it tried unsuccessfully to discourage governments from
attending the award ceremony in Norway. China made a similar effort to block
a proposed UN commission of inquiry into war crimes committed in Burma.
6
WORLD REPORT 2011
The United Nations and Its Member States
The obsession with dialogue and cooperation is particularly intense at the UN
Human Rights Council in Geneva, where many of the members insist that the
Council should practice “cooperation, not condemnation.” A key form of pressure
at the Council is the ability to send fact-finders to expose what abuses
were committed and to hold governments accountable for not curtailing abuses.
One important medium for these tools is a resolution aimed at a particular
country or situation. Yet many governments on the Council eschew any country
resolution designed to generate pressure (except in the case of the Council’s
perennial pariah, Israel). As China explained (in the similar context of the UN
General Assembly), ”[s]ubmitting [a] country specific resolution…will make the
issue of human rights politicized and is not conducive to genuine cooperation
on human rights issues.” The African Group at the UN has said it will support
country resolutions only with the consent of the target government, in other
words, only when the resolution exerts no pressure at all. This approach was
taken to an extreme after Sri Lanka launched indiscriminate attacks on civilians
in the final months of its war with the Tamil Tigers–rather than condemn
these atrocities, a majority of Council members overcame a minority’s objections
and voted to congratulate Sri Lanka on its military victory without mentioning
government atrocities.
If members of the Council want dialogue and cooperation to be effective in
upholding human rights, they should limit use of these tools to governments
that have demonstrated a political will to improve. But whether out of calculation
or cowardice, many Council members promote dialogue and cooperation
as a universal prescription without regard to whether a government has the
political will to curtail its abusive behavior. They thus resist tests for determining
whether a government’s asserted interest in cooperation is a ploy to avoid
pressure or a genuine commitment to improvement–tests that might look to
the government’s willingness to acknowledge its human rights failings, welINTRODUCTION
7
come UN investigators to examine the nature of the problem, prescribe solutions,
and embark upon reforms. The enemies of human rights enforcement
oppose critical resolutions even on governments that clearly fail these tests,
such as Burma, Iran, North Korea, Sri Lanka, and Sudan.
Similar problems arise at the UN General Assembly. As the Burmese military
reinforced its decades-long rule with sham elections designed to give it a civilian
facade, a campaign got under way to intensify pressure by launching an
international commission of inquiry to examine the many war crimes committed
in the country’s long-running armed conflict. A commission of inquiry
would be an excellent tool for showing that such atrocities could no longer be
committed with impunity. It would also create an incentive for newer members
of the military-dominated government to avoid the worst abuses of the past.
The idea of a commission of inquiry, originally proposed by the independent
UN special rapporteur on Burma, has received support from, among others,
the US, the United Kingdom, France, Netherlands, Canada, Australia, and New
Zealand.
Yet some have refused to endorse a commission of inquiry on the spurious
grounds that it would not work without the cooperation of the Burmese junta.
EU High Representative Ashton, in failing to embrace this tool, said: “Ideally,
we should aim at ensuring a measure of cooperation from the national authorities.”
Similarly, a German Foreign Ministry spokeswoman said that, to help
advance human rights in the country, it is “crucial to find some co-operation
mechanism with the [Burmese] national authorities.” Yet obtaining such cooperation
from the Burmese military in the absence of further pressure is a pipe
dream.
One favorite form of cooperation is a formal intergovernmental dialogue on
human rights, such as those that many governments conduct with China and
the EU maintains with a range of repressive countries, including the former8
WORLD REPORT 2011
Soviet republics of Central Asia. Authoritarian governments understandably
welcome these dialogues because they remove the spotlight from human
rights discussions. The public, including domestic activists, is left in the dark,
as are most government officials outside the foreign ministry. But Western
governments also often cite the existence of such dialogues as justification for
not speaking concretely about human rights violations and remedies in more
meaningful settings–as Sweden did, for example, during its EU presidency
when asked why human rights had not featured more prominently at the EUCentral
Asia ministerial conference.
Human Rights Watch’s own experience shows that outspoken commentary on
human rights practices need not preclude meaningful private dialogue with
governments. Human Rights Watch routinely reports on abuses and generates
pressure for them to end, but that has not stood in the way of active engagement
with many governments that are the subject of these reports. Indeed,
governments are often more likely to engage with Human Rights Watch,
because the sting of public reporting, and a desire to influence it, spurs them
to dialogue. If a nongovernmental organization can engage with governments
while speaking out about their abuses, certainly governments should be able
to do so as well.
The Need for Benchmarks
Dialogues would have a far greater impact if they were tied to concrete and
publicly articulated benchmarks. Such benchmarks would give clear direction
to the dialogue and make participants accountable for concrete results. But
that is often exactly what dialogue participants want to avoid. The failure to
set clear, public benchmarks is itself evidence of a lack of seriousness, an
unwillingness to deploy even the minimum pressure needed to make dialogue
meaningful. The EU, for example, has argued that publicly articulated benchmarks
would introduce tension into a dialogue and undermine its role as a
INTRODUCTION
9
“confidence-building exercise,” as if the purpose of the dialogue were to promote
warm and fuzzy feelings rather than to improve respect for human rights.
Moreover, repressive governments have become so adept at manipulating
these dialogues, and purported promoters of human rights so dependent on
them as a sign that they are “doing something,” that the repressors have managed
to treat the mere commencement or resumption of dialogue as a sign of
“progress.” Even supposed rights-promoters have fallen into this trap. For
example, a 2008 progress report by the EU on the implementation of its
Central Asia strategy concluded that things were going well but gave no
specifics beyond “intensified political dialogue” as a measurement of
“progress.”
Even when benchmarks exist, Western governments’ willingness to ignore
them when they prove inconvenient undermines their usefulness. For example,
the EU’s bilateral agreements with other countries are routinely conditioned
on basic respect for human rights, but the EU nonetheless concluded a
significant trade agreement and pursued a full partnership and cooperation
agreement with Turkmenistan, a severely repressive government that cannot
conceivably be said to comply with the agreements’ human rights conditions.
It is as if the EU announced in advance that its human rights conditions were
mere window-dressing, not to be taken seriously. The EU justified this step in
the name of “deeper engagement” and a new “framework for dialogue and
cooperation.”
Similarly, despite Serbia’s failure to apprehend and surrender for trial indicted
war crimes suspect Ratko Mladic (the former Bosnian Serb military leader)–a
litmus test for the war-crimes cooperation that the EU has repeatedly insisted
is a requirement for beginning discussions with Serbia about its accession to
the EU–the EU agreed to start discussions anyway. The EU also gradually lifted
sanctions imposed on Uzbekistan after security forces massacred hundreds in
10
WORLD REPORT 2011
2005 in the city of Andijan, even though no steps had been taken toward permitting
an independent investigation–originally the chief condition for lifting
sanctions–let alone prosecuting those responsible or doing anything else that
the EU had called for, such as releasing all wrongfully imprisoned human
rights activists.
By the same token, the Obama administration in its first year simply ignored
the human rights conditions on the transfer of military aid to Mexico, under
the Merida Initiative, even though Mexico had done nothing as required
toward prosecuting abusive military officials in civilian courts. While in its second
year the administration did withhold a small fraction of funding, it once
again certified–despite clear evidence to the contrary–that Mexico was meeting
Merida’s human rights requirements. The US also signed a funding compact
with Jordan under the Millennium Challenge Corporation even though
Jordan had failed to improve its failing grades on the MCC’s benchmarks for
political rights and civil liberties.
Weak Leadership
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has been notably reluctant to put pressure
on abusive governments. As secretary-general, he has two main tools at his
disposal to promote human rights–private diplomacy and his public voice. He
can nudge governments to change through his good offices, or he can use the
stature of his office to expose those who are unwilling to change. Ban’s disinclination
to speak out about serious human rights violators means he is often
choosing to fight with one hand tied behind his back. He did make strong
public comments on human rights when visiting Turkmenistan and
Uzbekistan, but he was much more reticent when visiting a powerful country
like China. And he has placed undue faith in his professed ability to convince
by private persuasion the likes of Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir,
INTRODUCTION
11
Burmese military leader Than Shwe, and Sri Lankan President Mahinda
Rajapaksa.
Worse, far from condemning repression, Ban sometimes went out of his way to
portray oppressive governments in a positive light. For example, in the days
before Burma’s sham elections in November, Ban contended that it was “not
too late” to “make this election more inclusive and participatory” by releasing
political detainees–an unlikely eventuality that, even if realized, would not
have leveled the severely uneven electoral playing field. Even after the travesty
was complete, Ban said only that the elections had been “insufficiently
inclusive, participatory and transparent”–a serious understatement.
When he visited China the same month, Ban made no mention of human
rights in his meeting with Chinese President Hu Jintao, leaving the topic for
lesser officials. That omission left the impression that, for the secretary-general,
human rights were at best a second-tier priority. In commenting on the
awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize to Liu Xiaobo, the imprisoned Chinese
human rights activist, Ban never congratulated Liu or called for his release
from prison but instead praised Beijing by saying: “China has achieved
remarkable economic advances, lifted millions out of poverty, broadened
political participation and steadily joined the international mainstream in its
adherence to recognized human rights instruments and practices.”
The new British prime minister, David Cameron, did only marginally better during
his visit to China. He did not mention Liu in his formal meeting with
Chinese Prime Minister Wen Jiabao, saving the matter for informal talks over
dinner. And his public remarks stayed at the level of generality with which the
Chinese governments itself is comfortable–the need for “greater political
opening” and the rule of law–rather than mention specific cases of imprisoned
government critics or other concrete rights restrictions.
12
WORLD REPORT 2011
The government of German Chancellor Angela Merkel showed a similar lack of
courage in its dealings with China. “Dialogue” is the German government’s
widely mentioned guiding principle, and Merkel in public remarks during her
latest visit to China made only the slightest passing reference to human rights,
although she claimed to have mentioned the issue privately. At the “China
Meets Europe” summit in Hamburg, German Foreign Minister Guido
Westerwelle, without mentioning concrete abuses, cited an “intensive rule of
law dialogue” and a “human rights dialogue” as “build[ing] a solid foundation
for a real partnership between Germany and China.” In France, President
Nicolas Sarkozy, as he was about to welcome Chinese President Hu Jintao in
Paris in November, did not even congratulate Liu Xiaobo for having been
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.
With respect to Saudi Arabia, the US government in 2005 established a
“strategic dialogue” which, because of Saudi objections, did not mention
human rights as a formal subject but relegated the topic to the “Partnership,
Education, Exchange, and Human Development Working Group.” Even that
dialogue then gradually disappeared. While the US government contributed to
keeping Iran off the board of the new UN Women agency in 2010 because of
its mistreatment of women, it made no such effort with Saudi Arabia, which
has an abysmal record on women but was given a seat by virtue of its financial
contribution. Similarly, the UK has maintained a quiet “two kingdoms” dialogue
with Saudi Arabia since 2005. Its launching included only oblique references
to human rights, and it has exerted no discernible pressure on the
Saudi government to improve its rights record.
Other Interests at Stake
Sometimes those who promote quiet dialogue over public pressure argue efficacy,
although often other interests seem to be at play. In Uzbekistan, which
provides an important route for resupplying NATO troops in Afghanistan, the
INTRODUCTION
13
EU argued that targeted sanctions against those responsible for the Andijan
massacre were “alienating” the government and “standing in the way of a constructive
relationship,” as if making nice to a government that aggressively
denied any responsibility for killing hundreds of its citizens would be more
successful at changing it than sustained pressure. In making the case for why
human rights concerns should not stand in the way of a new partnership and
cooperation agreement with severely repressive Turkmenistan, a country with
large gas reserves, the EU resorts to similar stated fears of alienation. To avoid
public indignation if it were to openly abandon human rights in favor of these
other interests, the EU feigns ongoing concern through the medium of private
dialogue.
A similar dynamic is at play in China, where Western governments seek economic
opportunity as well as cooperation on a range of global and regional
issues. For example, in its first year in office, the Obama administration
seemed determined to downplay any issue, such as human rights, that might
raise tensions in the US-China relationship. President Obama deferred meeting
with the Dalai Lama until after his trip to China and refused to meet with
Chinese civil society groups during the trip, and Secretary of State Hillary
Clinton announced that human rights “can’t interfere” with other US interests
in China. Obama’s efforts to ingratiate himself with Chinese President Hu
Jintao gained nothing discernible while it reinforced China’s view of the US as
a declining power. That weakness only heightened tension when, in Obama’s
second year in office, he and Secretary Clinton rediscovered their human
rights voice on the case of Liu Xiaobo, although it remains to be seen whether
they will be outspoken on rights during the January 2011 US-China summit.
Western governments also have been reluctant to exert pressure for human
rights on governments that they count as counterterrorism allies. For example,
the Obama administration and the Friends of Yemen, a group of states and
intergovernmental organizations established in January 2010, have not condi14
WORLD REPORT 2011
tioned military or development assistance to Yemen on human rights improvements,
despite a worsening record of abusive conduct by Yemeni security
forces and continuing government crackdowns on independent journalists and
largely peaceful southern separatists.
US policy toward Egypt shows that pressure can work. In recent years, the US
government has maintained a quiet dialogue with Egypt. Beginning in 2010,
however, the White House and State Department repeatedly condemned abuses,
urged repeal of Egypt’s emergency law, and called for free elections. These
public calls helped to secure the release of several hundred political
detainees held under the emergency law. Egypt also responded with anger–for
example, waging a lobbying campaign to stop a US Senate resolution condemning
its human rights record. The reaction was designed to scare US diplomats
into resuming a quieter approach, but in fact it showed that Egypt is profoundly
affected by public pressure from Washington.
Defending Rights by Osmosis
One common rationalization offered for engagement without pressure is that
rubbing shoulders with outsiders will somehow help to convert abusive agents
of repressive governments. The Pentagon makes that argument in the case of
Uzbekistan and Sri Lanka, and the US government adopted that line to justify
resuming military aid to Indonesia’s elite special forces (Kopassus), a unit with
a long history of severe abuse, including massacres in East Timor and “disappearances”
of student leaders in Jakarta. With respect to Kopassus, while the
Indonesian government’s human rights record has improved dramatically in
recent years, a serious gap remains its failure to hold senior military officers
accountable for human rights violations, even in the most high-profile cases.
In 2010 the US relinquished the strongest lever it had by agreeing to lift a
decade-old ban on direct military ties with Kopassus. The Indonesian military
made some rhetorical concessions–promising to discharge convicted offendINTRODUCTION
15
ers and to take action against future offenders–but the US did not condition
resumption of aid on such changes. Convicted offenders today remain in the
military, and there is little reason to credit the military’s future pledge given its
poor record to date. Notably, the US did not insist that Indonesian President
Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono authorize a special court to investigate Kopassus
officers implicated in the abduction and presumed killing of student leaders in
1997-98, a step already recommended by Indonesia’s own parliament. And
the US did not insist on ending the military’s exclusive jurisdiction over crimes
committed by soldiers.
Trivializing the significance of pressure, US Defense Secretary Robert Gates
justified resuming direct ties with Kopassus: “Working with them further will
produce greater gains in human rights for people than simply standing back
and shouting at people.” Yet even as the US was finalizing terms with
Indonesia on resumption of aid to Kopassus, an Indonesian general implicated
in abductions of student leaders was promoted to deputy defense minister
and a colonel implicated in other serious abuses was named deputy commander
of Kopassus.
A similarly misplaced faith in rubbing shoulders with abusive forces rather
than applying pressure on them informed President Obama’s decision to continue
military aid to a series of governments that use child soldiers–Chad,
Sudan, Yemen, and the Democratic Republic of Congo–despite a new US law
prohibiting such aid. In the case of Congo, for example, the military has had
children in its ranks since at least 2002, and a 2010 UN report found a “dramatic
increase” in the number of such children in the prior year. Instead of
using a cutoff of military assistance to pressure these governments to stop
using child soldiers, the Obama administration waived the law to give the US
time to “work with” the offending militaries.
16
WORLD REPORT 2011
Another favorite rationale for a quiet approach, heard often in dealings with
China, is that economic liberalization will lead on its own to greater political
freedoms–a position maintained even after three decades in which that has
not happened. Indeed, in 2010 the opposite occurred–in its regulation of the
internet, China began using its economic clout to try to strengthen restrictions
on speech, pressing businesses to become censors on its behalf. In the end, it
was a business–Google–that fought back, in part because censorship threatened
its business model. GoDaddy.com, the world’s largest web registrar, also
announced that it would no longer register domains in China because onerous
government requirements forcing disclosure of customer identities made censorship
easier.
Despite these efforts, China still leveraged access to its lucrative market to
gain the upper hand because others in the internet industry, such as
Microsoft, did not follow Google’s lead. Conversely, the one time that China
backed off was when it faced concerted pressure–it apparently abandoned its
“Green Dam” censoring software when the industry, civil society, governments,
and China’s own internet users all loudly protested. And even Google’s
license to operate a search engine in China was renewed, casting further
doubt on the idea that a public critique of China’s human rights practices
would inevitably hurt business.
Humanitarian Excuses
Some governments and intergovernmental organizations contend that promoting
human rights must take a back seat to relieving humanitarian suffering.
Humanitarian emergencies often require an urgent response, but this argument
becomes yet another excuse to avoid pressure even when human rights
abuses are the cause of the humanitarian crisis. That occurred in Zimbabwe
during Operation Murambatsvina (Clean the Filth), when the government
destroyed the homes of tens of thousands of people, and in Sri Lanka during
INTRODUCTION
17
the final stages of the civil war, when the army disregarded the plight of hundreds
of thousands of Tamil civilians who were trapped in a deadly war zone.
In Zimbabwe, the UN country team never publicly condemned the destruction
and displacement caused by Operation Murambatsvina, and almost never
spoke out publicly about the extremely serious human rights abuses committed
by Robert Mugabe’s government and the ruling Zimbabwe African National
Union- Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF). In fact, during his four-year tenure in
Zimbabwe, the UN resident representative rarely met with Zimbabwean human
rights activists, never attended any of their unfair trials, and almost never
spoke publicly about the widespread and severe human rights abuses being
committed. Such silence did not translate into better access to the displaced
civilian population–the Zimbabwean authorities and ZANU-PF officials continued
to restrict and manipulate humanitarian operations in Zimbabwe, and frequently
prevented humanitarian organizations from reaching vulnerable populations
suspected of being pro-opposition. But by failing to publicly condemn
the abuses in Zimbabwe, the UN country team lost key opportunities to use its
substantial influence as the most important implementer of humanitarian and
development assistance in the country. It also left itself addressing the symptoms
of repression rather than their source.
By contrast, the special envoy appointed by then Secretary-General Kofi Annan
to investigate Operation Murambatsvina issued a strongly worded report in
2005 citing the indiscriminate and unjustified evictions and urging that those
responsible be brought to justice. The report led to widespread international
condemnation of Mugabe’s government–pressure that forced the government
to allow greater humanitarian access to the displaced population.
Similarly in Sri Lanka, in the final months of the war with the Tamil Tigers, UN
personnel were virtually the only independent observers, giving them a unique
capacity to alert the world to ongoing war crimes and to generate pressure to
18
WORLD REPORT 2011
spare civilians. Instead, the UN covered up its own information about civilian
casualties, stopped the release of satellite imagery showing how dire the situation
was, and even stayed silent when local UN staff members were arbitrarily
arrested. UN officials were concerned that by speaking out they would lose
access required to assist a population in need, but given Sri Lanka’s complete
dependence on international assistance to run camps that ultimately housed
300,000 internally displaced persons, the UN arguably overestimated the risk
of being barred from the country. In addition, the government’s use of an
expensive Washington public-relations firm to counter criticism of its war conduct
showed its concern with its international image. By not speaking out, the
UN lost an opportunity to influence the way the Sri Lankan army was conducting
the war and thus to prevent civilian suffering rather than simply alleviate it
after the fact. By contrast, after the conflict, when the independent UN special
rapporteur on the rights of the internally displaced spoke out about the lack of
freedom of movement for the internally displaced, the government promptly
began releasing civilians from the camps.
A comparable pattern could be found in the role played by Western development-
assistance bureaucracies in dealing with Rwanda and Ethiopia. Both
countries are seen as efficient, relatively uncorrupt recipients of development
assistance. Western donor agencies, often finding it difficult to productively
invest the funds that they are charged with disbursing, thus have a strong
interest in maintaining warm relationships with the governments. (Ethiopia’s
role in combating the terrorist threat emanating from Somalia reinforces this
interest.) Indeed, economic assistance to both countries has grown as their
repression has intensified. Because it would be too callous to say that economic
development justifies ignoring repression, the European Commission,
the UK, several other EU states, and the US have offered various excuses, from
the claim that public pressure will backfire in the face of national pride to the
assertion that donor governments have less leverage than one might think.
INTRODUCTION
19
The result is a lack of meaningful pressure–nothing to change the cost-benefit
analysis that makes repression an attractive option. Quiet entreaties are least
likely to be effective when they are drowned out by parallel delivery of massive
quantities of aid.
Dated Policies
Brazil, India, and South Africa, strong and vibrant democracies at home,
remain unsupportive of many human rights initiatives abroad, even though
each benefitted from international solidarity in its struggle to end, respectively,
dictatorship, colonization, and apartheid. Their foreign policies are often
based on building South-South political and economic ties and are bolstered
by reference to Western double standards, but these rationales do not justify
these emerging powers turning their backs on people who have not yet won
the rights that their own citizens enjoy. With all three countries occupying
seats on the UN Security Council, it would be timely for them to adopt a more
responsible position toward protecting people from the predation of less progressive
governments.
Japan traditionally has resisted a strong human rights policy in part because
Japanese foreign policy has tended to center around promoting exports and
building good will, in part because the setting of foreign policy has been dominated
by bureaucrats who faced little public outcry over their inclination to
maintain smooth relations with all governments, and in part because Japan
still has not come to terms with its own abusive record in World War II.
However, in recent years, partly due to a change in government and partly due
to growing pressure from the small but emerging Japanese civil society, the
Japanese government has begun to be more outspoken on human rights with
regard to such places as North Korea and Burma.
20
WORLD REPORT 2011
The Chinese government is naturally reluctant to promote human rights
because it maintains such a repressive climate at home and does not want to
bolster any international system for the protection of human rights that might
come back to haunt it. But even China should not see turning its back on mass
atrocities–a practice that, one would hope, China has moved beyond–as
advancing its self-interest.
Conclusion
Whatever the rationalization, the quest for dialogue and cooperation is simply
not a universal substitute for public pressure as a tool to promote human
rights. Dialogue and cooperation have their place, but the burden should be
on the abusive government to show a genuine willingness to improve. In the
absence of demonstrated political will, public pressure should be the default
response to repression. It is understandable when governments that themselves
are serious human rights violators want to undermine the option of
public pressure out of fear that it will be applied to them in turn. But it is
shameful when governments that purportedly promote human rights fall for, or
endorse, the same ploy.
Defending human rights is rarely convenient. It may sometimes interfere with
other governmental interests. But if governments want to pursue those interests
instead of human rights, they should at least have the courage to admit
it, instead of hiding behind meaningless dialogues and fruitless quests for
cooperation.
This Report
This report is Human Rights Watch’s twenty-first annual review of human rights
practices around the globe. It summarizes key human rights issues in more
than 90 countries and territories worldwide, drawing on events through
November 2010.
INTRODUCTION
21
Each country entry identifies significant human rights issues, examines the
freedom of local human rights defenders to conduct their work, and surveys
the response of key international actors, such as the United Nations, European
Union, Japan, the United States, and various regional and international organizations
and institutions.
This report reflects extensive investigative work undertaken in 2010 by the
Human Rights Watch research staff, usually in close partnership with human
rights activists in the country in question. It also reflects the work of our advocacy
team, which monitors policy developments and strives to persuade governments
and international institutions to curb abuses and promote human
rights. Human Rights Watch publications, issued throughout the year, contain
more detailed accounts of many of the issues addressed in the brief summaries
collected in this volume. They can be found on the Human Rights
Watch website, www.hrw.org.
As in past years, this report does not include a chapter on every country where
Human Rights Watch works, nor does it discuss every issue of importance. The
failure to include a particular country or issue often reflects no more than
staffing limitations and should not be taken as commentary on the significance
of the problem. There are many serious human rights violations that
Human Rights Watch simply lacks the capacity to address.
The factors we considered in determining the focus of our work in 2010 (and
hence the content of this volume) include the number of people affected and
the severity of abuse, access to the country and the availability of information
about it, the susceptibility of abusive forces to influence, and the importance
of addressing certain thematic concerns and of reinforcing the work of local
rights organizations.
The World Report does not have separate chapters addressing our thematic
work but instead incorporates such material directly into the country entries.
22
WORLD REPORT 2011
Please consult the Human Rights Watch website for more detailed treatment of
our work on children’s rights, women’s rights, arms and military issues, business
and human rights, health and human rights, international justice, terrorism
and counterterrorism, refugees and displaced people, and lesbian, gay,
bisexual, and transgender people’s rights, and for information about our international
film festivals.
Kenneth Roth is executive director of Human Rights Watch.
WHOSE NEWS?
23
Whose News?:
The Changing Media Landscape and NGOs
By Carroll Bogert
These are tough times for foreign correspondents. A combination of rapid
technological change and economic recession has caused deep cuts in the
budget for foreign reporting at many Western news organizations. Plenty of exforeign
correspondents have lost their jobs, and many others fear for their
jobs and their futures. Consumers of news, meanwhile, are watching international
coverage shrink in the pages of major papers. One recent study estimated
that the number of foreign news stories published prominently in newspapers
in the United Kingdom fell by 80 percent from 1979 to 2009.1 The
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development estimates that 20
out of its 31 member states face declining newspaper readerships;2 since foreign
reporting is expensive, it is often the first to be cut.
While changes in the media world may be hard on journalists and unsettling
for news consumers, they also have very significant implications for international
NGOs such as Human Rights Watch. Foreign correspondents have
always been an important channel for international NGOs to get the word out,
and a decline in global news coverage constitutes a threat to their effectiveness.
At the same time, not all the implications of this change are bad. These
are also days of opportunity for those in the business of spreading the word.
This essay attempts to examine the perils and possibilities for international
NGOs3 in these tectonic shifts in media.
Of course NGOs of all kinds accomplish a great deal without any recourse to
the media at all. Human rights activists pursue much of their mission outside
the public eye: private meetings with diplomats; closed-door policy discussions
with government officials; strategy sessions with other NGOs; and, of
24
WORLD REPORT 2011
course, interviews with victims and eyewitnesses whose identity and safety
must be protected from the glare of publicity. NGOs that do research in the
field may share a close bond with journalists, but research is only part of their
overall mission of effecting social change.
Not all NGOs deal regularly with foreign correspondents; in fact, quite the
opposite. Most NGO activists are working inside their own national borders. If
the local media are at least somewhat free, they are likely to be more focused
on national coverage. The international or regional media may serve as an
additional form of pressure on the activists’ own government, but changes in
the funding and composition of foreign correspondents will not always have a
significant impact on their work.
NGOs have a complex and ambivalent relationship with journalists. They work
at a different pace from the media, take a considerably longer time to publish
their findings, and feel far removed from the feeding frenzies and 15-minute
celebrities that often dominate commercial media. They frequently feel that in
the rush of the news cycle, key facts may get forgotten or taken out of context,
and the headline-grabbing aspects of the story may not be the most meaningful
or important angles for their own advocacy.
At the same time, with a few exceptions, NGOs are constantly seeking greater
media attention for their work. The changing media landscape presents new
challenges and possibilities for such groups, particularly those that view international
media as an important channel for getting their message out.
NGOs and Foreign Correspondents: A Symbiosis
One of the most potent tools of international human rights NGOs has always
been “naming and shaming,” or publicizing specific human rights violations
and identifying those responsible. Its usefulness can be measured in part by
the resources governments mobilize to combat it. At the United Nations
WHOSE NEWS?
25
Human Rights Council in Geneva, for example, government delegations conduct
extensive diplomatic campaigns to avoid being publicly censured.
Bad publicity can help spark government action. When a video surfaced in
October 2010 showing two Papuan farmers being tortured by Indonesian soldiers,
the Indonesian government clearly felt pressure to act. United States
President Barack Obama was scheduled for a visit that month and neither government
wanted the torture issue to dominate the headlines. The Indonesian
government, which has been notoriously reluctant to punish its soldiers for
human rights abuses, promptly tried and convicted four soldiers of torture.4 It
was clearly responding to media pressure in doing so.
For groups that do not enjoy extensive grass-roots support or mass membership,
media coverage may act as a kind of stand-in for public pressure. In very
few countries, and relatively rare circumstances, does the public become seriously
mobilized over an issue of foreign policy. To be sure, the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict has the capacity to rally global publics outside the
region–on both sides–and so does the use of US military power abroad. The
Save Darfur campaign brought hundreds of thousands of students and other
supporters to street demonstrations. But those are exceptions. In general, foreign
affairs pique the interest of a narrow subsection in any society. Extensive
media coverage of an issue may help to affect policy even when the public
remains silent on the issue. Serbian atrocities in Kosovo at the end of the
1990’s comes to mind; significant public debate, in the media and elsewhere,
helped generate pressure on NATO policymakers to take action.
Media coverage can also act as an informal “stamp of approval” for international
advocacy groups. When a prominent publication cites an NGO official in
a story, it signifies that the reporter, who is supposed to be knowledgeable
about the issue, has determined the NGO to be credible. When an NGO
spokesperson appears on a well-regarded television show, she may thereafter
26
WORLD REPORT 2011
carry greater weight with the policymakers she is trying to reach. Her very
access to the media megaphone makes her a bigger threat, and a person to
be reckoned with.
If advocacy groups need the media, it is clear that media need them, too. In
many countries where the press corps is not fully free, journalists rely on international
groups to say things that they cannot. In Bahrain, for example, the
ruling family promotes itself as reformist but it would have been very difficult
for the one independent local newspaper there to report extensively on
renewed use of torture during police interrogations. The fact of this resurgence
was widely alleged by activists and detainees, but considered too sensitive to
publicize locally.5 When Human Rights Watch published a report on the issue,5
the local independent newspaper covered the issue extensively, reproducing
much of the report in its pages without major fear of retribution.
Foreign correspondents working in repressive countries do not face the same
consequences that local journalists do when they report on human rights or
social justice issues. But they, too, may pull their punches in order to avoid
problems with their visas or accreditation. Quoting an NGO making critical
comments is safer than doing so oneself.
Some journalists feel a strong bond of kinship with NGOs that work on political
repression and abuse of power. Whether it was Washington Post correspondents
Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein bringing the Watergate crimes to
light, or the international press corps covering the wars in the former
Yugoslavia, journalists are often driven by the desire to expose the crimes of
political leaders and see justice done.
Whose Sky is Falling?
Paradoxically, it is precisely in wealthier countries where the media are sickest
today. In the United States, the triple blow of the internet, the economic recesWHOSE
NEWS?
27
sion, and the poor management of a few major newspapers has dramatically
shrunk the cadre of foreign correspondents. Several daily papers, such as the
Boston Globe and Newsday, have shut down their foreign bureaus entirely.
Television networks have closed almost all of their full-fledged bureaus, leaving
local representatives in a handful of capitals. The New York Times and The
Washington Post, the reigning monarchs of international coverage, appear to
maintain their foreign bureaus more out of the personal commitment of the
families who still own them. In the United States, at least, the commercial
model for international fact-gathering and distribution is evidently broken.
No one is more vocal about the dire consequences of these cutbacks than the
newspapers’ foreign correspondents themselves. Pamela Constable, a
respected foreign correspondent for The Washington Post, wrote in 2007: “If
newspapers stop covering the world, I fear we will end up with a microscopic
elite reading Foreign Affairs and a numbed nation watching terrorist bombings
flash briefly among a barrage of commentary, crawls, and celebrity gossip.”6
As The New York Times’ chief foreign correspondent said: “When young men
ask me for advice on how to become a foreign correspondent, I tell them:
‘Don’t.’ It is like becoming a blacksmith in 1919–still an honorable and skilled
profession; but the horse is doomed.”7
But the correspondent, C.L. Sulzberger, made that comment in 1969. Every age
laments its own passing, and old foreign correspondents are no exception. It
is not entirely clear that the American public, or the public in any of the countries
where foreign correspondents are in decline, is less well-informed than it
used to be. At least one study has shown, in fact, that the American public is
roughly as informed about international affairs as it was 20 years ago, before
the big declines in traditional sources of foreign reporting.8 And overall, even
among Western publics, media consumption is increasing.9
28
WORLD REPORT 2011
Meanwhile, in countries such as Malaysia, Singapore, Vietnam, and others,
the internet is allowing the public to get foreign news without government filters–
an important advance in their knowledge of the world.10 And the OECD
has estimated that, while readership of newspapers is declining among most
of its members, that decline is more than offset by the overall growth in the
newspaper industry globally.11
A number of media outlets from the global South have greatly enhanced their
international presence in recent years. Al-Jazeera and al-Jazeera English,
financed by the emir of Qatar, report on a wide range of global news, although
the network has recently cut back one of its four international broadcasting
centers. Others are not so free-wheeling. Xinhua, the state-run news agency of
China, and other Chinese media organizations such as CCTV, are loathe to run
much human rights news–and are positively allergic to such news out of China
or its allies.
A Peril and a Boon
The information revolution made possible by the internet represents both a
peril and a boon to international NGOs grappling with the decline in Western
media reporting on foreign news. On the one hand, the plethora of online publications,
blogs, Facebook, and Twitter feeds, cable and satellite television stations,
and other forms of new media is clamorous and confusing. How are
advocacy groups to know which media are important? If one purpose of getting
media coverage, as laid out above, is to reach policymakers, how does
one ascertain which media they are consuming? Previously, in most countries,
a couple of daily papers, a weekly magazine or two, and a few radio and television
broadcasts constituted the core of what critical decision-makers in government
were likely to get their news from. Nowadays their reading habits are
not so easy to guess. The audience for international news has fractured.
WHOSE NEWS?
29
A 2008 study by graduate students at Columbia University asked a range of
officials associated with the UN in New York what media they read, listened to,
and watched. Unsurprisingly, nearly three-quarters of those surveyed said they
read The New York Times every day. Fifty percent read The Economist–also no
surprise. But a significant number of respondents said they were also reading
the frequent postings of a blogger at the Inner City Press, who covers UN affairs
closely but is virtually unknown outside the UN community.12
The internet poses the challenge of the glut. Advocacy groups, after all, not
only seek media coverage but also respond to media queries. Which questioners
are worthy of the scarce attentions of an NGO? Which bloggers are merely
cranks who will waste an inordinate amount of staff time while offering little
impact? And how does one tell the difference? And how much time should an
NGO spend poring through the latest data-dump from Wikileaks?
But then there is the boon. The same internet that has blown a gaping hole in
media budgets is also allowing NGOs to reach their audiences directly.
Technologies that were once the exclusive preserve of a professional class are
now widely available. Taking a photograph of a policeman beating up a
demonstrator and transmitting the image to a global audience used to involve
expensive equipment and access to scarce transmission technology. Only a
handful of trained journalists could do it. Now the same picture can be taken
and transmitted with a US$35 mobile phone. During Egypt’s parliamentary
elections in late November 2010, for example, the government rejected international
observers and drastically restricted local monitors. But NGO activists
managed to film a local mayor affiliated with the ruling party filling out multiple
ballots and, in another place, plainclothes men with sticks disrupting a
polling station.
30
WORLD REPORT 2011
Picking Up the Slack?
For NGOs with large field presences–and even for those with only an occasional
investigator or representative overseas–the ability to generate and distribute
content is potentially revolutionary. But it requires more than taking a cellphone
photograph of a news event and posting it to Facebook. The question is
whether NGOs will operate systematically in the vacuum left by the commercial
media. To do so will require re-purposing the information they are already
gathering, and acquiring the skills to reach the public directly with features
capable of attracting public attention. At present not many NGOs have the
resources to reconfigure their research and information into user-friendly content.
Most of them operate on the written word. Often they are addressing
other experts rather than the public at large. Importantly, they generally have
precious little visual information to illustrate their findings.
That is beginning to change. Human Rights Watch assigns professional photographers,
videographers, and radio producers to work in the field alongside
its researchers, documenting in multimedia features what the researchers are
documenting in words.13
Amnesty International is creating an autonomous “news unit,” staffed with
five professional journalists, to generate human rights news. Medecins Sans
Frontieres also uses photography and video extensively, while the Natural
Resources Defense Council is assigning journalists to write about environmental
issues.
Even if NGOs are able to produce user-friendly content, the question remains
of how to distribute it. An NGO can post content on its website, and reach a
few thousand people, perhaps tens of thousands. Distributing via Facebook,
Twitter, YouTube, and other social media might garner a few thousand more.
Content that “goes viral” and reaches millions of people remains the rare
exception. Sooner or later the question of distribution returns to the mainWHOSE
NEWS?
31
stream media, whose audiences still dwarf those of the non-profit sector. Will
they distribute content produced by NGOs?
With budgets for foreign news in decline, one might expect editors and producers
to be grateful for the offer of material from non-profit sources. But that
is not always the case, and the answer depends on the country, the media
outlet, and the NGO. The BBC, for example, rarely takes material from advocacy
groups for broadcast. CBS, in the US, recently tightened up its regulations
for taking content from outside sources.14 Time magazine will not accept
images from a photographer whose assignment was underwritten by an NGO.
And many media commentators, writing on the rising importance of NGOs as
information producers, are wary of the trend. “While journalists–if sometimes
imperfectly–work on the principle of impartiality, the aid agency is usually
there to get a message across: to raise money, to raise awareness, to change a
situation.”15
Issues of Objectivity and Neutrality
NGOs like Human Rights Watch do not present facts for the sake of reporting
the news but to inform the public and advocate on behalf of victims of abuse.
That sets their work apart from traditional journalism and raises the very
important question of whether the information being gathered and conveyed
by these NGOs is less trustworthy. Unless the NGO is transparent about its
aims, about the provenance of the material it is distributing, and about the
standards it uses in its own information-gathering, the consumer–whether a
journalist or a visitor to the website–will be justifiably wary.
The best media professionals spend their entire careers trying, as hard as they
can, to rid their own reporting of bias and to be fair to all sides. They believe,
and they are correct, that unbiased information is a genuine public good and
that biased information can mislead readers, including policymakers, into bad
32
WORLD REPORT 2011
decisions–even social strife and violence. Many media training organizations
in conflict zones around the world are struggling to instill the notion of unbiased
reporting in media environments where the lack of it has proved disastrous.
At the same time few people believe that the American media, where
the culture of neutral and apolitical reporting has been most fiercely propagated,
are in fact unbiased.
Research-driven NGOs put a premium on rigorous, factual reporting. If they
play fast and loose with the facts, they lose credibility and so lose traction
with policymakers. Their reputations depend on objective reporting from the
field. At the same time, they work in service of a cause, advocating on behalf
of victims and seeking accountability for perpetrators. While different NGOs
have different standards for gathering, checking, and vetting information, the
entire purpose of that information is to act to protect human dignity. Those
who gather information must do so impartially, from all sides, but they are not
neutral towards atrocity.
Media organizations and advocacy groups stay independent of each other for
good reason. They are pursuing different objectives. Journalists’ refusal to distribute
content produced by others protects against the partisan abuse of the
media space. Meanwhile, international advocacy groups are wary of drifting
from their core mission into the media business. But changes in technology
and commerce, at least in some countries, are pushing them closer together.
To the extent that NGOs do produce more user-friendly content, they must
keep in mind a few principles for establishing their credibility: first, transparency
in the methods of collecting the information; second, a proven track
record and a reputation, over many years, for reliable research; and third,
complete openness about the aims of the organization and the fact of its
authorship.
WHOSE NEWS?
33
NGOs still face the question of how far they want to go in creating user-friendly
content. Few seem inclined to reorient their identities as information producers
in the new information age. Filling the vacuum in international news takes
money, and most NGOs struggle to meet their existing budgets, let alone
expand into areas that seem tangential to their central mission. But if they
turn their backs on the trend, they will miss a critical opportunity to be heard.
This information revolution has big implications for more than just a handful
of advocacy groups. Any entity that produces denser material written for a
more specialist audience must now realize that the legions of those who will
transform it into something the layperson can understand–in other words, a
work of journalism–are now much diminished. To have maximum impact in
the world today, information must be repurposed and refashioned for multiple
audiences and platforms, like a seed sprouting in every direction. That is a
trend that no one who cares about influencing public opinion can afford to
ignore.
Carroll Bogert is the deputy executive director, external relations,
of Human Rights Watch.
34
WORLD REPORT 2011
1 Martin Moore, Shrinking World: The decline of international reporting in the British
press (London: Media Standards Trust, November 2010), p 17. The study looked at foreign
stories appearing in the first ten pages of four major daily newspapers.
2 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development: Directorate for Science,
Technology and Industry Committee for Information, Computer, and Communications
Policy, “The Evolution of News and the Internet,” June 11, 2010
http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/30/24/45559596.pdf (accessed November 20, 2010),
p.7. The steepest declines were registered in the United States, the United Kingdom,
Greece, Italy, Canada, and Spain.
3 This essay focuses primarily on NGOs that do research and advocacy in multiple countries
and therefore interact regularly with journalists who cover one country for audiences
in another. Most of these remarks concern NGOs working on human rights and
other social justice issues, rather than, for example, global warming and the environment,
although they face some of the same challenges.
4 The four were actually convicted of torture that was revealed in another, unrelated
video. See “Indonesia: Investigate Torture Video From Papua,” Human Rights Watch
news release, October 20, 2010, http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2010/10/20/indonesiainvestigate-
torture-video-papua.
5 Human Rights Watch, Torture Redux: The Rivival of Physical Coercion during
Interrogations in Bahrain, February 8, 2010,
http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2010/02/08/torture-redux
6 Pamela Constable, “Demise of the Foreign Correspondent,” The Washington Post,
February 18, 2007.
7 John Maxwell Hamilton, Journalism’s roving eye: a history of American foreign reporting
(Lousiana State University Press, 2010), p. 457.
8 “Public Knowledge of Current Affairs Little Changed by News and Information
Revolutions: What Americans Know: 1989-2007,” The Pew Research Center for the People
& the Press, April 15, 2007 http://people-press.org/report/319/public-knowledge-of-current-
affairs-little-changed-by-news-and-information-revolutions (accessed November 29,
2010).
9 Richard Wray, “Media Consumption on the Increase,” The Guardian, April 19, 2010
http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2010/apr/19/media-consumption-survey
(accessed November 21, 2010).
10 See, for example, the Temasek Review in Singapore; Malaysiakini and other online
portals in Malaysia; numerous Vietnamese bloggers; and the Democratic Voice of Burma
and Mizzima, among others.
WHOSE NEWS?
35
11 OECD, 2010
12 “Mass Media and the UN: What the Advocacy Community Can Do to Shape Decision
Making,” Columbia University School of International Public Affairs, May 2009, on file at
Human Rights Watch. The respondents came from the UN Secretariat, various UN departments
whose work touches on human rights, and diplomats representing 12 of the 15 UN
Security Council members.
13 Many photographers now raise money from foundations to partner with NGOs. Among
the most active donors, for example, is the Open Society Institute’s Documentary
Photography Project: http://www.soros.org/initiatives/photography (accessed
November 20, 2010); photographers at Magnum are increasingly willing to “partner…
with select charitable organizations and provid[e] free or reduced rate access to the
Magnum Photos archive,” http://magnumfoundation.org/core-programs.html (accessed
November 20, 2010).
14 Private conversation with CBS producer, October 2010.
15 Glenda Cooper, “When lines between NGO and news organization blur,” Nieman
Journalism Lab, December 21, 2009, http://www.niemanlab.org/2009/12/glenda-cooper-
when-lines-between-ngo-and-news-organization-blur/ (accessed November 20, 2010).
36
WORLD REPORT 2011
Schools as Battlegrounds:
Protecting Students, Teachers, and Schools
from Attack
By Zama Coursen-Neff and Bede Sheppard
Of the 72 million primary school-age children not currently attending school
worldwide, more than half—39 million—live in countries afflicted by armed
conflict. In many of these countries, armed groups threaten and kill students
and teachers and bomb and burn schools as tactics of the conflict.1
Government security forces use schools as bases for military operations, putting
students at risk and further undermining education.
In southern Thailand, separatist insurgents have set fire to schools at least
327 times since 2004, and government security forces occupied at least 79
schools in 2010. In Colombia, hundreds of teachers active in trade unions
have been killed in the last decade, the perpetrators often pro-government
paramilitaries and other parties to the ongoing conflict between the government
and rebel forces. In northern Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), the
rebel Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) has abducted large numbers of children
from schools and taken revenge on villages believed to be aiding LRA defectors
by, among other things, looting and burning schools.
“We warn you to leave your job as a teacher as soon as possible otherwise we
will cut the heads off your children and shall set fire to your daughter,” read a
threatening letter from Taliban insurgents in Afghanistan, where between
March and October 2010 20 schools were attacked using explosives or arson,
and insurgents killed 126 students.
While attacks on schools, teachers, and students in Afghanistan have perhaps
been most vivid in the public eye—men on motorbikes spraying pupils with
gunfire, girls doused with acid—intentional targeting of education is a farSCHOOLS
AS BATTLEGROUNDS
37
reaching if underreported phenomenon. It is not limited to a few countries but
a broader problem in the world’s armed conflicts. Human Rights Watch
researchers have documented attacks on students, teachers, and schools—
and their consequences for education—in Afghanistan, Colombia, the DRC,
India, Nepal, Burma, Pakistan, the Philippines, and Thailand. The United
Nation’s Education, Science, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) reports that
attacks occurred in at least 31 countries from 2007 to 2009.2
While only a few non-state armed groups openly endorse such attacks, too little
is being done to document, publicize, and take steps to end them. Nor is
the negative impact of long-term occupation of schools by military forces fully
appreciated. Access to education is increasingly recognized as an important
part of emergency humanitarian response, particularly during mass displacement
and natural disasters. But protecting schools, teachers, and students
from deliberate attack in areas of conflict is only now receiving greater attention.
Humanitarian aid groups increasingly are alert to the harm and lasting
costs of such attacks and human rights groups have begun to address them in
the context of protecting civilians in armed conflict and promoting economic
and social rights, including the right to education.
An effective response to attacks on education will require more focused policies
and action by concerned governments and a much stronger international
effort. Making students, teachers, and schools genuinely off limits to nonstate
armed groups and regular armies will require governments, opposition
groups, and other organizations to implement strong measures that are
enforced by rigorous monitoring, preventive interventions, rapid response to
violations, and accountability for violators of domestic and international law.
38
WORLD REPORT 2011
Why Schools, Teachers, and Students Are Attacked
Non-state armed groups target schools, teachers, and students for a variety of
reasons. Rebel groups often see schools and teachers as symbols of the state.
Indeed in rural areas, they may be the only structures and government
employees in the vicinity, serving multiple purposes. In India, Pakistan, and
Afghanistan, for example, armed opposition groups have attacked schools
used as polling places around elections.
Teachers and schools make high-visibility “soft” targets: they are more easily
attacked than the government security forces, and attacks are likely to garner
media attention to the assailants and their political agenda, and undermine
confidence in government control. Opposition groups may also view schools
and teachers as symbols of an oppressive educational system. A teacher in
southern Thailand told Human Rights Watch how he became a target of both
sides of the separatist conflict there. Muslim insurgents warned him that, as a
Muslim, he should not be teaching at a government school. Later, local government
paramilitary troops also threatened him for allegedly supporting the
insurgents. Soon after, unidentified assailants shot him on his way home from
daily prayers at his mosque, seriously wounding him.
Sometimes schools are attacked because armed groups are hostile to the content
of the education being delivered or because of the students they educate.
In some countries, schools have been targeted because their curriculum is
perceived to be secular or “Western,” others simply because the schools educate
girls. Not all the violence is ideological: criminal elements may want to
drive out competing sources of authority; some attacks are simply local disputes
that may or may not have to do with education.
Schools and the routes students take to reach them can also be preyed upon
by rebels, paramilitaries, and others seeking children for their armies, for
indoctrination, or for coerced sex. During the prolonged civil war in Nepal, for
SCHOOLS AS BATTLEGROUNDS
39
example, Human Rights Watch documented how Maoist rebels used a variety
of techniques for recruiting children, including the abduction of large groups
of children, often from schools, for indoctrination.
The Consequences of Attacks
The impact of attacks can be devastating. Large numbers of teachers and
pupils may be injured or traumatized, in some cases killed. And attacks often
lead to dramatic decreases in school attendance rates. When attendance
remains low over the long term there are negative knock-on effects on the
economy and on key development indices such as measures of maternal and
child health.
In the worst cases, hundreds of schools are closed. For example,
Afghanistan’s Ministry of Education reported in March 2009 that roughly 570
schools remained closed following attacks by the Taliban and other insurgent
groups, with hundreds of thousands of students denied an education.
Attacks can also damage facilities and teaching materials, requiring extensive
repairs and costly new materials before schools can reopen. If not shut down
entirely, classes may be suspended for days, weeks, or even longer and, when
resumed, held in dangerous, partially destroyed structures or even outside.
Other valuable services provided to communities in school buildings, such as
adult education and community health and other services, may also be lost.
When governments fail to rebuild after an attack, the impact is even greater.
For example, in India, none of the schools attacked by Maoist rebels (known
as Naxalites) that Human Rights Watch visited in 2009 had received any government
assistance to repair or rebuild. The attacks had occurred between two
and six months earlier, and state governments had stated that they had the
funding to rebuild.
40
WORLD REPORT 2011
Attacks on schools and teachers traumatize students and affects teachers’
work performance. Even where school buildings remain intact or the physical
infrastructure is restored, teachers and students may be too fearful to return.
Qualified teachers may refuse to work in the area, leaving those who remain
stretched thin.
For example, in rural Bihar state in India, local residents described to Human
Rights Watch how a large Maoist force blew up the middle school building in
their town. In response, local paramilitary police established a camp inside
the remaining structures. School classes were being held in a travelers’ shelter
partially exposed to the elements, without toilets or the government-mandated
midday meal. As one parent told Human Rights Watch, “When people hear
about these problems, parents take their children out [of the school].”
Attacks can also have a ripple effect on surrounding schools and affect the
overall calculation that parents and students make in assessing the costs and
benefits of attending school. In conflict areas, the quality of education is often
already weak and families may be highly sensitive to violence. When two
teachers were assassinated on their way to a local market in southern
Thailand in September 2010, for example, the local teachers’ federation suspended
classes in all government schools in the province for three days.
Threats alone can be very effective in shutting down schools in environments
where violence is widespread and perpetrators go unpunished. A teacher in
rural Laghman province, Afghanistan, told Human Rights Watch that a third of
her students dropped out after a so-called “night letter” was left at the
mosque, which stated: “We warn you to stop sending your girls to these classes
or you cannot imagine the consequences. Your classes will be blown up by
a bomb, or if any of your daughters is raped or kidnapped, you cannot complain
later on.”
SCHOOLS AS BATTLEGROUNDS
41
Use of Schools for Military Purposes
Closely related to targeted attacks on schools is the use of school facilities by
national armed forces or other armed groups. Attracted by schools’ central
locations, solid structures, and electrical and sanitation facilities, some security
forces take over schools for weeks or months, and sometimes years. In
Bihar and Jharkhand states in India, for example, where government security
forces took over dozens of schools as outposts in conflicts with Maoist rebels,
all of the 21 school occupations Human Rights Watch investigated in 2009 and
2010 had lasted between six months and three years. Military use of schools
not only disrupts students’ education, it may itself provoke attacks from
opposing forces.
Even when schools are not being used for classes, military use is problematic
because attacks by opposing forces can destroy school infrastructure and blur
the lines between civilian and military installations, potentially exposing
schools to attack when students return. When security forces take over a
school, they frequently fortify and militarize the school buildings and
grounds—for example, by establishing reinforced sentry boxes, digging trenches,
and constructing protective walls of barbed wire and sand bags. When
security forces leave, they often leave these fortifications behind. This places
the school in ongoing danger by giving the appearance of a military presence
long after the forces have left.
In some instances, security forces entirely displace students. In none of the
cases investigated by Human Rights Watch had governments taken steps to
provide alternative educational facilities of comparable quality to children displaced
by military occupations of school facilities.
In other cases, militaries occupy only certain areas within schools, with classes
continuing to be held in the unoccupied parts. Such partial occupation of
schools is also problematic. In partially occupied schools visited by Human
Rights Watch in India and southern Thailand, students, teachers, and parents
42
WORLD REPORT 2011
variously complained about problems as diverse as overcrowding of classrooms,
loss of kitchens that had provided mid-day meals, and inability to use
school latrines. (Lack of access to toilets is a globally recognized factor contributing
to lowered school attendance by girls.) Students try to continue their
studies alongside armed men whose often poor behavior—ranging from beating
criminal suspects in front of students to gambling, drinking, and using
drugs—are all counter to a safe and positive learning environment for children.
When security forces move in, there is typically an immediate exodus of students.
And long-term occupations deter new enrollments. Girls appear more
likely to drop out or fail to enroll, motivated in part by fear of harassment by
occupying soldiers or police. Students and teachers in Jharkhand and Bihar in
India, for example, complained that security force personnel bathed in their
underwear in front of girls. Girls in southern Thailand told us that paramilitary
Rangers had asked them for their older sisters’ phone numbers. This kind of
behavior obviously has no place on school grounds.
International Standards Protecting Education
Under international human rights law—namely the widely-ratified Convention
on the Rights of the Child and the International Covenant on Economic, Social,
and Cultural Rights—states are obligated to make primary education compulsory
and available free to all, and secondary education available and accessible.
They must work to progressively improve regular attendance at schools
and to reduce drop-out rates for both boys and girls. In order to ensure the
right to education, states have an obligation to prevent and respond to attacks
by non-state armed groups so that the schools function and children receive
an education. Attacks on students, teachers, and schools will violate various
provisions of domestic criminal law.
In situations that rise to the level of armed conflict, international humanitarian
law—the laws of war—also applies. International humanitarian law is binding
on all parties to a conflict, both the government and opposition armed groups.
Applicable law includes the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and its two additional
protocols and customary international law. Under international humanitarian
law, schools and educational institutions are civilian objects that are protected
from deliberate attack unless and only for such time as they are being
used by belligerent forces for a military purpose. Thus a school that serves as
a headquarters or an ammunition depot becomes a military objective subject
to attack.
International humanitarian law also forbids acts or threats of violence with the
primary purpose of spreading terror among the civilian population.
When government forces or non-state armed groups take over schools during
an armed conflict, they have an obligation to take all feasible precautions to
protect civilians from attack and to remove them from the vicinity: it is unlawful
to use a school simultaneously as an armed stronghold and as an educational
center. The longer a school cannot be used for educational purposes,
the greater the obligation on the state to ensure the affected students’ right to
education by other means. When a structure ceases being used as a school,
the authorities must relocate the school’s teachers and students to a safe
locale where education can continue or they are denying children the right to
an education under international human rights law.
* * *
Putting an end to attacks on schools, teachers, and students requires action
at national and international levels on three fronts:
• Stronger monitoring systems;
• Targeted preventive measures, and more decisive and timely response
when incidents do occur; and
• Effective justice mechanisms that hold violators of domestic and international
law accountable.
43
SCHOOLS AS BATTLEGROUNDS
Monitoring
A more effective deterrence to attacks on education needs to begin with
acknowledgment of the problem, including clear public statements by officials
and, wherever possible, rebel group commanders, that attacks on students
and teachers are prohibited and the use of schools for military purposes
should be off limits. Too often, government policies and regulations on use of
schools for military operations in conflict zones are ambiguous or nonexistent.
A notable positive model is the Philippines, which specifically criminalizes
attacks against education buildings, and prohibits the use of school buildings
by government forces as command posts, detachments, depots, or other types
of military facility.3
Information is also critical. Officials need to put in place monitoring systems
that ensure that attacks on schools, teachers, and students are tracked: it is
impossible to devise an effective response if the scope of the problem is not
known. Too often attacks on education have fallen between the cracks of protection
and education agencies and thus have not been addressed as a systematic
problem requiring monitoring and a coordinated response. And while
governments are in the best position to monitor attacks, some lack the capacity
or will to do so, or are themselves implicated. Here, the UN and other international
actors have an important role to play.
International monitoring is especially important for overlooked conflicts,
including low level conflicts that have not produced widespread displacement
but which involve attacks on education. Militaries, embassies, political affairs
offices, and other peace and security institutions should also be encouraged
to view—and thus monitor—access to and attacks on education at all levels as
a critical measurement of security.
The UN Security Council’s Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism (MRM) on
Children and Armed Conflict provides a vehicle that, if more focused on such
WORLD REPORT 2011
44
attacks, could have particularly far-reaching impact. The MRM was established
in 2005 and now operates in 13 countries, feeding information on abuses
against children in conflict from the field to the Security Council. The Security
Council in turn has the power to take strong action against parties who commit
abuses against children during armed conflicts, including imposing sanctions
and arms embargoes and referring perpetrators of war crimes and crimes
against humanity to the International Criminal Court.
At present the MRM is only “triggered” by evidence of the war crimes of
recruitment and use of children as soldiers, sexual violence against children in
conflict, and killing and maiming of children. Once it is operational in a country,
however, the mechanism is required to monitor other abuses, including
attacks on education. The Security Council has rightly urged parties to conflicts
to refrain from “attacks or threats of attacks on school children or teachers
as such, the use of schools for military operations, and attacks on schools
that are prohibited by applicable international law.”4 It has, however, made far
fewer recommendations on education via the MRM than on higher profile
issues such as child soldiers. The MRM is also not present in some places,
such as southern Thailand and India, that continue to suffer repeated attacks
on school facilities and personnel.
Supported by the MRM, the UN has achieved substantial successes reducing
the use of child soldiers by negotiating action plans with both governments
and armed groups to demobilize children from their forces and end new
recruitment of children. To achieve similar success in ending attacks on education,
the UN-led country teams that monitor violations against children in
armed conflict should improve their monitoring of attacks on education, providing
the Security Council with more information and recommendations for
action. Additionally, the Security Council should include attacks on education
as a “trigger” to start up the MRM.
45
SCHOOLS AS BATTLEGROUNDS
Preventive Measures and Timely Response
When attacks occur or even loom as a possibility, officials need to take immediate
measures to protect teachers and students from further harm. For example,
by enhancing community participation in school construction and management,
education providers may draw on local information about how to
best deter threats and increase incentives among community members to support
their schools. Other steps may include providing private guards or escorts
for school buildings and transport; exploring alternative schools sites and
schedules; prohibiting the use of schools for any military or police purpose;
and negotiating with all parties the status of schools as protected or demilitarized
zones as provided for under international humanitarian law. In some
contexts, opposition groups may be influenced by statements from influential
religious leaders or even those leaders’ active participation in schools, by
interaction with community leaders, and other steps that would discourage
rebel attacks on education.
For example, in Nepal the Schools as Zones of Peace initiative and the
Partnerships for Protecting Children in Armed Conflict (PPCC) are often cited as
effective partnerships of non-governmental organizations and international
agencies that, among other things, have helped keep armed groups out of
schools. In contrast, in Afghanistan in the lead up to the 2009 elections, a
group of humanitarian agencies and the Minister of Education used data on
attacks to call for schools to be used as polling places only as a last resort.
Their call was unheeded, and according to the ministry, 26 of the 2,742
schools used as polling places were attacked on election day.5
The government’s immediate response to an attack, including repairing buildings
and replacing materials, is important for mitigating its effects and getting
students back to school as quickly as possible. As governments and education
WORLD REPORT 2011
46
agencies try out responses, a “tool kit” of proven preventive measures and
responses would be useful to assist their efforts.
Justice
Finally, accountability for attacks on education—including prosecuting perpetrators—
is critical. Countries that have not done so should explicitly criminalize
within domestic law and military codes attacks on schools and place
greater restrictions on the military use and occupation of schools. The United
Kingdom’s Ministry of Defense Manual of the Law of Armed Conflict, for example,
includes specific references to the protection of education buildings.6 In
addition to stating that attacks on schools are unlawful unless being used for
military purposes, the manual notes that the “use of a privileged building for
an improper purpose” is a “war crime traditionally recognized by the customary
law of armed conflict.”7 In another example, the Indian Supreme Court and
various Indian state courts have ordered police and paramilitary forces
engaged in military operations to vacate occupied schools; however, security
forces have often ignored these orders.
Domestic prosecutions for attacks, including of non-state actors, are indispensible.
For example, in the DRC, an Ituri Military Tribunal in August 2006 convicted
Ives Kahwa Panga Mandro (“Chief Kahwa”), founder of the Party for
Unity and Safeguarding of the Integrity of Congo, on six charges, including the
war crime of intentionally directing attacks against a primary school, a church,
and a medical center. Citing the DRC constitution’s provision allowing courts
and military tribunals to apply international treaties, the tribunal directly
applied the crime under the International Criminal Court’s Rome Statute of
intentionally directing attacks against institutions of education. Kahwa
received a 20-year sentence.8 In a decision light on both legal and factual reasoning,
however, an appeals court cancelled the verdict,9 and the case
remains in legal limbo at this writing.
47
SCHOOLS AS BATTLEGROUNDS
Where governments are unwilling or unable to prosecute, international courts
can play an important role in punishing perpetrators and deterring future violations.
The International Criminal Court, for example, has explicit jurisdiction
over intentional attacks against buildings dedicated to education in both international
and internal armed conflicts, provided they are not military objectives.
The court has yet to include attacks on education in its charges and
should give specific consideration to the issue during relevant investigations
and pursue cases where the evidence indicates that such attacks are among
the most serious crimes of concern to the international community and which
are of sufficient gravity to warrant ICC prosecution.
Outside of formal justice mechanisms, commissions of inquiry and truth and
reconciliation commissions should address attacks on education. The 1998
final report of South Africa’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission, for example,
recognized that a variety of state and non-state actors had bombed,
burned, and occupied schools, and assaulted and killed teachers. Many individual
perpetrators came before the commission to admit to their own involvement
in attacks against schools, students, and teachers.10
The Committee on the Rights of the Child, which monitors the implementation
of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, is also well-placed to highlight
how attacks and occupations violate the right to education. It has already
commented on the problem in at least four countries: Burundi, Ethiopia,
Israel, and Moldova.11 As a next step, the Committee could issue a “General
Comment”, a statement that expands upon and clarifies provisions within the
Convention. In 2008 it held a day of discussion on education in emergency situations,
collecting information and recommendations that could be turned
into a General Comment. Such an interpretation of the Convention on this
issue could assist states to protect students, teachers, and schools during
times of emergencies, as well as give the Committee and other international
and domestic bodies a set of standards by which to judge government action.
WORLD REPORT 2011
48
Conclusion
In too many conflict-afflicted countries, combatants are able to target schools,
teachers, and students with few if any consequences for the perpetrators. The
consequences instead fall heavily on the affected teachers, students, and families,
with long-term negative consequences for the affected society as a
whole.
The formation in 2010 of a new international coalition of UN agencies, humanitarian
organizations and other civil society groups on protection of education
signals renewed attention to the issue.12 The coalition’s experience to date
already suggests concrete steps governments can take to minimize attacks on
education. Lasting improvements in the protection of schools, teachers, and
students from attack, however, will require far more focused and coordinated
national and international action.
As a tribal elder from northern Helmand province in Afghanistan noted: “The
people want schools, even for girls. We are losing a golden opportunity now to
lift our children.”
Zama Coursen-Neff is deputy director of the Children’s Rights Division at Human
Rights Watch; Bede Sheppard is senior researcher in the division.
1 Save The Children, “The Future is Now: Education for Children in Countries Affected by
Conflict”, 2010, pg viii.
2 Brendan O’Malley, Education under Attack 2010, (Paris: UNESCO, 2010).
3 An Act Defining and Penalizing Crimes Against International Humanitarian Law,
Genocide and Other Crimes Against Humanity, Organizing Jurisdictions, Designating
Special Courts, and for Other Related Purposes, Republic Act No. 9851, 2009- criminalizes
attacks on school facilities; An Act Providing for Stronger Deterrence and Special
Protection Against Child Abuse, Exploitation and Discrimination, Providing Penalties for
49
SCHOOLS AS BATTLEGROUNDS
its Violation, and for Other Purposes, Republic Act No. 7610, 1992- prohibits use of such
facilities for military operations.
4 United Nations Security Council, “Presidential Statement on Children and Armed
Conflict”, UN Doc. S/PRST/2009/9, April 29, 2009.
5 “Afghanistan: Over 20 Schools Attacked on Election Day,” IRIN News, August 24, 2009,
http://www.irinnews.org/Report.aspx?ReportId=85831 (accessed October 8, 2009).
6 UK Ministry of Defence, Manual of the Law of Armed Conflict (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2004).
7 Ibid.,16.16.1, 16.29(c), pp. 428-29, n. 122.
8 Tribunal Militaire de Garnison de l’Ituri, Jugement Contre Kahwa Panga Mandro, RPA
No. 039/2006, RMP No. 227/ PEN/2006 (August 2, 2006).
9 Cour Militaire de la Province Orientale, Arrêt Contre Kahwa Panga Mandro, RPA No.
023/2007, RMP 227/PEN/2006 (July 28, 2007).
10 Truth and Reconciliation Commission of South Africa, Report of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission of South Africa (1998), vol. I, p. 34, vol. II, pp. 154, 150, 380,
387, 431, 436, and 661-662, vol. III, pp. 59-60, 236, 311, 370, 408, and 617; vol. IV, p.
266; and vol. V, pp. 255 and 355.
11 United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child (CRC), UN Committee on the
Rights of the Child: Concluding Observations, Burundi, CRC/C/15/Add.133 (October 16,
2000), paras. 64-65; CRC, UN Committee on the Rights of the Child: Concluding
Observations, Ethiopia, CRC/C/ETH/CO/3 (November 1, 2006), paras. 27-28; CRC, UN
Committee on the Rights of the Child: Concluding Observations, Israel,
CRC/C/15/Add.195 (October 9, 2002), para. 52; CRC, Consideration of Reports Submitted
by States Parties Under Article 44 of the Convention: Convention on the Rights of the
Child: 2nd and 3rd Periodic Reports of States Parties Due in 2005: Republic of Moldova,
CRC/C/MDA/3 (July 10, 2008), paras. 423 and 435.
12 The Global Coalition for Protecting Education from Attack (GCPEA) includes the Council
for Assisting Refugee Academics, Education Above All, Education International, Human
Rights Watch, Save the Children International, UNESCO, and UNICEF, the UN Children’s
Fund. The coalition is dedicated to raising awareness about the scope of attacks on education
and their consequences, and mobilizing a more effective international response.
WORLD REPORT 2011
50
H U M A N
R I G H T S
W A T C H
WORLD REPORT
2011
PHOTO ESSAYS
BURMA, KYRGYZSTAN, KUWAIT, KAZAKHSTAN,
AND THE LORD’S RESISTANCE ARMY
51
EXILED
BURMA’S DEFENDERS
by Platon
Burma is one of the most repressive and closed societies in the world, run by
generals since 1962. Longstanding human rights abuses by the government
include silencing of most of civil society, torture in prison, use of child
soldiers, forced labor, trafficking of women, and attacks targeting civilians in
ethnic minority areas. In May 2010, Human Rights Watch took leading portrait
photographer Platon to the Thai-Burma border to photograph former political
prisoners, civil society leaders, ethnic minority group members, journalists
and other people in exile from their country, Burma.
(left) A group of mine victims: Kio Say, 43;
Hsa Ka Twe, 15; Par Taw, 45. Burma is one
of the top remaining users of landmines
as part of long-running armed conflicts
with ethnic minority groups.
(opposite) Left to right: Ashin Sopaka,
Ashin Issariya, known as “King Zero,” and
U Teza. September 2007 saw the largest
popular protests against military rule in
Burma in nearly 20 years. Burmese
government security forces killed, beat,
tortured, and violently dispersed peaceful
protesters, including monks.
WORLD REPORT 2011
52

WORLD REPORT 2011
54
Democratic Voice of Burma broadcast journalists Thiri Htet San, 30, and Moe Myint Zin, 34. The DVB
is a satellite radio and television news service, with highly professional reporters who risk their lives
to report and record events inside Burma, and then to broadcast the news back into Burma and to
distribute it worldwide.
55
PHOTO ESSAYS
A medical student at the time, Win Min became a leader of the 1988 pro-democracy
demonstrations in Burma. He is now one of the driving forces behind an innovative
collective called the Vahu (in Burmese: Plural) Development Institute, which trains
Burmese civil society workers to work for development and peaceful change.
WORLD REPORT 2011
56
57
KYRGYZSTAN: “WHERE IS THE JUSTICE?”
Zhura Payzulaeva cries as she
recounts how seven members of
her family were killed in the first
two days of ethnic clashes in Osh.
“WHERE IS THE JUSTICE?”
INTERETHNIC VIOLENCE
IN SOUTHERN KYRGYZSTAN
by Moises Saman/Magnum Photos
WORLD REPORT 2011
58
Violence erupted on June 10 when hundreds of
Uzbeks gathered near a dormitory in the center of
Osh, Kyrgyzstan, allegedly in response to recent
scuffles between Uzbeks and Kyrgyz. Human
Rights Watch researchers working in southern
Kyrgyzstan from June 10 to 22 documented the
subsequent massive looting and destruction of civilian property and widespread
acts of violence by Kyrgyz and Uzbek mobs in the city of Osh and the towns of
Jalal-Abad and Bazar-Kurgan. While both ethnic Kyrgyz and Uzbeks fell victim to
the violence, Uzbek neighborhoods were particularly affected as mobs of ethnic
Kyrgyz, many of them reportedly from villages surrounding the city of Osh,
repeatedly attacked Uzbek areas.
22-year-old Eliza Makeeve holds a
photograph of her late husband,
23-year-old Ulan Dzhoroev, an
ethnic Kyrgyz man killed by
gunmen during clashes that
started June 10 in the city of Osh.
59
PHOTO ESSAYS
(above) An ethnic Uzbek man walks
past the burned remains of a house
burned by mobs during ethnic clashes
in the southern Kyrgyz city of Osh.
(left) An ethnic Uzbek Kyrgyz woman
displays the burned remains of her
Kyrgyz passport and her and her son's
identity papers after Kyrgyz security
forces destroyed them during a security
operation in the village of Nariman.
Workers continue to spend long periods waiting at
embassy shelters, including the Philippines safe house,
shown here. Workers reported spending weeks or
months in official custody, moving from embassy
shelters to police stations, and from there to criminal
investigation facilities, before they were sent to
deportation detention.
WALLS AT EVERY TURN
ABUSE OF MIGRANT
DOMESTIC WORKERS IN KUWAIT
by Moises Saman/Magnum Photos
Kuwait has the highest ratio of domestic workers to citizens in the
Middle East. The country’s more than 660,000 migrant domestic
workers constitute nearly a third of the work force in this small Gulf
country of only 1.3 million citizens. But domestic workers are
excluded from the labor laws that protect other workers. They have
minimal protection against employers who withhold salaries, force
employees to work long hours with no days off, deprive them of
adequate food, or abuse them physically or sexually.
WORLD REPORT 2011
62
A recruitment agent stands with a group of Ethiopian
domestic workers as they waited for potential clients at an
agency office in the basement of a shopping center in the
Hawalli neighborhood of Kuwait. Women who leave
employers and return to recruitment agencies—either as
a result of their employer’s decision or their request—are
called “returns.”
63
PHOTO ESSAYS
(above) More than 200 women are packed in a
sweltering room in the Philippines Embassy, where
they sleep on their luggage. Other labor-sending
countries, including Sri Lanka, Indonesia, Nepal,
Ethiopia, and India, maintain shelters in Kuwait.
Most are equally, if not more, crowded.
(left) Gyanu, 21, came from Nepal to work as a
domestic worker in Kuwait. After leaving her
employers, she sought refuge inside a makeshift
shelter operated from a private house on the
outskirts of Kuwait City.
WORLD REPORT 2011
64
“HELLISH WORK”
EXPLOITATION OF MIGRANT TOBACCO WORKERS
IN KAZAKHSTAN
by Moises Saman/Magnum Photos
Every year, tens of thousands of migrant workers from Kyrgyzstan travel to the
Central Asian economic powerhouse of Kazakhstan in search of employment.
Thousands of these migrant workers, often together with their children, find work in
tobacco farming, where many are subjected to abuse and exploitation by employers
supplying tobacco to Philip Morris Kazakhstan, a subsidiary of Philip Morris
International, one of the world’s largest tobacco companies.
65
PHOTO ESSAYS
(above) A migrant worker from Kyrgyzstan sits
inside her makeshift house in the village of
Koram, Kazakhstan.
(opposite) A child migrant worker’s hands are
covered in tobacco residue after picking leaves on
a tobacco farm near Koram, Kazakhstan.
WORLD REPORT 2011
66
67
KAZAKHSTAN: “HELLISH WORK
A migrant worker from Kyrgyzstan
picks tobacco leaves near the village
of Malybai, Kazakhstan.

LORD’S RESISTANCE ARMY
Since September 2008, at least 2,000 civilians have been killed and
nearly 3,000 others have been abducted during attacks by the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA). The LRA, a Ugandan rebel group, operates in the
border region between northern Congo, the Central African Republic and
south Sudan. Many of the victims, including children, were beaten to
death, had their skulls crushed or their heads sliced with machetes.
Abducted children are forced to kill their family members. Three of the
LRA’s leaders – Joseph Kony, Okot Odhiambo, and Dominic Ongwen –
are sought by the International Criminal Court under arrest warrants
issued in July 2005 for war crimes committed in northern Uganda. All
three remain at large and continue to commit atrocities.
Boniface, 14, spent six months as a rebel fighter
with the Lord's Resistance Army and was
released after the government Uganda Peoples’
Defense Forces (UPDF) attacked their camp.
WORLD REPORT 2011
70
(above) Marcelline, 15, was forced to
be the “wife” of an Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA) commander.
She spent over a year with the LRA.
(left) Masua, 22, is a fisherman and
father of three children. He was
abducted by the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA) and used as a porter.
When he became too tired to
continue, LRA commanders forced
children to hit him with sticks until
he was left for dead.
71
PHOTO ESSAYS
(above) Olivier, 16, was abducted
in October 2009. He was forced
to witness and participate in
brutal attacks by the Lord’s
Resistance Army.
(right) Yoris was shot by the
Lord’s Resistance Army in August
2010 while returning from the
market on his bicycle.
An abandoned school lies on the outskirts
of Ango, northeastern Congo. People have
fled because of recent abductions and
killings by the Lord's Resistance Army.


H U M A N
R I G H T S
W A T C H
WORLD REPORT
2011
AFRICA
75
Angola
On February 5, after minimal public discussion, Angola’s new constitution entered
into force. It was approved in late January by parliament, which has been dominated
by the ruling Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA) since
2008. The constitution consolidates the president’s de facto powers over state
institutions and prescribes a parliament-based model of electing the president,
rather than separate elections.
In April parliament passed a law to curb Angola’s endemic corruption, following
the president’s new “zero-tolerance” anti-corruption discourse. The law has not
yet been implemented.
Fundamental rights such as freedom of expression and information became more
curtailed in 2010, despite strong guarantees in the new constitution. The environment
for human rights defenders remains restricted. Several human rights organizations
have continued to struggle with unresolved lawsuits against banning
orders, administrative registration obstacles, threats, and intimidation. In
Cabinda province, two prominent human rights defenders were sentenced to
prison on trumped-up charges following politically motivated proceedings.
Arbitrary Detentions in Cabinda
An intermittent armed conflict with a separatist movement has persisted in
Cabinda since 1975, despite a peace agreement signed in 2006. The authorities
have long used the conflict to justify restrictions on the rights to freedom of
expression, assembly, and association in this oil-rich enclave. The government
has not responded to calls for an independent investigation into allegations of
torture and other serious human rights violations committed by the Angolan
Armed Forces in Cabinda for many years. Perpetrators of torture there have not
been prosecuted.
In 2010 the authorities used an armed attack on the Togolese football team on
January 8, which killed two Togolese and injured nine others, as a pretext to
arrest and convict prominent Cabindan intellectuals and government critics. The
Front for the Liberation of the Enclave of Cabinda, a separatist guerrilla group,
WORLD REPORT 2011
76
77
AFRICA
claimed responsibility for the attack. The government has not carried out a credible
investigation into the incident.
Only two of the nine men arrested between January 8 and April 11 were formally
charged with direct involvement in the attack, and at this writing they are awaiting
trial. Six others were formally charged and tried between June and September
for unspecified “other crimes” against the security of the state, under article 26
of the 1978 law on crimes against the security of the state. This legal provision
contradicts international human rights law because it is overbroad and does not
specify the crimes for which the authorities may impose prison penalties.
Those convicted include: a Chevron worker who was arrested on January 8 and
sentenced to three years of imprisonment in June; two prominent human rights
defenders–Raúl Tati, a Catholic priest, and Francisco Luemba, a lawyer–who were
arrested in January and sentenced to five years’ imprisonment in August; and
civic activist and university professor Belchior Lanso Tati and a former policeman
who were also arrested in January and sentenced to six and three years, respectively,
of imprisonment in the same trial. In September a former activist of the
civic association Mpalabanda, arrested in January 2010, was tried and acquitted.
Another former Mpalabanda activist, António Paca Panzo Pemba, was arbitrarily
arrested in April on suspicion of having organized a public demonstration in solidarity
with these political detainees, together with two Angolan human rights
organizations. In November, charges against him were dropped for lack of evidence.
Five other activists were briefly detained and released provisionally in
April for wearing and allegedly distributing t-shirts with the faces of political
detainees printed on them. In November, two teachers were arrested and convicted
to prison sentences for “inciting to civil disobedience.” They had authored and
distributed leaflets calling on the population to abstain from Angola’s independence
celebration on November 11.
Defense lawyers in August appealed to the Constitutional Court seeking revocation
of article 26 of the 1978 state crime law. In September the Angolan Bar
Association also filed a request regarding the same legal provision at the
Constitutional Court. At this writing the Constitutional Court’s decision is pending,
WORLD REPORT 2011
78
and despite the approval of a revised law on crimes against the security of the
state, the convicted persons remain in prison.
Media Freedom
The media environment in Angola remains restrictive, and the government continues
to limit access to information, despite the emergence of a number of new
media outlets over the past two years. The ruling party imposes a strong political
bias in the state media. Authorities routinely limit the access of private media to
official information and have curtailed space for open political debate on state
and private radio stations, particularly in the provinces. They have also obstructed
media coverage of politically sensitive events such as forced evictions. On
November 4 the parliament passed a revised law on crimes against the security of
the state, which contains provisions that restrict freedom of expression, for example
by declaring “insult” of the president a criminal offense.
In September and October two journalists of the Luanda-based Radio Despertar,
a radio station close to the opposition party UNITA, were attacked by unknown
men. On September 5 the Radio Despertar journalist Alberto Tchakussanga was
shot dead in his home. On October 22 the radio satirist António Manuel Jojó was
stabbed in the street but survived. Both ran popular programs critical of the government
and had previously received anonymous death threats. At this writing
police investigations remain inconclusive.
Defamation remains a criminal offense in the new press law. Other offenses, such
as “abuse of press freedom,” are vague and thus open to political manipulation.
No new defamation charges against journalists were reported in 2010, but a number
of previous proceedings against journalists of the weekly newspapers Folha 8,
A Capital, and Novo Jornal remain pending at this writing. Such litigation, in an
increasingly difficult economic environment for the private media, perpetuates a
widespread culture of self-censorship that restricts the public’s access to independent
information.
A new press law was enacted in May 2006 but the additional legislation required
to implement crucial parts of the law, which would improve the legal protection of
freedom of expression and access to information, have still not passed at this
79
AFRICA
writing. Independent private radio stations cannot broadcast nationwide, while
the government’s licensing practices have favored new radio and television stations
linked with the ruling MPLA and the presidency. The 2006 press law contains
provisions that prevent the establishment of media monopolies and require
disclosure of shareholders of media corporations. Yet, the real shareholders of
companies registered as owners of several media corporations established since
2008, which are reportedly linked to the presidential entourage, have not been
disclosed. In June a company reportedly linked to the president bought three of
the most popular weekly newspapers known for their government criticism,
Semánario Angolense, A Capital, and 40 percent of Novo Jornal.
Freedom of Assembly and Demonstration
The new constitution guarantees freedom of assembly and peaceful demonstration,
and Angolan laws explicitly allow public demonstrations without the need to
obtain government authorization. However, in 2010 the authorities arbitrarily
banned two public demonstrations organized by civil society organizations, publicly
threatened demonstrators, and deployed security forces to prevent the
demonstrations. In November the police also temporarily detained peaceful
demonstrators and opposition party activists in Luanda who were peacefully distributing
leaflets.
In March a demonstration against mass forced evictions and demolition of houses
in Huila, organized by the human rights organization Omunga, was banned by
the governor of Benguela province. The governor deployed hundreds of police
agents and publicly rejected “any responsibility” for the resulting physical damage
or harm to the protesters. The demonstration later took place on April 10 following
local and international pressure. In May the governor of Cabinda banned a
public demonstration organized by civil society groups in solidarity with civilians
jailed on suspicion of state security crimes after the January 8 guerilla attack. The
governor deployed police and military to prevent the demonstration from taking
place on May 22. The military and police also surrounded the organizers’ houses
on the day of the demonstration, despite the demonstration being called off by
its organizers.
WORLD REPORT 2011
80
Housing Rights and Forced Evictions
Angola’s laws do not give adequate protection against forced eviction, nor do
they enshrine the right to adequate housing. In 2010 the government continued
to carry out mass forced evictions and house demolitions in areas that it claims to
be reserved for public construction in Luanda and increasingly also in provincial
towns. This has occurred without adequate prior notice or compensation in several
documented cases.
Between March and October an estimated 25,000 residents were forcibly evicted
from their homes in Huila, without compensation or adequate prior notice, and
resettled in peripheral areas without any infrastructure, driving many of the evicted
into extreme poverty. In March the government ordered the destruction of at
least 3,000 residences in Lubango, Huila province to clear railway lines.
Demolitions have proceeded despite massive public criticism of the evictions by
civil society organizations, the Catholic Church, opposition parties, the parliament,
and a public apology by the Minister of Territorial Administration. In
September and October the government has demolished at least 1,500 houses
and annexes at the riverside in Lubango to make way for an urban beautification
project.
Key International Actors
Angola remains one of Africa’s largest oil producers and is China’s second most
important source of oil and most important commercial partner in Africa. This oil
wealth, and Angola’s regional military power, has greatly limited leverage of other
governments and international organizations pushing for good governance and
human rights. Trade partners remain reluctant to criticize the government, to protect
their economic interests. Since 2009 falling oil and diamond prices and the
global economic crisis have forced the government to invest more efforts to seek
support from international partners, including the International Monetary Fund
with which Angola signed a Stand-by-Arangement in November 2009.
In February Angola underwent the Universal Periodic Review at the United Nations
Human Rights Council. Angola adopted a number of important recommendations
from member states. However, it did not issue a standing invitation to all UN spe-
81
AFRICA
cial rapporteurs, as requested by a number of member states as well as local and
international human rights organizations. In May Angola was re-elected as a
member of the Council and reiterated its pledge to sign or ratify all major international
human rights instruments. However, none of the pending signings or ratifications
has taken place despite a previous pledge in 2007.
WORLD REPORT 2011
82
Burundi
Burundi held local and national elections between May and September 2010.
Following communal elections on May 24, the electoral commission announced
an overwhelming majority for the ruling party, the National Council for the
Defense of Democracy–Forces for the Defense of Democracy (CNDD-FDD).
Opposition parties cried fraud and boycotted subsequent elections. Government
officials banned opposition meetings and tortured political opponents. Both
CNDD-FDD and opposition supporters carried out acts of political violence.
International observers, relieved that Burundi had not descended into mass violence,
described the elections as “calm.”
The government facilitated the illegal takeover of the main opposition party, the
National Liberation Forces (FNL), by a dissident wing friendly to the ruling party.
Some FNL and other opposition members retreated to the bush and took up
arms. Police apprehended and killed several FNL members who were attempting
to join the armed groups.
The government cracked down on journalists, civil society organizations, and
international organizations that denounced abuses.
Elections and the Breakdown of Democratic Progress
CNDD-FDD’s election campaign relied on bribery and use of state resources,
along with intimidation. Police shut down the meetings of some opposition parties
and arrested some activists.
The May communal election results gave 64 percent of the vote to CNDD-FDD.
Opposition parties claimed that there had been massive fraud and formed a
coalition, ADC-Ikibiri, which called for a boycott of subsequent elections. They did
not present concrete evidence of massive fraud, but the failure of the National
Independent Electoral Commission (CENI) to publicize written vote tallies from
each voting station—in violation of the electoral law—raised doubts about the
integrity of the process.
83
AFRICA
All six opposition candidates dropped out of the presidential elections in June,
leaving incumbent President Pierre Nkurunziza as the sole candidate. One opposition
party, UPRONA, participated in legislative elections in July. Still, CNDD-FDD
won over 80 percent of parliament seats.
Political Violence and Return to Armed Conflict
Before and throughout the elections most major parties used intimidation tactics,
including violence. These parties included the FNL and, to a lesser degree, the
Front for Democracy in Burundi (FRODEBU), the Movement for Solidarity and
Democracy (MSD), the Union for Peace and Development (UPD), and the Union for
National Progress (UPRONA), but the majority of incidents were attributed to
CNDD-FDD. Partisan youth groups, including the CNDD-FDD’s Imbonerakure,
played a significant role in the violence. The Imbonerakure were also involved in
carrying out illegal arrests before, during, and after the elections.
In the two weeks before communal elections at least five politically-motivated
killings took place. During the presidential and legislative elections at least 128
grenade attacks – many of them targeting political activists on all sides – took
place throughout Burundi, killing 11 and injuring at least 69. At least 33 CNDDFDD
meeting places were set on fire during this period.
Throughout July and August FNL members fled their homes to avoid arrest, many
returning to the forests where they had fought during Burundi’s 16-year civil war.
FNL leader Agathon Rwasa went into hiding, as did ADC-Ikibiri spokesperson
Leonard Nyangoma. A new armed movement was formed. In September seven
workers employed by a prominent CNDD-FDD member were killed; evidence suggested
that the perpetrators were FNL members in the Rukoko forest. At least 18
bodies, many mutilated, washed up in the Rusizi River; some were recognized as
FNL members. The United Nations mission in Burundi (BINUB) and a Burundian
human rights group presented the authorities with evidence that police carried
out some of the killings.
WORLD REPORT 2011
84
85
AFRICA
WORLD REPORT 2011
86
Repression of the Political Opposition and
Resurgence of Torture
Over 250 opposition members were arrested in June and July. Charges included
“inciting the population not to vote,” which is not a crime in Burundi. Others were
suspected of serious crimes, including throwing grenades.
At least 12 opposition activists were tortured or ill-treated in June and July by the
National Intelligence Service (SNR). Dozens were ill-treated by the police. SNR
agents cut off part of the ear of one UPD member and forced him to eat it. Other
activists were kicked in the genitals or imprisoned in toilets.
Three opposition leaders were illegally prevented from leaving the country in
June. On June 8 Interior Minister Edouard Nduwimana banned all opposition
activities. He rescinded the ban in late July, but police still shut down some opposition
activities, including a September 17 ADC-Ikibiri press conference.
On August 4 Interior Minister Nduwimana recognized the results of an “extraordinary
congress,” organized by former FNL members with support of the ruling
party, in which FNL president Rwasa was voted out and replaced by more compliant
leaders. After years of effort by government officials and the international
community to bring Rwasa and the FNL into the political process, the congress
violated FNL internal rules and left Rwasa and his supporters with no political
voice.
On September 27 MSD spokesperson François Nyamoya was arrested on defamation
charges after stating in a radio interview that President Nkurunziza should
dismiss SNR chief Adolphe Nshimirimana and Deputy Police Director Gervais
Ndirakobuca due to abuses committed by both services. He was released on bail
on October 14. In addition to his political activity, Nyamoya is a prominent lawyer
who has defended government critics in court. His client Jackson Ndikuriyo, a former
police officer who had filed a complaint for unlawful dismissal, was killed on
August 26 in what Burundian rights organizations denounced as an extrajudicial
execution by police. Ndikuriyo had been fired for denouncing police corruption
and had told Nyamoya before his death that he was being threatened by Deputy
Police Director Ndirakobuca.
87
AFRICA
Human Rights Defenders and Journalists
The year 2010 represented a low point for the rights of human rights defenders
and journalists, with repression reaching a level not seen since 2006.
On May 18 Foreign Minister Augustin Nsanze revoked the work permit of Human
Rights Watch’s Burundi researcher, claiming that the organization’s May report on
political violence in Burundi was “biased” and that the researcher demonstrated
“attitudes that are harmful to government institutions.” The government did not
contest any specific information in the report and as of November Nsanze had not
responded to a series of requests from Human Rights Watch for dialogue.
Four journalists were arrested in 2010. Jean Claude Kavumbagu, editor of the
online service Net Press, was detained in July on treason charges—by law only
applicable “in times of war”—after questioning the army’s ability to respond to an
attack by al-Shabaab. Prosecutors insinuated that threats from al-Shabaab
against Burundi constituted “war.” As of October Kavumbagu had been held illegally
in pretrial detention for three months. Thierry Ndayishimiye, editor of the
newspaper Arc-en-Ciel, was detained in August for denouncing corruption at the
state energy company. He was released on bail. Two journalists from the private
newspaper Iwacu were detained for two days in November, with no explanation
and no charges.
On July 29 Gabriel Rufyiri, president of the anti-corruption organization OLUCOME,
was questioned by a magistrate subsequent to a defamation complaint.
Bujumbura prosecutor Renovat Tabu ordered Rufyiri’s arrest. The magistrate
refused, for lack of evidence, and was transferred the next day to a post in a jurisdiction
in rural Burundi.
Eric Manirakiza and Bob Rugurika, the director and editor-in-chief of the private
radio station RPA, received death threats. Pacifique Nininahazwe, delegate general
of the Forum for the Strengthening of Civil Society (FORSC), was subjected to
surveillance by vehicles associated with the SNR.
Hearings were held in the trial of suspects in the April 2009 murder of Ernest
Manirumva, OLUCOME vice president. Civil society groups expressed concern that
prosecutors have neglected to arrest or question several high-ranking police and
WORLD REPORT 2011
88
89
AFRICA
SNR officials who have been cited by witnesses. They have also presented evidence
suggesting that some witnesses have disappeared or have been killed.
Prosecutors lost the witnesses’ confidence by sharing information on witnesses
with the SNR.
Transitional Justice and Criminal Justice
A committee representing the government, the UN, and civil society completed a
series of “national consultations” on establishing a Truth and Reconciliation
Commission and a Special Tribunal to address past war crimes. The committee
presented President Nkurunziza with a report in April, but it still is not public at
this writing, preventing progress on establishing the proposed mechanisms.
The Burundian justice system was plagued by backlogs in 2010. Sixty-five percent
of prisoners were in pretrial detention. A September court decision upholding the
pretrial detention of journalist Kavumbagu held that pretrial detention is always
the best means to maintain a suspect “at the disposition of the justice system,”
in violation of international human rights principles.
Key International Actors
International diplomats in Bujumbura closely followed proceedings in cases
affecting human rights defenders and journalists, many personally attended hearings.
Belgium’s foreign minister condemned the arrests of Kavumbagu and
Nyamoya and called for investigations into the allegations of torture of political
opponents. The United States, which offered technical assistance from its FBI in
investigations into Manirumva’s death, pressed the government to pursue highranking
officials suspected of involvement in the killing.
Many foreign governments failed to denounce restrictions on the rights of the
political opposition during the election period. They downplayed the lack of an
equal playing field and exerted heavy pressure on the opposition to end its boycott,
which resulted in alienating opposition parties.
WORLD REPORT 2011
90
The UN mission in Burundi systematically documented cases of torture, arbitrary
arrests, and extrajudicial executions, and pressed the government to end these
practices.
The UN-appointed Independent Expert on the Situation of Human Rights in
Burundi has not been able to present any report on the situation in Burundi since
September 2008, in a deviation from standard practice at the UN Human Rights
Council. Burundi lobbied the Council to postpone the presentation of the independent
expert’s report during the council’s September 2010 session.
Rwandan pressure on Burundi resulted in the illegal repatriation of 103 Rwandan
asylum seekers in November 2009. Tanzania took the positive step of naturalizing
162,000 Burundian refugees who had been in Tanzania since 1972.
91
AFRICA
Chad
A rapprochement agreement between Chad and Sudan, signed January 15, 2010,
marked the end of a five-year proxy war. The normalization of relations led to the
repatriation of Chadian rebels from Sudan, the opening of the border between the
two countries in April after seven years of closure, and the deployment of a joint
force to secure the border, though attacks on civilians in the area continue.
President Idriss Déby visited Khartoum, Sudan’s capital, in February for the first
time in six years; and in July Chad, a state party to the International Criminal
Court, hosted Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir, earning the dubious distinction
of being the first ICC member state to harbor a suspect from the court. The
Chadian government clashed with rebel forces in eastern Chad in January and
April. Criminality, banditry, kidnappings, carjackings, and armed robbery targeting
humanitarian agencies led to the withdrawal and temporary suspension of some
humanitarian operations.
In January the government of Chad requested that the United Nations begin the
process of withdrawing the peacekeeping mission in eastern Chad. The government
cited the mission’s slow deployment, uneven record of success, and
improvements in the security situation as reasons for its decision. In May the UN
revised the mission’s mandate and authorized its gradual drawdown and closure
by the end of the year, and effectively shifted full responsibility for the protection
of civilians, including displaced populations and refugees from Darfur, to the
Chadian security forces.
The implementation of the reforms promised in an August 2007 agreement with
opposition parties has been slow and uneven. President Déby, one of Africa’s
longest-serving heads of state, has failed to make adequate funding available
and has instead tightened his grip on power. Despite a new media law passed in
August, the government continues to suppress free speech.
Throughout the country, government forces continue to arbitrarily arrest and
detain civilians and suspected rebels, often on the basis of ethnicity, and subject
them to ill-treatment and torture, sometimes in unofficial places of detention.
Chad’s prison conditions are among the harshest on the African continent.
WORLD REPORT 2011
92
Weak institutions of justice contributed to a culture of impunity. The government
has not investigated or prosecuted serious abuses against civilians, such as
killings and rapes by government security forces and rebels following clashes at
Am Dam in May 2009. The disappearance of opposition leader Ibni Oumar
Mahamat Saleh during the February 2008 attack on N’Djamena, the capital,
remains unresolved.
Drawdown of the United Nations Mission in Chad
Peacekeepers from the UN Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT)
have been in eastern Chad and northeastern Central African Republic
since mid-2008 with a mandate to protect refugees and displaced populations,
facilitate humanitarian assistance, and promote human rights.
Following the UN decision to draw down the mission by the end of 2010, representatives
of UN agencies formed a working group with the Chadian government
to improve security for humanitarian groups in eastern Chad. The plan includes
consolidation of the Chadian Integrated Security Detachment (DIS), a component
of MINURCAT comprised of Chadian police forces trained by the UN, which provide
security in and around the refugee camps. However, the plans do not clearly
address the security concerns of refugees, internally displaced persons (IDPs), or
the local population.
Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons
More than 250,000 Sudanese refugees and 168,000 Chadian displaced people
live in camps and elsewhere in eastern Chad. In April approximately 5,000 new
Sudanese refugees arrived from West Darfur, following renewed fighting there
between the Sudanese rebel group Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) and
Sudanese government forces.
The security situation of refugees and IDPs in camps remains precarious, with
continued reports of human rights abuses and other crimes. The militarization of
camps, unexploded landmines, and the proliferation of arms in eastern Chad continue
to put civilians at risk. Humanitarian needs were greatly exacerbated by
93
AFRICA
food shortages and pockets of famine. Severe flooding destroyed the infrastructure
of some refugee camps and left 4,000 refugees completely without shelter.
In May the prime minister encouraged IDPs to return to their areas of origin. An
estimated 20,000 people returned in the Dar Sila and Ouaddai regions between
April and July, but the sustainability of these movements is uncertain. Returnees
continue to report cases of unlawful killings, attacks, and theft. The lack of basic
infrastructure, such as access to drinking water, health centers, or schools also
stops many IDPs from returning home. Inequity in the justice system and violations
perpetrated by the Chadian Armed Forces further add to this climate of fear.
Sexual Violence
Sexual and gender-based violence, including rape, early and forced marriages,
and female genital mutilation, was reported frequently to UN human rights monitors
in eastern Chad; in the first half of 2010 DIS registered over 250 complaints
in this area. Most victims are children. The high levels of violence are exacerbated
by an entrenched culture of impunity and structural gender inequality. Rapes
occur in domestic settings, near victims’ residences, and outside villages, refugee
camps, and IDP sites; perpetrators include members of the Chadian National
Army (ANT). Women and girls do not have adequate access to health and legal
services.
Child Soldiers
Various Chadian security forces, including the ANT and JEM, continued to recruit
and employ children in eastern Chad. In January and February six children recruited
to JEM between 2007 and 2008 deserted and returned to the Iridimi refugee
camp. In September the special representative of the secretary-general for children
and armed conflict presented a report to the UN Human Rights Council listing
both the ANT and JEM as parties that recruit and use children. In 2007 the
Chadian government signed an agreement with the UN Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
to release all children from its armed forces.
On September 14, 2010, the Chadian government arrested four Sudanese rebels
who were allegedly recruiting child soldiers in the Goz Amir refugee camp. UNICEF
WORLD REPORT 2011
94
has demobilized over 800 child soldiers in Chad over the past three years; more
than 90 percent of these children were affiliated with Chadian armed opposition
groups.
In June the government hosted a regional conference on child soldiers with five
other Central African nations, leading to the adoption of the “N’Djamena
Declaration,” which pledges to stop the use of children in armed conflict and to
release and reintegrate child soldiers.
Hissène Habré Trial
The Senegalese government continues to delay judicial proceedings against former
Chadian president Hissène Habré, who stands accused of crimes against
humanity and torture during his 1982-1990 rule. In 2006 Senegal accepted an
African Union “mandate” to prosecute Habré “on behalf of Africa,” but then stated
that the prosecution would not move forward unless international donors
assumed the full expense of organizing a trial, which Senegal estimated at US$40
million.
In July 2010 a joint African Union-European Union team, with the support of the
United States, presented Senegal with a proposed budget of $9 million for the
trial. Senegal has accepted the proposed budget and a donors’ conference is
scheduled to take place in Dakar, the Senegalese capital, by the end of 2010.
Meanwhile thousands of victims of torture and killings under Habré’s rule have
never received compensation or recognition from Chad’s current government, and
many of Habré’s henchmen still hold key positions of power, including state security
jobs.
International Actors
Despite solid evidence of widespread and serious human rights abuses in Chad,
the country’s key international partners have refrained from pressing the Chadian
government on its human rights commitments. By lodging a formal request to the
UN for the non-renewal of the mission’s mandate, Chad succeeded in diverting
international attention from its election and domestic human rights problems.
95
AFRICA
The government of Chad received ongoing military support from both France and
the US. France has had troops stationed in Chad since 1986; currently they number
1,000 soldiers. Yet the Chadian government has started to question the justification
of the French deployment and, during celebrations of Chad’s 50th anniversary
of independence, President Déby said that France must “pay a price” if it
“wants to stay in Chad, to use its airplanes, and train its soldiers there.” It is not
clear yet how France’s stated plan to reorganize troops stationed in its former
colonies and negotiate new defense agreements will affect its military cooperation
with Chad.
As one of the key US allies on the African continent, Chad received US military
assistance under the Trans-Saharan Counterterrorism Partnership, a scheme
through which the US sends Special Forces instructors to train antiterrorist commandos
in Chad. US President Barak Obama issued a waiver allowing US military
assistance to continue to flow to Chad, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Sudan,
and Yemen, despite State Department findings that these countries violate the US
Child Soldiers Prevention Act.
China is becoming an increasingly important international player in Chad.
Attracted by the growing petroleum industry in the Sahel region of Africa, Chinese
companies have increased their presence there. In June 2010 the China National
Petroleum Corporation—one of China’s largest oil and gas companies, which is
also present in Sudan—began working on an oil pipeline in southwestern Chad.
The pipeline is expected to be operational in 2011 and will facilitate the transport
of crude oil from the Koudalwa field (300 kilometers, or 186 miles, south of
N’Djamena) to the Djarmaya refinery (north of N’Djamena).
In early February 2010 Chad won reelection onto the Peace and Security Council
of the AU, the AU’s most important organ in charge of the day-to-day management
of peace and security issues on the continent.
WORLD REPORT 2011
96
Côte d’Ivoire
A long-delayed presidential vote on October 31 left President Laurent Gbagbo and
former prime minister Alassane Ouattara in a run-off scheduled for November 28.
Optimism among Ivorians and international partners that the country was moving
toward reunification after a calm first round was tempered by the ethnic-regional
split among voters, as well as concerns that incendiary rhetoric by the candidates’
supporters could lead to incidents of communal and political violence. A successful
election would signal an end to the political uncertainty that has beleaguered
the country for more than five years.
Meanwhile the almost singular focus on elections by the Ivorian government and
its international partners resulted in grossly insufficient efforts to address disarmament,
human rights abuses, and deficiencies within rule of law institutions.
Ivorians continue to suffer high levels of sexual violence, banditry, and land conflict
with little recourse in a justice system plagued by corruption, lack of independence,
and insufficient resources. The state institutions mandated to protect
the population and investigate and hold accountable perpetrators of serious
crimes continue to engage in unprofessional and predatory conduct, including
the open extortion of citizens at checkpoints throughout the country.
Elections and a Continuing Political-Military Stalemate
In the first round of presidential elections, almost 80 percent of eligible Ivorians
cast their votes in a process that international observers deemed to be free and
fair. However, none of the candidates received 50 percent of the vote, resulting in
a run-off between Gbagbo and Ouattara. Votes were cast sharply along ethnic and
regional lines during the first round, with Gbagbo controlling the south and west
and Ouattara the north. There were widespread concerns that a contested second
round would fail to end the country’s long-term political uncertainty.
Ivorian authorities made minimal effort to disarm former combatants in 2010,
allowing for the continued abundance of arms, particularly in the rebel-held north
and the formerly pro-government militia stronghold in the far west of the country.
As of August the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) had collected
only 715 arms during their disarmament programs for rebel and militia forces
97
AFRICA
combined, despite the government’s census of 70,000 combatants and claims
that around 30,000 combatants had already been demobilized. Rebel forces were
increasingly unwilling to cooperate with inspectors from the UN Group of Experts
tasked with monitoring compliance of a 2004 arms embargo. The government’s
Republican Guard has refused outright to cooperate since the embargo was
imposed.
Rule of Law
The judicial system remains marked by corruption and lack of independence. The
planned redeployment of judicial officials to the north progressed slowly in 2010,
although several tribunals and correctional facilities were able to reopen after
being in rebel hands for seven years. However, Forces Nouvelles rebels’ refusal to
relinquish de facto control of much of the north, including prisons and security,
hampered the judiciary’s ability to be effective and independent.
Land Rights
Violent conflicts over land rights remain a persistent problem in southern and
western Côte d’Ivoire, exacerbated by the chronic failure of the judicial system to
resolve disputes. Many such conflicts pit indigenous populations against immigrant
communities. In May at least 10 people were killed in a clash around Mont
Peko, one of many protected forest regions where land is illegally sold and turned
into cocoa fields, while more than 20 people were seriously injured during a
September confrontation in Fresco. In the far west, almost 900 ethnic Burkinabé
internally displaced persons remain within a camp outside Guiglo due to fear of
retribution from the indigenous population should they return to their land.
Extortion and Racketeering
As in past years the government took no meaningful steps to address widespread
extortion and racketeering by government security forces and rebels. In the government-
controlled south, police, gendarmes, and customs officials routinely
demand bribes at checkpoints. Individuals who refuse to pay bribes to corrupt
officials are refused passage, intimidated, and often beaten or arbitrarily
WORLD REPORT 2011
98
99
AFRICA
detained. Immigrant populations and other perceived outsiders are targeted for
particularly severe treatment.
Extortion remains even more problematic in the north, where Forces Nouvelles
rebels continue to exert almost complete economic control over the population.
The rebels reap the equivalent of hundreds of millions of dollars annually at
checkpoints and through rackets on businesses, particularly the lucrative cocoa
and timber trade. In late August rebel leaders promised that forces would stay in
their barracks during the two months preceding the elections. However, at this
writing, many are still illegally manning checkpoints.
Political Violence
The first round of presidential voting occurred with few reported incidents of violence
or intimidation. However, in the prelude to the run-off between Gbagbo and
Ouattara, inflammatory rhetoric by party media organs and incidents of intimidation
by party youth wings intensified. At this writing there were increasing fears
that intimidation and violence might mar the second round and the announcement
of results.
Tensions flared in early February as a result of disputes over the voter list.
Following reports that judicial authorities were controversially removing names
from the voter list, protests turned violent in several towns across Côte d’Ivoire,
leaving several persons dead or seriously injured. Government buildings were
sacked in Man, Bouaké, and Vavoua. President Gbagbo dissolved the government
and electoral commission on February 12, citing the protests and accusations that
the electoral commission’s head committed fraud, leading to additional protests
throughout the country. Law enforcement officials fired on demonstrators in
Gagnoa on February 19, killing five. An investigation by UNOCI’s human rights
division found that Ivorian security and defense forces committed serious violations
in suppressing these protests and riots, including extrajudicial killings,
physical violence, and illegal arrests and detentions.
WORLD REPORT 2011
100
Sexual Violence
Sexual violence remained pervasive throughout the country. Problems are particularly
acute in the far west of Côte d’Ivoire, where armed men sexually assault
women and girls in their homes, as they tend to their fields, as they walk to or
from the market, and after hauling them from transport vehicles. Victims are typically
attacked during a robbery. The attacks are especially common during the
cocoa harvest and on market days. Victims’ access to health and legal services
remains extremely limited. Attempts to investigate and prosecute cases of sexual
violence are hampered by lack of political will among police and court officials,
and aggravated by severe deficiencies in the justice system, particularly in the
north and west.
Accountability for Past Abuses
Impunity for serious crimes committed in Côte d’Ivoire remains a major concern.
The UN Security Council has still not made public the findings of the UN
Commission of Inquiry into serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law since September 2002, delivered to the UN secretary-general in
November 2004. In 2003 the Ivorian government accepted the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court over serious crimes committed in violation of international
law. However, it has since repeatedly failed to facilitate ICC initiatives to
assess national efforts on accountability for such crimes, including to determine
whether the ICC should open an investigation there.
The National Human Rights Commission, which began work in July 2008, submitted
its second annual report in August 2010. The commission still failed to meet
the standards laid out in the Paris Principles because it remained politicized, not
effectively independent from the executive, and inadequately funded.
Key International Actors
Côte d’Ivoire’s key partners – including the UN, the Economic Community of West
African States, the European Union, and France – grew increasingly frustrated
with election delays, and throughout the year exerted considerable pressure on
the Ivorian government to hold elections in 2010. They also provided significant
101
AFRICA
financial support for election preparations. However, these international partners
remained reluctant to publicly criticize the government for its human rights
record, or to push for accountability for those responsible for war crimes, political
violence, or rampant crime.
With the notable exception of the August report on human rights violations during
the February demonstrations, UNOCI continued to fail to make its statistics and
reporting on human rights abuses in the country publicly available.
UN Security Council Resolution 1933, adopted in June, extended UNOCI’s mandate
through December, authorizing over 8,400 military and police personnel. In
advance of elections the Security Council agreed to deploy 500 additional peacekeeping
troops, and UNOCI was given a clearer mandate regarding the protection
of civilians. However, proactive efforts to stem rampant violence, including sexual
violence, remained nominal. France maintained 900 troops in Côte d’Ivoire to
support UNOCI.
The Security Council extended a sanctions regime through April 30, 2011, including
an arms embargo, a ban on the import of Ivorian diamonds, and travel bans
and asset freezes on three individuals, two of whom were implicated in attacks
against UN personnel in 2006. In its August report, UNOCI recommended an
exception allowing the Ivorian government to import anti-riot equipment, citing
the lack of such equipment as a contributing factor to the February abuses by
security forces.
In January 2010 the UN Human Rights Council published a report on Côte d’Ivoire
under its Universal Periodic Review mechanism. Côte d’Ivoire committed to implement
recommendations on the rule of law and to end impunity for sexual violence
by bringing perpetrators to justice. However, virtually no efforts were made during
the year to achieve these goals.
WORLD REPORT 2011
102
Democratic Republic of Congo
Attacks on civilians and other human rights abuses continued with disturbing frequency
in 2010. The Congolese army sustained its military campaigns against foreign
and national armed groups in the east and north, and launched a new campaign
in the west to quell a local insurgency. As in the past, all sides targeted
civilians, who were killed, raped, arbitrarily arrested, pressed into forced labor,
and looted. The ongoing violence left nearly 2 million people displaced and a further
145,000 as refugees in neighboring countries.
The United Nations peacekeeping mission was renamed the UN Organization
Stabilization Mission in Congo (MONUSCO) following calls for its withdrawal by
the Congolese government, which was eager to claim security improvements
ahead of the 50th anniversary of Congo’s independence. The new name made little
difference in the struggle to protect civilians. Some perpetrators were arrested
on war crimes charges, but many others remained in positions of power, most
notably Bosco Ntaganda, a general sought on an arrest warrant from the
International Criminal Court (ICC). Violent attacks on journalists and human rights
defenders increased.
Attacks by the Lord’s Resistance Army in Northern Congo
Attacks against civilians were the most severe in northern Congo, where the
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), a Ugandan rebel group, continued its brutal campaign.
A further 604 people were killed and 473 abducted, bringing the death toll
in Congo to over 2,000 and the number of abducted to 2,600 since the LRA began
its latest campaign of violence in 2008. The LRA also attacked civilians across the
border in the Central African Republic and Southern Sudan. The largest attack in
Congo was in the remote Makombo area of Haut Uele District, where in December
2009 LRA combatants clubbed to death at least 345 civilians and abducted 250
others. The attack was one of the worst ever perpetrated by the rebel group in its
bloody 24-year history. The LRA also carried out widespread abductions in Bas
Uele District, deliberately targeting children whom the group forced to serve as
soldiers.
103
AFRICA
The Ugandan army—in coordination with the Congolese, Central African, and
Southern Sudanese armed forces—continued its military campaign against the
LRA. The operation had some success in weakening the rebel group, but the LRA’s
ability to attack civilians remained undiminished. No progress was made on
apprehending three of the LRA’s top leaders sought by the ICC for crimes committed
in northern Uganda. Congolese army and MONUSCO efforts to protect civilians
in LRA-affected areas remained inadequate, with limited resources directed
to address the threat.
Military Operations in the East and West
The Congolese army continued military operations in North and South Kivu
provinces of eastern Congo against the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of
Rwanda (FDLR), a predominantly Rwandan Hutu rebel group, some of whose leaders
participated in the 1994 genocide. At the same time the army sought to integrate
nearly two dozen former armed groups into its ranks, a condition of the
peace accords signed in March 2009. The integration process was fraught with
problems. A number of the armed groups dropped out, angry that their enemies
received higher ranks or more lucrative posts. Other groups, such as the National
Congress for the Defense of the People (CNDP), conducted their own military
operations under the guise of the Congolese army, but without approval from the
military hierarchy. The confusion affected chains of command and control of the
troops.
Attacks on civilians by the army and armed groups were rampant. Hundreds were
killed and raped as each warring party accused local populations of supporting
its enemies. For example, at least 105 civilians were killed in western Masisi territory
when former CNDP troops newly integrated into the army conducted unilateral
operations against the FDLR and their allies. In another incident in Walikale territory
in early August, FDLR combatants and a local armed group, the Mai Mai
Cheka, systematically gang raped at least 303 civilians in 13 villages. The attackers
accused their victims of supporting the Congolese army.
As in 2009, UN peacekeepers provided logistical and operational support to the
Congolese military operations against the FDLR. Following earlier criticisms that
peacekeepers had failed to put in place adequate conditions to ensure respect for
WORLD REPORT 2011
104
105
AFRICA
WORLD REPORT 2011
106
human rights, MONUSCO strengthened its conditionality policy and sought to
support only battalions it had previously screened. But the confused chains of
command made the policy’s application exceedingly difficult. Many officers with a
known track record of human rights abuses remained in command positions. The
most blatant example was General Bosco Ntaganda, sought on an arrest warrant
from the ICC, who continued to play the de facto role as deputy commander of the
joint military operations. Ntaganda also continued to perpetrate human rights
abuses and was implicated in assassinations and arbitrary arrests of individuals
opposed to him.
In addition to problems in the east, the Congolese army also deployed to western
Equateur Province to counter an insurgency led by the Enyele ethnic group, after a
local fishing dispute spun out of control. The insurgents attacked opponents from
other ethnic groups, as well as policemen and soldiers. While quelling the insurgency,
Congolese security forces were themselves responsible for numerous
human rights violations. The UN estimated that 100 civilians were killed in the
clashes.
Sexual Violence and Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
The level of sexual violence in Congo continued at an alarming rate. Over 15,000
cases of sexual violence were reported in 2009. In 2010 there were no signs that
the trend was decreasing. For the first six months of the year 7,685 cases were
reported. More than half of the victims were under 18 years of age.
In October a private member’s bill was introduced in the National Assembly proposing
a punishment of three to five years’ imprisonment for “homosexual relations”
and to outlaw all publications and films that highlight “sexual practices
against nature.” The bill also seeks to criminalize members and financers of associations
that promote or defend “sexual relations against nature” with six months
to one year in prison.
Threats to Journalists and Human Rights Defenders
Congolese human rights defenders and journalists were increasingly targeted in
2010. A prominent human rights defender, Floribert Chebeya Bahizire, executive
107
AFRICA
director of Voice of the Voiceless, was found dead on June 1, following a visit to
police headquarters in Kinshasa, the capital. His driver, Fidele Bazana Edadi,
remains missing at the time of writing. The national police chief was suspended
and other senior police officers were detained following the murder, though none
was charged at the time of writing. In eastern Congo, on June 30, a human rights
defender working for Le Bon Samaritain was killed by armed men in uniform near
Beni, North Kivu. Sylvestre Bwira Kyahi, civil society president of Masisi territory,
was abducted by army soldiers on August 24 and held for a week in an underground
prison, where he was repeatedly beaten for writing a public letter
denouncing abuses by soldiers under Ntaganda’s command and calling for his
arrest.
Freelance cameraman Patient Chebeya Bankome was shot dead by soldiers outside
his home in Beni on April 5. Radio France Internationale (RFI) began broadcasting
again in Congo on October 12, after being off the air since June 2009.
Other radio stations, including in Bandundu and Kisangani, were shut down or
interrupted by authorities when they criticized government policy.
Justice and Accountability
The vast majority of crimes committed in Congo have gone unpunished and, in
many cases, perpetrators are rewarded rather than brought to justice.
Despite the somber trend, there were some positive developments. On November
17, 2009, the FDLR president, Ignace Murwanashyaka, and his deputy, Straton
Musoni, were arrested in Germany by the German police for war crimes and
crimes against humanity committed by FDLR troops under their command in eastern
Congo. Another FDLR leader, Callixte Mbarushimana, was arrested in France
by French police on October 11, 2010, under an arrest warrant issued by the ICC
for similar crimes.
In Congo the government increased military prosecutions against soldiers
accused of human rights violations, including crimes of sexual violence, although
the majority of those prosecuted held junior ranks. In one notable exception, following
pressure from the UN Security Council and human rights organizations,
judicial authorities in Kinshasa arrested General Jerome Kakwavu in April 2010 on
WORLD REPORT 2011
108
109
AFRICA
war crimes charges for rape and torture. Kakwavu is the first general arrested on
rape charges in Congo’s history.
In another important landmark, the Office of the UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights published on October 1 its report of a human rights mapping exercise
in Congo, which documented 617 incidents of serious violations of international
humanitarian law between 1993 and 2003. The report described the role of
the main Congolese and foreign parties responsible—including military or armed
groups from Rwanda, Uganda, Burundi, and Angola—and suggested options to
pursue justice for the crimes, including the proposed establishment of a mixed
chamber in Congo with Congolese and international judges. Rwanda and Uganda,
among others, rejected the report. In an important statement, the Congolese government
welcomed it and said it would support the option of a mixed chamber.
Key International Actors
At the insistence of the government, the UN withdrew some 1,500 peacekeepers
and pledged to conduct a joint security assessment with the government to determine
future drawdown.
Following the mass rape in Walikale, the UN dispatched its assistant secretarygeneral
for peacekeeping operations, Atul Khare, to Congo to assess the challenges
for protecting civilians and recommend improvements. The UN secretarygeneral’s
special representative on sexual violence in conflict, Margot Wallström,
also visited Congo twice to strengthen UN action to address sexual violence and
hold perpetrators accountable.
On May 24 United States President Barack Obama signed legislation committing
the US to developing a comprehensive strategy to protect civilians from LRA
attacks and to end the group’s violence.
WORLD REPORT 2011
110
Equatorial Guinea
Equatorial Guinea remains mired in corruption, poverty, and repression under the
leadership of Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, the country’s president for over
30 years. Vast oil revenues fund lavish lifestyles for the small elite surrounding
the president, while the majority of the population lives in dire poverty. The government
regularly engages in torture and arbitrary detention. It also continues a
practice of abducting perceived opponents abroad and holding them in secret
detention. Journalists, civil society, and members of the political opposition face
heavy government repression.
President Obiang, who overwhelmingly won re-election in November 2009 in a
deeply flawed vote, unsuccessfully sought to enhance his international image by
announcing purported human rights reforms. Several prominent Obiang initiatives,
including a the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) prize in his honor, were blocked due to widespread concern
over well-documented corruption and abuse in his administration.
Economic and Social Rights
Significant oil revenues and the country’s small population make Equatorial
Guinea’s per capita gross domestic product among the highest in the world, and
the highest in sub-Saharan Africa. Nevertheless, socioeconomic conditions for
the country’s population of approximately 600,000 remain dismal. One study
published in The Lancet found that the country had the world’s highest child mortality
rate, though a second study in the same publication found that the country
did see progress in reducing maternal mortality.
The government has failed to utilize available resources to progressively realize
the social and economic rights of the population. Given its high oil revenues, it
has invested only paltry sums in health, education, and other social services. As
reported by the International Monetary Fund in May, after a four-year delay,
Equatorial Guinea in 2010 began to disburse “small” amounts for those purposes
through its Social Development Fund. The government, instead, has prioritized
investments in projects, such as an ultra-modern hospital, that have little benefit
111
AFRICA
for the poor who lack access to basic health services. An anti-malaria campaign
largely funded by Western oil companies has lowered the incidence of malaria.
In February a United States Senate investigation revealed that President Obiang’s
eldest son and presumed successor—known by the nickname Teodorín—who
serves as minister of agriculture and forestry, bypassed money-laundering controls
and used suspect funds to finance expensive purchases in the US. The son’s
spending on luxury goods from 2004-2007 was nearly double the Equatoguinean
government’s 2005 budget for education. The US Senate also reported that
Teodorín is under criminal investigation in the US. In response to this negative
publicity, he hired a Washington communications firm to polish his image, selecting
the same firm used by his father. President Obiang also hired a new US lobbyist,
replacing the firm he retained after a 2004 US Senate investigation exposed
his improper personal spending from national oil accounts.
Freedom of Expression and Association
Equatorial Guinea remains notorious for its lack of press freedom; its ranking by
Reporters Without Borders fell to 167th out of 178 countries in 2010. A few nonstate-
controlled media outlets publish erratically and are tightly restrained.
Journalists from the state media are not permitted to criticize the government.
According to international press freedom groups, in January the government fired
four reporters from the state radio and television broadcaster for “lack of enthusiasm.”
In February a journalist with state-run radio was arrested and held for three
days after he reported on-air that seven bodies were found at a trash dump in
Bata, the largest city on the country’s mainland. In April the sole foreign correspondent
in Equatorial Guinea, an Agence France-Presse reporter, was detained
and held for several hours when he attempted to cover the arrival of foreign dignitaries
at the airport in Malabo, the capital.
Freedom of association and assembly are also severely curtailed, infringing on
the development of civil society. The government imposes restrictive conditions
on the registration and operation of nongovernmental groups. As a result, there is
not one legally registered independent human rights organization in the country.
The few local activists who openly promote needed reforms are vulnerable to
WORLD REPORT 2011
112
intimidation, harassment, and reprisals. The government is also intolerant of critical
views from abroad, frequently characterizing those who expose President
Obiang’s autocratic and corrupt rule as racist and colonialist. It also regularly
denies visas to foreign journalists.
Political Parties and Political Opposition
Contrary to President Obiang’s claims that “my country is democratic,” free and
fair elections are denied to its people. In the lead-up to the November 2009 presidential
vote, which President Obiang won with 95.4 percent of the ballot, the government
stifled and harassed the country’s beleaguered political opposition,
denied the opposition equal access to the media, and imposed serious constraints
on international observers.
The ruling Democratic Party (PDGE) maintains a monopoly over political life. Only
two of the four other political parties with candidates running in the election—the
Convergence for Social Democracy (CPDS) and the People’s Union (UP)—actively
oppose the ruling party and Obiang. Opposition parties are silenced through the
use of criminal prosecution, arbitrary arrest, and harassment. Freedom House
named Equatorial Guinea as one of the “worst of the worst” countries for the
harsh repression of political rights and civil liberties, as it has for several previous
years.
In July Teodorín was elected to head the ruling party’s youth wing. That role automatically
confers on the younger Mr. Obiang the vice-presidency of the PDGE and
presumably ensures that he is next in line to replace his father.
Abduction, Arbitrary Detention, Torture, and Unfair Trials
There is no independent judiciary in Equatorial Guinea. The government commonly
employs arbitrary detention and arrests without due process. Detainees continued
to be held indefinitely without knowing the charges against them. Basic fair
trial standards are disregarded. Torture remains a serious problem despite a
national law prohibiting it. Equatorial Guinea’s security services have kidnapped
more than a dozen perceived opponents abroad, including at least four in 2010.
113
AFRICA
Amnesty International reported that Equatorial Guinea abducted four nationals
living in exile in Benin in January 2010, held them in secret detention where they
were tortured and forced to confess to participating in a February 2009 attack on
the presidential palace, and then executed them in August following a military
trial that violated international human rights standards and the country’s own
laws.
The government had earlier arbitrarily detained and accused 10 opposition politicians
and scores of Nigerian citizens, including fisherman and traders, of involvement
in the same attack on the presidential palace. In March, after more than a
year in detention, seven of the Nigerian citizens were prosecuted in an unfair
civilian trial and each sentenced to 12 years in prison, while two Equatoguinean
opposition members were first acquitted by the civilian court and then retried in
August by a military court, receiving sentences of 20 years.
Key International Actors
At its review under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism of the UN Human
Rights Council in December 2009, and during a follow-up session in March 2010,
Equatorial Guinea accepted over 100 recommendations to improve its human
rights record, including commitments to end torture and arbitrary and secret
detentions. In June President Obiang announced a reform plan at the Global
Forum in Cape Town, South Africa, pledging that he would make his country’s oil
revenues fully transparent, increase social spending, institute legal reforms, protect
human rights, and preserve the environment. Although President Obiang
hired a “reform adviser” to help promote these purported improvements, the various
pledges were consistently belied by his government’s action.
In April the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, a global initiative promoting
openness on petroleum and mining revenues, expelled Equatorial Guinea for
failing to meet its most basic criteria. In July, the Community of Portuguese-
Speaking Countries deferred Equatorial Guinea’s application to join, also in the
wake of controversy over President Obiang’s record. (Although Portuguese is not
spoken in the former Spanish colony, President Obiang declared it Equatorial
Guinea’s newest national language.) In August the US government, as well as a
UN working group and others, sharply criticized the unfair trial and executions
WORLD REPORT 2011
114
that took place that month in Equatorial Guinea. In October, after stalling a decision
several times, UNESCO indefinitely suspended an award named after—and
funded by—President Obiang. UNESCO’s executive board acted after a global civil
society campaign generated an international uproar over the planned “dictator
prize” that threatened to seriously taint the organization.
The US is Equatorial Guinea’s main trading partner and US companies dominate
the country’s oil sector. The US government took some steps to hold Equatorial
Guinea to global standards, notably taking a strong stance at UNESCO against the
Obiang prize.
Spain could play an important role as the former colonial power, but it generally
has declined to apply pressure on Equatorial Guinea regarding human rights
issues. The Spanish government, however, also opposed the UNESCO prize.
In addition to the reported criminal inquiry against Teodorín Obiang in the US,
legal challenges are proceeding in France, Spain, and before the African
Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights alleging misuse of Equatorial
Guinea’s oil funds.
115
AFRICA
Eritrea
By any measure, the unelected government of President Isayas Afewerki is
oppressive. It allows no space for individual autonomy in any sphere—political,
economic, or religious. Arbitrary arrests, torture, and forced labor are rampant.
Rule by fiat is the norm. The Eritrean government refuses to implement a constitution
approved in 1997 containing civil and human rights provisions. Many
Eritreans conclude that they can avoid oppression only by fleeing the country at
risk to their lives.
Arbitrary Detention, “Enforced Disappearances,”
and Deaths in Custody
Thousands of Eritreans are incarcerated without charge, trial, or opportunity to
appeal. They are denied access to lawyers or family. The government releases no
information about numbers of prisoners, their places of confinement, whether
they remain alive, or why they are being held. Many detainees simply “disappear.”
Prisoners include high-ranking government officials arrested in September 2001
after they publicly criticized President Isayas’s leadership, as well as editors and
publishers of all private newspapers. None have been charged or brought to trial.
There have been persistent reports from former prison guards that over half the
officials and journalists arrested in 2001 are dead. Among those still held is a
journalist with dual Eritrean-Swedish citizenship, Dawit Isaac. In 2010 President
Isayas’s principal political advisor told Swedish interviewers the journalist was
jailed for conspiring to “facilitate” an Ethiopian invasion of Eritrea during the
1998-2000 war. The advisor refused to provide substantiation and reiterated the
“conspirators” would never be brought to trial or released.
Despite government secrecy, information about arrests leaks out. In May and June
2010 the government arrested several hundred citizens, most belonging to the
Afar ethnic group, according to external opposition websites. (An Afar insurgent
group has been active along Eritrea’s southeast Red Sea coast). About 30 women
members of an “unregistered” Christian church were arrested in December 2009.
Although members of such churches are frequently arrested, Eritrea’s information
WORLD REPORT 2011
116
minister said that “religion had nothing to do with” their arrests. “I’m sure they
were committing a crime,” he added. Their crime has never been disclosed. A
prominent former government journalist was arrested in March 2010 with no
explanation for the arrest. A government journalist arrested in 2009 along with 11
of her colleagues, also without explanation, was reported to have been placed in
solitary confinement in 2010.
Death in custody is common from ill-treatment, torture, starvation, and denial of
medical care. In April 2010 a woman held for over two years in a shipping container
because she would not renounce her unregistered religious faith died at
the Sawa military training center from maltreatment.
Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment
Torture and other forms of cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment in detention
are routine. Former detainees report that detention almost always includes severe
beatings, often leading to permanent bodily harm. Punishments also entail mock
drowning, being hung by the arms from trees, and being tied up in the sun in contorted
positions for hours or days.
Poor detention conditions often amount to torture. Many prisoners are held in
unlit underground bunkers and in shipping containers with broiling daytime and
freezing nighttime temperatures. A woman with deep visible scars from beatings
in detention told a BBC reporter in 2010 she had been held 23 hours a day in an
underground cell in “unbearable” heat and made to walk on sharp rocks and
thorns for an hour each day.
Restrictions on Freedom of Expression and Association
The government has monopolized all information media since 2001. No private
newspapers have been allowed since then and no political organization other
than the ruling People’s Front for Democracy and Justice (PFDJ) is permitted. All
unions are government-run. Nongovernmental public gatherings are prohibited.
Asking a critical question at a government-convened forum constitutes grounds
for arrest. No NGOs exist.
117
AFRICA
Homosexuality is illegal. In March 2010 a government minister told the United
Nations Human Rights Council that homosexuality is in “direct contradiction” to
Eritrean values and will not be legalized.
Restrictions on Religious Freedom
It is unlawful to practice a faith unless it is one of four “registered” religions:
Eritrean Orthodox, Muslim, Catholic, or Lutheran. Security forces arrest members
of “unregistered” religions, often during religious services. A religious-freedom
monitoring group reported that scores were arrested in 2010. Persons arrested for
this reason are subject to the same torture and abuse as other prisoners, but can
often obtain their release by renouncing their faith. Those who refuse sometimes
pay with their lives. Jehovah’s Witnesses are especially targeted; three have been
detained since 1994 for refusing to submit to military service. The patriarch of the
Orthodox Church, deposed by the government in 2006, remains under house
arrest without access to communication.
Indefinite Conscription and Forced Labor
By law, all able-bodied adult Eritreans must perform 18 months of national service.
In practice, national service is routinely prolonged indefinitely. National service
conscripts are paid a pittance and often used as cheap, involuntary labor on
projects personally benefiting ranking civilian and military leaders. They have
been used as forced labor to implement development projects. A former goldmine
employee reported that national service recruits were involuntarily assigned
to his gold-prospecting team, receiving only national service pay. Abuse of conscripts,
including torture, is common.
Prolonged service, harsh treatment, and starvation wages are principal reasons
for the hundreds of monthly desertions. President Isayas said in 2010 that most
deserters left for economic reasons or were “going on a picnic.”
Indefinite conscription also forces many Eritreans to flee the country. Despite a
“shoot-to-kill” policy for anyone caught trying to cross the country’s borders,
thousands of refugees pour out of Eritrea to Sudan and Ethiopia. In March 2010
the UN High Commissioner for Refugees reported that 50,000 Eritrean refugees
WORLD REPORT 2011
118
were housed in camps in Ethiopia, a third of them military deserters, with 1,800
Eritreans escaping monthly. The most prominent defections occurred in December
2009 when 12 Eritrean football players defected in Kenya and later obtained asylum
in Australia. Some escapees never make it. Border guards reportedly killed 12
refugees in March 2010 during an escape attempt, according to an unconfirmed
Sudanese press report.
United Nations Sanctions and Horn of Africa Relations
In December 2009 the UN Security Council imposed sanctions on Eritrea for defying
the council’s demands that it remove troops from territory in neighboring
Djibouti and stop providing political, financial, and logistical support to armed
insurgents in Somalia. Sanctions include an arms embargo, travel restrictions on
Eritrean officials and organizations designated by a UN sanctions committee, and
a freeze of their assets.
In June 2010, two years after Eritrea invaded Djibouti, it withdrew its troops and
agreed to binding demarcation of the border following Qatari mediation. During
the two years, President Isayas repeatedly called allegations that Eritrea had
invaded Djibouti “fabrications” and refused to meet with UN and African Union
investigators. About 230 Eritrean troops deserted to Djibouti in the months following
the June 2008 battle and received refugee status. Eritrean government
media have never informed the Eritrean public about the invasion, withdrawal, or
desertions.
A UN monitoring committee reported in March 2010 that “the scale and nature of
Eritrean government support [of Somali insurgent groups] had either diminished
or become less visible, but had not altogether ceased.” While detectable military
assistance had declined, Eritrea continued to provide political and, possibly,
financial support, according to the UN report. At year’s end, UN sanctions
remained in place.
Eritrea’s relations with Ethiopia remain strained. Ethiopia occupies Eritrean territory,
having reneged on a commitment, made in an agreement ending a two-year
war between the countries, to accept as final a border demarcated by a neutral
Border Commission. A Claims Commission in 2005 found Eritrea had violated
119
AFRICA
international law by attacking Ethiopia in 1998. Eritrea continues to try to destabilize
Ethiopia by funding and arming insurrection groups in that country.
Key International Actors
At least 14 mining companies from Canada, China, Australia, the United Kingdom,
India, and Libya are prospecting for gold and other minerals in Eritrea. A
Canadian mining company, Nevsun, Inc., is to begin commercial operations in
early 2011 at Bisha, 150 kilometers west of Asmara, the capital. The Eritrean government
owns 40 percent of the Bisha project. Mining income is unaffected by
United Nations sanctions for now.
Eritrea receives a modest amount of foreign aid. China was the largest contributor
in 2010, largely as a lender of soft loans. It announced a US$60 million loan for
mining activities, apparently used by Eritrea to buy a 30 percent stake in the
Bisha project (Eritrea already owned 10 percent by law). China also lent US$6 million
for food security programs. The African Development Bank donated US$20
million for higher education. Eritrea is in the second year of a five-year €122-million
European Commission grant for food production and infrastructure projects.
Little of the grant has been disbursed because of Eritrea’s failure to improve
human rights conditions. Other ongoing lenders and donors include the United
Arab Emirates, Iran, Qatar, and Libya; none announced new assistance programs
in 2010.
During the 2010 Universal Periodic Review (UPR) of human rights practices at the
UN Human Rights Council, Eritrea committed to acceding to the Convention
Against Torture. At year’s end it hadn’t done so, and there was no evidence that
its practices changed.
WORLD REPORT 2011
120
Ethiopia
The ruling Ethiopian People’s Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) consolidated
political control with a striking 99.6 percent victory in the May 2010 parliamentary
elections. The polls were peaceful, but were preceded by months of intimidation
of opposition party supporters and an extensive government campaign
aimed at increasing support for the ruling party, including by reserving access to
government services and resources to ruling party members.
Although the government released prominent opposition leader Birtukan
Midekssa from her most recent two-year stint in detention in October 2010, hundreds
of other political prisoners remain in jail and at risk of torture and ill-treatment.
The government’s crackdown on independent civil society and media did
not diminish by year’s end, dashing hopes that political repression would ease
following the May polls.
The 2010 Elections
Although the sweeping margin of the 2010 victory came as a surprise to many
observers, the ruling party’s win was predictable and echoed the results of local
elections in 2008. The 99.6 percent result was the culmination of the government’s
five-year strategy of systematically closing down space for political dissent
and independent criticism. European election observers said that the election fell
short of international standards.
In the run-up to the 2010 elections there were a few incidents of violent assaults,
including the March 1 killing of Aregawi Gebreyohannes, an opposition candidate
in Tigray. More often, voters were influenced by harassment, threats, and coercion.
The Ethiopian government’s grassroots-level surveillance machine extends
into almost every community in this country of 80 million people through an elaborate
system of kebele (village or neighborhood) and sub-kebele administrations,
through which the government exerts pressure on Ethiopia’s largely rural population.
Voters were pressured to join or support the ruling party through a combination of
incentives—including access to seeds, fertilizers, tools, and loans—and discrimi-
121
AFRICA
natory penalties if they support the opposition, such as denial of access to public
sector jobs, educational opportunities, and even food assistance. During April
and May officials and militia from local administrations went house to house
telling residents to register to vote and to vote for the ruling party or face reprisals
from local party officials, such as bureaucratic harassment or losing their homes
or jobs.
Political Repression, Pretrial Detention, and Torture
In one of Ethiopia’s few positive human rights developments in 2010, in October
the government released Birtukan Midekssa, the leader of the opposition Unity
for Democracy and Justice Party, after she spent 22 months in detention. Along
with many other opposition leaders, Birtukan was initially arrested in 2005 and
then pardoned in 2007 after spending almost two years in jail. She was rearrested
in December 2008. In December 2009 United Nations experts determined that
her detention was arbitrary and in violation of international law.
Hundreds of other Ethiopians have been arbitrarily arrested and detained and
sometimes subjected to torture and other ill-treatment. No independent domestic
or international organizations have access to all of Ethiopia’s detention facilities,
so it is impossible to determine the number of political prisoners and others who
have been arbitrarily detained.
Torture and ill-treatment have been used by Ethiopia’s police, military, and other
members of the security forces to punish a spectrum of perceived dissenters,
including university students, members of the political opposition, and alleged
supporters of insurgent groups, as well as alleged terrorist suspects. Secret
detention facilities and military barracks are most often used by Ethiopian security
forces for such activities. Although Ethiopia’s criminal code and other laws contain
provisions to protect fundamental human rights, they frequently go unenforced.
Very few incidents of torture have been investigated promptly and impartially,
much less prosecuted.
Torture and ill-treatment of detainees arrested on suspicion of involvement with
armed insurgent groups such as the Oromo Liberation Front and the Ogaden
National Liberation Front in Somali region remains a serious concern. The
WORLD REPORT 2011
122
123
AFRICA
Ethiopian military and other security forces are responsible for serious crimes in
the Somali region, including war crimes, but at this writing no credible efforts
have been taken by the government to investigate or prosecute those responsible
for the crimes.
Freedom of Expression and Association
The government intensified its campaign against independent voices and organizations,
as well as its efforts to limit Ethiopians’ access to information in late
2009 and 2010. By May, when the parliamentary elections took place, many of
Ethiopia’s leading independent journalists and human rights activists had fled
the country due to implicit and sometimes explicit threats. While a few independent
newspapers continue to publish, they exercise self-censorship.
In December 2009 government threats to invoke the 2009 Anti-Terrorism
Proclamation against the largest circulation independent newspaper, Addis
Neger, forced its editors to close the paper and flee the country. A few days later,
police beat an Addis Neger administrator responsible for winding down the newspaper’s
affairs.
Other newspapers were also threatened or attacked. The Committee to Protect
Journalists reported that 15 journalists fled the country between late 2009 and
May 2010. An official of the government’s media licensing office accused the
Awramba Times of “intentionally inciting and misguiding the public.” In August
unknown assailants smashed windows and doors of its office. In September
police interrogated the editor of Sendek after it published interviews with an
opposition party leader; the police purportedly were investigating whether the
newspaper was licensed.
In March a panel of the Supreme Court reinstated large fines against the owners
of four publishing companies convicted in 2007 for “outrages against the constitution”
solely for their coverage of the 2005 parliamentary elections. In February a
judge sentenced the editor of Al Quds to one year in prison for an article he wrote
two years earlier challenging Prime Minister Meles Zenawi’s characterization of
Ethiopia as an Orthodox Christian country.
WORLD REPORT 2011
124
Foreign media did not face much better. The government began jamming the
Voice of America language programs in Amharic, Oromo, and Tigrinya in February
2010 and followed by jamming Deutsche Welle; the jamming ended in August.
Prime Minister Meles personally justified the jamming on the grounds that the
broadcasters were “engaging in destabilizing propaganda” reminiscent of
Rwandan radio broadcasts advocating genocide.
The assault on independent institutions extends to nongovernmental organizations,
particularly those engaged in human rights work. The repressive Charities
and Societies Proclamation, enacted in 2009, forbids Ethiopian nongovernmental
organizations from doing work on human rights or governance if they receive
more than 10 percent of their funding from foreign sources.
The effects of the law on Ethiopia’s slowly growing civil society have been predictable
and devastating. The leading Ethiopian human rights groups have been
crippled by the law and many of their senior staff have fled the country due to the
sometimes blatant hostility toward independent activists.
All organizations were forced to re-register with the newly created Charities and
Societies Agency in late 2009. Some organizations have changed their mandates
to exclude reference to human rights work. Others, including the Ethiopian
Human Rights Council (EHRCO), Ethiopia’s oldest human rights monitoring organization,
and the Ethiopian Women’s Lawyers Association (EWLA), which engaged
in groundbreaking work on domestic violence and women’s rights, slashed their
budgets, staff, and operations. The government froze both groups’ bank accounts
in December 2009, allowing them access to only 10 percent of their funds.
Meanwhile, the government is encouraging a variety of ruling party-affiliated
organizations to fill the vacuum, including the Ethiopian Human Rights
Commission, a national human rights institution with no semblance of independence.
Key International Actors
Regional security concerns—particularly regarding Sudan’s upcoming referendum
and the increasing reach of Somalia’s Islamist armed groups—have thus far insulated
Ethiopia from increased human rights pressure from Western donors.
125
AFRICA
Ethiopia’s African neighbors have been mute in the face of Ethiopia’s deteriorating
human rights situation, while China, South Korea, and Japan have increased
engagement in 2010, although their contributions remain small compared to
Western aid. Chinese money largely flows into infrastructure, although trade also
increased 27 percent to more than US$800 million in the first six months of 2010,
according to The Economist.
Few governments commented publicly on the increasing political repression gripping
the country in the months before and after the May elections. In a rare
exception, the United States noted in late May that “an environment conducive to
free and fair elections was not in place even before Election Day.” The European
Union’s election observers also raised multiple concerns with the unlevel playing
field and constraints on freedom of assembly and expression. Yet even after the
election result proved the EPRDF’s consolidation of a single-party state, Ethiopia’s
donors continued to channel enormous sums of development assistance through
the government. The government received more than $3 billion in development
assistance in 2008 alone.
The final report of the UN Human Rights Council’s Universal Periodic Review of
Ethiopia’s human rights record was adopted in March 2010. Ethiopia committed
to ratifying the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. It rejected
recommendations that it repeal or amend the Charities and Societies
Proclamation and that it end the impunity of Ethiopia’s security forces.
WORLD REPORT 2011
126
Guinea
The June and November 2010 presidential elections marked a major step forward
in Guinea’s transition from military to civilian rule. While some irregularities and a
leadership crisis within the electoral commission marred the credibility of the
polls, they were nevertheless considered to be the first free and fair elections
since independence in 1958. However, serious bouts of intercommunal violence
and clashes between supporters of the two parties, and the excessive use of
lethal force by the security forces in responding to them, highlighted the fragility
of the security situation and pressing rule of law challenges.
At year’s end there was considerable optimism that the new government would
begin to address Guinea’s deeply entrenched human rights problems, notably a
longstanding culture of impunity, a bloated and poorly managed army, criminal
acts in the face of inadequate policing, striking deficiencies within the judicial
system, weak rule of law, and endemic corruption that deprives Guineans of key
economic rights.
Some of the officers who assumed control of the security forces in late 2009
made a concerted effort to instill discipline within the ranks. However, violations
against demonstrators and ordinary Guineans continued, and there was only limited
progress in ensuring accountability for past atrocities, notably the 2007 and
2009 massacres of unarmed demonstrators by members of the security forces.
International actors—including France, the United States, the European Union,
the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and the African
Union—intervened proactively to keep the transition to democratic rule on track,
but remained virtually silent on the need for justice for past crimes.
Political Developments
The elections brought to an end a period of profound political instability beginning
in December 2008, when Captain Moussa Dadis Camara took power in a
coup after the death of Lansana Conté, Guinea’s authoritarian president for 24
years. Throughout 2009 the military violently suppressed the opposition, culminating
in a large-scale massacre of some 150 demonstrators in September 2009
127
AFRICA
in the capital, Conakry. In December 2009 Camara was removed following an
assassination attempt against him, and his deputy, the more moderate General
Sékouba Konaté, took over, committing to move the country toward democratic
elections.
In January Dadis Camara formally handed over power to General Konaté, under
considerable pressure from international actors, by way of an agreement signed
in the Burkinabé capital Ouagadougou, which called for the formation of a transitional
government of national unity; an ad hoc parliamentary body comprised of
members of civil society, political parties, the security forces, and religious bodies;
and democratic elections within six months.
In the run-up to elections, there were few allegations of violations of freedom of
expression, peaceful assembly, association for political parties and movements,
and protection from political violence. However, clashes between supporters of
opposing candidates and violent protests against the electoral commission
resulted in at least six deaths.
Both rounds of elections were marred by procedural flaws including the late or
non-delivery of voting materials and vote tampering. Candidates mounted numerous
legal challenges to the election result. Despite the many problems, both
domestic and international election observers concluded that the elections were
generally free and fair.
Legislative Developments
The new constitution, adopted in April by the ad hoc parliamentary body, the
National Transition Council, includes several provisions which, if implemented,
could increase respect for human rights and good governance. These include
establishing Guinea’s first independent national human rights institution, requiring
public asset declarations by the president and his ministers, and creating a
Court of Audit mandated to conduct yearly financial audits of public institutions.
The constitution also strengthened the independence of the High Council of
Judges, responsible for the discipline, selection, and promotion of judges.
WORLD REPORT 2011
128
Conduct of the Security Forces
In October and November, members of the security forces used excessive lethal
force in responding to bouts of electoral and intercommunal violence; at least
eight protesters and passersby died, and scores of others were wounded as a
result. During the violence, the security forces also engaged in theft, robbery, and
assault. There were few attempts to investigate, discipline, or prosecute the soldiers
and policemen implicated in these criminal acts. The military hierarchy also
failed to put on administrative leave, pending investigation, soldiers and officers
known to have taken part in the September 2009 violence.
Numerous soldiers and civilians allegedly involved in the December 2009 assassination
attempt against Dadis Camara were beaten, assaulted and in the case of
at least seven soldiers, tortured to death, inside the Alpha Yaya Diallo military
camp in Conakry. Some 30 soldiers, detained in April after being accused of trying
to sabotage the transition to civilian rule, remain in arbitrary detention within
a gendarme camp at this writing.
The military hierarchy’s efforts to instill greater discipline included the creation of
a Military Police force, banning off-duty soldiers from wearing uniforms or carrying
guns in public places, and adopting a Use of Force Policy committing Guinean
security forces to internationally recognized best practices.
Meanwhile police were repeatedly implicated in extortion, solicitation of bribes,
and, in a few cases, sexual abuse of female detainees. Crime victims are frequently
required to pay for investigations, while authorities commonly fail to conduct
adequate investigations and, in some cases, free alleged criminals. Police
leadership made no effort to address these problems.
Detention Conditions
Severe shortages of judicial personnel, unprofessional conduct, poor recordkeeping,
and insufficient infrastructure and resources, continue to lead to widespread
detention-related abuses, notably prolonged pretrial detention and dreadfully
poor prison conditions. Prison and detention centers are severely overcrowded
and lack adequate nutrition, health care, and sanitation. The population of the
country’s largest detention facility—designed for 300 detainees—stands at over
129
AFRICA
900. Between 80-90 percent of prisoners in Guinea were held in prolonged pretrial
detention. Prison officials consistently fail to separate convicted and untried
prisoners and, in some centers, children from adults. Unpaid prison guards regularly
extort money from prisoners and their families, exacerbating problems of
hunger and malnutrition.
Progress included the late December 2009 release of some 15 military personnel
held for over one year by the coup government, and the May 15 release of some
100 prisoners held in extended pretrial detention for minor offenses.
Accountability for the September 28, 2009 Massacre
and Other Crimes
In December 2009 the International Commission of Inquiry led by the United
Nations issued its report confirming the killing of at least 156 people and the rape
of over 100, and concluding that the crimes perpetrated in Conakry on September
28, 2009, rose to the level of crimes against humanity. The inquiry identified several
military officers, including former coup leader Dadis Camara, as bearing
direct individual criminal responsibility for the crimes. This contradicted the government’s
investigation, published in February, which absolved Dadis Camara,
laid blame solely on his then-aide de camp Lieutenant Abubakar Diakité and the
soldiers he commanded, and set the number of dead at 63.
The then-government committed to bringing to justice the perpetrators of the
September 2009 violence, and in early 2010 appointed three investigating judges
to the case. However, there has been scant information on the investigation’s
progress, and no evidence of government efforts to locate the more than 100 bodies
believed to have been disposed of secretly by the security forces.
Meanwhile, there were no attempts to investigate, much less hold accountable,
members of the security forces responsible for the 2007 killing of some 130
demonstrators, or the several alleged crimes committed by the security forces in
2010.
WORLD REPORT 2011
130
131
AFRICA
The International Criminal Court, which in October 2009 confirmed that Guinea
was under preliminary examination, visited the country in February, May, and
November to assess progress made in national investigations.
Key International Actors
Efforts to undermine and delay the electoral process were met with consistent
interventions by ECOWAS, the UN, the AU, France, the US, and the EU. The international
response was organized through an International Contact Group for
Guinea (known as the Contact Group). High-level visits by the UN Security
Council’s special representative for West Africa, the presidents of Burkina Faso
and Mali, and the AU chairman, helped keep the electoral process on track. After
the intervention of the Contact Group, Malian General Siaka Toumani Sangaré
was appointed as head of the electoral commission. Some 70 EU and 200 ECOWAS
observers monitored the elections. However, Guinea’s partners remained
largely silent on the need for those responsible for the September 2009 violence
to be held accountable for their crimes.
With few exceptions, the sanctions, arms embargos, travel bans, and asset
freezes against former government members imposed in response to the 2009
violence remained in place. The US funded a private security company to train a
unit of the Presidential Guard. Israeli authorities fined an Israeli security firm for
negotiating a deal to provide weapons and military training to the former military
government in violation of Israeli rules governing such contracts.
The UN Security Council held several formal and informal consultations on
Guinea. In July the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights established a mission in Guinea following a recommendation contained in
the report by the International Commission of Inquiry. The office is tasked with
helping establish a national human rights institution, undertaking judicial
reforms, and combating impunity. In May 2010 Guinea underwent the UN Human
Rights Council’s Universal Periodic Review during which Guinea committed to
reform the judiciary and security services, and address rampant impunity.
WORLD REPORT 2011
132
Kenya
In a historic move, Kenya’s citizens voted overwhelmingly in favor of accountability
and reform when they supported a new constitution by a two-thirds majority in
August 2010. Constitutional reform was among the steps to which the coalition
government agreed after the 2007 post-election violence. It paves the way for
restructuring the government, establishing a land commission, and carrying out
sweeping changes to the police and judiciary. The year also saw the prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court open an investigation into the post-election violence.
Kenya continues to suffer the regional effects of Somalia’s crisis, with a
steady flow of refugees entering the country; some suffered serious abuses at the
hands of Kenyan police as they tried to find safety.
A New Constitution
The new constitution, supported by 67 percent of Kenyan voters on August 4, was
the culmination of four decades of effort. The new coalition government committed
to a new constitution, among other reforms, after post-election violence in
2007 in which 1,300 people died and hundreds of thousands were displaced.
The new constitution addresses several longstanding concerns, namely the concentration
of power in the executive, the absence of checks and balances, and
the use of land as a tool of political patronage. It creates a smaller cabinet of ministers
who do not have to be parliament members; reforms the legislature by creating
an upper house, the Senate; and devolves considerable power to a new tier
of county governments and governors. In an effort to address the judiciary’s lack
of independence, the new constitution creates a new judiciary service commission
to nominate judges, creates a new post of director of public prosecutions,
and requires parliamentary approval for appointing the attorney general. It also
enshrines in law a land commission, which removes the president’s ability to
allocate land, review existing land holdings, and set minimum and maximum
holdings of land.
Celebration of the constitution was marred by the presence of Sudanese
President Omar al-Bashir, who is wanted on ICC arrest warrants for genocide,
crimes against humanity, and war crimes. The government’s invitation to al-
133
AFRICA
Bashir and its failure to cooperate with the ICC to arrest him call into question its
commitment to cooperate with the court’s investigation.
Impunity and Accountability for Post-Election Violence
Impunity remains a pervasive problem in Kenya. In 2008 the coalition government
promised to establish a national tribunal to investigate and prosecute those most
responsible for the post-election violence, or refer the crimes to the ICC. It failed
to do either, and in November 2009 the ICC prosecutor sought authority from an
ICC pre-trial chamber to begin investigations in Kenya. On March 31, 2010, the
chamber granted permission by a vote of two judges to one, after which the ICC
prosecutor announced an ambitious agenda to bring at least two cases against
four to six individuals by the end of 2010.
While a limited number of cases are being investigated by the ICC, Kenya has not
credibly and effectively investigated and prosecuted other perpetrators of the
post-election violence.
Witness protection emerged as a key challenge to investigations. Threats against
individuals who witnessed post-election violence, including some who testified
before the Commission to Investigate the Post-Election Violence, increased after
the prosecutor announced that he would seek to open a Kenya investigation. In
May the president signed into law amendments to the Witness Protection Act, a
key step in reforming Kenya’s witness protection system. The amendments create
a new witness protection agency with increased independence, but resources and
time are needed to implement changes.
There have been no investigations or forthcoming prosecutions for war crimes
committed by the insurgent Sabaot Land Defence Force or Kenyan security forces
during the 2006-2008 Mount Elgon conflict; abuses by Kenyan army and police
units implicated in using excessive force in disarmament operations in Mandera
and Samburu districts; or extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances of
suspected Mungiki gang members by police officers. There were no developments
in finding the killers of Oscar Kamau Kingara and John Paul Oulu, human rights
defenders from the Oscar Foundation Free Legal Aid Clinic who were gunned
down in Nairobi in 2009.
WORLD REPORT 2011
134
135
AFRICA
WORLD REPORT 2011
136
There were two achievements in the efforts against impunity during 2010.
In a landmark ruling on February 4, 2010, the African Commission on Human and
Peoples’ Rights condemned Kenya’s government for expelling the Endorois people
from their traditional land for tourism. It ruled the eviction—with minimal compensation—
violated the Endorois’ right as an indigenous people to property,
health, culture, religion, and natural resources. It ordered Kenya to compensate
and restore them to their historic land. It was the first international tribunal ruling
to find a violation of the right to development.
In another unprecedented judgment, Kenya’s constitutional court awarded
US$500,000 compensation to 21 political prisoners who were tortured during the
government of former president Daniel Arap Moi, who left office in 2002. The
court had previously ruled that the case, from the period when Moi was in office,
could not be heard.
Police Reform
In January 2010 President Mwai Kibaki set up the Police Reforms Implementation
Committee to monitor the progress of reforms. The committee included members
of civil society. Key aspects of the reforms, such as establishing an independent
police oversight board, are provided for in the new constitution, but other recommendations,
such as merging the administration police with the regular force, are
not.
Eight Kenyans were transferred illegally to Uganda following the bombings in
Kampala, Uganda’s capital, in July and were allegedly mistreated in detention.
Refugees
The overstretched refugee camps in Dadaab, northeastern Kenya, continued to
receive thousands of new arrivals during the year, including some 34,000 people
between January and September.
Many of the new refugees from Somalia endured serious abuses at the hands of
Kenyan police when they crossed the officially closed border. These included violence,
arbitrary arrest, unlawful detention in inhuman and degrading conditions,
137
AFRICA
threats of deportation, and wrongful prosecution for “unlawful presence” to extort
money from the new arrivals—men, women, and children alike. In some cases,
police raped women. Police also failed to diligently investigate and prosecute
rapes within the refugee community.
In early 2010 hundreds, and possibly thousands, of Somalis unable to pay extortion
demands were sent back to Somalia in flagrant violation of Kenyan and international
law. The Kenyan government announced an internal investigation into
the allegations. In October the government promised to reconstruct the screening
center at Liboi on the Somali border “soon.” However, Kenya continued to deny
almost 400,000 camp-based refugees the right to free movement in the country,
in violation of international law.
Women’s and Children’s Right to Health
Partly due to health care system failures, tens of thousands of Kenyan women
and girls die each year in childbirth and pregnancy, while more suffer preventable
injuries, serious infections, and disabilities. Maternal deaths represent 15 percent
of all deaths for women of reproductive age—one in 39 women in Kenya die during
childbirth according to the United Nations—while an estimated 300,000
women and girls are living with untreated fistula. Kenya’s restrictive abortion
laws, which criminalize abortion generally, contribute to maternal death and disability.
Unsafe abortions cause about 30 percent of maternal deaths.
The Kenyan government fails to provide adequate pain treatment and palliative
care for hundreds of thousands of children with diseases such as cancer or
HIV/AIDS. Oral morphine, an essential medicine for pain treatment, is currently
out of stock. Kenya’s few palliative care services, which provide pain treatment
but also counseling and support to families of chronically ill patients, lack programs
for children.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Kenya continues to punish consensual adult sexual conduct with up to 14 years
imprisonment. On February 11, following unsubstantiated rumors of a “gay wedding”
in the coastal town of Mtwapa, influential Muslim and Christian religious
WORLD REPORT 2011
138
139
AFRICA
leaders demanded the closure of the Mtwapa office of the Kenya Medical
Research Institute (KEMRI), which conducts research on HIV/AIDS with men who
have sex with men. The religious leaders issued a statement promising to “flush
out gays” in Mtwapa.
On February 12, a group of over 200 individuals–armed with sticks, stones, and
other makeshift weapons–surrounded KEMRI. Smaller mobs went to the homes of
people suspected of being gay. The police attempted to protect the individuals
targeted by the mob by taking them into custody. Another mob severely beat up a
KEMRI volunteer on February 13. Two individuals were beaten up in Mombasa on
suspicion of being gay, on February 13 and 16 respectively.
In Mtwapa, Mombasa, and elsewhere, lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
people went into hiding in fear for their lives, and HIV/AIDS outreach, testing, and
treatment among men who have sex with men remains compromised by the
attacks and the continuing climate of homophobia.
Key International Actors
Kenya’s partners in Europe and North America are united in pushing for accountability
for the election violence and an end to impunity, key conditions of the
reform agenda that Kofi Annan brokered in early 2008. The United States and the
European Union continued to threaten travel bans against key suspects and government
members to encourage Kenya to pursue reform. The US continues to support
Kenya’s military and police, particularly their counterterrorism efforts, and
thus has some influence over the conduct of those forces.
Kenya cited a July 2009 decision by the African Union not to cooperate with the
ICC in arresting al-Bashir to justify its failure to do so during his August visit. In
the face of criticism over al-Bashir’s visit, including from many of Kenya’s international
partners, officials repeated their commitment to work with the ICC in its
Kenya investigation. Kenya also concluded an agreement in September with the
ICC to facilitate the court’s work within its territory. Nonetheless, concerns over
Kenya’s willingness to fulfill its commitments to cooperate with the ICC persist in
the wake of al-Bashir’s visit.
WORLD REPORT 2011
140
Regionally, the conflict in Somalia where the al-Shabaab militia continues to
strengthen and the fragility of Somalia’s transitional government remain pressing
security concerns for Kenya. The 2011 referendum on the status of neighboring
Southern Sudan is a key issue that could have major implications for Kenya as a
frontline state and host to refugees.
141
AFRICA
Liberia
During 2010 the Liberian government made some gains in consolidating the rule
of law, ensuring sound fiscal management, and improving access to key economic
rights, including health care and primary education.
However, inadequate police response to persistent violent incidents, continued
deficiencies in the judiciary and criminal justice sectors, and the failure to prosecute
civil servants implicated in large-scale embezzlement resulted in increased
domestic and , to a lesser extent, international criticism of the government of
President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf. Concern about these weaknesses was heightened
by several risk factors, notably high unemployment, communal tensions, and the
upcoming 2011 presidential and parliamentary elections.
Meanwhile, there was little progress in ensuring justice for victims of war crimes
committed during Liberia’s years of armed conflict, or in implementing the recommendations
of the 2009 report of Liberia’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission
(TRC).
Insecurity and Police Conduct
High rates of crime, including armed robbery and rape, as well as violent protests
over layoffs and land disputes, including one in Lofa county that left four dead,
continued to be of major concern in 2010.
The undisciplined, poorly managed, and ill-equipped Liberian police were challenged
to maintain law and order. On several occasions, their failure to do so
necessitated the intervention of United Nations peacekeepers, deployed to
Liberia since 2003. Lack of public confidence in the police and criminal justice
systems led people to take justice into their own hands, resulting in mob attacks
on alleged criminals and others, causing several deaths.
Liberian police continue to engage in unprofessional and sometimes abusive and
criminal behavior, including frequent absenteeism, extortion, bribery, assault,
and rape. They frequently fail to adequately investigate alleged criminals, and
when they make arrests, suspects are often freed. Lack of funding for transporta-
WORLD REPORT 2011
142
tion and communications equipment further undermines the effectiveness of the
national police, especially in rural areas.
However, the police demonstrated some improvement in 2010. Crime levels in
Monrovia, the capital, dropped somewhat as a result of more proactive patrolling.
The actions of two new elite squads – the Emergency Response Unit and the
Police Support Unit – led to multiple arrests and showed promise in responding
to unrest. The police leadership showed an increased willingness and ability to
respond to complaints of misconduct within the force, and implemented a performance
appraisal system to monitor individual officers, and a database to track
cases of misconduct.
Judiciary Weaknesses
Persistent deficiencies in Liberia’s judiciary led to widespread abuses of the right
to due process and undermined efforts to address impunity for the perpetrators
of crimes. The problems include insufficient judicial personnel, including prosecutors,
public defenders, and clerks; an inadequate number of courtrooms; logistical
constraints, including insufficient computers, photocopiers, and vehicles to
transport prisoners and witnesses to court; archaic rules of procedure; and poor
case management. Witnesses’ refusal to testify, jurors’ willingness to accept
bribes, and unprofessional and corrupt practices by judicial staff also undermined
progress.
Because of the courts’ inability to adequately process cases, hundreds of prisoners
were held in extended pretrial detention in overcrowded jails and detention
centers that lack basic sanitation, nutrition, and health care; in 2010 just over 10
percent of the roughly 1,700 individuals detained in Liberia’s prisons had been
convicted of a crime. The number of jailbreaks—at least 12 in 2010—illuminated
continuing weaknesses in the criminal justice system. Improvements included the
deployment of over 20 public defenders throughout Liberia and a mobile “fast
track” court operating out of the Monrovia Central Prison, which helped to clear
the backlog of pretrial detainees.
143
AFRICA
Harmful Traditional Practices
Serious abuses and some deaths resulting from harmful traditional practices continued
to occur in 2010, in part because of distrust of the judicial system and the
absence of law enforcement and judicial authorities. These included ritual
killings, including one case in which alleged perpetrators were local government
officials; killings of alleged witches; and “trials by ordeal” in which suspects of
crimes are forced to swallow the poisonous sap of a tree or endure burning, their
guilt or innocence determined by whether they survive. The government condemned
these practices and on several occasions the police and judiciary took
action against alleged perpetrators.
Sexual Violence
The incidence of rape of women and girls continued to be alarmingly high in
2010, despite the establishment in 2009 of a dedicated court for sexual violence.
The majority of victims were under the age of 16. While public reporting and the
police response to reports of rape improved, deficiencies in the justice system
and the reluctance of witnesses to testify hampered efforts to prosecute cases.
Corruption
While authorities made progress in conducting regular audits and putting programs
in place to improve public finance management, these efforts made little
headway in curbing official malfeasance. Corruption scandals—including allegations
involving the ministers of information, interior, and gender; the inspector
general of police and police deputy commissioner for administration; the head of
the Telecommunications Authority and high-level members of the Finance
Ministry and Central Bank—resulted in few investigations and only two convictions,
with a third case pending. The work of the Anti-Corruption Commission, created
in 2008, was hampered by insufficient funds, personnel, and authority to
independently prosecute cases. The government’s refusal to prosecute some
high-ranking civil servants and to take action against individuals cited in a controversial
financial audit led to the perception that the president lacks the will to
address the problem. Corrupt practices in large part gave rise to the armed con-
WORLD REPORT 2011
144
flicts that wracked Liberia in the 1990s and ended in 2003, and have long undermined
the provision of basic education and health care to the most vulnerable.
The Liberia Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, in effect since 2009, was
implemented over the course of the year, but the lack of government control over
some mining areas undermined adherence to the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme, the global effort to end the trade in conflict minerals.
Legislative Developments
In September the parliament passed the Freedom of Information Bill, and also
finally constituted the Independent National Commission on Human Rights, seven
years after it was mandated by the Comprehensive Peace Agreement to protect
human rights and oversee the implementation of the TRC’s recommendations.
Problems marred the selection of the commission’s members—including a flawed
vetting procedure, inadequate involvement of civil society groups, and the initial
selection of a member with close ties to the president, and of other members
who lacked relevant experience—generating concerns about the president’s commitment
to the commission and its potential for independence.
Truth and Reconciliation Commission and Accountability
The Liberian government made no progress in ensuring the prosecution of those
responsible for war crimes committed during the armed conflicts, and made little
effort to implement the recommendations of the TRC.
The TRC, mandated to investigate human rights violations committed between
1979 and 2003, presented its final report to the government in December 2009,
and concluded its four-year mandate in June 2010. Its key recommendations
included dispensing reparations; establishing a criminal tribunal to prosecute the
most notorious perpetrators; barring from public office scores of former supporters
of the warring factions, including the current president; and instituting an
informal village-based reconciliation mechanism. Implementing the recommendations
was slowed by disagreement about whether the executive, legislature, or
the Independent National Commission on Human Rights should take the lead, as
well as legitimate questions about the constitutionality of some recommenda-
145
AFRICA
tions. The poor quality of sections of the report, notably the lack of solid factual
evidence about those recommended for prosecution and bans from public office,
further undermined its findings. During the year the president asked the Justice
Ministry, the Law Reform Commission, and the Liberian National Bar Association
to study the legal and constitutional implications of the recommendations.
However, the slow pace of this consultation process raised questions about the
president’s will to move things forward.
Liberian Army
The program funded and led by the United States to recruit and train a new
2,000-member Liberian army completed its work in December 2009. Continued
training and mentoring of the officer corps was conducted throughout the year by
some 60 US military personnel. Soldiers nonetheless committed numerous criminal
acts, which were mostly addressed by the judiciary. The new army has yet to
put in place a court martial board or military tribunal.
Key International Actors
Persistent weaknesses in security and rule of law institutions despite considerable
foreign aid generated concern among Liberia’s key international and development
partners, most notably the UN and US.
In July Liberia reached the completion point under the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries Initiative, bringing the total external debt cancelled since 2007 to
US$4.6 billion. The US is Liberia’s largest donor, and in fiscal year 2009-2010
contributed more than $450 million to support democratization, security sector
reform, girls’ education, and reconstruction efforts, including some $250 million
in support of the UN Mission in Liberia (UNMIL).
In December 2009 the UN Security Council renewed for one year the travel ban on
persons deemed a threat to peace in Liberia, as well as asset freezes on those
sanctioned. The council also renewed the mandate for the panel of experts monitoring
the implementation of sanctions and resource exploitation, but lifted an
arms embargo in place since 2003. In September 2010, the council renewed
UNMIL’s mandate for one year. The UN Peacebuilding Commission will provide a
WORLD REPORT 2011
146
$25 million grant to support programs in justice and rule of law, as well as to
combat high youth unemployment.
147
AFRICA
Nigeria
The May inauguration of President Goodluck Jonathan, following the death from
natural causes of President Umaru Yar’Adua, brought hope for improvements in
Nigeria’s deeply entrenched human rights problems. Jonathan’s removal of the
attorney general, under whose watch impunity flourished, and his appointment of
a respected academic to replace the discredited head of the electoral commission,
who presided over phenomenally flawed elections, were widely viewed as
positive first steps. Yet major challenges remain.
During the year, episodes of intercommunal violence claimed hundreds of lives,
while widespread police abuses and the mismanagement and embezzlement of
Nigeria’s vast oil wealth continued unabated. Perpetrators of all classes of human
rights violations enjoyed near-total impunity. A spate of politically motivated
killings by Islamist militants in the north, and continued kidnappings and violence
by Niger Delta militants – including the brazen Independence Day bombing
in Abuja, the capital, for which they claimed responsibility –raised concern about
stability in the run-up to planned 2011 general elections.
The National Assembly again failed to pass legislation to improve transparency,
notably the Freedom of Information bill, but approved a watered-down version of
an electoral reform bill. Nigeria’s judiciary continues to exercise a degree of independence
in electoral matters and has, since 2007, overturned more than onethird
of the ruling People’s Democratic Party (PDP) gubernatorial election victories
on grounds of electoral malpractices and other irregularities. Meanwhile free
speech and the independent press remained fairly robust. Foreign partners took
some important steps to confront endemic corruption in Nigeria, but appeared
reluctant to exert meaningful pressure on the government over its poor human
rights record.
Intercommunal and Political Violence
Intercommunal, political, and sectarian violence has claimed the lives of more
than 14,500 people since the end of military rule in 1999. During 2010, episodes
of intercommunal violence in Plateau State, in central Nigeria, left over 900 dead.
In January several hundred were killed in sectarian clashes in and around the
WORLD REPORT 2011
148
state capital of Jos, including a massacre on January 19 that claimed the lives of
more than 150 Muslims in the nearby town of Kuru Karama. Shortly thereafter, on
March 7, at least 200 Christians were massacred in Dogo Nahawa and several
other nearby villages. In the months that followed more than 100 people died in
smaller-scale attacks and reprisal killings in Jos and surrounding communities.
Meanwhile intercommunal clashes in Nassarawa, Niger, Adamawa, Gombe,
Taraba, Ogun, Akwa Ibom, and Cross River states left more than 110 dead and
hundreds more displaced. State and local government policies that discriminate
against “non-indigenes”—people who cannot trace their ancestry to what are said
to be the original inhabitants of an area—exacerbate intercommunal tensions.
Widespread poverty and poor governance in Nigeria have created an environment
where militant groups thrive. In Bauchi State in December 2009, violent clashes
between government security forces and rival factions of a militant Islamist group
known as Kala Kato left several dozen dead, including more than 20 children.
Between July and October 2010, suspected members of the Boko Haram Islamist
group killed eight police officers, an Islamic cleric, a prominent politician, and
several community leaders in the northern city of Maiduguri, and in September
attacked a prison in Bauchi, freeing nearly 800 prisoners, including more than
100 suspected Boko Haram members.
Targeted killings and political violence increased ahead of the 2011 elections. In
January 2010 Dipo Dina, an opposition candidate in the 2007 gubernatorial elections
in Ogun State, was gunned down. In a series of attacks in Bauchi State in
August, gunmen killed two of the state governor’s aides and a security guard for
an opposition candidate for governor, and injured several others. Meanwhile, the
Nigerian government has still not held accountable those responsible for the
2007 election violence that left at least 300 dead.
Conduct of Security Forces
Again in 2010, members of the Nigeria Police Force were widely implicated in the
extortion of money and the arbitrary arrest and torture of criminal suspects and
others. They solicited bribes from victims of crimes to initiate investigations, and
from suspects to drop investigations. They were also implicated in numerous
extrajudicial killings of persons in custody. Meanwhile senior police officials
149
AFRICA
embezzle and mismanage funds intended for basic police operations. They also
enforce a perverse system of “returns,” in which rank-and-file officers pay a share
of the money extorted from the public up the chain of command.
The government lacked the will to reform the police force and hold officers
accountable for these and other serious abuses. At this writing, none of the
police officers responsible for the brazen execution of the Boko Haram leader,
Mohammed Yusuf, and dozens of his suspected supporters in Maiduguri in July
2009 have been prosecuted. Similarly, the government has still not held members
of the police and military accountable for their unlawful 2008 killing of more
than 130 people during sectarian violence in Jos, or for the 2001 massacre by the
military of more than 200 people in Benue State, and the military’s complete
destruction of the town of Odi, Bayelsa State, in 1999.
Government Corruption
Nigeria made limited progress with its anti-corruption campaign in 2010. The
national Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC) indicted more than a
dozen politicians and senior government officials on corruption charges, including
a former federal government minister, a former state governor, and a handful
of state officials. However, the EFCC failed to indict other senior politicians implicated
in the massive looting of the state treasury, including former Rivers State
governor Peter Odili.
Key convictions included that of a powerful banker, sentenced to six months in
prison in October, and a former head of the national anti-drug agency, sentenced
to four years in prison in April for taking bribes from a criminal suspect, the
longest sentence handed down to a government official to date. Meanwhile, the
governing elite continues to squander and siphon off the country’s tremendous
oil wealth, leaving poverty, malnutrition, and mortality rates among the world’s
highest.
Targeted attacks against anti-corruption officials increased significantly in 2010.
Gunmen in three separate incidents shot and killed anti-corruption personnel,
including the head of the forensic unit and a former senior investigator. Still,
WORLD REPORT 2011
150
151
AFRICA
Nuhu Ribadu, the former EFCC head, returned to Nigeria in June, after fleeing the
country in 2009 following what he believed to be an assassination attempt.
Violence and Poverty in the Niger Delta
Following a lull in violence in the oil-rich Niger Delta, attacks increased, including
kidnappings of schoolchildren, wealthy individuals, and oil workers, and car
bombings in Delta State, Bayelsa State, and Abuja. The 2009 amnesty – in which
a few thousand people, including top militant commanders, surrendered
weapons in exchange for cash stipends – led to a reduction of attacks on oil facilities
in 2010, but their disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration have been
poorly planned and executed. The amnesty has further entrenched impunity, and
the government has made little effort to address environmental degradation,
endemic state and local government corruption, or political sponsorship of armed
groups, which drive and underlie violence and poverty in the region.
Human Rights Concerns in the Context of Sharia
In northern Nigeria 12 state governments apply Sharia law as part of their criminal
justice systems, which include sentences such as the death penalty, amputations,
and floggings that amount to cruel, inhuman, and degrading punishment.
Serious due process concerns also exist in Sharia proceedings, and evidentiary
standards in the Sharia codes discriminate against women, particularly in adultery
cases.
Death Penalty
There are about 870 inmates, including over 30 juvenile offenders, on death row
in Nigeria. Although Nigeria has an informal moratorium on the use of the death
penalty, state governors in 2010 announced plans to consider resuming executions
to ease prison congestion.
Freedom of Expression and the Media
Civil society and the independent press openly criticize the government and its
policies, allowing for robust public debate. Yet journalists are subject to intimida-
WORLD REPORT 2011
152
tion and violence when reporting on issues implicating the political and economic
elite. Edo Ugbagwu, a journalist with The Nation, one of Nigeria’s largest newspapers,
was gunned down at his Lagos home in April. In Jos two journalists with a
local Christian newspaper were killed in sectarian clashes in April, while a Muslim
journalist from Radio Nigeria was badly beaten in March, in an attack the journalist
said was incited by a state government official.
Key International Actors
Because of Nigeria’s role as a regional power, leading oil exporter, and major contributor
of troops to United Nations peacekeeping missions, foreign governments—
including the United States and the United Kingdom—have been reluctant
to publicly criticize Nigeria’s human rights record.
US government officials did speak out forcefully against the country’s endemic
government corruption and took an important first step to back up these words by
revoking the visa of former attorney general Michael Aondoakaa. The UK government
continued to play a leading role in international efforts to combat money
laundering by corrupt Nigerian officials, demonstrated by the May arrest in Dubai
of the powerful former Delta State governor, James Ibori, on an Interpol warrant
from the UK, and the conviction of two of his associates in an English court in
June for laundering his funds. However, in fiscal year 2010, the UK increased
funding to £140 million (US$225 million) in aid to Nigeria, including security sector
aid, without demanding accountability for Nigerian officials and members of
the security forces implicated in corrupt practices and serious human rights abuses.
The UN secretary-general expressed his concern about the intercommunal violence
in Jos, but at this writing a mission by his special adviser on the prevention
of genocide is stalled due to resistance from the Nigerian government.
153
AFRICA
Rwanda
Rwanda’s development and economic growth continued in 2010, but there were
numerous violations of civil and political rights, and the government failed to fulfill
its professed commitment to democracy. The year was marked by political
repression and restrictions on freedom of expression and association in the runup
to the presidential election. In August President Paul Kagame was re-elected
with 93.8 percent of the vote in an election in which he faced no meaningful challenge.
None of the new opposition parties were able to participate in the elections.
Opposition party members, independent journalists, and other government
critics were subjected to persistent intimidation and harassment, including
arrests, detention, ill-treatment, death threats, and at least two extrajudicial
killings. A prominent government opponent in exile narrowly escaped an attempt
on his life. Human rights organizations encountered hostility and numerous
obstacles to their work.
Trials in the gacaca courts—community-based courts trying cases related to the
1994 genocide—began to wind down, though the deadline for their closure was
postponed several times. The imminent completion of the gacaca process
opened the way for further justice reforms. However, continuing concerns about
fair trials prevented other states, as well as the Tanzania-based International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), from transferring genocide suspects to
Rwanda.
The report of the mapping exercise on the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights documented
grave crimes allegedly committed by the Rwandan army in 1996 and 1997.
Attacks on Government Opponents
None of the three new opposition parties were able to nominate candidates in
the presidential election. Local authorities prevented the FDU-Inkingi and the
Democratic Green Party from registering as parties. Meetings of the PS-Imberakuri
were disrupted, sometimes violently, by dissident members and other individuals.
WORLD REPORT 2011
154
The PS-Imberakuri, registered in 2009, was taken over in March 2010 by dissident
members believed to have been manipulated by the ruling Rwandan Patriotic
Front (RPF). In late 2009 the Senate summoned the party’s president, Bernard
Ntaganda, on accusations of “genocide ideology.” In June the police arrested
Ntaganda and raided his house and the party office. The charges against him
included endangering national security, inciting ethnic divisions, and organizing
demonstrations without authorization. By November he was still in prison awaiting
trial.
Victoire Ingabire, president of the FDU-Inkingi, who returned to Rwanda in January
after 16 years in exile, was arrested in April on charges of “genocide ideology,”
“divisionism,” and collaboration with the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of
Rwanda (FDLR), an armed group active in eastern DRC and composed in part by
individuals who participated in the 1994 Rwanda genocide. Ingabire was released
on bail with travel restrictions, but in October was re-arrested following allegations
of involvement in forming an armed group. In November she remained in
detention awaiting trial.
Members of the three new opposition parties received threats related to their
party activities. Several members of the PS-Imberakuri and the FDU-Inkingi were
arrested for attempting to hold a demonstration in June. Some were released, but
others were arrested in July. Several were ill-treated by police in detention. In July
the Green Party’s vice-president, André Kagwa Rwisereka, was found dead, his
body mutilated, outside the town of Butare. The circumstances of his death
remain unclear.
Peter Erlinder, an American and one of Victoire Ingabire’s defense lawyers, was
arrested in May on charges of “genocide denial and minimization,” and “spreading
malicious rumors that could endanger national security.” He was released on
bail three weeks later. The charges against Erlinder, who is also a defense lawyer
at the ICTR, related primarily to articles published in previous years in which he
questioned key events surrounding the genocide.
On June 19 Faustin Kayumba Nyamwasa, a Rwandan general in exile in South
Africa since February, was seriously injured in a murder attempt in Johannesburg.
Once a close ally of President Kagame and former chief-of-staff of the Rwandan
155
AFRICA
army, Nyamwasa has become an outspoken government critic since early 2010.
South African authorities arrested several suspects. Rwanda has requested
Nyamwasa’s extradition, alleging he was behind a series of grenade attacks in
Kigali earlier in the year.
Deogratias Mushayidi, a former journalist and outspoken government opponent
in exile, was arrested in Burundi in March and handed over to Rwandan authorities.
In September Mushayidi was found guilty and sentenced to life imprisonment
on three charges: spreading rumors inciting civil disobedience, recruiting an
armed group to overthrow the government, and using forged documents. He was
also charged with four other offenses, including “genocide ideology” and “divisionism.”
The government continued to use a law on “genocide ideology”—a broad and illdefined
offense—as a tool to silence independent opinion and criticism. In a welcome
development, the minister of justice announced that the law was being
reviewed.
Clampdown on Independent Media
In April the government-affiliated Media High Council suspended the independent
newspapers Umuseso and Umuvugizi for six months, then called for their definitive
closure, alleging, among other things, that some of their articles threatened
national security. The editors of both newspapers fled into exile after receiving
threats. Copies of the first edition of The Newsline, an English-language newspaper
produced by exiled Umuseso journalists, were seized at the Uganda-Rwanda
border in July.
In February Umuseso editor Didas Gasana, former editor Charles Kabonero, and
journalist Richard Kayigamba were found guilty of defamation; they received sentences
of between six months’ and a year’s imprisonment and were ordered to
pay a large fine. In April Umuvugizi editor Jean-Bosco Gasasira was also found
guilty of defamation and fined.
Umuvugizi journalist Jean-Léonard Rugambage, who had been investigating sensitive
cases including the attempted murder of Nyamwasa, was shot dead in June
WORLD REPORT 2011
156
outside his home in Kigali. He had reported being under increased surveillance in
the days before his death.
Three journalists with the Umurabyo newspaper were arrested in July in connection
with articles published in their newspaper; two remain in detention at this
writing, while the other was only held for one day.
Obstructions to the Work of Human Rights Organizations
Human rights organizations operated in a difficult and hostile climate. Rwandan
human rights groups, weakened by years of intimidation, received threats and
were publicly accused by government officials of supporting the government’s
overthrow and armed groups linked to the genocide. Civil society itself was divided:
organizations close to the government publicly denounced those who were
more critical, such as the LDGL and LIPRODHOR, two of the few independent
human rights groups left in the country. Under pressure from individuals close to
the government, several organizations disowned a joint civil society submission
on Rwanda for the Universal Periodic Review at the UN Human Rights Council.
International nongovernmental organizations, including Human Rights Watch,
were repeatedly criticized and discredited by senior government officials and the
pro-government media. Immigration authorities cancelled the work visa in March
of Human Rights Watch’s senior researcher in Kigali, rejected her second visa
application, and forced her to leave the country in April.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In December 2009 the parliament took a positive initiative by voting against criminalizing
homosexuality. However, continuing negative comments on homosexuality
by some public officials and newspapers reinforced the stigma faced by sexual
minorities.
Gacaca Trials
Gacaca courts were due to end their genocide trials in 2010, but the definitive
completion of the process was repeatedly delayed. The government is developing
157
AFRICA
mechanisms to handle outstanding genocide cases and to adjudicate alleged
miscarriages of justice by gacaca jurisdictions.
Gacaca courts have prosecuted around 1.5 million cases with involvement from
local communities across the country. The conduct of trials before gacaca courts
has been mixed. Some judges delivered fair and objective judgments. Others
handed down heavy sentences, including life imprisonment in isolation, on the
basis of very little evidence. A number of witnesses and judges proved vulnerable
to corruption and outside influence, affecting the outcome of trials and undermining
confidence in the courts. Some defense witnesses were afraid to testify for
fear of being accused of genocide themselves, and there were numerous allegations
that gacaca courts sacrificed the truth to satisfy political interests.
Cases Related to the Democratic Republic of Congo
Laurent Nkunda, former leader of the Congolese rebel group the National
Congress for the Defense of the People (CNDP), remaied illegally detained under
house arrest, without charge or trial, since January 2009. Repeated attempts to
get his case heard in Rwandan courts were thwarted on the basis of legal technicalities.
There were several arrests, disappearances, and at least one killing of Congolese
supporters of Nkunda in Rwanda, including Denis Ntare Semadwinga, who was
murdered in June, and Sheikh Iddy Abbasi, who disappeared after being abducted
in March.
On October 1 the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights published
the report of its mapping exercise on the most serious violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law in the DRC between March 1993 and June
2003 (see chapter on the DRC). Among other things, the report documents grave
crimes allegedly committed by the Rwandan army in 1996 and 1997. While the
Congolese government welcomed the report, the Rwandan government rejected
it, initially threatening to pull out its peacekeepers from UN missions if the UN
published it.
WORLD REPORT 2011
158
Key International Actors
Most Western donors remained broadly supportive of the Rwandan government
and few expressed public concern about human rights violations. However, in the
pre-election period, and in the face of increasingly critical media coverage of
Rwanda in their own countries, some donor governments raised mostly private
concerns about political and media restrictions with the Rwandan government.
These concerns were also mentioned in the final report of the Commonwealth
Observer Group on the presidential election. Relations between Rwanda and the
UN came under strain following the publication of the UN mapping report on the
DRC.
159
AFRICA
Sierra Leone
Throughout 2010 the government of President Ernest Bai Koroma made meaningful
progress in addressing endemic corruption and improving access to justice
and key economic rights, notably health care and education. Endemic public and
private corruption has for decades undermined development, and was one of the
major factors underpinning the 11-year armed conflict that ended in 2002.
High levels of unemployment, persistent weaknesses in the performance of the
police and judiciary, and increased political tension in advance of the 2012 elections
slowed the consolidation of the rule of law. Through the efforts of the
United Nations-backed Special Court for Sierra Leone, however, progress continued
in achieving accountability for war crimes committed during the armed conflict.
The discovery of a major offshore oil deposit, and the ratification by parliament of
major resource exploitation contracts, notably those involving a large iron ore
deposit, raised hopes that Sierra Leone would be better able to address chronic
unemployment, improve access to basic economic rights, and minimize donor
dependency. It also illuminated the continued importance of focusing on deficits
in economic governance and anti-corruption efforts.
Corruption
In 2010 the Anti-Corruption Commission (ACC) secured convictions against several
high-level public officials, including the minister of health and sanitation, the
minister of fisheries and marine resources, the head of the school feeding program
in the Ministry of Education, a judge, and the director of procurement at the
Ministry of Defense. At year’s end a further five cases and some 90 investigations
were ongoing. While President Koroma repeatedly admonished government officials
to desist from corrupt practices, the May resignation of ACC Commissioner
Abdul Tejan-Cole, reportedly over security concerns and government interference,
and the ACC’s subsequent failure to investigate or indict several ruling party
politicians, raised concerns that recent gains would be reversed. In March
President Koroma released the country’s first Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative report.
WORLD REPORT 2011
160
Rule of Law
Serious deficiencies in the judicial system persist, including extortion and bribetaking
by officials; insufficient numbers of judges, magistrates, and prosecuting
attorneys; unprofessional conduct and absenteeism by court personnel; and
inadequate remuneration for judiciary personnel.
Overcrowding and inadequate food, sanitation, and health care in prisons remain
serious concerns. The population of the country’s largest detention facility—
designed for 324 detainees—stands at over 1,300. In 2010 some 65 percent of
prisoners in Sierra Leone were held in prolonged pretrial detention.
However, concerted efforts by the UN, the United Kingdom (through its Justice
Sector Development Programme), aid agencies, and the government have led to
meaningful improvements in access to legal representation. The Pilot National
Legal Aid program (PNLA) supports lawyers in providing legal aid to hundreds of
people detained within police stations and prisons in Freetown, the capital. By
the end of August 2010 the cases of over 1,000 individuals had been processed,
of which 506 were discharged. A UN Development Program (UNDP) funded project
also helped clear the backlog of cases throughout the country by supporting
lawyers from the Bar Association in representing indigent detainees, establishing
a few new permanent court houses and temporary special tribunals, and deploying
itinerant judges. A donor-funded program that deployed tens of paralegals,
backed by lawyers, to some 30 locations throughout Sierra Leone helped bridge
the gap between the customary and formal legal systems.
Police and Army Conduct
The police in Sierra Leone continue to engage in unprofessional and at times
criminal behavior. There were persistent allegations of crime victims being
required to pay for investigations and of police involvement in extortion, solicitation
of bribes, and other criminal acts. In late 2009 the Sierra Leonean army
stepped in to help the police address a spike in armed robberies.
The UK-led International Military Advisory and Training Team has been working
since 1999 to reform the Republic of Sierra Leone Armed Forces (RSLAF). In 2010
some 40 mostly British military officers were deployed to Sierra Leone. Over the
161
AFRICA
last several years the army has been downsized from 17,000 to its goal of 8,500
personnel. The Military Court Martial Board within the RSLAF, established in
2009, encouraged discipline by adjudicating the cases of several soldiers implicated
in misconduct, misappropriation, and criminality. A milestone was achieved
in early 2010 when the first-ever contingent of RSLAF troops was deployed as
peacekeepers, to Sudan.
Sexual and Gender-Based Violence and Treatment of Children
Incidents of sexual and gender-based violence against girls and women remained
high; in 2009, the latest year for which figures exist, victims reported 927 cases
of rape and other forms of sexual assault and 1,543 of domestic violence. While
Family Support Units within police stations led to increased reporting, fear of stigma
and weaknesses within the judiciary resulted in very few prosecutions. Child
labor within artisanal diamond mining areas continued to be a major cause of
concern. However, the completion of construction of remand facilities for juvenile
offenders successfully kept children from entering adult prisons, as was previously
the practice.
Accountability for Past Abuses
Between 2004 and 2009, eight individuals associated with the three main warring
factions were tried and convicted by the Special Court for Sierra Leone for
rape, murder, mutilation, enslavement, recruitment of child soldiers, forced marriage,
and attacks against UN peacekeepers. All eight were transferred in October
2009 to Rwanda to serve out their sentences.
During 2010 the trial of former Liberian president Charles Taylor—charged with 11
counts of war crimes and crimes against humanity for his role in supporting Sierra
Leonean rebel groups during the conflict—made notable progress. The defense,
which closed its case in November, brought forward 21 witnesses, including
Charles Taylor. Earlier, 94 witnesses testified for the prosecution. Closing arguments
are scheduled for February 2011 and a judgment is expected later in the
year. Taylor is the first sitting African head of state to be indicted and face trial
before an international or hybrid tribunal. Due to security concerns, his trial is
taking place in The Hague, Netherlands, instead of in Freetown.
WORLD REPORT 2011
162
Meanwhile, the Special Court began closing down operations in Freetown. In May
the Special Court handed over control of its detention facility to the Sierra Leone
prison service. It also reached an agreement with the government on residual
functions of the court, which include witness protection, court archives, supervision
of sentences, and the trial of the last person indicted, Johnny Paul Koroma,
who remains at large. The Special Court—whose largest donors include the United
States, the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, and Canada—continues to lack the
resources to complete its work. The Special Court relies solely on voluntary contributions
from the international community.
Reparations programs for war victims, as recommended by the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, provided financial and medical assistance and skills
training to some 20,000 victims with support from the UN Peacebuilding Fund
and UN Development Fund for Women.
Economic and Social Rights
In 2010 the government launched a free healthcare plan for pregnant women,
breast-feeding mothers, and children under five years old; raised the salaries of
health workers; and announced plans to increase the number of midwives trained
each year from 30 to 150, representing a significant step toward improving access
to basic health care. To improve access to education, the government increased
the number of teachers, awarded grants to girls and the disabled attending secondary
school and university, and investigated and prosecuted Education
Ministry personnel engaged in corrupt practices.
According to the 2009 UN Human Development report, Sierra Leone ranked 180th
out of 182 countries for overall development. A 2009 report of the UN Department
of Economic and Social Affairs found that Sierra Leone had the world’s worst indicators
for infant mortality (123 deaths per 1,000 live births) and maternal mortality
(the lifetime risk of maternal death is 1 in 8).
163
AFRICA
National Human Rights Commission and Legislative
Developments
The National Human Rights Commission carried out its mandate to investigate
and report on human rights abuses and generally operated without government
interference. In January a revised Mines and Minerals Act envisioned to improve
Sierra Leone’s benefits from its vast natural resources was signed into law. In
November the Right to Access Information Bill was introduced into parliament.
However, the government has yet to act on the report of the Constitutional Review
Committee, submitted in 2008, or conduct a promised review of the Criminal
Libel Law.
Key International Actors
In 2010 UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and World Bank President Robert
Zoellick visited Sierra Leone. The UN and the UK government continued to take
the lead in helping to reform and support Sierra Leone’s rule of law sectors. The
UK remained Sierra Leone’s largest donor, providing some £50 million (US$80
million) in the last fiscal year, including support for the health sector, anti-corruption
efforts, security sector reform, and access to justice.
In July the World Bank gave $20 million to be used over three years to address
high unemployment by supporting skills training and cash-for-work programs. The
EU gave €52.5 million ($73.7 million) to support infrastructure, agriculture, and
governance.
In September the UN Security Council extended the mandate of the UN Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) for one year and lifted an arms
embargo and travel ban on former rebel leaders that had been imposed in 1997.
UNIPSIL plays a largely advisory role in strengthening democratic institutions and
addressing organized crime, drug trafficking, and youth unemployment.
The UN Peacebuilding Fund has approved more than $35 million since 2007 to
support justice, security, youth employment, and good governance in Sierra
Leone.
WORLD REPORT 2011
164
Somalia
The Transitional Federal Government (TFG), supported by the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), lost control of further territory to opposition
groups in Somalia in 2010, with bitter fighting imposing a significant toll on civilians,
especially during an upsurge of attacks in August and September. Al-
Shabaab and Hizbul Islam, the militant Islamist groups that spearhead the opposition,
consolidated control over much of south-central Somalia, where the population
experienced relative stability but also increasingly harsh and intolerant
repression, in the name of Sharia law. A humanitarian crisis exists across the
country. Humanitarian agencies have limited access due to ongoing insecurity,
and armed opposition groups threatened humanitarian workers, journalists, and
civil society activists with attack.
The northern region of Somaliland, a self-declared independent republic, provided
a rare positive note in the region when its long-delayed presidential election
took place in a largely free and fair atmosphere in June 2010.
Indiscriminate Warfare in Mogadishu
Continual fighting between militant Islamist groups and the TFG raged in
Mogadishu, Somalia’s capital, throughout 2010, with all parties conducting indiscriminate
attacks causing high civilian casualties. Opposition fighters have
deployed unlawfully in densely populated civilian neighborhoods and at times
used civilians as “shields” to fire mortars at TFG and AMISOM positions. These
attacks are conducted so indiscriminately that they frequently destroy civilian
homes but rarely strike military targets. Often AMISOM or TFG forces respond in
kind, launching indiscriminate mortar strikes on the neighborhoods from which
opposition fighters had fired and then fled, leaving only civilians to face the
resulting devastation.
The TFG lost further ground to al-Shabaab during the year and at this writing controls
just a few square blocks around the presidential palace at Villa Somalia in
Mogadishu, with the AU forces defending the capital’s port, the airport, and a few
other strategic sites.
165
AFRICA
Clashes and attacks intensified in August and September—during the Islamic holy
month of Ramadan—after al-Shabaab claimed responsibility for the July 11 bomb
blasts in Kampala, Uganda’s captial. At least 76 civilians died in those attacks,
which struck crowded public gatherings the day of the football World Cup final.
Uganda provides the largest contingent of the 7,100-member African Union
Mission in Somalia. AMISOM forces were accused of indiscriminate shelling in
retaliation for the Kampala blasts, particularly in Bakara Market. Bakara and other
residential areas were repeatedly hit on July 12 and 13, again in late August, and
on September 9; dozens of civilians were killed and injured in these attacks.
On August 23 al-Shabaab and Hizbul Islam called for an escalation in the fighting,
and al-Shabaab claimed responsibility for an August 24 suicide attack at the
Muna Hotel, which killed 32 people, including civilians and several members of
parliament. Another suicide attack on Mogadishu’s international airport on
September 9 killed at least nine people, including civilians.
Much of the remaining population of Mogadishu fled this new round of fighting
and is now displaced in makeshift camps on the outskirts of the capital, primarily
in the Afgoi corridor, with little access to humanitarian aid and at risk of harassment
by local militia groups.
Both the armed opposition groups and the TFG have used children in their ranks.
Abuses in Opposition-Controlled Areas
South-central Somalia was under the control of local administrations linked to
armed opposition groups throughout 2010. In many areas al-Shabaab rule
brought relative stability and order, which contrasts dramatically with the chaos
in Mogadishu. Residents from some of these areas credit al-Shabaab with ending
a constant menace of extortion, robbery, and murder from bandits and freelance
militias. But even where this holds true, security has come at a steep price, especially
for women.
Grinding repression characterizes daily life in communities controlled by al-
Shabaab, and many local administrations have sought to implement harsh and
intolerant measures in the name of Sharia law. These measures control minute
details of personal lives, including the way people dress and work. The punish-
WORLD REPORT 2011
166
167
AFRICA
ments for even minor offenses are often summary, arbitrary, and cruel. A climate
of fear prevents most people from speaking out against abuses of power. As one
resident of the southern town of El Wak said, “We just stay quiet. If they tell us to
follow a certain path, we follow it.”
Freedoms women took for granted in traditional Somali culture have been dramatically
rolled back. In many areas women have been barred from engaging in any
activity that leads them to mix with men, even small-scale commercial enterprises
on which many of them depend for a living. Al-Shabaab authorities have arrested,
threatened, or whipped countless women for trying to support their families by
selling cups of tea.
Al-Shabaab and other opposition forces often threaten to kill people they suspect
of harboring sympathies for their opponents or who resist recruitment. These are
not empty threats; opposition groups have murdered civilians regularly and with
complete impunity.
Elections in Somaliland and Instability in the North
After almost two years of delay, Somaliland finally held its presidential election
on June 26, 2010. International observers deemed the polls reasonably free and
fair despite an isolated incident in the Sool region, where one person was killed.
The incumbent President Dahir Riyale accepted defeat and peacefully ceded
power to an opposition candidate, further advancing hopes for stability in the
northern region.
The situation remains unstable in the contested regions of Sool, Sanag, and Cayn,
which lie between Somaliland, in Somalia’s northwest, and the autonomous state
of Puntland in the northeast. Thousands of civilians were displaced by clan-based
clashes and conflicts over resources in the disputed area in June.
Attacks on Journalists, Human Rights Defenders, and
Humanitarian Workers
Somalia remains one of the world’s most dangerous places to be a journalist. At
least three journalists were killed in 2010, bringing the total killed since 2007 to
WORLD REPORT 2011
168
22. Two were targeted killings: Sheikh Nur Mohamed Abkey of state-run Radio
Mogadishu was killed by three gunmen in May, and Abdullahi Omar Gedi was
stabbed by unknown assailants in Galkayo. Barkhat Awale was killed by a stray
bullet in Mogadishu on August 24. Both TFG and opposition forces have harassed
the dwindling number of journalists still struggling to operate in Somalia. In April
al-Shabaab banned all BBC broadcasts in Somalia and confiscated equipment.
Journalists also suffered detentions and harassment in the northern Somali
regions of Somaliland and Puntland. In January Puntland authorities released
Mohamed Yasin Isak, a local correspondent for Voice of America, after 17 days of
detention without charge.
The majority of human rights defenders fled the country in the past years amid
increasing threats to civil society and media; the few individuals remaining in
south-central Somalia censor themselves.
The delivery of humanitarian assistance to south-central Somalia has been partially
blocked by insecurity as well as measures imposed by armed opposition
groups specifically targeting humanitarian agencies. At least eight agencies have
been expelled from Somalia by al-Shabaab since January. In addition, United
States sanctions on support to terrorist groups have restricted the delivery of food
aid toward southern and central Somalia. As a result, some agencies had to cancel
their operations, and access is reportedly at its lowest point since 2006.
Key International Actors
Western governments, the UN, the AU, and neighboring countries, with the exception
of Eritrea, are united in supporting the TFG as the government of Somalia.
The July 2010 bombings in Kampala, Uganda, increased regional concern over the
threat posed by al-Shabaab and its connections to al-Qaeda. At this writing the
principal response has been to increase the number of AMISOM troops to approximately
7,100 and pledge further funds.
Of the US$213 million pledged by a joint UN, European Union, and AU conference
held in Brussels in April 2009, little has reached Somalia. The EU, Ethiopia,
Uganda, and Kenya trained TFG soldiers and police in neighboring countries
throughout 2010. But efforts to bolster the TFG’s weak military and police capacity
169
AFRICA
have been plagued by allegations of corruption and the defection of newly
trained troops, some with their weapons; many of the trainees complain that they
never received their salaries.
Since withdrawing from Mogadishu in early 2009, Ethiopian troops have repeatedly
entered into Somalia for security operations near the border. Ethiopia, along
with Eritrea, remains a key player in Somalia, with both countries providing various
types of support to proxy forces, although Eritrea’s support for armed opposition
groups has reportedly declined, according to UN experts.
WORLD REPORT 2011
170
South Africa
South Africa’s pro-human rights constitution, stable government, democratic
institutions, independent judiciary, and strong economy mean it has great potential
to become a global human rights leader. However, government efforts to realize
this potential at home have been inconsistent, and recent trends suggest possible
constriction of civil and political rights. In addition, inadequate policies and
poor implementation of good ones has slowed the realization of social and economic
rights for many South Africans.
In the international arena, South Africa’s government has refrained in recent years
from condemning abuses in China, Sri Lanka, Iran, Burma, Sudan, and the
Democratic Republic of Congo, dashing hopes that it would be a reliable partner
in promoting human rights. South Africa’s foreign policy role will be in the international
spotlight again following its assumption of a seat on the United Nations
Security Council on January 1, 2011.
Freedom of Expression
Two separate but interrelated developments in 2010 led to widespread criticism
and concern that the government is trying to limit freedom of expression. Ahead
of its policy conference in September the ruling African National Congress party
(ANC) resurrected a 2007 resolution pushing for the establishment of a Media
Appeals Tribunal, arguing that media cannot be counted on to regulate themselves,
and that “freedom of the press is not an absolute right and must be balanced
against individuals’ rights to privacy and human dignity.” The ANC’s proposal
seeks to establish a regulatory mechanism accountable to the ANC-dominated
Parliament, which would constitute a back-door path to censorship and
suppression of dissent.
On August 4 Mzilikazi Wa-Afrika, a prominent journalist with the Sunday Times
who had exposed corruption by officials, was arrested without a warrant by 20
policemen in six vans. He was then taken to a secret location in Mpumalanga and
interrogated at 2 a.m. without a lawyer. The police also searched his home and
took notebooks without a search warrant. Wa-Afrika was eventually released on
R5,000 (US$725) bail after his newspaper went to the High Court; the charges
171
AFRICA
cited upon his arrest have since been dropped. The incident heightened fears
that such politically motivated intimidation of the press could become the norm if
the ANC-proposed tribunal is established.
In April 2010 the Department of State Security tabled a draft of the Protection of
Information Bill (PIB) for parliamentary consideration. In 2008 Parliament first
tabled and rejected the bill—which aims to replace the existing, expansive 1982
apartheid-era law that prevents and penalizes disclosure of state secrets—for
being too draconian. Parliament instructed the Department of State Security to
revise the bill in line with the constitution. But when it was re-presented in July
2010, offending elements of the bill had been retained and even made harsher.
The PIB currently gives the government sweeping powers to classify information
and impose jail terms of up to 25 years for publishing classified information. It
sets no limits on which officials or state bodies can classify information, and has
no clear criteria for classifying information. The bill also extends the protection of
secrecy to commercial entities, exempts intelligence agencies from scrutiny, and
imposes serious punitive measures against those who disclose information.
If enacted as currently written, the bill would seriously impede the free flow of
information, erode the right of access to information, and violate key constitutional
provisions. The Right to Know Campaign, which represents a broad spectrum of
civil society groups, has pressured to squash the bill in its current form.
Parliament gave the adhoc committee tasked with finalizing the bill until January
28, 2011 to incorporate all inputs and present a final draft.
Refugees and Migrants
On May 11 the Consortium for Refugees and Migrants in South Africa (CoRMSA)
reported 10 incidents of xenophobic violence in Siyathemba, Atteridgeville,
Mamelodi, Orange Farm, and Sasolburg, where large crowds looted foreignowned
shops.
CoRMSA also reported mounting threats of violence following the football World
Cup, held in South Africa in June and July, leading thousands of migrants—mainly
Zimbabweans—to flee South Africa or relocate to other communities. Responding
to public pressure, the government moved swiftly, establishing a heavy police
WORLD REPORT 2011
172
presence and deploying the military in Alexandria, Katlehong, and other townships
where xenophobic violence had been predicted. The anticipated violence
did not materialize, but migrants in South Africa continue to report scattered incidents
of xenophobic attacks.
In September South Africa moved to “regularize the presence of Zimbabweans in
South Africa” by ending the special dispensation for Zimbabwean nationals that
the government introduced in April 2009, and resuming deportations of those
without the new special permits. After the January 2011 lifting of the moratorium
on deporting Zimbabweans, they have two options to lawfully enter and remain in
South Africa: apply for asylum, or apply for a temporary residence permit under
the Immigration Rules’ work, study and business provisions. Most are unlikely to
qualify under either regime. South Africa’s Department of Home Affairs already
had a backlog of 309,794 unresolved applications at the end of 2009, according
to the UN High Commissioner for Refugees.
Socioeconomic Rights
Millions of South Africans suffer from inadequate access to shelter, water, education,
and health care. South Africa is unlikely to meet the UN health-related
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), and is one of only eight countries in the
region where the rate of maternal deaths seems to be increasing. The South
African government estimates that the maternal mortality ratio was 625 deaths
per 100,000 live births in 2007, up from 150 deaths per 100,000 live births in
1998. The under-five mortality rate was 104 deaths per 1000 live births in 2007,
up from 59 deaths in 1998, while the infant mortality rate was 53 deaths per
1,000 live births in 2007, compared to 54 in 2001.
South Africa also has one of the world’s largest populations affected by HIV/AIDS,
with more than 5 million people living with HIV, and more than 1 million needing
AIDS treatment. The country’s response to the epidemic has significantly
improved under Health Minister Aaron Motsoaledi. On April 25 the government
launched the HIV Testing and Counseling campaign (HTC), which aims to see 15
million people accepting voluntary HIV testing and counseling by 2011, and 1.5
million receiving antiretroviral treatment by June 2011. However, weaknesses in
173
AFRICA
South Africa’s public health system are already hampering the campaign’s success.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
While South Africa has attempted to foster a culture of tolerance by outlawing discrimination
based on sexual orientation and by legalizing same-sex unions,
social conservatism means that gays, lesbians, and gender-nonconforming individuals
remain vulnerable to violence and discrimination. In a study by the
Human Sciences Research Council (HSRC) in 2008, over 80 percent of respondents
across age groups “consistently” expressed the view that sex between two
men or two women “was always wrong,” and that gays and lesbians were “un-
African.” The cases of Sizakele Sigasa and Salome Masooa, who were tortured,
raped, and brutally murdered on July 7, 2007, in Soweto, as well as subsequent
cases of Eudy Simelane, Zoliswa Nonkonyane, and others has highlighted the vulnerability
of black lesbians and gender-nonconforming individuals to violence
and hate crimes. The 07-07-07 Campaign continues to take up cases of violence
against black lesbians and gender-nonconforming individuals, and advocate for
an end to hate crimes. However, the government has yet to develop and implement
measures to end these human rights abuses.
International Role
South Africa plays a significant role on the African continent, where it is one of
the largest contributors to peacekeeping missions and a key player on regional
bodies, such as the African Union and the Southern African Development
Community.
South Africa continues to drive mediation efforts in Zimbabwe, which have taken
a bolder approach toward President Robert Mugabe under President Jacob
Zuma’s stewardship. Yet South Africa has not publicly pushed Zimbabwe’s coalition
government on key rights reforms and the need to end ongoing violations. It
failed to condemn the violence that erupted in Zimbabwe during September’s
constitution-outreach process, and neglected to speak out against abuses committed
in the Marange diamond fields in eastern Zimbabwe, despite ample evidence
that the Zimbabwean military is using forced adult and child labor.
WORLD REPORT 2011
174
At a high-level meeting on Sudan in September, organized by UN Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, International Relations Minister Maite Nkoane-Mashabane
appealed for international support to guarantee a peaceful referendum outcome
in January in South Sudan and Abyei. South Africa has also supported the work of
the AU Panel on Sudan and contributed to the joint AU-UN operation in Darfur
(UNAMID).
In 2010 South Africa lobbied aggressively and successfully to regain a non-permanent
seat at the UN Security Council, which will allow it to exert influence on key
international issues. Its past performance in multilateral institutions has been
disappointing from a human rights perspective. As a member of the Security
Council in 2007-2008, South Africa opposed a resolution condemning abuses by
the military junta in Burma, while at the UN Human Rights Council in 2007, South
Africa attempted to block discussions of rights abuses in Zimbabwe and voted to
end monitoring of abuses in Iran and Uzbekistan. South Africa’s seat on the UN
Security Council beginning in 2011 affords the country an opportunity to translate
its constitutional commitment to human rights into critical involvement on international
issues where protecting human rights is a central concern.
175
AFRICA
Sudan
Sudan’s human rights environment deteriorated in 2010 during the April elections
and in the months leading up to the historic referendum on southern self-determination,
scheduled for early January 2011. The referendum was called for as part
of the 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), which ended Sudan’s 22-
year civil war.
The April multi-party national elections, also prescribed by the CPA, were marked
by serious human rights violations and resulted in the consolidation of power for
both the national ruling National Congress Party (NCP) and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement (SPLM), which controls Southern Sudan. Omar al-Bashir –
subject of an arrest warrant from the International Criminal Court for crimes committed
in Darfur – was re-elected president of the national government, and Salva
Kiir as president of Southern Sudan and vice president of the national government.
In the second half of the year domestic and international attention shifted to the
referendum, in which southerners will vote to either remain part of a united
Sudan or secede. Should southerners secede, a parallel referendum in Abyei, the
disputed oil-rich area straddling the north-south divide, will determine whether
that area remains part of Sudan or joins Southern Sudan.
The parties made slow progress in resolving key issues around the referendum
such as voter eligibility in the Abyei referendum, and post-referendum arrangements
concerning citizenship rights, oil- and wealth-sharing, and debt allocations.
Darfur, in western Sudan, saw continued large-scale attacks by government forces
on rebel forces and civilians, as well as an increase in armed clashes between
ethnic groups, particularly in South and West Darfur. The United Nations and
humanitarian agencies increasingly came under attack and were targeted for robberies,
kidnappings, and killings by armed elements in Sudan’s western region.
In January the parliament amended the Child Act, setting 18 years as the legal age
of majority. The previous year Sudan executed Abdulrahman Zakaria Mohammed
in El Fasher, North Darfur, for a crime he committed at the age of 17. It remains
WORLD REPORT 2011
176
unclear whether the amendments to the child act will lead to a ban on the juvenile
death penalty in accordance with international law.
Rights Abuses in National Elections
Human Rights Watch documented numerous rights violations across Sudan by
both northern and southern authorities in connection with the April elections.
International and domestic election observers reported widespread technical
irregularities such as multiple voting, ballot-stuffing, and other acts of fraud.
In the months leading up to the elections in the north, the ruling NCP arrested
opposition party observers and civil society groups, suppressed peaceful assemblies
by opposition party members in the north, and restricted free association
and speech. During the week of the election, there were fewer cases of such
restrictions, but Human Rights Watch documented several cases of harassment,
intimidation, and arrests of opposition members and election observers in the
north.
In Darfur, continued insecurity presented an obstacle to holding free and fair
elections. Large areas of Darfur were inaccessible to election officials and candidates;
insecurity due to banditry and ongoing conflict restricted candidates’ freedom
of movement.
In Southern Sudan, throughout the elections process, security forces engaged in
widespread intimidation, arbitrary arrest, detention, and mistreatment of opponents
of the SPLM as well as of election observers and voters.
In the weeks following the elections the human rights situation across Sudan
deteriorated, with renewed political repression in the north, incidents of electionrelated
violence in the south, particularly where SPLM candidates ran against
independent candidates, and ongoing conflict in Darfur. The lack of accountability
for abuses during the elections did not bode well for a free and fair referendum
process nine months later.
177
AFRICA
Political Repression in Northern Sudan
The national government failed to enact institutional and legal reforms, which are
required by the CPA. The national legal framework continues to allow censorship
of the press and restrictions on freedom of assembly and political expression.
The new National Security Act, passed in January, retains broad powers of arrest
and detention for up to four-and-a-half months, in violation of international
treaties to which Sudan is a party. Legal immunities for security forces remain in
place.
The post-election crackdown in Khartoum, Sudan’s capital in the north, included
the May 15 arrest and six week detention of the opposition figure Hassan al-Turabi
and the arrest of four journalists from Rai al Shaab, the newspaper affiliated with
al-Turabi’s Popular Congress Party (PCP). One of the journalists was subjected to
electric shocks while in the custody of national security agents. In July three of
the journalists received prison sentences on charges of “attempting to destabilize
the constitutional system.”
In addition, authorities resumed pre-print censorship, a practice that al-Bashir
publicly declared had ended in September 2009. Officials banned articles that
reported on the arrests of al-Turabi and the journalists, and the escalating violence
in Darfur. In the weeks that followed authorities continued to censor papers
through site visits and telephone calls to editors—what Sudanese journalists call
“remote control censorship”—and shut down several newspapers.
National security forces continued to harass human rights activists and target student
members of the United Popular Front (UPF), a student group that the government
alleges has links to the Darfuri rebel group led by Abdel Wahid al-Nur.
Members of the group were subjected to arrest, detention, ill-treatment, and torture.
Insecurity and Human Rights Violations in Southern Sudan
Vote-rigging and intimidation during the elections in the south led to anger and
frustration. Grievances over the election results led to armed clashes, particularly
in areas where the SPLM faced strong opposition.
WORLD REPORT 2011
178
179
AFRICA
WORLD REPORT 2011
180
In northern Jonglei state, for example, forces loyal to a former deputy chief of staff
of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) who unsuccessfully ran for state
governor as an independent candidate, clashed with the SPLA on multiple occasions
after the results were announced. The SPLA’s efforts to capture the renegade
commander resulted in numerous human rights abuses against the civilian
population in northern Jonglei including sexual violence. In Upper Nile state, SPLA
soldiers clashed with local militia whom they accused of links to the SPLM-DC, a
breakaway political party led by former SPLM leader Lam Akol. The soldiers were
responsible for killings and rapes of civilians during these operations.
Patterns of intercommunal violence stemming from cattle-rustling and other localized
disputes across Southern Sudan continued to put civilians at risk of physical
violence and killings. The Lord’s Resistance Army also continued to pose a significant
security threat in western parts of the region, with attacks, abductions, and
killings reported on a monthly basis.
Neither the Government of Southern Sudan nor the UN Mission in Sudan has adequately
been able to protect civilians from these sources of violence. Weaknesses
in the justice sector and lack of accountability mechanisms fostered an environment
of impunity for violence and human rights violations.
Civil and Political Rights and the Referendum
In the weeks preceding the referendum, Southern Sudanese communities living
in Khartoum and other northern states reported heightened anxiety over the status
of their citizenship rights following the referendum. NCP officials publicly
threatened that southerners may not be able to stay in the north in the event of a
secession vote. A higher-than usual number of southerners returned to Southern
Sudan toward the end of 2010, with tens of thousands arriving in southern states
during voter registration in November. Although SPLM and Government of
Southern Sudan officials stated that they would protect the rights of northerners
living in the South, some northern traders reported facing intimidation and
moved to northern states. As of mid-November, however, the two ruling parties
had not formally agreed to post-referendum citizenship arrangements. Both
southerners in the north and northerners living in Southern Sudan said that they
feared retaliation, even expulsion, if secession were approved.
181
AFRICA
Journalists and civil society activists across the country reported that they were
not free to speak openly about any opposition to the prevailing sentiment regarding
the outcome of the referendum. In October security forces arrested a group of
southern students speaking out in support of secession at a pro-unity rally in
Khartoum, underscoring growing tensions. Although the head of the national
security service in early August lifted pre-print censorship in northern states,
repressive policies toward the media have caused many Khartoum-based papers
to self-censor on sensitive topics, including the referendum outcome.
Deterioration in Darfur
Fighting in Darfur intensified in 2010, with armed clashes between government
and rebel forces, among rebel factions, and between armed ethnic Arab groups in
South and West Darfur. In Jebel Mara, a stronghold of the Sudan Liberation Army
(SLA) faction led by Abdel Wahid al-Nur, fighting among SLA groups over support
for the Doha, Qatar peace talks and clashes between government forces and
rebels continued throughout the year. Government attacks on Jebel Mara intensified
again in September, destroying dozens of villages and causing mass displacements.
In Jebel Mun, another rebel stronghold, and elsewhere, clashes
between government forces and the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) intensified
early in the year, following the January rapprochement between Chad and
Sudan, in which both governments agreed to end support to rebel groups fighting
in each other’s territory and to jointly patrol their common border.
The UN-African Union Mission in Darfur (UNAMID) was unable to access most of
the areas affected by violence, despite its mandate to protect civilians under
imminent threat of physical violence. Both government and rebel authorities
blocked the peacekeepers and humanitarian agencies at various times. An
increase in banditry, abductions, and attacks on UN and humanitarian aid operations
undermined the international response.
Meanwhile the peace process at Doha foundered. JEM and the SLA faction led by
Abdel Wahid al-Nur and other groups boycotted the process, leaving only one
rebel group, the Liberation and Justice Movement (LJM), to negotiate.
WORLD REPORT 2011
182
In September the Sudanese government released a new strategy on Darfur that
focused on the return of displaced persons to their home villages. The plan did
not provide clear safeguards for the rights of displaced persons, such as their voluntary
return. The government repeated its intention to dismantle the camps, particularly
the volatile South Darfur Kalma camp, where political violence between
armed groups killed 10 people in August.
Between October 30 and November 3, Sudanese national security officials arrested
and detained more than 10 Darfuri activists and journalists in Khartoum, and
continue to hold them in unknown locations without access to family or lawyers.
The arrests were widely viewed as a means to suppress information and advocacy
on Darfur.
Key International Actors
International engagement on Sudan increased and intensified with the elections
and referendum, particularly by key CPA stakeholder countries like the United
States. The UN continues to deploy two major peacekeeping missions in the
country: the UN Mission in Sudan (UNMIS) and UNAMID.
On September 24 the UN convened a high-level meeting on Sudan in which the
Sudanese parties to the CPA and 40 heads of state re-affirmed their commitment
to a timely, peaceful referendum in January 2011.
With the focus on the referendum, international attention shifted away from
Darfur, despite the deteriorating situation there and lack of progress on a peace
deal. The Sudanese government made little progress in implementing recommendations
of the AU High Level Panel on Darfur; the AU and other influential leaders
did not press the government to do so. In general, the key stakeholder countries
engaged on Sudan continued to be divided in approach and willingness to use
pressure to influence the Sudanese government.
In Geneva, in September, the UN Human Rights Council renewed the mandate of
the Independent Expert on Sudan, maintaining a much-needed avenue for human
rights reporting, over objections from Sudan and its allies. The two major peacekeeping
missions in Sudan, UNMIS and UNAMID, did not publicly report on their
183
AFRICA
human rights concerns except through regular reports to the UN secretary-general.
The ICC continued its investigation of crimes committed in Darfur and issued a
second arrest warrant for President al-Bashir in July 2010, adding genocide to
charges on war crimes and crimes against humanity. The same month, the AU
reiterated a July 2009 call for its member states not to cooperate in the arrest of
al-Bashir. In a setback for accountability Kenya and Chad – both states parties to
the ICC – allowed al-Bashir to enter their territories in July and August, citing the
AU decision.
WORLD REPORT 2011
184
Uganda
Freedoms of assembly and expression in Uganda have come under attack in
2010, the pressure intensifying in advance of presidential and parliamentary elections
scheduled for February 2011. Journalists critical of the government face
intimidation and sometimes criminal charges from state agents and members of
the ruling party. Security and quasi-military organizations continue to illegally
detain and torture suspects, in some instances leading to death. Impunity for
human rights abuses persists. For example, Uganda failed to carry out investigations
or prosecutions for the deaths of at least 40 people killed, some by military
police, in riots in September 2009.
On July 11, 2010, two bomb blasts in Kampala, the capital, killed 76 people who
had gathered to watch the football World Cup final. The Somali armed Islamist
group al-Shabaab claimed responsibility and threatened further attacks if Uganda
continued to supply troops to the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
Uganda arrested scores of suspects, charged 36 with terrorism, and eventually
committed 17 for trial. The judiciary issued an injunction barring the press from
covering the investigations and, on July 28, police broke up an opposition
demonstration, stating that public gatherings were banned until the perpetrators
of the bombings were arrested.
Some fear of violence around the 2011 elections was furthered by irregularities
surrounding the ruling National Resistance Movement primaries in August 2010.
Roughly 350 petitions were filed with the party’s electoral commission, alleging
beatings, intimidation, and bribery. Investigations are ongoing at this writing.
Freedoms of Assembly and Expression
Opposition demonstrations protesting the composition of the electoral commission
were met with police brutality. For example, in January 33 women from an
opposition coalition were charged with illegal assembly, and in June police
severely beat these women as they exited a court appearance causing four to be
hospitalized.
185
AFRICA
Ugandan officials have repeatedly failed to hold state actors involved in electionrelated
violence accountable. That continued in 2010, for example in March at the
Rukiga by-election, where police detained six opposition supporters and beat
others who attempted to bring food to detainees leaving one person in a coma.
Police were not charged with any crime.
In June an ad hoc group known as the kiboko (stick) squad assaulted Forum for
Democratic Change presidential candidate Kizza Besigye and other opposition
leaders at a rally in Kampala. The opposition accused the state of supporting and
mobilizing the squad. Police denied the allegations, but failed on several occasions
to arrest squad members. In July police in 13 towns arrested at least 80 people
during a nationwide demonstration against the electoral commission. In
Mbale, eastern Uganda, police used their guns to strike unarmed opposition
demonstrators.
The Ugandan government uses media and penal laws to prosecute journalists,
restrict who can lawfully work as a journalist, and revoke broadcasting licenses
without due process. Journalists face harassment and threats, especially outside
the capital. After being forced off air by security agents during the September
2009 riots, CBS Radio was permitted to operate again in October 2010. The government
never provided evidence in court of any wrongdoing.
In August the constitutional court ruled, after five years, that the crime of sedition
is unconstitutional. The court upheld the constitutionality of the crime of “promoting
sectarianism,” which prohibits any act promoting “feelings of ill will or
hostility” on account of religion, tribe, ethnicity, or regional origin. At least four
journalists and some opposition politicians who criticized alleged government
favoritism of some ethnicities over others currently face this charge, which has
effectively silenced debate.
At this writing, the government is considering draft amendments to the media
law, which would further imperil freedom of expression.
Extrajudicial Killings, Torture, and Illegal Detention
As the Ugandan People’s Defence Force (UPDF) continued a disarmament exercise
in the northeast region of Karamoja, soldiers have killed civilians with impunity.
WORLD REPORT 2011
186
187
AFRICA
WORLD REPORT 2011
188
The Uganda Human Rights Commission stated that soldiers killed civilians,
including children and the elderly, in Kotido district, and two Karamoja parliamentarians
accused the army of killing between 48 and 55 civilians between April and
August. UPDF officials acknowledged that soldiers killed 10 Karamojong, four of
them children, during crossfire on April 24 in Kotido, but said that no soldiers
would be punished.
The Rapid Response Unit (RRU), formerly known as Operation Wembley and the
Violent Crimes Crack Unit, a section of the police created to combat armed crime,
continues to detain people without charge, well beyond the constitutionally mandated
48 hours. At least two individuals died this year as a result of torture in RRU
custody. Those arrested by the RRU await trial before military courts for long periods
of time. The slowness of the military courts has resulted in instances of
defendants serving longer periods on remand than would result from the maximum
sentence for their charges.
The RRU in September arrested Kenyan human rights activist Al-Amin Kimathi,
who had criticized the handover of Kenyan suspects in the July bombings to the
Ugandan authorities without due process. Kimathi was detained for six days without
charge, denied access to a lawyer, and eventually charged with terrorism in
the July bombing. At this writing, he is awaiting trial with 16 other suspects.
Human Rights Watch was denied access to all the detainees on this file.
Bills Violating International Human Rights Law
Indicating a troubling authoritarian trend as elections loom, Parliament and the
Cabinet drafted and debated a raft of repressive legislation.
The draft Public Order Management Bill would grant the inspector general of
police and the minister of internal affairs wide discretionary powers over the management
of all public meetings. The draft bill imposes extensive obligations on
meeting organizers, which violates rights to freedom of assembly and speech. The
bill would also allow state actors to regulate the conduct and content of discussions.
The Constitutional Court has already deemed some of these provisions
unconstitutional in previous cases.
189
AFRICA
The draft Press and Journalist Amendment Bill requires print media to be annually
registered and licensed by government regulatory bodies. It empowers the Media
Council to deny licenses based on its assessment of the newspaper’s “values”
and revoke them at will.
Homosexual conduct is already criminalized in Uganda, a violation of international
standards, but the proposed 2009 Anti-Homosexuality Bill would go further,
punishing homosexuality with up to life imprisonment, and “serial” homosexuality
with the death penalty. The bill, still pending at this writing, would also punish
failure to report acts of homosexuality and prohibit the “promotion” of homosexuality
through advocacy on sexual minority rights, threatening work of human
rights groups. In early October 2010 a new newspaper, Rolling Stone, published
photographs, names, and locations of some Ugandan lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender rights activists and individuals under a headline that included the
phrase “Hang Them.” Some have since gone into hiding. The government has
taken no action to protect them. The High Court issued a temporary injunction
barring further publication of such articles, though Rolling Stone went on to
allege that sexual minorities supported the July bombings.
The draft HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Act criminalizes intentional or attempted
transmission of HIV, an approach discredited by international principles.
Contravening international standards of voluntary counseling and testing the bill
also makes testing mandatory for pregnant women, their partners, and other
specified groups. The bill allows medical practitioners to disclose HIV status without
the patient’s consent potentially exposing women and girls to domestic violence.
Lord’s Resistance Army
While relative calm continued to prevail in northern Uganda, the Ugandan armed
rebel group the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) continued killings and abductions
across Central African Republic, southern Sudan and northern Democratic
Republic of Congo (see chapter on the DRC).
Warrants issued by the International Criminal Court for LRA leaders in 2005
remain outstanding. President Museveni reportedly signed a bill domesticating
WORLD REPORT 2011
190
191
AFRICA
the Rome Statute in May prior to the ICC Review Conference in Kampala. The
newly created War Crimes Division of the Ugandan High Court is expected to
begin its first trial in 2011 of LRA fighter Thomas Kwoyelo, charged with willful
killing, taking hostages, and extensive destruction of property. Kwoyelo has
applied for amnesty.
Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons
After two decades of conflict in Uganda’s northern region, internally displaced
persons (IDPs) have largely moved out of the camps. For persons with disabilities
there are significant hurdles to returning home. Research by Human Rights Watch
found that women with disabilities experience stigma and isolation, genderbased
violence, and obstacles in accessing health care and justice.
The government, cooperating with Rwandan authorities, forcibly repatriated more
than 1,700 Rwandan refugees and asylum seekers from southwestern Uganda in
July. Ugandan officials reportedly deceived the residents of Kyaka and Nakivale
camps into gathering around trucks by announcing a food distribution and information
on asylum appeals. Police and camp commanders then forced the residents
onto the trucks at gunpoint. In the ensuing panic 25 people were injured
and at least two died.
Key International Actors
Uganda’s Joint Budget Support partners–the European Commission, the World
Bank, the United Kingdom, Germany, Demark, Belgium, Ireland, Norway, the
Netherlands, Austria, and Sweden–reduced their US$360 million contribution to
Uganda’s budget by 10 percent due to concerns about unaddressed corruption.
A range of international actors, including United States President Barack Obama,
actively condemned the Anti-Homosexuality Bill, which appeared to have contributed
to retarding the bill’s progress in Parliament. Other key human rights
issues, particularly accountability for extrajudicial killings and torture by state
agents, were not raised with similar zeal.
The US and the UK, among other donors, put significant effort into
enhancing the election process in advance of 2011, including training for
WORLD REPORT 2011
192
police in public order management and support to reduce legal and regulatory
restrictions on freedom of expression. Some raised concerns
about the independence of the electoral commission, but the government
made no concessions.
The US continues to provide considerable logistical support and training to the
Ugandan army, both in counterterrorism efforts and for the ongoing UPDF-led
operations against the LRA. The FBI provided substantial resources to investigate
the July 11 bombings, but denied reports that its agents were present during interrogations
of suspects.
193
AFRICA
Zimbabwe
Two years into Zimbabwe’s power-sharing government, President Robert Mugabe
and the Zimbabwe African National Union- Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF) have used
violence and repression to continue to dominate government institutions and
hamper meaningful human rights progress. The former opposition party, the
Movement for Democratic Change (MDC), lacks real power to institute its political
agenda and end human rights abuses.
The power-sharing government has not investigated widespread abuses, including
killings, torture, beatings, and other ill-treatment committed by the army,
ZANU-PF supporters, and officials against real and perceived supporters of the
MDC.
Political Violence during Constitutional Outreach Program
In 2010 the power-sharing government began a series of community outreach
meetings called the Constitutional Outreach Program to elicit popular views on a
new constitution. However, the meetings were marked by increasing violence and
intimidation, mainly by ZANU-PF supporters and war veterans allied to ZANU-PF.
In February police disrupted MDC-organized preparatory constitutional reform
meetings, beat participants, and arbitrarily arrested 43 people in Binga, 48 in
Masvingo, and 52 in Mt. Darwin. The violence worsened in Harare, the capital,
and led to the suspension of 13 meetings in September.
On September 19, ZANU-PF supporters attacked MDC supporters and prevented
some from attending an outreach meeting in Mbare, Harare. The meeting ended
when violence broke out. ZANU-PF supporters and uniformed police assaulted 11
residents and MDC supporters from Mbare with blunt objects as they left the
meeting. One resident, Chrispen Mandizvidza, died from his injuries on
September 22.
Human Rights Violations in Marange Diamond Fields
Diamond revenue, particularly from the Marange diamond fields in eastern
Zimbabwe, is providing a parallel source of revenue for ZANU-PF and its repres-
WORLD REPORT 2011
194
195
AFRICA
WORLD REPORT 2011
196
sive state apparatus. Companies with connections to ZANU-PF are mining diamonds
in Marange, where military control and abuses continue. Corruption is rife,
and smuggling of diamonds by soldiers in the fields is prolific. The diamond revenues
continue to benefit a few senior people in the government and their associates
rather than the people of Zimbabwe. Soldiers continue to perpetrate abuses
in Marange, including forced labor, beatings, and harassment, which
Zimbabwe’s government has failed to investigate or prosecute.
State security agents have harassed local civil society organizations attempting to
document smuggling and abuses in the fields. On June 3, police arrested Farai
Maguwu, the head of the Centre for Research and Development, after he provided
sensitive information on the activities of soldiers in the fields to Abbey Chikane, a
monitor appointed by the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme, an international
body that oversees the diamond trade (also known as the Kimberley Process).
Police also beat, arrested, and detained members of Maguwu’s family. Maguwu
was charged with “communicating and publishing falsehoods against the State
with the intention to cause prejudice to the security or economic interests of the
country” under section 31 of the Criminal Law (Codification and Reform) Act.
The Kimberley Process has struggled to address state abuses in the fields. It’s
mandate narrowly defines “blood diamonds” as those mined by abusive rebel
groups, not abusive governments. In November 2010, at their annual meeting in
Jerusalem, Israel, Kimberley Process members failed to reach a consensus on
whether Zimbabwe should be allowed to resume exports of diamonds from parts
of the Marange diamond fields. However, Zimbabwe threatened to go ahead with
diamond exports, arguing that it had met the minimum standards required by the
Kimberley Process.
Media Freedom and Freedom of Expression
With ZANU-PF still in control, the power-sharing government continues to use an
arsenal of repressive legislation and unlawful tactics to restrict the right to freedom
of expression, and harass and punish critical journalists. While the government
has lifted restrictions on the international media and allowed independent
local daily papers to resume operations, it has not reformed media-related laws
as promised. It has also not reviewed criminal defamation laws that impose
197
AFRICA
severe penalties, including prison terms, on journalists. The government continues
to block free expression through senior officials aligned to ZANU-PF and partisan
state security agents.
Journalists and media practitioners routinely face arrest for allegedly violating the
state’s repressive media laws. On January 17, police arrested Barnabas
Madzimure and Fortune Mutandiro, two directors of a distribution company for
The Zimbabwean, a weekly newspaper published in South Africa and distributed
in Zimbabwe. The police questioned them for two hours about the operations of
the newspaper and then released them. On February 11, they were charged as
accomplices in “publishing falsehoods prejudicial to the state” in violation of the
Criminal Law (Codification and Reform) Act.
Journalists and media outlets have also been subjected to threats and harassment
from the authorities and security forces, creating major obstacles to reporting
on Zimbabwe’s political system and continuing abuses by ZANU-PF. On
January 16 freelance journalist Stanley Kwenda was forced to flee the country, following
death threats from a senior police officer. The death threats were prompted
by a story that Kwenda wrote for The Zimbabwean. The story reported that a
named senior police officer had barred Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai from visiting
police stations across the country.
In an example of restrictions on freedom of expression, police arrested artist
Owen Maseko on March 26 after he displayed an exhibition that portrayed massacres
that took place in Matabeleland in the 1980s, allegedly carried out by
troops loyal to President Mugabe. Maseko was initially arrested on charges of violating
section 33 of the Criminal Law (Codification and Reform) Act for insulting or
undermining the authority of the president. The charges were later altered to section
31 of the same act which deals with the publication of false statements prejudicial
to the state. Maseko spent four days in police custody before he was
released on bail, and is awaiting trial at this writing.
Human Rights Defenders
The working environment for human rights defenders continues to be restrictive.
For example, 83 men and women from the group Women of Zimbabwe Arise were
WORLD REPORT 2011
198
arrested in Harare on September 20 as they demonstrated against the lack of professionalism
by the Zimbabwean police. The group was detained at the Harare
Central Police Station for two days. On September 22 they were charged with
criminal nuisance under the Criminal Law (Codification and Reform) Act and
released on free bail.
In a raid at the offices of the organization Gays and Lesbians of Zimbabwe (GALZ)
on May 21, police arrested staff members Ellen Chadenama and Ignatius Mhambi,
charging them with possession of “obscene, indecent or prohibited articles” and
confiscating educational material. On May 24 a Zimbabwean magistrate’s court
added the charge of “undermining authority of or insulting [the] president”
because the GALZ office displayed a placard that made a critical reference to
President Mugabe. Two days later police searched the house of the acting director
of GALZ, confiscating his birth certificate, several GALZ magazines, books, and
business cards. Chadenama and Mhambi spent six days in detention before they
were released on bail; they pleaded not guilty to the charges. Mhambi and
Chadenama reported that they were physically assaulted by the police while in
custody. Mhambi said that police hit him with empty glass bottles on his knees.
The arrests, which Human Rights Watch considers to be politically motivated,
occurred shortly before the opening of the Constitutional Outreach Program,
through which GALZ is seeking to remove discriminatory provisions and secure
constitutional protections for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people. The
trial is ongoing at this writing although Mthambi has been acquitted of the first
charge.
Rule of Law
In a worrying development for respect for the rule of law, heads of state of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC), at their annual summit in
August, upheld Zimbabwe’s objections to the jurisdiction of the SADC Tribunal.
Zimbabwe formally withdrew from the tribunal, arguing that the court did not
exist by law. In 2008 the tribunal ruled in favor of 79 white commercial farmers
who took the government to the tribunal in a bid to block the compulsory acquisition
of their farms by the state, and has made a number of other rulings against
the state. Zimbabwe’s courts have refused to enforce rulings by the tribunal.
199
AFRICA
Key International Actors
The South African government deepened its engagement with the power-sharing
government, but failed to make full use of its leverage to ensure meaningful
human rights improvements. Despite visiting the country several times, President
Jacob Zuma and his mediation team have failed to engage the power-sharing government
on critical issues that include cessation of human rights abuses, institutional
reform targeting constitutional and electoral processes, as well as security
sector reform.
Instead Zuma and other heads of state from the SADC community have called for
the lifting of targeted sanctions against President Mugabe and his inner circle,
arguing that these were a major obstacle to the progress of the power-sharing
government. In September SADC announced that it had asked for regional leaders
to embark on a tour of the United States and European Union calling for the lifting
of sanctions. In the absence of meaningful progress, the US and the EU have
maintained targeted sanctions on Mugabe and others within his government.
WORLD REPORT 2011
200
201
AFRICA

203
AFRICA
WORLD REPORT
2011
AMERICAS
H U M A N
R I G H T S
W A T C H
Argentina
Argentina continues to make significant progress in prosecuting military and
police personnel for “disappearances,” killings, and torture during the country’s
“dirty war” in the 1980s, although trials have been subject to delays.
Argentina passed legislation to regulate broadcast and print media in 2010, and
is considering bills to promote access to information. The impact of the new
media legislation on freedom of expression in Argentina will depend on how it is
implemented by a new regulatory body established by the law. A landmark law
passed in July legalized same-sex marriage.
Significant ongoing rights concerns include deplorable prison conditions and
arbitrary restrictions on women’s reproductive rights.
Confronting Past Abuses
Several important human rights cases from Argentina’s last military dictatorship
(1976-1983) were reopened in 2003 after Congress annulled the 1986 “Full Stop”
law, which had forced a halt to the prosecution of all such cases, and the 1987
“Due Obedience” law, which granted automatic immunity in such cases to all
members of the military except those in positions of command. Starting in 2005
federal judges struck down pardons issued by then-president Carlos Menem in
1989-90 of former officials convicted or facing trial for human rights violations.
As of October 2010, 748 people were facing charges for these crimes and 81 had
been convicted. In December 2009, after long delays, the trial began of 19 officers
who worked in the infamous Navy Mechanics School (ESMA) for their alleged
responsibility for the torture and enforced disappearance of 87 victims. In April
2010 former military president Gen. Reynaldo Bignone received a 25 year prison
sentence for the kidnapping and torture of 56 people at the Campo de Mayo military
camp on the outskirts of Buenos Aires.
Delays in judicial proceedings, however, continue to undermine accountability.
According to the Center for Legal and Social Studies (CELS), by October 2010, 253
people implicated in crimes committed during the dictatorship had died before
WORLD REPORT 2011
204
being brought to justice. One of the main causes of delay was the failure to allocate
sufficient courtrooms in Buenos Aires. There have also been long delays at
the appellate level: as of March 2010 the Supreme Court had confirmed final sentences
in only two of the cases reactivated after the annulment of the amnesty
laws.
The security of witnesses in human rights trials continues to be a serious concern.
Jorge Julio López, age 78, a former torture victim who “disappeared” from
his home in September 2006,the day before he was due to attend one of the final
days of a trial, remains missing.
In September the government filed a criminal complaint charging the owner and
president of the newspaper Clarin, the director of La Nacion, and the former owners
of La Razon with crimes against humanity. The complaint alleged that the
three newspapers had illegally appropriated the newsprint company Papel Prensa
in 1976, during the military dictatorship. In 1977 government agents kidnapped
and tortured five members of the Graiver family, which owned majority shares in
Papel Prensa. The government alleges that representatives of the newspapers, in
concert with the military government, used threats to pressure the members of
the family into signing over their shares. Clarin and La Nacion insisted that the
acquisition of the shares was legal and denied any link between their purchase
and the detention of the Graiver family. They accused the government of attacking
the papers because of their criticism of President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner.
Freedom of Expression and Information
A bill to regulate the broadcast media, approved by Congress in October 2009,
aims to promote diversity of views by limiting the ability of corporations to own
large portions of the radio frequency spectrum. The new law contains vague definitions
of what “faults” could lead to sanctions such as the revocation of broadcasting
licenses. Responsibility for interpreting and implementing the law is
assigned to a new regulatory body. Courts have issued injunctions suspending
the application of some of its articles while they review the law.
In October 2010 commissions of the Chamber of Deputies approved draft legislation
presented by President Fernández to regulate the company that produces
205
AMERICAS
and distributes paper for newsprint in Argentina. The law would also declare that
the supply of newsprint is a matter of public interest, granting oversight powers to
an implementing body that reports to the executive.
In 2010 both chambers of Congress debated bills to ensure public access to information
held by state bodies. In September the Senate approved a bill presented
by an opposition senator to ensure public access to information held by all three
branches of government as well as other public institutions such as universities,
state-funded enterprises, and the Central Bank. The bill would establish a body to
apply the regulations, with members appointed by each branch of government,
the ombudsman, the comptroller general, and the National Archive. By October
Congress had not yet agreed on a final text.
The absence of transparent criteria for allocating government advertising contracts,
at the federal level and in some provinces, creates a risk of political discrimination
against media outlets that criticize government officials. In a case
against the provincial government of Neuquen, the Supreme Court ruled in
September 2007 that, while media companies have no right to government advertising
revenue, officials may not apply discriminatory criteria in deciding where to
place advertisements. Several bills to regulate the matter remain pending.
Judicial Independence
President Fernández, her husband (former president Néstor Kirchner, who died in
October 2010), and high level authorities repeatedly questioned decisions adopted
by the judiciary in 2010. For example, in September the Supreme Court
ordered the province of Santa Cruz to reinstate a former state attorney general
who had been removed from his post in 1995, when former President Kirchner
was governor of Santa Cruz, without following the legal procedure for his removal.
President Fernández supported the governor, who refused to reinstate the attorney
general, and stated that the ruling was unconstitutional.
Transnational Justice
To date no one has been convicted for the 1994 bombing of the Jewish Argentine
Mutual Association in Buenos Aires (AMIA), in which 85 people died and over 300
WORLD REPORT 2011
206
were injured. Criminal investigations and prosecutions have been hindered by
judicial corruption and political cover-ups in Argentina, and by the failure of Iran,
which is suspected of ordering the attack, to cooperate with the Argentine justice
system. An Argentine federal court issued an international warrant for the arrest
of former Iranian president Ali Akbar Hashemi-Rafsanjani and six Iranian officials
in 2006, but demands for their extradition fell on deaf ears. In a speech at the
United Nations in September 2010 President Fernández offered Iranian President
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad the possibility of holding the trials in a neutral third
country. In a letter to the UN in October Iran rejected the proposal as “unsustainable.”
In September 2010 the Argentine Supreme Court approved a request by Chile for
the extradition of Galvarino Apablaza, a Chilean citizen facing criminal investigation
for his alleged role in the assassination of former Chilean senator Jaime
Guzmán, a close civilian advisor of General Pinochet. A former leader of a leftwing
armed group, Apablaza was also wanted in Chile for allegedly ordering the
kidnapping of the son of a prominent newspaper owner. Both crimes were committed
in 1991 after Chile’s return to democratic rule. The Supreme Court ruled
that the crimes were not political and approved the extradition subject to a ruling
by Argentina’s National Refugee Commission (CONARE) on Apablaza’s long-standing
request for political asylum in Argentina. CONARE, an inter-ministerial panel
on which only government officials have the right to vote, decided unanimously to
grant Apablaza political asylum. The grounds for the decision were not made public.
Conditions in Detention Facilities
Overcrowding, abuses by guards, and inmate violence continue to be serious
problems in detention facilities. In a landmark ruling in May 2005 the Supreme
Court declared that all prisons in the country must abide by the UN Standard
Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, highlighting the deplorable conditions
in the province of Buenos Aires. According to a report submitted to the
Supreme Court in October 2009 by CELS, 4,507 people were being held in police
stations in the province which are unsuited for long-term detention. CELS estimated
that the provincial prison population was nearly 40 percent above capacity,
the figure rising to nearly 65 percent if individuals held in police stations were
207
AMERICAS
included. Responding to this report in March 2010 the court again urged the
province’s Supreme Court to correct the “inhuman conditions” in detention facilities.
Detainee and prisoner access to medicines and medical services continues to be
inadequate in many facilities despite HIV prevalence rates far higher than in the
general population and conditions conducive to ill health.
Reproductive Rights and Marriage
Women face numerous obstacles to reproductive health products and services
such as contraception, voluntary sterilization procedures, and abortion after rape.
The most common barriers are long delays in obtaining services, unnecessary
referrals to other clinics, demands for spousal permission contrary to law, financial
barriers, and, in some cases, arbitrary denials. As a direct result of these barriers,
women and girls may face unwanted or unhealthy pregnancies. Unsafe
abortions have been a leading cause of maternal mortality for decades.
Government oversight of reproductive health care and accountability practices are
woefully deficient.
In a major advance for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender rights, Argentina in
July became the first Latin American country to legalize same-sex marriage.
Key International Actors
In June 2010 the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights expressed “deep
concern” about conditions in Argentina’s police jails and prisons, and urged the
government to end the use of police stations as detention centers.
Argentina continued to positively engage on human rights issues at the UN
Human Rights Council and in other international settings. At the Council,
Argentina has consistently voted in a principled way to ensure scrutiny of human
rights violators. It also has played a key role in opposing a proposed UN resolution
on defamation of religion that would undermine freedom of expression standards.
WORLD REPORT 2011
208
209
AMERICAS
Bolivia
Lack of accountability for rights abuses remains a serious problem in Bolivia. The
fate of scores who “disappeared” before democracy was re-established in 1982
has still not been clarified, and most perpetrators of disappearances and extrajudicial
executions have escaped justice. In 2010 officials of President Evo
Morales’s government backed the military when it failed to comply with court
orders to provide access to information. During the same year the Bolivian
Legislative Assembly passed anti-corruption laws that do not fully adhere to the
rights to a fair trial and due process.
Due Process and Judicial Independence
Laws enacted in 2010 that are intended to strengthen accountability for past
human rights abuses and corruption by government officials include provisions
that contravene international standards of due process and fair trial, including
the prohibition on the retroactive application of criminal law and the right to be
present during trial.
An anti-corruption law establishing new crimes and harsher penalties passed in
March 2010. It allows for individuals to be prosecuted for actions and behavior
that was not criminalized before the law was adopted, a breach of the international
law principle that criminal provisions may not be applied retroactively. The
anti-corruption law also makes it possible to try former heads of state in absentia,
a provision incompatible with the right to be present during trial in order to exercise
a proper defense.
In February 2010, responding to the crisis provoked by the legislature’s inability
to agree on judicial appointments, President Morales obtained legislative
approval to appoint five temporary justices to the Supreme Court, as well as temporary
magistrates to the Constitutional Court, in a process that lacked the usual
safeguards for selecting judges. The judges are to be replaced by permanent
judges to be elected by universal suffrage in December 2010.
WORLD REPORT 2011
210
Accountability for Past Abuses
Efforts in 2010 by prosecutors to reopen investigation into serious abuses committed
under previous governments, particularly the military dictatorships of
Hugo Banzer (1971-1978) and Luis García Meza (1980-1981), met with resistance
from Bolivian armed forces. Instead of guaranteeing full military cooperation with
such investigations, the government backed the armed forces in conflicts with
prosecutors and judges.
In February 2010 an investigating judge ordered the army to turn over information
that could help clarify “disappearances” that occurred in 1980. The defense minister
assured that access would be granted. However, when the public prosecutor,
Milton Mendoza, visited army headquarters to request a view of the files, he was
turned away on the grounds that the army first needed to put the documents in
order. Another prosecutor was allowed into the building a week later, but was
allowed only to view the contents of a filing cabinet, and not to remove or photocopy
documents. The armed forces eventually provided only a photocopied register
of personnel on active service in 1980. In April 2010 the Supreme Court issued
a further ruling ordering the declassification of files covering the first year of the
García Meza dictatorship. However, at this writing the army continued to defy the
order and has provided no information to help clarify the fate of the “disappeared.”
Mendoza, whom Vice-President Alvaro García Linera publicly criticized
for overstepping his mandate, was taken off the case.
In October 2010 the Supreme Court upheld the conviction of 11 former police and
military officers for their role in the murder in 1980 of socialist leader Marcelo
Quiroga Santa Cruz. It sentenced three of them in absentia to 30 years in prison
on charges including terrorism and murder, and the others to shorter prison terms
for covering up the crime. Quiroga’s remains have still not been found.
In November 2008 Bolivia’s government requested the extradition of former president
Gonzalo Sánchez de Lozada and two of his ministers to stand trial for killing
at least 60 people in anti-government protests in September and October 2003,
when the army used lethal force to quell violent demonstrations in the highland
city of El Alto. As of November 2010 it has received no response from the United
States government.
211
AMERICAS
Sánchez de Lozada resigned and fled to the US after the events, known in Bolivia
as “Black October.” The three men, as well as other ministers who were given asylum
in Peru, have been declared fugitives from justice. In August 2010 the prosecutor
filed charges against three senior military officials, including a former commander-
in-chief of the armed forces, for destroying military documents, including
a log believed to have recorded details of the events and the personnel who participated.
Military Jurisdiction
The determination of Bolivia’s military courts to assert jurisdiction over human
rights abuses has been a major obstacle to accountability for many years. The
military has often refused to allow members of the armed forces to testify before
civilian courts, instead insisting on trying the cases in military court, which invariably
ends in acquittals. However, in an important precedent in September 2010,
the army commander-in-chief—at President Morales’s insistence—ordered four
officers accused of subjecting a conscript to water torture in September 2009 to
appear before a civilian court.
Political Violence and Impunity
Impunity continued to be a problem in 2010. Investigations into deaths and
injuries that occurred during violent protests in 2008 and 2009 over Bolivia’s new
constitution and demands for autonomy by five regional departments were ineffective
and subject to long delays.
In June 2010, after long delays due to conflicts over jurisdiction, a court in La Paz
began to hear a case against 26 defendants in connection with the killing of at
least nine pro-Morales demonstrators in Porvenir, Pando department, in
September 2008. The accused included the former prefect of Pando department,
Leopoldo Fernández, who was indicted in October 2009 on charges of homicide,
terrorism, and conspiracy. He was still in preventive detention in September
2010.
The Attorney General’s Office also failed in 2010 to conduct a thorough and
impartial investigation into the circumstances in which three Europeans were
WORLD REPORT 2011
212
shot dead in April 2009 when an elite police unit broke into their rooms in a
Santa Cruz hotel. The public prosecutor accused the men of being mercenaries
engaged in a plot to kill President Morales, and named several government opponents
alleged to have hired them. However, the evidence he offered to support
the official version that the three men were involved in a firefight when they were
killed was widely questioned. The government rejected calls from European governments
for an independent investigation.
Media Freedom
Bolivia enjoys vibrant public debate, with a variety of critical and pro-government
media outlets. However, in what remains a politically polarized atmosphere,
President Morales sometimes aggressively criticizes the press, accusing journalists
of distorting facts and seeking to discredit him. In January 2010, he warned
journalists that he would establish norms “so that the media don’t lie.” However,
at this writing the government has presented no proposals for legislation on the
media.
Under a law against racism and other forms of discrimination, passed in October
2010, media that “authorize or publish racist or discriminatory ideas” can be
fined and have their broadcasting licenses suspended. Media outlets protested
these provisions, claiming they were so broad that they could be used against
media critical of the government.
Human Rights Defenders
In August 2010, police searched and removed computers from the office and
home of Jorge Quiroz and Claudia Lecoña, lawyers for the parents of two students
killed when police broke up a protest in May in Caranavi, in the department of La
Paz. Quiroz, who worked as a volunteer for the La Paz Permanent Assembly of
Human Rights, reportedly accused police of using excessive force. Government
officials accused Quiroz of a string of offenses, including drug-trafficking, immigration
irregularities, acting as an “infiltrator” for the US embassy in the Caranavi
protests, and trafficking prostitutes. However, no proof was provided or charges
leveled, raising concern that the government aimed to discredit Quiroz because of
his accusations against the police.
213
AMERICAS
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
The new constitution explicitly bans discrimination based on sexual orientation
and gender identity. The anti-racism law under debate in Congress provides a
penalty of up to five years imprisonment for anyone who discriminates on the
basis of sexual orientation or gender identity, and an even higher penalty of up to
seven-and-a-half years if the offender is a public official.
Key International Actors
In October 2010 the Inter-American Court of Human Rights found Bolivia responsible
for multiple violations of human rights in relation to the enforced disappearance
of Rainer Ibsen Cárdenas, a student, and his father, José Luis Ibsen Peña,
during the military dictatorship of Hugo Banzer in the early 1970s.
WORLD REPORT 2011
214
Brazil
Brazil has consolidated its place as one of the most influential democracies in
regional and global affairs in recent years, but important human rights challenges
remain. Faced with high levels of violent crime, some Brazilian police officers
engage in abusive practices instead of pursuing sound policing policies.
Detention conditions in the country are often inhumane, and torture remains a
serious problem. Forced labor persists in some states despite federal efforts to
eradicate it. Indigenous peoples and landless peasants face threats and violence,
particularly in rural conflicts over land distribution.
Public Security and Police Conduct
Most of Brazil’s metropolitan areas are plagued by widespread violence perpetrated
by criminal gangs and abusive police. Violence especially impacts low-income
communities. There are more than 40,000 intentional homicides in Brazil every
year. In Rio de Janeiro hundreds of low-income communities are occupied and
controlled by drug gangs, who routinely engage in violent crime and extortion.
Police abuse, including extrajudicial execution, is a chronic problem. According to
official data, police were responsible for 505 killings in the state of Rio de Janeiro
alone in the first six months of 2010. This amounts to roughly three police killings
per day, or at least one police killing for every six “regular” intentional homicides.
The number of killings by police in Sao Paulo, while less than in Rio de Janeiro, is
also comparatively high. A 2009 Human Rights Watch report found that police in
Sao Paulo state had killed more people over the prior five years than had police
in all of South Africa, a country with a higher homicide rate than Sao Paulo.
Police claim these are “resistance” killings that occur in confrontations with criminals.
While many police killings undoubtedly result from legitimate use of force by
police officers, many others do not, a fact documented by Human Rights Watch
and other groups and recognized by Brazilian criminal justice officials. Reform
efforts have fallen short because state criminal justice systems rely almost entirely
on police investigators to resolve these cases, leaving police largely to police
themselves.
215
AMERICAS
In 2010 the attorney general of Sao Paulo took an important step to address the
problem of police violence by establishing that all cases involving alleged police
abuse be investigated by a special unit of prosecutors.
The state of Rio de Janeiro has installed Pacifying Police Units (UPP) in some favelas
(shanty towns) since 2008, with the aim of establishing a more effective
police presence at the community level. However, the state has not yet taken adequate
steps to ensure that police who commit abuses are held accountable.
Some police officers also commit abuses while off duty. In Rio de Janeiro, policelinked
militias control dozens of neighborhoods at gunpoint, extorting residents
and committing murders and other violent crimes. The government has undertaken
significant efforts to dismantle some of these groups, and dozens of alleged
militia members have been arrested, but the problem remains critical.
In April 2010, 23 people were executed in the region of Santos, in the state of Sao
Paulo. Local residents have attributed the killings to a death squad known as the
“Ninjas” which allegedly includes police officers among its members.
In July 2010, four military police officers were convicted of murdering and decapitating
a mentally disabled person. They were identified as being members of a
death squad known as the “Highlanders”, a nickname derived from the group’s
practice of cutting off the heads and hands of their victims in an effort to cover up
their crimes (a practice from the 1986 fictional film Highlander).
Detention Conditions, Torture, and Ill-Treatment
Brazil’s prisons and jails are plagued by inhumane conditions, violence, and
severe overcrowding. Delays within the justice system contribute to the overcrowding:
some 44 percent of all inmates in the country are pretrial detainees.
Over the past three years the National Council of Justice, the judiciary’s oversight
body, ordered the release of more than 25,000 prisoners who were being held
arbitrarily.
The use of torture is a chronic problem within the penitentiary system. A report by
the multiparty National Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry on the Penitentiary
WORLD REPORT 2011
216
217
AMERICAS
System concluded that the national detention system is plagued by “physical and
psychological torture.” In one case from Goias, the Commission received evidence
that the National Security Force subjected female detainees to kicks and
electric shocks, stepped on the abdomen of a pregnant woman, and forced
another woman to strip naked. A 2010 report by the Pastoral Prison Commission
found that these problems continue.
Gangs continue to dominate the prisons in Brazil. In early 2010 gang rivalry in a
prison in Parana state led to a riot involving 1,200 prisoners. Five people were
killed, including two burned to death.
HIV and tuberculosis prevalence rates in Brazilian prisons are far higher than
rates in the general population; overcrowded conditions facilitate the spread of
disease and prisoners’ access to medical care remains inadequate.
There were also continued reports of substandard conditions at Rio de Janeiro’s
juvenile detention centers run by the General Department of Socio-Educational
Measures (DEGASE). In 2010, 44 DEGASE agents were charged with participating
in a torture session in 2008 that resulted in the death of one juvenile and left
another 20 injured.
A 2001 law sought to overhaul the system of mental health institutions, which
had been plagued by overcrowding and inhumane conditions, but it has not yet
been fully implemented.
Reproductive Health Rights
Raids on family planning clinics and aggressive prosecution of abortion limited
women’s access to reproductive health services in 2010. In May a bill to prioritize
the human rights of a fertilized ovum over those of the pregnant woman carrying
it was voted favorably out of the Family and Social Security Commission of the
Brazilian House of Representatives. The bill is still pending at this writing.
Forced Labor
Since 1995 the federal government has taken important steps to eradicate forced
labor, including creating mobile investigation units to monitor conditions in rural
WORLD REPORT 2011
218
areas and establishing a list of employers found to have used forced labor. More
than 36,000 workers have been freed since 1995. However, the Pastoral Land
Commission reported that more than 6,000 workers were subject to forced labor
in 2009. Criminal accountability for offending employers remains relatively rare.
According to the United Nations special rapporteur on contemporary forms of
slavery, forced labor is also present in urban centers in the garment industry.
Bolivian workers are recruited by Brazilian sweatshops and trafficked to Sao
Paulo, where they have to endure harsh living and working conditions. They are
often locked in basements, work up to 18 hours a day, and receive very little pay.
Rural Violence and Land Conflicts
Indigenous and landless peoples face threats and violence, particularly in land
disputes in rural areas. According to the Pastoral Land Commission, 25 people
were killed and 62 were attacked in rural conflicts throughout the country in
2009. In September 2010 José Valmeristo Soares, a member of the Landless Rural
Workers’ Movement, was killed by gunmen in Para, the state with the highest
numbers of such killings.
Confronting Past Abuses
Brazil has never prosecuted those responsible for atrocities committed during the
period of its military dictatorship (1964-1985). A 1979 amnesty law has thus far
been interpreted to bar prosecutions of state agents, an interpretation reaffirmed
in April 2010 by the Supreme Federal Tribunal.
The federal government in 2010 presented a bill creating a national truth commission
to investigate dictatorship-era abuses, but at this writing its approval is still
pending in congress.
Human Rights Defenders
Some human rights defenders, particularly those working on issues of police violence
and land conflicts, suffer intimidation and violence. In January 2009
Manoel Mattos, a human rights lawyer, was shot and killed in the border area
219
AMERICAS
between the states of Paraiba and Pernambuco. The main suspect, a police officer
linked to a death squad under investigation by Mattos, has been arrested. In
October 2010 in an unprecedented decision, the judiciary ruled in favor of a
request by the Attorney General’s Office to grant federal prosecutors jurisdiction
over the case to ensure an independent investigation and prosecution.
Media Freedom
In July 2009 a court issued an injunction prohibiting the newspaper O Estado de
Sao Paulo from publishing stories containing information from the “Operacao
Faktor” police investigation involving Fernando Sarney, son of Senate President
José Sarney. Despite strenuous criticism from national and international press
freedom organizations, the ruling was confirmed by the Supreme Federal Tribunal
in December 2009. At this writing the restrictions are still in force.
In September 2010 the Supreme Federal Tribunal suspended an electoral law provision
that had imposed restrictions on radio and television broadcast of programs
that “degrade or ridicule” political candidates.
Key International Actors
In March 2009 the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights filed an application
at the Inter-American Court regarding the “Guerrilha do Araguaia” case, asking
the court to hold Brazil responsible for the enforced disappearance of guerrilla
members carried out by the Brazilian military in the 1970s, during the military dictatorship.
It also petitioned the court to instruct the Brazilian government to
ensure that the country’s amnesty law does not continue to bar the investigation
and prosecution of past human rights abuses. In May 2010 the Brazilian defense
minister declared that Brazil would not comply with such a ruling. The court’s
decision is still pending at this writing.
The Inter-American Court of Human Rights issued a ruling against Brazil in
September 2009 in the case of Garibaldi v. Brazil, declaring that Brazilian authorities
had not acted with due diligence in investigating the death of Sétimo
Garibaldi, who was killed in 1998 during an extrajudicial operation aimed at evicting
families of landless workers in Parana.
WORLD REPORT 2011
220
Brazil increased its influence at the UN Human Rights Council. In 2009 the government
controversially abstained from supporting strong scrutiny of North Korea,
Sri Lanka, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In 2010 it improved its
record, supporting continued UN monitoring of human rights conditions in North
Korea and Sudan and convening a session on Haiti. Brazil also proposed in 2010
that the Council develop a more cooperative, less adversarial approach to its
work, an idea that could weaken the Council if not accompanied by new mechanisms
to ensure human rights accountability.
221
AMERICAS
Chile
Chilean military courts that fall short of international standards of independence
and impartiality continue to investigate and try police accused of human rights
abuses. Counterterrorism legislation has been used inappropriately to deal with
common crimes committed by indigenous protesters. Legislation enacted in 2010
only partially corrected these problems.
Judges continue to convict former military personnel accused of committing grave
human rights violations during the military dictatorship (1973-1990). However,
final sentences are often unacceptably lenient given the seriousness of the
crimes. Overcrowding and inhumane conditions in many Chilean prisons remains
a serious problem.
Military Jurisdiction
Beginning in 2000, Chile has overhauled its criminal justice procedure and reinforced
due process guarantees, however, until 2010, military courts continued to
exercise jurisdiction over civilians accused of acts of violence against Carabineros
(uniformed police), which is part of the armed forces. Military courts still hold
jurisdiction over crimes committed by Carabineros against civilians, such as use
of excessive force, torture, and ill-treatment.
In a 2005 ruling in the Palamara case, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights
ordered Chile to ensure that military courts no longer exercise jurisdiction over
civilians. Subsequent court decisions have held that members of the armed
forces accused of humans rights violations should also be tried under civilian
jurisdiction.
Legislation approved by Congress in September 2010 finally complied with Chile’s
obligation to ensure that civilian courts try civilians in all cases. However, it did
not transfer to civilian jurisdiction cases of abuse by police officers against civilians,
thereby failing to meet Chile’s obligations under international law to ensure
that law enforcement officials accused of human rights abuses are tried by independent
and impartial courts.
WORLD REPORT 2011
222
Police Abuses
In repeated incidents, carabineros have used excessive force during operations in
indigenous Mapuche communities in the Araucanía region. Abuses typically occur
when police try to control Mapuche protests and prevent land occupations, or
when they enter communities to pursue activists suspected of crimes allegedly
committed during land disputes with farmers and logging companies.
Since 2002, police have been responsible for the deaths of at least three
Mapuches. As noted, such cases are investigated by military courts that do not
meet international standards of independence and impartiality; sentences have
either resulted in acquittals or been extremely lenient. In August 2010, for example,
Corte Marcial (the military appeals court) placed on probation for three years
a police corporal convicted of using excessive force by shooting a Mapuche
activist, Matías Catrileo, in the back with a submachine gun. Three military judges
on active service have a majority on the panel, which also includes two civilian
appellate judges. The same court acquitted a policeman accused of shooting a
young Mapuche, Alex Lemun, in 2002. In July 2010 it ordered charges dropped
against four policeman accused of beating Carlos Curinao, the son of a Mapuche
community leader, while he lay prostrate on the ground.
Counterterrorism Laws
Since 2004 Human Rights Watch has expressed concern about inappropriate use
of counterterrorism legislation to deal with common crimes, such as arson, committed
by indigenous Mapuche activists. Under Chile’s counterterrorism law,
crimes against property, such as burning homesteads, woods, or crops; or damaging
vehicles or machinery, are considered terrorist crimes if judges believe they
are intended to spread fear among the population. Defendants under the law
have restricted due process rights and face much higher sentences. As of June
2010 more than 50 Mapuches faced terrorism charges and five had been convicted
of terrorist crimes.
In October 2010 the government enacted legislation to modify the counterterrorism
law in response to a hunger strike by 32 Mapuche prisoners protesting the
law’s application to their cases, as well as their prosecution by military courts.
223
AMERICAS
The reforms of the counterterrorism law strengthened some due process guarantees,
such as allowing witnesses whose identity can be concealed by prosecutors
to be cross-examined by defense attorneys. The government also announced it
would drop all accusations of terrorism against Mapuches currently in the courts,
and accuse them only under the ordinary criminal law. However, the inclusion in
the law of crimes against property was left unchanged, and public prosecutors
continued to apply the law to such crimes.
Confronting Past Abuses
Cases of human rights abuses committed during military rule under investigation
by the courts rose from 350 in April 2010 to 452 in June 2010 due to relatives’
associations filing new cases. President Sebastian Piñera continues to provide
government support for the Human Rights Program attached to the Ministry of the
Interior, whose lawyers help relatives of victims pursue their cases before the
courts.
As of June 2010, 292 former military personnel and civilian collaborators had
been convicted on charges of enforced disappearances, extrajudicial executions,
and torture (of whom 210 had the verdict confirmed on final appeal). Sixty-four
were serving prison sentences; 490 more were facing charges.
In July 2010 Piñera announced he would exclude prisoners convicted of human
rights violations from presidential clemency measures that the Catholic Church
had requested to mark the 200th anniversary of Chile’s founding as a republic.
In July 2010 the Supreme Court’s criminal chamber confirmed the conviction of
Augusto Pinochet’s secret police chief, Manuel Contreras, and eight other agents
for the 1974 car bomb assassination of former army commander Carlos Prats and
his wife. The court sentenced Contreras and his associate Pedro Espinoza to 20
years in prison for aggravated homicide and criminal association. The court held
these were crimes against humanity, and that Chile is bound under the Geneva
Conventions to judge and punish those responsible for such crimes, regardless of
the self-amnesty law that Pinochet introduced in 1977.
However, in many cases the Supreme Court has routinely used its discretionary
powers to reduce sentences against human rights violators in recognition of the
WORLD REPORT 2011
224
time elapsed since the criminal act. Often the sentence finally imposed is low
enough to exempt those convicted from going to prison. This practice raises concerns
about Chile’s fulfillment of its obligation to hold perpetrators of disappearances
accountable by imposing appropriate punishment or sanctions; less than
one-third of those convicted were actually serving prison time in August 2010.
Prison Conditions
Chile has yet to take effective measures to relieve severe overcrowding in its prisons,
and alleviate conditions that a senior justice official has described as “inhumane.”
In Chile’s most crowded prisons in 2010, at least two prisoners on average occupied
facilities intended for one. Prison conditions include overcrowding; poor
sanitation, ventilation, and nutrition; and lack of potable water. Yet despite conditions
conducive to ill-health and the spread of infectious disease, access to medical
care remains inadequate. According to a report that a government-appointed
prison review commission issued in March 2010, the problem stems from delays
in the construction of new facilities, the introduction of faster criminal procedures,
harsher sentencing policies, and failure to implement effective alternatives
to prison. Following visits to facilities across the country in July and August,
Minister of Justice Felipe Bulnes said that the problem of overcrowding had been
“invisible for a long time,” and announced measures to improve conditions.
Reproductive Rights
Chile is one of a handful of countries that prohibits abortion in all circumstances,
even in cases of rape or incest, or to save the life or health of a pregnant woman.
Despite this, an estimated 60,000 to 200,000 clandestine abortions occur annually,
corresponding to between 20 and 40 percent of all pregnancies. The lack of
precise statistics on the prevalence of abortion speaks to the highly stigmatized
and clandestine nature of the practice. Chile also has one of the highest teenage
pregnancy rates in the world, with over 15 percent of all births corresponding to
adolescent mothers. There was continued controversy in 2010 over the distribution
of modern contraceptive methods. For example, the main health authority of
Coquimbo region withdrew the authority of midwives to distribute contraception,
225
AMERICAS
contravening national norms. Many women, especially in rural or less accessible
areas, lose real access when only medical doctors can distribute contraception.
Key International Actors
United Nations experts have repeatedly criticized the use of counterterrorism legislation
against Mapuche activists, including the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination and the special rapporteur on the situation of human rights
and fundamental freedoms of indigenous peoples.
In September the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights filed a case with
the Inter-American Court on Human Rights accusing Chile of discriminating
against Karen Atala, a judge who is an open lesbian, by depriving her of custody
of her children because of her sexual orientation. The Supreme Court refused to
participate in a panel formed by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to debate ways of
implementing the commission’s recommendations, arguing the final court decision
was not subject to discussion. The Inter-American Court will decide for the
first time whether such discrimination violates the American Convention on
Human Rights.
WORLD REPORT 2011
226
Colombia
Colombia’s internal armed conflict continued to result in serious abuses by irregular
armed groups in 2010, including guerrillas and successor groups to paramilitaries.
Violence has displaced millions of Colombians internally, and displaces
hundreds of thousands every year. Armed actors frequently threaten or attack
human rights defenders, journalists, community leaders, trade unionists, indigenous
and Afro-Colombian leaders, displaced persons’ leaders, and paramilitaries’
victims seeking land restitution or justice.
In August 2010 President Juan Manuel Santos replaced former President Alvaro
Uribe, whose administration was racked by scandals over extrajudicial killings by
the army, a highly questioned paramilitary demobilization process, and the
national intelligence service’s illegal surveillance of human rights defenders, journalists,
opposition politicians, and Supreme Court justices. President Santos has
promoted legislation to restore land to displaced persons and compensate victims
of abuses by state agents, publicly voiced respect for an independent judiciary,
and denounced threats against human rights defenders. However, it remains
to be seen whether his approach translates into concrete results in light of serious
ongoing abuses.
Guerrilla Abuses
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and the National Liberation
Army (ELN) continue to carry out serious abuses against civilians. The FARC especially
is often involved in killings, threats, forced displacement, and recruiting
child combatants.
The FARC and ELN frequently use antipersonnel landmines. The government
reported that 76 civilians were injured between January and August 2010 by
antipersonnel landmines and unexploded munitions.
In September 2010 the Colombian military killed top FARC military commander
Victor Julio Suárez, alias “Mono Jojoy,” responsible for numerous grave abuses
during his decades of leadership.
227
AMERICAS
Paramilitaries and their Successors
Since 2003 more than 30,000 individuals have participated in a paramilitary
demobilization process, although there is substantial evidence that many were
not paramilitaries, and that others never demobilized.
Successor groups to the paramilitaries, often led by mid-level commanders of
demobilized paramilitary organizations, exercise territorial control in certain
regions and are responsible for widespread atrocities against civilians. The
Colombian National Police reported the groups had 3,749 members as of July
2010; however, the Colombian NGO Instituto de Estudios para el Desarrollo y la
Paz estimates the groups have 6,000 armed combatants, and have expanded
operations to 29 of Colombia’s 32 departments. Toleration of these successor
groups by members of the public security forces is a main factor in their growth.
Like previous paramilitaries, the groups engage in drug trafficking, actively
recruit, and commit widespread abuses, including massacres, killings, rapes, and
forced displacement. Successor groups repeatedly target human rights defenders,
trade unionists, and victims groups seeking justice and recovery of land. In
Medellín homicides have surged since 2008, apparently due to these groups.
Successor groups contribute significantly to forced displacement. State agencies
often refuse to register people as displaced if they say paramilitary successor
groups forced them to flee, contributing to disparities between government and
NGO estimates of Colombia’s internally displaced population. While the state
agency Social Action registered 154,040 newly displaced in 2009, the respected
Colombian NGO CODHES holds that 286,389 persons were displaced that year.
Social Action has registered 3.3 million displaced persons between 1997 and July
2010, compared to 3.9 million that CODHES reports between 1997 and 2009.
Colombia’s Supreme Court has in recent years made considerable progress investigating
Colombian Congress members accused of collaborating with paramilitaries.
In the “parapolitics” scandal, more than 150 Congress members – most
from President Uribe’s coalition – have been investigated, and at least 20 convicted.
The Uribe administration repeatedly took actions that could have sabotaged
investigations, including issuing public and personal attacks against
WORLD REPORT 2011
228
Supreme Court justices. President Santos has publicly stated his commitment to
respecting the court’s independence.
The Supreme Court is currently investigating more than 20 members of Congress
amid concerns of high levels of paramilitary infiltration. Investigations by the
Attorney General’s Office into senior military officers and businesspersons who
allegedly collaborated with paramilitaries have been slow.
Implementation of the Justice and Peace Law, which offers dramatically reduced
sentences to demobilized paramilitaries who confess their atrocities, has also
been slow and uneven. As of November 2010, more than five years after the law
was approved, there have only been two convictions and prosecutors have recovered
a negligible fraction of the millions of acres of land that paramilitaries
seized. The Santos government has promoted legislation to return millions of
acres of land to Colombia’s displaced population through a procedure separate
from the Justice and Peace Law.
Paramilitary leaders’ confessions in the justice and peace process suffered a setback
when President Uribe extradited most paramilitary leaders to the United
States between May 2008 and August 2009 to face drug trafficking crimes.
Paramilitary cooperation declined significantly thereafter, and several commanders
refused to continue testifying, fearing reprisals against family in Colombia.
Military Abuses and Impunity
In recent years Colombia’s Army has been blamed for an alarming number of
extrajudicial killings of civilians, including extrajudicial executions known as
“false positives,” when army members, pressured to show results, kill civilians
and report them as combatants killed in action. The alleged executions have
occurred throughout Colombia and involve multiple army brigades.
The problem continues, despite a significant drop in false positives since 2009.
The government does not keep statistics for such cases, but as of May 2010, the
Attorney General’s Office was investigating 1,366 cases of alleged extrajudicial
killings committed by state agents involving more than 2,300 victims. There have
only been convictions in 63 cases.
229
AMERICAS
The military justice system’s resistance to transferring cases to ordinary civilian
courts impeded prosecution of extrajudicial killings. Military courts transferred
266 cases in 2009 but only seven from January to September 2010.
Violence against Trade Unionists
Colombia still leads the world in killings of trade unionists, with more than 2,800
reported killings since 1986, according to the National Labor School (ENS),
Colombia’s leading NGO monitoring labor rights. Most are attributed to paramilitaries
and their successor groups.
While the number of murders dropped in 2007 to 39, statistics are still alarmingly
high: 52 murders in 2008, 47 in 2009, and 36 from January to September 15,
2010, according to the ENS. Threats against unionists—mostly attributed to paramilitaries’
successor groups—have increased since 2007.
Impunity in such cases is widespread: only 25 percent of more than 2,800 ENSdocumented
killings of unionists are being investigated by the Attorney General’s
Office unit mandated to prosecute such crimes. The office has opened investigations
into more than 1,300 cases (including several hundred that do not appear
on the ENS list), but has only obtained convictions in 14 percent of these cases.
There are also concerns the investigations are piecemeal, and do not consider
whether the victim’s union activities motivated the crime.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders are routinely threatened and attacked. According to the
NGO Somos Defensores, seven defenders were murdered and 51 threatened in
the first half of 2010. A coalition of Colombian and international NGOs reported
30 killings of human rights defenders and social leaders between July and
October 15, 2010. Over 40 leaders of victims groups seeking to recover land have
been killed since the Justice and Peace process started in 2005. In 2010 several
leaders of Afro-Colombian and indigenous communities were reported killed.
Impunity for these crimes contributes to their persistence.
WORLD REPORT 2011
230
President Santos has publicly condemned threats against human rights defenders—
an improvement from their stigmatization during President Uribe’s administration.
The Early Warning System of the Ombudsman’s Office, which monitors Colombia’s
human rights situation, regularly issues “risk reports” warning of threats to communities
and individuals. Other Colombian authorities have sometimes ignored
these and failed to act to prevent abuses.
Illegal Surveillance
In February 2009 Colombia’s leading news magazine, Semana, reported the
Colombian intelligence service, DAS, which answers directly to the president’s
office, had for years engaged in extensive illegal phone tapping, email interception,
and surveillance directed at trade unionists, human rights defenders, journalists,
opposition politicians, and Supreme Court justices. DAS documents indicate
the alleged criminal activities included death threats and smear campaigns
to link targets to guerrillas. The Attorney General’s Office has begun investigating
dozens of former and current DAS officials, including the current director and several
of his predecessors.
Former DAS functionaries say that high-level officials in the Uribe administration
may have ordered the illegal surveillance. In October 2010 the Inspector
General’s Office meted out disciplinary sanctions against President Uribe’s chiefof-
staff and three former DAS directors for their part in the surveillance.
Key International Actors
The United States remains the most influential foreign actor in Colombia. In 2010
it provided approximately US $673 million—mostly military and police aid—
though an increasing percentage consists of social and economic assistance.
Thirty percent of US military aid is subject to human rights conditions, which the
US Department of State has not consistently enforced. In September 2010 the
State Department certified, for the second time under President Barack Obama’s
administration, that Colombia was meeting human rights conditions. However,
231
AMERICAS
the State Department’s 2010 certification did include a comprehensive memorandum
outlining Colombia’s significant human rights problems.
The US Congress has delayed ratifying the US-Colombia Free Trade Agreement
until there is “concrete evidence of sustained results on the ground” regarding
impunity for violence against trade unionists and the role of paramilitaries.
The United Kingdom reportedly reduced military assistance to Colombia in 2009,
apparently due to scandals over illegal surveillance and extrajudicial executions.
The European Union provides social and economic assistance to Colombia,
including some aid to the government’s paramilitary demobilization programs.
The Organization of American States’ Mission to Support the Peace Process in
Colombia, charged with verifying paramilitary demobilizations, issued reports in
2009 and 2010 expressing alarm over the activities of paramilitary successor
groups.
The Office of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court continued to monitor
local investigations into human rights crimes. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights is active in Colombia, and has arranged to
monitor the military’s internal control structure. In October 2010 Colombia’s
Congress approved the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance. It would go into effect after being signed by
President Santos and upheld by the Constitutional Court.
WORLD REPORT 2011
232
Cuba
Cuba remains the only country in Latin America that represses virtually all forms
of political dissent. In 2010 the government continued to enforce political conformity
using criminal prosecutions, beatings, harassment, denial of employment,
and travel restrictions.
Since inheriting control of the government from his brother Fidel Castro in 2006,
Raul Castro has kept Cuba’s repressive legal and institutional structures firmly in
place. While Cuban law includes broad statements affirming fundamental rights,
it also grants officials extraordinary authority to penalize individuals who try to
exercise them.
Following the death of a political prisoner on hunger strike in February 2010 and
the subsequent hunger strike of a prominent dissident, Cuba’s government has
released more than 40 political prisoners, forcing most into exile. Many more
journalists, human rights defenders, and dissidents remain behind bars, while
the government increasingly relies on short-term, arbitrary detentions to punish
its critics.
Political Prisoners, Arbitrary Detentions, and “Dangerousness”
Cubans who dare to criticize the government are subject to criminal and “precriminal”
charges. They are exempt from due process guarantees, such as the
right to a defense, and denied meaningful judicial protection because courts are
“subordinated” to the executive and legislative branches.
In February 2010 political prisoner Orlando Zapata Tamayo died following an 85-
day hunger strike. Zapata—who was jailed during a 2003 crackdown on more than
75 human rights defenders, journalists, and dissidents—initiated his hunger
strike to protest the inhumane conditions in which he was being held and to
demand medical treatment. Following Zapata’s death, dissident Guillermo Fariñas
initiated a hunger strike to demand medical attention for political prisoners with
serious health problems. In July Fariñas ended his hunger strike after 135 days
when the Catholic Church announced it had reached an agreement with the
Cuban government to release the 52 political prisoners still behind bars from the
233
AMERICAS
2003 crackdown. By mid-November, 39 of the 52 prisoners had been released on
the condition that they accept forced exile to Spain, while 12 prisoners, who
refused to leave Cuba, remained in prison. One prisoner had been granted provisional
freedom and allowed to stay on the island.
Scores of political prisoners remain in Cuban prisons. In October 2010 the
Women in White—a respected human rights group comprised of wives, mothers,
and daughters of political prisoners—issued a list of 113 prisoners whom it said
were incarcerated for political reasons. According to the Damas, there are likely
many more prisoners whose cases they cannot document because Cuba’s government
does not allow international monitors or national groups to access its prisons.
The government continued to rely on arbitrary detention to harass and intimidate
individuals exercising their fundamental rights. The Cuban Commission for
Human Rights and National Reconciliation documented 325 arbitrary detentions
by security forces in 2007; from January to September of 2010, it registered more
than 1,220. The detentions are often used to prevent individuals participating in
meetings or events viewed as critical of the government. Security officers often
offer no charge to justify the detentions—a clear violation of due process rights—
but warn detainees of longer arrests if they continue participating in activities
deemed critical of the government. For example, from February 23 to 25, more
than 100 people were arbitrarily detained across Cuba or placed under house
arrest to prevent them participating in memorial services for Orlando Zapata
Tamayo.
Raul Castro’s government has increasingly relied on a “dangerousness” (estado
peligroso) provision of the criminal code that allows the state to imprison individuals
before they have committed a crime, on the suspicion that they might commit
an offense in the future. Scores of individuals have been sentenced to
between one and four years for “dangerous” activities including handing out
copies of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, staging peaceful marches,
writing critical news articles, and trying to organize independent unions.
WORLD REPORT 2011
234
Freedom of Expression
The government maintains a media monopoly on the island, ensuring that freedom
of expression is virtually nonexistent. Although a small number of independent
journalists manage to write articles for foreign websites or maintain independent
blogs, they must publish their work through back channels—writing from
home computers, saving information on memory sticks, and uploading articles
and posts through illegal internet connections. Others dictate articles to contacts
abroad. The risks associated with these activities are considerable. For example,
blogger Luis Felipe Rojas of Holguin has repeatedly been arbitrarily detained,
interrogated, and threatened by authorities for his work. In May 2010, soldiers
and police surrounded his house for six days. He was arrested in September
along with five human rights defenders when he traveled to attend a pro-democracy
meeting, and again in October.
The government controls all media outlets in Cuba and access to outside information
is highly restricted. Only a tiny fraction of Cubans have the chance to read
independently published articles and blogs because of the high cost of, and limited
access to, the internet: an hour of internet use costs one-third of Cubans’
monthly wages and is only available in a few government-run centers.
Human Rights Defenders
Refusing to recognize human rights monitoring as a legitimate activity, the Cuban
government denies legal status to local human rights groups. The government
also employs harassment, beatings, and imprisonment to punish human rights
defenders who attempt to document abuses. For example, in October 2010 two
members of the Women in White were detained as they marched in Havana holding
a banner that read: “Down with racism and long live human rights.” Police
transferred them to a police station and beat them, fracturing one woman’s nose
and the other’s wrist, and held them without access to communications for seven
hours.
235
AMERICAS
Travel Restrictions and Family Separation
The Cuban government forbids the country’s citizens from leaving or returning to
Cuba without first obtaining official permission, which is often denied. For example,
internationally acclaimed blogger Yoani Sanchez has been denied the right to
leave the island to accept awards and participate in conferences eight times in
the past three years.
Widespread fear of forced family separation gives the Cuban government a powerful
tool for punishing defectors and silencing critics. The government frequently
bars citizens engaged in authorized travel from taking their children with them
overseas, essentially holding children hostage to guarantee their parents’ return.
The government restricts the movement of citizens within Cuba by enforcing a
1997 law known as Decree 217. Designed to limit migration to Havana, the decree
requires Cubans to obtain government permission before moving to the country’s
capital. It is often used to prevent dissidents traveling to Havana to attend meetings,
and to harass dissidents from other parts of Cuba who live in the capital. For
example, in January 2010 authorities repeatedly threatened to remove human
rights defenders Juan Carlos González and Tania Maceda Guerra from Havana.
Security officers visited their home, called them “counterrevolutionaries,” and
warned they would be forcibly returned to their native province under Decree 217
if they did not leave Havana voluntarily.
Prison Conditions
Conditions for prisoners are overcrowded, unhygienic, and unhealthy, leading to
extensive malnutrition and illness. Political prisoners who criticize the government,
refuse to participate in ideological “reeducation,” or engage in hunger
strikes and other forms of protest are routinely subjected to extended solitary
confinement, beatings, visit restrictions, and denial of medical care. Prisoners
have no effective complaint mechanism to seek redress, giving prison authorities
total impunity.
WORLD REPORT 2011
236
Key International Actors
In October 2010 the European Union renewed its “Common Position” on Cuba,
adopted in 1996, which conditions full economic cooperation with Cuba on the
country’s transition to a pluralist democracy and respect for human rights. At the
same time the EU dispatched its top foreign police official, Catherine Ashton, to
initiate a dialogue with Cuba’s government on how to improve relations.
The United States’ economic embargo on Cuba, in place for more than half a century,
continues to impose indiscriminate hardship on the Cuban people, and has
done nothing to improve human rights in Cuba. At the United Nations General
Assembly in October, 187 of the 192 member countries voted for a resolution condemning
the US embargo; only the United States and Israel voted against it. In
April 2009 the US government eliminated all limits on travel and remittances by
Cuban Americans to Cuba. Legislation introduced in the US House of
Representatives in February 2010 would restore the right travel to Cuba for all
Americans and remove obstacles to sales of US agricultural commodities to Cuba.
It has not yet been brought to a vote.
As of October 2010 Cuba’s government had yet to ratify the core international
human rights treaties—the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights—which it
signed in February 2008. Cuba is currently serving a three-year term on the UN
Human Rights Council, having been reelected in May 2009.
237
AMERICAS
Ecuador
On September 30 President Rafael Correa was held captive inside a hospital for
several hours by police who were protesting a law that diminished benefits for
law enforcement officers. During the standoff, the government declared a state of
emergency and ordered all TV stations to transmit the official channel’s programming.
A shootout broke out when members of the military rescued President
Correa, resulting in at least five deaths. The government stated the events constituted
an attempted coup d’etat. At this writing hundreds of police officers are
under investigation.
At least a dozen participants in protests and demonstrations were prosecuted or
investigated in 2010 on the exaggerated charge of terrorism, due to the overly
broad provisions of the criminal code. Police officers responsible for abuses in
previous years have not been held accountable.
Criminal defamation laws that restrict freedom of expression remain in force.
Some articles of the draft Communications Law could open the door to media
censorship. At this writing there is still no date set for the debate on the bill in the
National Assembly.
Misuse of Anti-Terror Laws in Dealing with Social Protests
Prosecutors have applied a “terrorism and sabotage” provision of the criminal
code in cases involving protest marches that have ended in confrontations with
police. Involvement in acts of violence during lawful protests should be an ordinary
criminal offense. Yet Ecuador’s criminal code includes, under the category of
sabotage and terrorism, “crimes against the common security of people or human
groups of whatever kind, or against their property,” by individuals or associations
“whether armed or not.” Such crimes carry a possible prison sentence of four to
eight years.
In June 2010 Marlon Santi, president of the Confederation of Indigenous
Nationalities of Ecuador (CONAIE), Ecuador’s largest indigenous organization, and
two other indigenous leaders were under criminal investigation for terrorism and
sabotage after leading a protest during a meeting of the Bolivarian Alliance for
WORLD REPORT 2011
238
the Americas (ALBA) in the city of Otavalo. Protesters broke through a police barrier
to gain entry to the building where Presidents Hugo Chávez, Evo Morales, and
Rafael Correa were meeting. In September a judge charged Pepe Acacho, a Shuar
indigenous leader, and 10 others, with sabotage and terrorism for their alleged
participation in violent protests in September 2009 in the city of Macas in the
Ecuadorean Amazon, in which a teacher was killed. According to the Ministry of
Justice, Acacho was accused of using a community radio station he directed,
Radio La Voz de Arutam, to incite demonstrators to take to the streets with poisoned
spears to protest the government’s alleged intent to privatize water.
In August a judge ordered the preventive detention of Juan Alcívar, a reporter for
La Hora newspaper and El Nuevo Sol radio station, on terrorism charges. Two
employees of the La Concordia town council accused Alcívar of throwing a tear
gas canister at President Correa during a demonstration, causing the Ecuadorean
leader to have to cover his face with a mask. Alcívar, who was an outspoken critic
of La Concordia’s mayor, argues he merely pushed the canister away. In
September the judge lifted the detention order, but the terrorism case against
him continued.
Accountability
Impunity for police abuses, including extrajudicial executions, is widespread, and
those responsible for murders often attributed by police to a “settling of
accounts” between criminal gangs are rarely brought to justice. In a June 2010
statement Philip Alston, the United Nations special rapporteur on extrajudicial
executions, described the justice system as “broadly dysfunctional.” The same
month a truth commission created by the Correa administration published a
report documenting 68 extrajudicial executions and 17 “disappearances”
between 1984 and 2008, and named 458 alleged perpetrators of abuses.
According to the commission, few of those responsible for the abuses had been
held accountable due to statutes of limitations, jurisdictional disputes, and procedural
delays. In October 2010 a team of prosecutors appointed by the attorney
general to investigate cases reported by the commission began re-interviewing
suspects and witnesses.
239
AMERICAS
Indigenous Justice
Competing jurisdiction of the ordinary courts and of traditional indigenous
authorities, which have equal status under the 2008 constitution, has been a
source of controversy. Critics of indigenous justice maintain that it is responsible
for a number of recent lynchings, which received wide press coverage. In 2010
two UN rapporteurs—on extrajudicial executions and on indigenous peoples—criticized
these allegations as unfounded. Both urged dialogue to resolve possible
conflicts between the two spheres of justice. At this writing the government is
working on draft legislation to determine the scope of each jurisdiction.
Freedom of Expression
The Ecuadorean criminal code still has provisions criminalizing “desacato,” under
which anyone who “offends” the president or other government authorities may
receive a prison sentence of up to three months (for offending officials), and up
to two years (for offending the president).
Journalists also face prison sentences for criminal defamation of public officials.
In March 2010 Emilio Palacio, an editorial writer for the Guayaquil newspaper El
Universo, received a three-year prison sentence for calling the president of a government-
run financial institution “a thug” in an August 2009 editorial. The Inter-
American Commission on Human Rights has urged member states to abolish
“desacato” provisions, and to use only civil sanctions to guarantee protection of
public officials’ reputations.
From September 2009 until June 2010 a National Assembly committee debated
draft legislation to regulate media. The draft Communications Law contains positive
elements that would strengthen free expression if enacted. It explicitly prohibits
monopolies and oligopolies in media ownership, potentially extending the
range and diversity of public debate. It broadens access for those with hearing
disabilities by promoting subtitles and sign language.
However, the bill contains several provisions that could undermine freedom of
expression. It includes restrictions whose vague language could open the way for
prior censorship, which the American Convention on Human Rights explicitly prohibits.
Employing the same language included in the constitution, it refers to the
WORLD REPORT 2011
240
right to freedom of expression as “the search, reception, exchange, production
and dissemination of truthful, verified, opportune, contextualized and plural
information.” Such definition is at odds with Principle 7 of the Declaration of
Principles of Freedom of Expression, endorsed by the Inter-American Commission
on Human Rights that states that the “prior conditioning of expressions… is
incompatible with the right to freedom of expression.” Moreover, the bill allows
an exception to the prohibition of prior censorship “in those cases established…
in the law.”
In addition, the proposed law includes sanctions that impose unreasonable
restrictions on free expression, and could allow undue interference in the work of
media outlets. Infractions for which an outlet could be punished include failure
“to observe its ethics code,” and publishing unsigned or anonymous letters. At
this writing the bill had still to be debated on the floor of the legislature.
Human Rights Defenders
President Correa has frequently accused environmental activists and NGOs
defending indigenous rights of interfering in politics, promoting violence, and
receiving funds from abroad to destabilize the country. In July 2010 Correa threatened
NGOs that “meddle in politics” with expulsion from the country. In October
he stated that he would review the list of some 50,000 NGOs registered in
Ecuador, some of which he said were suspected of tax evasion and prejudicing
the state.
In July unidentified assailants kidnapped Germán Antonio Ramírez Herrera, a
forensic expert specializing in investigating torture and extrajudicial executions,
forced him into a car, and later shot him. Ramírez, an expert consultant for PRIVA,
a member organization of the International Rehabilitation Council for Torture
Victims, had been investigating prisoners’ injuries following a police raid at the
prison of Quevedo, where he was a forensic doctor. He was killed on the same
day that he presented evidence to the UN’s special rapporteur on extrajudicial
executions. Ramírez was reported to have received death threats previously.
241
AMERICAS
Key International Actors
Members of the Union of South American Nations organized an emergency meeting
in Buenos Aires to support the presidency of Rafael Correa after he was held
by police in September. Other governments and international institutions, including
the United States and the Organization of American States (OAS) also
expressed support for Ecuador’s democratic institutions.
After visiting Ecuador in July, the UN’s special rapporteur on extrajudicial executions
criticized the justice system’s failure to hold accountable those responsible
for execution-style killings, whether committed by state agents, hired assassins,
or illegal armed groups. The OAS rapporteur on persons deprived of liberty, who
visited Ecuador in May 2010, stated that he had received reports of continuing
police torture. He urged Ecuador to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention
against Torture.
In May 2010 a court in Ontario, Canada struck out a claim for damages that three
Ecuadorean community leaders had filed against two directors of the Copper
Mesa Mining Corporation and the Toronto Stock Exchange, where the company is
listed. Since 2006, residents of Imbabura province, northern Ecuador, have
received repeated death threats because of their opposition to a mining project in
the area. On one occasion, Copper Mesa company guards physically attacked
them, an incident captured on film. The court argued the plaintiffs had failed to
establish the responsibility of the company directors and the stock exchange in
causing the alleged harm.
WORLD REPORT 2011
242
Guatemala
Guatemala’s weak and corrupt law enforcement institutions have proved incapable
of containing the powerful organized crime groups and criminal gangs that
contribute to one the highest violent crime rates in the Americas. Illegal armed
groups, which appear to have partly evolved from counterinsurgency forces operating
during the civil war that ended in 1996, are believed to be responsible for
targeted attacks on civil society actors and justice officials. More than a decade
after the end of the conflict, impunity remains the norm for human rights violations.
The ongoing violence and intimidation threaten to reverse the little
progress that has been made toward promoting accountability.
Public Security, Police Conduct, and the Criminal Justice System
Illegal armed groups and criminal gangs contribute significantly to violence and
intimidation, which they use to further political objectives and illicit economic
interests, including drug trafficking.
Powerful and well-organized youth gangs, including the “Mara Salvatrucha” and
“Barrio 18,” have also contributed to escalating violence in Guatemala. The gangs
use lethal violence against those who defy their control, including gang rivals and
former members, individuals who collaborate with police, and those who refuse
to pay extortion money. The gangs are believed to be responsible for the widespread
killings of bus drivers targeted for extortion. According to the National
Police, 57 drivers and 30 drivers’ assistants were murdered in the first seven
months of 2010.
Police have used repressive measures to curb gang activity, including arbitrary
detentions and extrajudicial killings. Investigations by the Human Rights
Ombudsman’s Office and NGOs have found police involvement in “social cleansing,”
killings intended to eliminate alleged gang members and criminals.
Moreover, abuses committed by police officers routinely go uninvestigated.
Guatemala’s justice system has proved largely incapable of curbing violence and
containing criminal mafias and gangs. According to official figures, there was
99.75 percent impunity for violent crime as of 2009. Deficient and corrupt police,
243
AMERICAS
prosecutorial, and judicial systems, as well as the absence of an adequate witness
protection program, all contribute to Guatemala’s alarmingly low prosecution
rate. In addition, members of the justice system are routinely subject to
attacks and intimidation.
Accountability for Past Abuses
Guatemala continues to suffer the effects of the 36-year civil war. A United
Nations-sponsored Commission on Historical Clarification (CEH) estimated that as
many as 200,000 people were killed during the conflict. The CEH attributed 93
percent of the human rights abuses it documented to state security forces and
concluded that the military had carried out “acts of genocide.” Very few of those
responsible for the grave human rights violations during the civil war have been
held accountable. Of the 626 massacres documented by the commission, only
three cases have been successfully prosecuted in Guatemalan courts.
Guatemala’s first conviction for the crime of enforced disappearance occurred in
August 2009, when an ex-paramilitary leader was sentenced to 150 years in
prison for his role in “disappearing” individuals between 1982 and 1984. The verdict
was made possible by a landmark ruling by the country’s Constitutional Court
in July 2009, which established that enforced disappearance is a continuing
crime not subject to a statute of limitations so long as the victims are still
unknown.
The July 2005 discovery of approximately 80 million documents of the disbanded
National Police, including files on Guatemalans who were killed or “disappeared”
during the conflict, could play a key role in prosecuting past human rights abuses.
Documents in the archive led to the March 2009 arrest of two former National
Police agents for their alleged participation in the 1984 “disappearance” of student
leader and activist Edgar Fernando García.
In September 2008 Congress passed the Law of Access to Public Information,
which orders that “in no circumstances can information related to investigations
of violations of fundamental human rights or crimes against humanity” be classified
as confidential or reserved. In March 2009 President Alvaro Colom created
WORLD REPORT 2011
244
the Military Archive Declassification Commission, tasked with sorting and declassifying
military documents from 1954-1996.
Human Rights Defenders and Journalists
Attacks and threats against human rights defenders are common, significantly
hampering human rights work throughout the country. Journalists, especially
those covering corruption, drug trafficking, and accountability for abuses committed
during the civil war, also face threats and attacks. Rolando Santiz, a reporter
for the national television station Telecentro 13, was shot to death in Guatemala
City on April 1. Antonio de León, a station cameraman, was injured in the attack.
Labor Rights and Child Labor
Freedom of association and the right to organize and bargain collectively are
endangered by increasing anti-union violence, including attacks on union offices,
and threats, harassment, and killings of trade unionists. The International Trade
Union Confederation reports that 16 trade unionists were killed in 2009, the second
highest total in the Americas. Seven trade unionists were reportedly killed in
the first eight months of 2010.
Workers pressing for their rights in labor cases must rely on labor courts, whose
work is stymied by dilatory legal measures, lengthy backlogs, and an inability to
enforce rulings. According to a 2009 United States Department of State report,
only two of the 216 companies operating in export processing zones (where
export-processing factories known as “maquilas” are located) had recognized
labor unions, and none had a collective bargaining agreement.
Guatemala has one of the highest rates of child labor in the Americas. The
International Labour Organization reported in 2008 that 16.1 percent of children
aged five to fourteen are obliged to work, many in unsafe conditions. Some of
these children are employed in the construction, mining, and sex industries.
245
AMERICAS
Sexual and Gender-Based Violence
Violence against women is a chronic problem in Guatemala, and most perpetrators
are never brought to trial. Despite legislative efforts to address this violence,
there has been wide impunity for crimes against women.
According to the UN special rapporteur on extrajudicial, arbitrary, and summary
executions, investigations into crimes against women, including transgender
women, are often inadequate and obstructed by investigating police operating
with a gender bias.
Reproductive Rights
In a positive development, in September 2010 Guatemala’s Congress adopted a
law guaranteeing pre-natal and maternal health care. The law also mandates the
appropriation of public funds for contraceptives to be distributed in the public
health care system.
Key International Actors
In September 2007 the UN secretary-general appointed Carlos Castresana, a
Spanish former prosecutor and judge, to lead the newly-founded International
Commission Against Impunity in Guatemala (CICIG). The commission’s unique
mandate allows it to work with the Guatemalan Attorney General’s Office, the
police, and other government agencies to investigate, prosecute, and dismantle
the criminal organizations operating in Guatemala. The CICIG can participate in
criminal proceedings as a complementary prosecutor, provide technical assistance,
and promote legislative reforms. As of September 2010 the commission
has undertaken 56 investigations and participated in 11 prosecutions. An investigation
by CICIG led to the March 2010 arrest of Baltazar Gómez, Guatemala’s
national police chief, and Nelly Bonilla, the head of its antinarcotics unit, who
were charged with drug trafficking and obstruction of justice, as well as involvement
in a gunfight that resulted in the death of five antidrug police officers. CICIG
also helped to improve the witness protection program and purge 1,700 officers
from the National Civilian Police.
WORLD REPORT 2011
246
Originally set to expire in 2009, CICIG’s mandate was extended by Congress for
another two years until the end of 2011. However, on June 7, 2010, Castresana
abruptly resigned, citing lack of cooperation from several high ranking government
officials, including the then-attorney general. The UN has since appointed
Francisco Dall’Anese, who was Costa Rica’s attorney general, as CICIG’s new
head.
In October 2010 Spanish police arrested Carlos Vielmann, Guatemala’s former
interior minister, in Madrid. Vielmann was allegedly involved in the extrajudicial
killing of seven detainees in 2006. CICIG had requested his capture some months
earlier.
The UN high commissioner for human rights has maintained an office in
Guatemala since 2005 that provides observation and technical assistance on
human rights practices in the country.
In June 2010 James Anaya, UN special rapporteur on the situation of human rights
and fundamental freedoms of indigenous people, visited Guatemala to investigate
alleged human rights violations affecting the country’s indigenous people.
Anaya concluded that the right to previous consultation, according to which
indigenous people are entitled to be consulted before any commercial enterprise
occurs in their territory, is not being adequately protected.
In July 2010 the Office of the US Trade Representative announced it would file a
case against Guatemala under the Dominican Republic-Central America-United
States Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR) alleging that it has failed to meet its obligations
on labor rights.
247
AMERICAS
Haiti
A devastating earthquake near Haiti’s capital, Port-au-Prince, on January 12, 2010,
left an estimated 222,750 people dead, 300,000 injured including 4,000 to 5,000
amputees, and up to 1.6 million homeless and displaced. In total 3 million people
were affected by the earthquake. Assessments calculate the material damage at
about 120 percent of the country’s annual GDP. Twenty-eight of twenty-nine government
ministry buildings and approximately 300,000 homes were damaged or
destroyed. Estimates from a range of NGOs, media outlets, and the World Bank
suggest that Haiti’s government lost between 20 and 40 percent of its civil servants.
Ten months after the earthquake approximately 1.3 million people still live in
some 1,300 informal settlements or camps, where conditions leave residents vulnerable
to flooding, disease, and violence. The government and humanitarian
actors prepared for a cholera epidemic, which broke out at the end of October, to
spread to the camps by the end of 2010. Many of these camps formed spontaneously
on private land, and most internally displaced persons (IDPs) face mounting
threats of eviction. The United Nations reports that 29 percent of closed
camps have been shut down due to forced evictions or negotiated departures.
The situation after the earthquake has exacerbated Haiti’s chronic human rights
problems, including violence against women and girls, inhumane prison conditions,
and vulnerability of children. Most prisoners who escaped from jail during
the earthquake remain at large. Already weak, the diminished capacity of the
state since the disaster continues to significantly undermine its ability to safeguard
fundamental human rights.
Public Security and the Justice System
Haiti has been plagued by high levels of violent crime for many years. Police ineffectiveness
and abuse, along with severe shortages of personnel, equipment,
and training, existed prior to the quake and contributed to overall insecurity in
Haiti. The earthquake has further weakened the capacity of Haitian National
Police (HNP), with 75 officers reported killed, 70 missing, and 253 injured in the
quake.
WORLD REPORT 2011
248
Haiti’s justice system, long-troubled by politicization, corruption, shortage of
resources, and lack of transparency, also suffered severe losses as a result of the
quake. At least 10 members of the judiciary died in the earthquake, and the
Ministry of Justice and the Palace of Justice were destroyed, along with many judicial
documents. The UN reported that the Supreme Court of Haiti remained nonfunctioning
as of September.
In recent years kidnappings posed a serious security threat. The UN reported the
rate of kidnappings increased 33 percent in the first eight months of the year
compared to the same period in 2009.
Gender-Based Violence
High rates of sexual violence existed before the earthquake, but the precarious
safety situation in the informal camps has left women and girls even more vulnerable
to such abuse. It is difficult to get accurate data on sexual violence in the
camps. The HNP reported that 534 arrests (24 percent of all arrests) from
February-April 2010 involved sexual violence. In other reports the HNP officials
indicate that 20 rapes were reported in Port-au-Prince for January-March 2010.
This inconsistency in data reflects a lack of coordinated governmental response to
sexual violence in the camps. On September 13, 2010, the UN launched a campaign
against rape and gender-based violence in Haiti.
Detention Conditions
Haiti’s prison system suffered from chronic and severe overcrowding when the
earthquake hit. The largest prison in Haiti, the Civil Penitentiary in Port-au-Prince,
housed over 5,400 prisoners, all of whom escaped after the quake. Eight months
after the quake the UN stabilization mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and HNP had reincarcerated
629 of the escapees. The rest remain at large.
Prior to the earthquake pre-trial detainees constituted almost 80 percent of all
prison inmates in Haiti. The UN reports that the loss of judicial files and registries
will increase prolonged pre-trial or arbitrary detentions and detentions of people
never formally charged. Damage to prison facilities since the earthquake has led
to limited cell space and even more dire prison conditions then existed before.
249
AMERICAS
On July 26, 2010, Haiti’s government, with UN support, established an independent
commission of inquiry into the HNP’s violent response to a prison uprising in
Les Cayes just days after the earthquake. The GOH called for the commission
inquiry after the New York Times published an in-depth report, which claimed that
on January 19, 2010, UN and HNP officers circled the prison to prevent a massive
outbreak after its 400 detainees began to riot due to worsening conditions after
the quake, and that HNP officers stormed the prison. Details of the event are not
independently confirmed, but the Times estimated that 12 to 19 inmates died and
up to 40 were wounded. The commission had not completed its report at this
writing.
Access to Education and Child Labor
Prior to the earthquake only about half of primary school-age children in Haiti
attended school. United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) estimates that the
earthquake damaged or destroyed almost 4,000 schools and that 2.5 million children
experienced an interruption in their education. Schools resumed several
months after the earthquake; however, many experienced a sharp drop in enrollment.
In 2009 the UN special rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery estimated
there were from 150,000 to 500,000 child domestic workers in Haiti, called
“restaveks.” Restaveks are children, 80 percent of whom are girls, from lowincome
households sent to live with other families in the hope that they will be
cared for in exchange for them performing light chores. These children are often
unpaid, denied education, and physically and sexually abused. The UN and civil
society organizations warned that unaccompanied minors and orphans, who
increased in number after the earthquake, are vulnerable to this form of forced
labor.
Some groups have also raised concerns about improper processing of inter-country
adoption in violation of domestic and international standards.
WORLD REPORT 2011
250
Human Rights Defenders
The human rights community lost three prominent women’s rights activists in the
quake: Myriam Merlet of Enfofamn, Magalie Marcelin of Kay Fanm, and Anne
Marie Coriolan of Solidarite Fanm Ayisen (SOFA).
Human rights defenders in Haiti have often been the targets of threats and
attacks. The Institute for Justice and Democracy in Haiti (IJDH) reports that criminal
gangs have threatened some women’s rights activists living and working on
gender-based violence in the IDP camps, forcing them to relocate.
Key International Actors
MINUSTAH, which has been present in Haiti since 2004, has played a prominent
role in increasing stability and protecting human rights in the country, but suffered
heavy losses in the earthquake; the head of mission and 96 staff were
killed, constituting the largest loss of life for the UN in a single incident. The UN
has since increased MINUSTAH’s capacity and extended its mandate through
October 15, 2011. The UN force contains 8,548 troops and 3,063 police.
In April 2010 parliament extended the state of emergency for eighteen months,
providing additional powers to the executive and establishing the Interim Haiti
Recovery Commission (IHRC). President René Prèval then issued a presidential
decree to grant necessary powers to the IHRC. Prime Minister Max Belle-rive and
former US President Bill Clinton were named as co-chairs, and the board of the
IHRC was constructed to include representatives from Haiti and donor countries.
IHRC’s mandate is to oversee billions of dollars in reconstruction aid and to conduct
strategic planning and coordination among multi-lateral and bilateral
donors, NGOs, and the private sector. Clinton also remains the UN special envoy
for Haiti, with Dr. Paul Farmer serving as deputy special envoy.
251
AMERICAS
Honduras
President Porfirio Lobo took office in January 2010, seven months after a military
coup ousted democratically elected President Manuel Zelaya. The Lobo administration
created a truth commission to look into the events surrounding Zelaya’s
ouster. But Honduras is failing to hold accountable those responsible for the
widespread human rights violations committed by the de facto government
installed after the coup. At this writing no one has been held criminally responsible
for these abuses.
Other continuing human rights concerns include lack of judicial independence
and violence and threats against journalists, human rights defenders, political
activists, and transgender people.
Lack of Accountability for Post-Coup Abuses
Following the military coup, the de facto government suspended key civil liberties,
including freedoms of the press and assembly. In the ensuing days the military
occupied opposition media outlets, temporarily shutting down their transmissions.
Police and military personnel responded to generally peaceful demonstrations
with excessive force. This pattern of the disproportionate use of force led to
several deaths, scores of injuries, and thousands of arbitrary detentions.
The human rights unit in the Attorney General’s Office is investigating approximately
200 cases of alleged abuses committed by security officials since the
coup, many of which involve multiple victims. At this writing, it has filed charges
in 20 cases. In eight, the defendants were acquitted, leaving many acts committed
by security forces after the coup unaccounted for. Most of the others remain
pending before the courts, some of them stalled because the defendants are at
large.
The human rights unit’s progress on these cases has been hindered by its limited
resources and by the government’s failure to allocate funds to the existing witness
protection program. The unit must rely on an investigative police force institutionally
tied to the Ministry of Security, an arrangement that could affect the
impartiality and thoroughness of the investigations.
WORLD REPORT 2011
252
Security forces have obstructed investigations of abuses committed after the
coup. Under the de facto government, military and police personnel systematically
refused to cooperate with investigators. They failed to turn over firearms for ballistics
tests, to respond to information requests to identify officers accused of
committing abuses, and to grant access to military installations. The situation has
improved somewhat under Lobo, but the prior lack of cooperation has had a lasting
impact on the investigations.
In October, the Honduran Congress approved an increased budget for the unit
only for 2011.
Judicial Independence
Immediately after the 2009 coup the Supreme Court held that the replacement of
Zelaya was a legitimate “constitutional succession of power.” The court subsequently
failed to resolve in a timely manner appeals challenging the constitutionality
of measures by the de facto government that undermined basic rights. It
waited until the de facto government revoked the measures and ruled that the
appeals were then moot.
The Supreme Court has absolute power to appoint and remove judges, and the
court has used this power to advance a politically partisan agenda, seriously
damaging the reputation of the judiciary. The court can fire judges applying vague
definitions of “fault,” such as carrying out “activities that are incompatible with
the honor of the position or that somehow affect its dignity.” There is no provision
to appeal the removals before an independent body.
In May 2010 the Court fired four judges who opposed the coup. One judge had
presented an appeal in favor of Zelaya, two others were present in anti-coup
demonstrations, and another said in an academic conference that there had been
a coup. While the court argued it was firing them because judges may not get
involved in politics, it applied a clear double-standard, failing to sanction judges
who supported the coup.
253
AMERICAS
Attacks on Journalists, Human Rights Defenders,
and Political Activists
2010 also saw a series of attacks on and threats against journalists, human rights
defenders, and members of the political opposition. For example, in February
Julio Benitez, a member of the opposition who had received numerous threatening
phone calls warning him to abandon his participation in opposition groups,
was shot by men on a motorcycle while on his way home. He died in the hospital
shortly afterwards. In March gunmen opened fire on Nahúm Palacios, who directed
TV Channel 5 of Aguan, while he was driving his car. He died at the scene.
Palacios had covered several politically sensitive issues, including anti-coup
demonstrations, corruption, drug trafficking, and agrarian conflicts.
In April Father Ismael Moreno, a Jesuit priest and human rights advocate, received
a text message threatening to kill the family of an opposition member who had
been raped by police officers. Father Moreno had been helping the woman and
her family leave Honduras. In June Eliodoro Cáceres Benitez, a political activist,
received three death threats by phone, stating that members of organized crime
would kill him and his family. Days later, his son went missing and remains missing
at this writing.
On September 15, police and military members attacked the offices of Radio Uno,
which had been critical of the coup. They threw tear gas bombs at the radio station’s
offices and at the people inside, broke windows in the building, damaged
equipment, and seriously injured one person.
Violence against Transgender Persons
Bias-motivated attacks on transgender people are common in Honduras. At least
19 transgender persons have been killed in public places in Honduras since
2004; many more have been injured in beatings, stabbings, or shootings.
These attacks are rarely followed by rigorous investigations let alone criminal convictions.
In a welcome change, a court in September 2010 sentenced an off-duty
police officer to 10-13 years for stabbing a female sex worker 17 times, the first
WORLD REPORT 2011
254
time since 2003 an officer has been convicted for a crime against a transgender
person.
Key International Actors
Influential allies and neighbors, as well as multilateral institutions—including the
European Union, Latin American governments, the Organization of American
States (OAS), and United Nations General Assembly—immediately condemned
the coup d’etat that ousted Zelaya. The United States also condemned the coup,
but waited several weeks before imposing key sanctions (including freezing the
visas of key officials) to pressure the de facto government to restore Zelaya to
office. Most governments gradually lifted the measures and sanctions after Lobo
took office, but Honduras’ membership to the OAS remains suspended.
The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights has played a critical role in
Honduras since the coup, producing comprehensive reports documenting abuses,
including killings, threats, and attacks on journalists.
The UN has also sought to promote human rights in the country. In August the UN
appointed a human rights officer in Honduras. In September the Lobo administration
requested the creation of a UN commission to fight impunity in the country,
which has yet to be established. In November several countries expressed concern
about the human rights situation in Honduras during the UN Human Rights
Council’s Universal Periodic Review of the country.
255
AMERICAS
Mexico
Many of Mexico’s most significant human rights issues in 2010 stemmed from
violent confrontations between state security forces and organized crime, as well
as clashes among criminal groups. The Mexican military continues to commit serious
abuses in public security operations, yet those responsible are virtually never
held accountable. Journalists, human rights defenders, and migrants are increasingly
the targets of attacks by criminal groups and members of security forces, yet
Mexico has failed to provide these vulnerable groups with protection or adequately
investigate the crimes against them.
Efforts to implement comprehensive reform to the criminal justice system, which
would address endemic problems such as police torture, continued to progress
slowly in 2010, leaving in place a system rife with abuses. Meanwhile, serious
restrictions on the exercise of reproductive rights remain and Mexican laws still
provide inadequate protections against domestic violence and sexual abuse.
Impunity for Military Abuses
President Felipe Calderón has relied heavily on the military to fight drug-related
violence and organized crime. While engaging in law enforcement activities, the
armed forces have committed serious human rights violations, including killings,
torture, and rapes. Mexico’s National Human Rights Commission has issued
detailed reports on 65 cases involving army abuses since 2007, and received
complaints of more than 1,100 additional human rights violations in the first six
months of 2010.
In April 2010 Martín and Bryan Almanza, ages nine and five, were killed, and five
other people were wounded, when the car they were riding in came under fire in
Tamaulipas. The army claimed it was a shoot-out between soldiers and criminals
but a subsequent investigation by the National Human Rights Commission
revealed that the military had manipulated the crime scene and that soldiers
were responsible for the killings.
Military authorities routinely assert jurisdiction to investigate and prosecute
crimes in which members of the military are accused; the vast majority are never
WORLD REPORT 2011
256
successfully prosecuted. The military justice system lacks the independence necessary
to carry out reliable investigations and its operations suffer from a general
lack of transparency. According to military authorities, since 2007 only one military
officer has been sentenced by military courts for human rights violations.
In October President Calderón proposed a reform to the Code of Military Justice
that would subject cases of rape, torture, and enforced disappearance to civilian
jurisdiction; other serious violations would continue to be investigated and prosecuted
within the military justice system. While the transfer of any cases of
human rights violations from military to civilian jurisdiction represents a step in
the right direction, the proposed reform would guarantee that serious abuses
such as extrajudicial killings would still be investigated by the military justice system,
leaving a significant gap in accountability for most abuses. It would also
grant military authorities discretion in classifying abuses, despite a track record
of downgrading the severity of charges against soldiers. At this writing, the reform
is being debated by the Congress.
Criminal Justice System
The criminal justice system routinely fails to provide justice to victims of violent
crime and human rights violations. The causes of this failure are varied and
include corruption, inadequate training and resources, and abusive policing practices
without accountability.
Torture remains a widespread problem. One perpetuating factor is the acceptance
by some judges of confessions obtained through torture and other mistreatment.
Another is the failure to investigate and prosecute most cases of torture.
Over 40 percent of prisoners in Mexico have never been convicted of a crime.
Rather, they are held in pretrial detention, often waiting years for trial. The excessive
use of pretrial detention contributes to prison overcrowding, which in turn
leads to inhumane, unsanitary, and dangerous conditions. In January 2010, 23
prisoners were killed in a riot in an overcrowded prison in Durango.
Prison inmates are subject to abuses by guards, and are routinely denied adequate
medical care, particularly among women. Children are often detained in
poor conditions in police stations and other institutions.
257
AMERICAS
In June 2008 Mexico passed a constitutional reform that creates the basis for an
adversarial criminal justice system with oral trials, and contains measures that
are critical for promoting greater respect for fundamental rights, such as including
presumption of innocence in the constitution. The government has until 2016 to
implement the reform. At present only a handful of states have undertaken substantive
changes.
In addition to its positive aspects, the reform also introduced the provision of
arraigo, which allows prosecutors, with judicial authorization, to detain individuals
suspected of participating in organized crime for up to 80 days before they
are charged with a crime—a power that is inconsistent with Mexico’s due process
obligations under international law.
Freedom of Expression
Journalists, particularly those who have reported on drug trafficking or have been
critical of security forces and authorities, have faced serious harassment and
attacks. From 2007 to October 2010, 35 journalists were killed, and eight more
are missing and feared dead. News outlets in Sinaloa, Coahuila, and several
other states were attacked with explosives or firearms in 2010. In July, police officers
in Veracruz kidnapped, robbed, and beat a journalist who had witnessed an
earlier incident in which police attacked a reporter.
In spite of the increasing attacks, authorities have failed to adequately investigate
and prosecute perpetrators or to protect journalists who face serious risk,
generating a climate of impunity and self-censorship. In July 2010 the Office of
the Special Prosecutor for Crimes against the Press was given a broader mandate
and greater autonomy, but has since failed to improve on its poor record of prosecuting
cases. In October Mexico announced plans to create a protection mechanism
for journalists under threat, a positive step, but at this writing the system
has not yet been created.
Defamation as a federal criminal offence was abolished in 2007. However, criminal
defamation laws that remain in place in many states undermine freedom of
expression.
WORLD REPORT 2011
258
A 2002 federal law on transparency and access to information and a 2007 constitutional
reform increased avenues for public scrutiny of the Mexican government.
However, progress in promoting transparency within the federal executive branch
has not been matched in other parts of the government.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders continue to suffer harassment and attacks, and authorities
consistently fail to provide them with adequate protection. For example, two
human rights defenders in Tijuana received menacing phone calls and emails
from November 2009 to May 2010 and were constantly followed by the police and
the military. A masked man told one of the defenders to leave town if she did not
want her family to be harmed, while a car was firebombed outside of the family
home of the other defender. Receiving little protection from authorities, they
eventually fled from Tijuana.
Migrants
Hundreds of thousands of migrants pass through Mexico each year and many are
subjected to grave abuses en route including physical and sexual assault, extortion,
and theft. Approximately 18,000 migrants are kidnapped annually, often
with the aim of extorting payments from their relatives in the United States.
Seventy-two kidnapped migrants originating from Central and South America
were executed en masse in August 2010 in Tamaulipas by armed gangs.
Authorities have not taken adequate steps to protect migrants, or to investigate
and prosecute those who abuse them. Authorities rarely inform migrants of their
rights, such as the right to seek asylum, and the authorities themselves are often
the perpetrators of abuses. The National Migration Institute has fired 350 agents
since 2007—roughly 15 percent of its total force—for suspected links with organized
crime and crimes such as human trafficking. In September 2010, immigration
agents beat and robbed more than 100 migrants as they disembarked from a
train in Oaxaca.
The federal Population Law requires public officials to demand that foreign citizens
show proof of their legal status before offering any service, such as provid-
259
AMERICAS
ing medical care and registering human rights complaints. As a result, migrants
who suffer abuses often choose not to report crimes out of fear of deportation. In
September 2010 the Senate approved a reform that would require all authorities
to attend to individuals who suffer abuses, regardless of their citizenship status.
President Calderon signed the reform into law in November.
National Human Rights Commission
Mexico’s official human rights institution has provided authoritative information
on specific human rights cases and usefully documented some systemic problems.
Under the leadership of President Dr. Raul Plascencia, the commission has
played a decisive role in investigating landmark cases, such as the March killing
of two students at Monterrey Tec, and in advocating for improved protection for
human rights defenders and journalists.
Human Rights Reforms to the Constitution
In April 2010 the Senate approved a series of human rights reforms to the
Constitution which would affirm the relevance of international law in Mexico,
establish the circumstances in which a state of emergency may be declared, and
protect against the arbitrary expulsion of foreigners, among other changes. The
reform has not yet been approved by the House of Deputies.
Domestic Violence, Reproductive Rights, and Same-Sex
Marriage
Mexican laws do not adequately protect women and girls against domestic violence
and sexual abuse. Some provisions, including those that make the severity
of punishments for some sexual offenses contingent on the “chastity” of the victim,
contradict international standards. Ninety percent of women who have suffered
human rights violations do not report them to authorities, while those who
do report them are generally met with suspicion, apathy, and disrespect. Such
underreporting undercuts pressure for necessary legal reforms and leads to
impunity for violence against women and girls.
WORLD REPORT 2011
260
In August 2008 the Supreme Court affirmed the constitutionality of a Mexico City
law that legalized abortion in the first 12 weeks of pregnancy. Since that time 16
of Mexico’s 32 states have adopted reforms that recognize the right to life from
the moment of conception. In May 2010 the Supreme Court ruled that all states
must provide emergency contraception and access to abortion for rape victims.
However, only five states have reformed their procedural codes accordingly and
efforts to inform women and girls of their rights have been very limited.
In August 2010 the Supreme Court recognized the right of same-sex couples in
Mexico City to adopt children and to marry, and ruled that all states in Mexico
must recognize same-sex marriages that take place in Mexico City.
Key International Actors
The United States to date has allocated $1.5 billion in aid to Mexico through the
Merida Initiative, a multi-year aid package agreed upon in 2007 to help Mexico
combat organized crime. Fifteen percent of the aid can be disbursed only after
the US secretary of state reports to the US Congress that the Mexican government
is meeting four human rights requirements: ensuring that civilian prosecutors and
judicial authorities investigate and prosecute federal police and military officials
who violate basic rights, consulting regularly with Mexican civil society organizations
on Merida Initiative implementation, enforcing the prohibition on use of testimony
obtained through torture or other ill-treatment, and improving the transparency
and accountability of police forces.
The impact of these requirements, however, was undermined when the United
States twice allocated the funds despite evidence that Mexico was not meeting
the conditions, most recently in September 2010. In a positive step, the State
Department announced in September that it would withhold an additional $26
million in Merida aid for 2010 pending Mexico’s passage of human rights reforms
to the Constitution and issuance of a proposal to reform the military justice system.
In November 2009, the Inter-American Court ruled that Mexico was responsible
for the forced disappearance of a Rosendo Radilla-Pacheco in 1974, and had
failed to adequately investigate the crime. The binding decision ordered Mexico
261
AMERICAS
to modify its Code of Military Justice to ensure that “under no circumstances can
military jurisdiction be applied” in cases where the military violates the human
rights of civilians. In August 2010, the Inter-American Court found that Valentina
Rosendo Cantú and Inés Fernández Ortega, indigenous women from Guerrero,
were raped and tortured by members of the army in 2002 and again ordered
Mexico to modify its military code.
The OAS and UN special rapporteurs on freedom of expression conducted a joint
visit to Mexico in August 2010, concluding that grave and diverse obstacles—
including serious acts of violence against journalists and widespread impunity—
continue to limit free expression in Mexico. In October, the UN special rapporteur
on the independence of judges and lawyers released an initial report following
her visit, highlighting the lack of access to justice for the poor and a “system deficient
in the investigation of crimes,” among other problems.
The UN Human Rights Committee conducted its periodic review of Mexico in
March. The committee urged Mexico, among other recommendations, to reestablish
a special prosecutor’s office dedicated to investigating abuses committed
during the country’s “dirty war” and eliminating arraigo detention from legislation
and practice.
WORLD REPORT 2011
262
Peru
Judicial efforts to hold military and police personnel accountable for abuses committed
during Peru’s internal armed conflict yielded disappointing results in 2010.
Government officials have often criticized the process, rather than supported it,
and in 2010 President Alan García signed a decree amounting to a blanket
amnesty that would leave most of the crimes unpunished. The measure was eventually
withdrawn after national and international protests. Nevertheless, the military’s
refusal to provide information continues to obstruct judicial investigations,
and most perpetrators have evaded justice.
There have been several incidents in which police have overstepped international
norms on the use of lethal force in controlling protests and demonstrations.
Torture, although not practiced systematically, continues to be a problem.
Confronting Past Abuses
According to Peru’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission, almost 70,000 people
died or “disappeared” during the country’s internal armed conflict. They were victims
of atrocities committed by the Shining Path and the Túpac Amaru
Revolutionary Movement, and of human rights violations by state agents.
In August 2010 President García signed into law a decree that amounted to a disguised
amnesty for perpetrators of human rights violations during the armed conflict.
Decree 1097 violates Peru’s international human rights obligations by allowing
a statute of limitations to be applied to crimes against humanity committed
before 2003, the year Peru ratified the United Nations Convention on the Non-
Applicability of Statutory Limitations to War Crimes and Crimes against Humanity.
Such crimes would include atrocities committed during the first government of
Alan García, such as the massacre of 122 prisoners at El Fronton prison in 1986.
Decree 1097 also obliged judges to close judicial proceedings against military
and police personnel if formal charges were not presented within the 36 month
maximum allowed by law. Within days a general and several members of the
Colina Group, a death squad responsible for killings and “disappearances” during
the government of Alberto Fujimori, asked a judge to close investigations
against them. President García initially defended the decree but changed his
263
AMERICAS
mind after intense international and domestic criticism. In September Congress
approved a government bill to repeal the decree with an overwhelming majority.
In December 2009 a Supreme Court panel unanimously confirmed a 25 year
prison sentence for former president Alberto Fujimori for the extrajudicial execution
of 15 people in the Barrios Altos district of Lima in November 1991, the
enforced disappearance and murder of nine students and a teacher from La
Cantuta University in July 1992, and two abductions. Fujimori was the first democratically
elected Latin American leader to be convicted for grave human rights
violations in his own country.
Given the landmark significance of the Fujimori conviction, prosecutions in other
human rights cases from the armed conflict period have had disappointing
results, with convictions trailing behind the number of acquittals. In June 2010
the National Human Rights Coordinator, an NGO that monitors accountability,
reported that the National Criminal Court, created in 2004 to hear cases involving
human rights violations and terrorism, had acquitted 65 military and police
agents, convicted only 15, and dismissed 23 cases.
The Peruvian military has consistently failed to provide information to help prosecutors
identify officers who participated in atrocities. Mainly as a result of this
lack of cooperation, prosecutors and lawyers for relatives of victims have had difficulty
assembling evidence that meets the rigorous standards courts demand.
For instance, army and Ministry of Defense officials denied the detention of two
students, Alcides Ccopa Taype and Francisco Juan Fernández Gálvez, who “disappeared”
in Huancayo in October 1990. In June 2010 the National Criminal Court
acquitted two army generals responsible for military operations in the zone. The
court discounted the testimony of a former detainee, who had seen the students
held at the army base, and the evidence of other witnesses who claimed to have
seen them in custody.
Several former senior military officials facing charges have used tactics to delay
court proceedings and then filed habeas corpus petitions to the Constitutional
Court, claiming that their right to a trial within a reasonable time had been violated.
WORLD REPORT 2011
264
Unjustified Use of Lethal Force
In recent years there have been several violent clashes between protesters and
police, with deaths on both sides. In some of these incidents police appear to
have used lethal force unjustifiably.
In April 2010, five civilians were killed and 16 were wounded by gunshots when
police opened fire to clear a demonstration by 6,000 striking miners who had
blocked a major highway in Chala, Caraveli province. A woman, who was not participating
in the events, reportedly died of a heart attack. As of September, 61
police officers were facing charges.
Controversy continues to surround the circumstances in which 33 people were
killed (23 police and 10 civilians) in June 2009 in violent clashes between police
and indigenous protesters in the provinces of Utcubamba and Bagua in the
Peruvian Amazon. An investigative commission appointed in July 2009 placed
most of the blame on the indigenous protesters, and the interference of “outside
actors.” However, two commissioners, including an indigenous member, refused
to sign the commission’s report. They published a minority version, citing evidence
that the protesters were unarmed when the police started to shoot at
them. In May 2010 Alberto Pizango, an indigenous leader who was accused of
instigating the protest, was arrested on charges of sedition and incitement on his
return from exile in Nicaragua. No ministers or police commanders were prosecuted
for their handling of the protest.
In August 2010 the president issued a decree that would allow the armed forces
to confront a “hostile group” in law enforcement situations using military rules of
engagement. The definition of “hostile group” is loosely worded to include those
armed with spears or knives or heavy objects such as rocks, raising concerns that
the decree could be used to justify the use of excessive force against indigenous
protesters.
Torture and Ill-Treatment
Torture remains a problem. The Human Rights Ombudsman and human rights
NGOs continue to report beatings by police and by members of municipal security
patrols. They also report victimization of military recruits by superior officers,
265
AMERICAS
such as the case in August 2010 of a soldier doing military service in Iquitos who
was allegedly forced by an army major to swallow keys after a dispute. Courts
often classify cases of torture according to the seriousness of physical injuries,
considering less serious injuries to be cases of “wounding,” which carries a lower
penalty that does not normally involve incarceration.
Reproductive Rights
Peru’s restrictive abortion laws and policies, which generally criminalize abortion
and provide only vague guidance on when an abortion may be procured lawfully,
contribute to maternal death and disability. In 2005 the UN Human Rights
Committee ruled that the Peruvian state’s failure to provide an abortion for an
adolescent girl carrying an anencephalic pregnancy constituted a violation of several
human rights, including the right to freedom from torture, and that the government
had an obligation to ensure that a similar situation would not occur in
the future. Even so, and despite much pressure from Peruvian civil society
groups, the government has yet to adopt clear legal guidelines for the provision of
legal abortion.
Media Freedom
Journalists in Peru’s provinces are vulnerable to intimidation and threats.
Individuals acting in support of, or working for, municipal authorities have
assaulted, and even murdered, journalists who publicize abuses by local government
officials.
In October 2010 the Ministry of Transport and Communications provisionally
restored the broadcasting license of Radio La Voz de Bagua, a local radio station
in the Peruvian Amazon, which was revoked in June 2009 after the minister of the
interior and members of the president’s American Revolutionary People’s Alliance
accused it of inciting violence during its coverage of the civil unrest in Bagua.
Human Rights Defenders
Former President Fujimori’s supporters in Congress, as well as some top government
officials, have aggressively sought to discredit NGOs that advocate for
WORLD REPORT 2011
266
human rights accountability. Such NGOs have been falsely accused of sympathy
with terrorist groups or of undermining the armed forces.
In recent years NGOs defending indigenous and environmental rights in areas
affected by mining operations have been subject to threats and judicial harassment
for allegedly organizing or participating in protests. The government abruptly
revoked the residency permit of Paul McAuley, a British lay member of a
Catholic order who heads an environmental association in Iquitos in the Peruvian
Amazon, and who has lived in Peru for 20 years.
Key International Actors
Following a visit to Peru in September 2010, the UN special rapporteur on human
rights and terrorism described Decree 1097 on the use of force by the military as
“likely to lead to breaches of international law.” He also expressed concern that
the decree could lead to the use of unjustifiable force against unarmed protestors.
In September 2010 the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights expressed
concern that Decree 1097 “could lead to impunity in hundreds of cases of human
rights violations.”
267
AMERICAS
Venezuela
The Venezuelan government’s domination of the judiciary and its weakening of
democratic checks and balances have contributed to a precarious human rights
situation. Without judicial checks on its action, President Hugo Chávez’s government
has systematically undermined journalistic freedom of expression, workers’
freedom of association, and the ability of human rights groups to promote human
rights. It has also harassed political opponents.
Police abuses and impunity are a grave problem. Prison conditions are
deplorable, and fatality rates high due to inmate violence.
Independence of the Judiciary
In 2004 President Chávez and his supporters in the National Assembly launched
a political takeover of the Supreme Court, filling it with government supporters
and creating new measures that make it possible to purge justices from the court.
Since then the court has largely abdicated its role as a check on executive power,
failing to uphold fundamental rights enshrined in Venezuela’s constitution in key
cases involving government efforts to limit freedom of expression and association.
The government shows scant respect for democratic checks and balances.
Individual judges may face reprisals if they rule against government interests. In
December 2009, Judge Maria Lourdes Afiuni was detained on the day she authorized
the conditional release of Eligio Cedeño, a banker accused of corruption.
Afiuni was following a recommendation by the UN working group on arbitrary
detentions, given that Cedeño had been in pre-trial detention for almost three
years despite, although Venezuelan law prescribes a two-year limit. A day after
her arrest, Chávez branded Afiuni a “bandit” who should be sentenced to the
maximum 30 years in prison. Accused of corruption, abuse of authority, and
“favoring evasion of justice,” the judge’s right to due process was violated in several
respects in criminal proceedings against her. Three UN human rights experts
issued a joint press release describing her arrest as “a blow to the independence
of judges and lawyers in the country,” and called for her release. Still, the
WORLD REPORT 2011
268
Supreme Court denied her appeals for the protection of her rights. As of October
2010 she was still held in deplorable conditions in a Caracas women’s prison.
Media Freedom
Venezuela enjoys vibrant public debate in which anti-government and pro-government
media are equally vocal in criticizing and defending the president. However,
the government has discriminated against media that air views of political opponents,
and has strengthened the state’s capacity to limit free speech and created
powerful incentives for government critics to self-censor. Laws contributing to a
climate of self-censorship include amendments to the criminal code extending
the scope of “desacato” laws that criminalize disrespect of high government officials,
despite international standards that require such laws be abolished, and a
broadcasting statute that allows arbitrary suspension of channels for the vaguely
defined offense of “incitement.”
In June 2010 journalist Francisco Pérez was sentenced to three years and nine
months in prison, stripped of his professional certification, and ordered to pay a
fine of almost US$20,000 for defaming Valencia’s mayor. Perez had published
two articles in El Carabobeno newspaper accusing the mayor of nepotism and corruption.
The government has abused its control of broadcasting frequencies to punish
radio and television stations with overtly critical programming, while obliging private
media to transmit speeches of the president and other officials. Since taking
office in February 1999 Chávez has compelled radio and TV stations using public
airwaves to transmit more than 2,000 of his speeches live.
In January 2010 the government broadcasting authority CONATEL ordered the
country’s cable providers to suspend transmitting channels that did not comply
with the broadcasting statute—including the requirement to transmit presidential
speeches—until they applied for, and received, the status of “international” channels
(to which the statute does not apply). The suspension affected seven channels,
including RCTV International, the cable channel created after RCTV—a critic
of Chávez—was taken off public airwaves in 2007. CONATEL rejected RCTV
269
AMERICAS
International’s application for status as a national broadcaster. At this writing the
channel was only available online and unable to transmit in Venezuela.
In June 2010 Chávez created by decree a Center for Situational Studies of the
Nation (CESNA), which has broad powers to limit public dissemination of “information,
facts or circumstance[s]” that it decides should be confidential. The
decree’s language is so broad it could allow the government to block information
disseminated by civil society groups and media entirely at its discretion.
Human Rights Defenders
The Chávez government has aggressively sought to discredit local and international
human rights organizations. Officials, including the president, have repeatedly
made unsubstantiated allegations that human rights advocates are engaged
in efforts to destabilize the country.
Rights advocates have been targeted for prosecutorial harassment. In July 2010,
President Chávez stated that prosecutors should “thoroughly investigate” the
“millions and millions of dollars” that the US State department gives Venezuelan
NGOs. His statements came a day after a pro-Chávez organization presented a
formal complaint before prosecutors seeking an investigation into funding
received by two leading human rights groups in Venezuela. The judiciary has
offered no protection in such cases. The Supreme Court ruled the same month
that “obtaining financial resources, either directly or indirectly, from foreign
states with the intent of using them against the Republic, [and] the interest of the
people [could constitute] treason.”
Human rights defenders are often stigmatized in government-controlled media
and harassed or intimidated by unidentified individuals aligned with the government.
Carlos Correa, director of Public Space, was the subject of an aggressive
publicity campaign in 2010, including an animated sequence aired by state television
(VTV) depicting him leaving the US embassy in a limousine with a suitcase
overflowing with US dollar bills.
WORLD REPORT 2011
270
Prosecution of Government Critics
Several prominent critics of the Chávez government have been targeted for criminal
prosecution. The courts’ lack of independence diminished the accused parties’
chances of receiving a fair trial.
The Attorney General’s Office opened an investigation into Guillermo Zuloaga,
president of Globovisión, a television station critical of the Chávez government,
for “disseminating false information, offense and insulting the President of the
Republic.” In a speech at a public meeting Zuloaga had accused the president of
having “ordered the shooting” of demonstrators during the April 2002 coup
against him. In June, the president voiced outrage in a televised speech that
Zuloaga was still free. A week later, police arrived at Zuloaga’s house to arrest
him and his son for alleged irregularities in their car sales business, an investigation
their lawyers said had been stalled for months. In August the Venezuelan
Supreme Court authorized a request for Zuloaga and his son’s extradition from
the United States, where they had fled to escape arrest.
In May a prosecutor charged Oswaldo Álvarez Paz, a former governor of the state
of Zulia and a Chávez opponent, with “public incitement [to violate laws] endangering
public tranquility” and “publicizing false information” for criticizing the
Chávez administration during a television interview in March. Álvarez Paz had
said that, “Venezuela has turned into a center of operations that facilitates the
business of drug trafficking.” He was in pretrial detention for almost two months.
Police Abuses
Violent crime is rampant in Venezuela, where extrajudicial killings by security
agents remain a recurring problem. The minister of the interior and justice has
estimated that police commit one in every five crimes. According to the Attorney
General’s Office, law enforcement agents allegedly killed 7,998 people between
January 2000 and the first third of 2009. Impunity for all violent crimes, including
those committed by police, remains the norm.
In April 2008 the Chávez administration issued a decree establishing a new
national police force, and enacting measures to promote non-abusive policing
that were proposed by a commission made up of government and NGO represen-
271
AMERICAS
tatives. In2010 agents of the new National Bolivarian Police (PNB), trained in
human rights and non-abusive methods, participated in a pilot scheme in Catia, a
high-crime district of Caracas. At this writing there had been no independent evaluation
of the new police force’s performance.
Prison Conditions
Venezuelan prisons are among the most violent in Latin America. Weak security,
deteriorating infrastructure, overcrowding, insufficient and poorly trained guards,
and corruption allow armed gangs to effectively control prisons. Hundreds of violent
prison deaths occur every year. In September 2010 16 prisoners were killed
and 35 wounded in a riot between rival armed gangs at the Aragua Penitenciary in
Tocorón.
Labor Rights
The Chávez government has systematically violated workers’ rights, undercutting
established labor unions while favoring new, parallel unions that support its
agenda.
The government requires the National Electoral Council (CNE), a public authority,
to organize and certify all union elections, violating international standards that
guarantee workers the right to elect their representatives in full freedom, according
to conditions they determine. Established unions whose elections have not
been CNE-certified are barred from participating in collective bargaining.
The government has for several years promised to reform the relevant labor and
electoral laws to restrict state interference in union elections. Reforms that explicitly
state that union elections held without CNE participation are legally valid were
still pending before the National Assembly at this writing.
Key International Actors
Venezuela’s government has increasingly rejected international monitoring of its
human rights record. In its December 2009 report on human rights in Venezuela,
the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights stated that by impeding it from
WORLD REPORT 2011
272
visiting the country, Venezuela was “contributing to the weakening of the Inter-
American system for the protection of human rights.” Chávez described the report
as “ineffable” and “ignominious.”
273
AMERICAS

WORLD REPORT
2011
ASIA
H U M A N
R I G H T S
W A T C H
275
Afghanistan
While fighting escalated in 2010, peace talks between the government and the
Taliban rose to the top of the political agenda. Civilian casualties reached record
levels, with increased insurgent activity across the country. An additional 30,000
United States troops increased international forces to more than 150,000.
Endemic corruption and violence marred parliamentary elections in September
2010.
Negotiations
The Afghan government made greater efforts in 2010 to promote a negotiated settlement
with the Taliban and Hezb-e Islami (Gulbuddin). In June a Consultative
Peace Jirga brought together around 1,500 Afghan elders, politicians, and civil
society representatives in Kabul. The government offered limited reassurances it
would seek to protect the rights of Afghan women and religious and ethnic
minorities during the peace process. In October a newly appointed High Level
Peace Council drew criticism from a wide range of Afghan civil society organizations
and human rights defenders because it included numerous former warlords
implicated in war crimes.
The Conflict
The armed conflict remains most acute in the south and southeast, with a marked
deterioration in security in the north. In the first nine months of 2010 the United
Nations documented the deaths of 2,135 civilians, an increase of more than 10
percent compared to the same period in 2009, largely due to increased insurgent
attacks that often take the form of drive-by shootings or suicide bombings. US
and NATO-caused civilian casualties dropped in the first six months of the year
compared to the previous year. However, the third quarter saw an increase in
civilian casualties, which matched an increase in the use of air attacks and night
raids. US, NATO, and Afghan forces were responsible for more than 350 civilian
deaths during the first nine months of 2010.
WORLD REPORT 2011
276
Insurgent-targeted killings in violation of international humanitarian law
increased, particularly in the south. The UN estimates 183 assassinations in the
first six months of the year, up 95 percent compared to 2009. Amongst the most
senior officials killed was the governor of Kunduz, northern Afghanistan, who was
targeted in an October suicide bombing.
In February and March the US military carried out a major operation in Marjah,
Helmand, aimed at expelling the Taliban and installing a local government capable
of providing basic services. The operation led to significant civilian displacement,
and increased insurgent activity in the area, including heavy mining.
According to the UN, more than 70 civilians were killed in Marjah between
February and April.
In June the US and NATO launched a civil and military campaign in Kandahar.
Although there was emphasis on governance reform as a central component of
winning popular support, little action was taken to reduce the stranglehold of a
few dominant tribal strongmen on the local government and economy, including
that of the president’s brother, Ahmad Wali Karzai, and Kandahar’s former governor,
Gul Agha Sherzai. Combat operations increased in September, with civilian
casualties and displacement rising due to the increased Taliban and international
military presence. The International Committee of the Red Cross reported close to
a thousand new patients with weapon-related injuries in August and September
2010, double the previous year.
So-called “night raids” against suspected insurgents intensified, despite a tactical
directive in January 2010 encouraging commanders to use daytime raids when
possible.
Timely and transparent inquiries or accountability for forces in the event of wrongdoing
are often lacking when civilians are hurt or killed in night raids, airstrikes,
or escalation of force incidents. A notable exception may be the response to allegations
that five US soldiers deliberately killed and mutilated Afghan civilians in
early 2010; several soldiers will face a court martial—for which no date has yet
been set—on charges of premeditated murder.
At this writing the US has almost doubled the number of detainees it is holding in
Afghanistan to more than a thousand. Despite modest procedural improvements,
277
ASIA
including the right to call witnesses, detainees do not receive adequate due
process, including the right to legal counsel or to see evidence against them.
In August unidentified insurgents killed ten aid workers in Badakhshan, including
eight foreign nationals and two Afghans. Insurgents abducted British aid worker
Linda Norgrove in Kunar province in September; she was killed during a US special
operations forces rescue operation in early October.
Attacks on Women and Girls in Taliban-Controlled Areas
Women in de facto Taliban-controlled areas face “night letters”—threatening missives
often delivered at night–and death threats by phone. In recent years several
high profile women have been assassinated; their killers have not faced justice.
While men in Taliban-controlled areas are also threatened and attacked, there is
an additional gender-related dimension to the pressures on women connected to
the Taliban’s interpretation of Sharia law, which is used to justify harsh punishments
for women seen to be mixing with men outside their immediate families.
The Taliban and other insurgent groups continued to target schools, particularly
for girls over 10-years-old. According to the Ministry of Education, between March
and October 2010, 20 schools were attacked using explosives or arson, and insurgent
attacks killed 126 students.
Parliamentary Elections 2010
Parliamentary elections took place in September 2010, with insecurity and fraud
disenfranchising a large segment of the electorate. More than 30 were killed on
polling day.
The Taliban claimed responsibility for killing three candidates during the campaign
period: Sayedullah Sayed, killed by a bomb while speaking in a mosque;
Ghazni candidate Najibullah Gulisanti, abducted and, after failed demands for
prisoner release, killed; and Haji Abdul Manan Noorzai, shot dead while walking
to a mosque in Herat. In August five campaign workers supporting Fauwzia Gilani
in Herat were abducted and killed. Women campaigners throughout the country
told election observers of threats and intimidation.
WORLD REPORT 2011
278
279
ASIA
There were serious attacks on election officials; in September, 28 election staff in
Baghlan were kidnapped and two were killed in Balkh. Election monitors were
also threatened and abducted during the campaign period.
Candidates and their supporters were responsible for a significant amount of the
violence, with little sign at this writing that disqualifications or criminal prosecutions
will follow.
Impunity
In January 2010 it emerged that a law had been quietly brought into effect in late
2009 that provides amnesty to perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against
humanity, despite earlier pledges by President Hamid Karzai that the National
Stability and Reconciliation law would not be promulgated. In 2007 a coalition of
powerful warlords in parliament pushed through the amnesty law to prevent prosecution
of individuals responsible for large-scale human rights abuses in the preceding
decades. It was revived in 2010 to facilitate amnesties for reconciliation
and reintegration of the Taliban and Hezb-i Islami (Gulbuddin).
Lack of due process of law remains a major failing of the legal system; Afghans
continue to face arbitrary detention, and are frequently denied access to a lawyer
and the right to challenge the grounds of their detention before an impartial
judge. Corruption and abuse of power often taint court proceedings. Reports persist
of torture and ill-treatment of detainees held by the National Directorate of
Security, with human rights officials gaining only erratic access to detention facilities
where abuses are thought to occur.
Kidnapping for ransom is common, with an estimated 450 Afghans abducted
annually according to the Afghanistan NGO Security Office. Insurgent groups also
use kidnapping to demand prisoner releases.
Attacks on Human Rights Defenders, NGOs, and Journalists
Threats, violence, and intimidation are regularly used to silence opposition politicians,
journalists, and civil society activists, particularly those who speak out
about impunity, war crimes, government officials, or powerful local figures.
WORLD REPORT 2011
280
Women’s rights defenders are regularly threatened and intimidated. Government
failure to bring perpetrators to justice compounds fear among other women
activists.
Journalists in the conflict areas face severe pressures. Insurgent groups use
arson, kidnapping, and intimidation to try to stop reporting they see as unsympathetic.
The government and local strongmen also intimidate and detain journalists.
Key International Actors
Safeguards against the potential human rights implications of reconciliation and
reintegration have been poorly articulated by most key international actors
involved, including the US, United Kingdom, and UN. While most have stressed
the need to protect women’s rights, notably US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton,
the constitution is cited as sufficient protection, without explicit guarantees that
women’s right to work and freedom of movement and education will be protected
in a negotiated settlement.
While the main international actors now acknowledge that impunity has fuelled
the insurgency, they have not effectively addressed systemic concerns, including
the entrenched power of strongmen and former warlords, misuse of presidential
powers, police corruption, and judicial weakness. This was exacerbated by continued
international support for powerbrokers with past and present records of
human rights abuses. The US military has introduced guidelines and a system of
oversight for contracting to try to reduce perceptions it is fuelling corruption,
though this has not yet led to a break with notorious powerbrokers providing
logistical and security services.
The US and NATO continued to operate in Afghanistan without an adequate legal
framework, such as a status-of-forces agreement. It is rare for the US and NATO to
hold independent and transparent investigations into possible acts of wrongdoing,
or to hold individuals to account. This is particularly true of special operations
forces, and the opaque irregular Afghan forces working with both special
operations forces and the CIA.
281
ASIA
Bangladesh
The elected government of Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina Wazed made strong
commitments to address serious human rights problems in 2010, but those promises
were not realized, as extrajudicial executions and torture continued, as well
as impunity for members of the security forces. The government mounted sustained
attacks on the right to freedom of expression of the media and political
opposition. Labor union activists protesting for higher wages were systematically
targeted and, in some cases, arrested and jailed on trumped-up charges.
Abuses by the Rapid Action Battalion and Other Forces
Soon after elections in December 2008, officials in the Awami League-led government
promised to institute a zero-tolerance policy and bring the perpetrators of
extrajudicial killings to justice. Yet little change has taken place, and in 2010 the
home minister and other officials denied any wrongdoing by law enforcement
agencies, including the Rapid Action Battalion (RAB), the elite anti-crime, anti-terror
force whose officers regularly kill with impunity. The RAB acknowledges that
its officers have killed at least 622 people since the force was established in
2004. But in press statements, the RAB has claimed that the victims were shot
and killed in “crossfire” after their accomplices opened fire on the force. The
home minister has also supported the claim that RAB officers who have killed
were acting in self-defense. In a worrying development, the police appear to have
increasingly adopted the RAB’s extrajudicial methods, and several hundred
killings have been attributed to the police force in recent years.
Investigations by human rights organizations regularly find that victims were executed
while in RAB custody. The bodies of the dead often bear marks of torture,
and many survivors of RAB custody have repeatedly alleged ill-treatment and torture.
The chairperson of the National Human Rights Commission recommended in
December 2009 that all allegations of RAB killings be investigated by an independent
commission of inquiry. At this writing the government has taken no
action on this, and not a single member of the RAB has been criminally prosecuted
for involvement in torture or killings.
WORLD REPORT 2011
282
In one abortive attempt at justice, the High Court issued a suo moto ruling calling
on the government to explain why action should not be taken against the RAB
officers responsible for the “crossfire” killing of Lutfar and Khairul Khalashi in
November 2009. However, before a ruling could be issued, the relevant judicial
bench was reorganized and the case has not since been heard by the court.
Attacks against Civil Society and Media
In July 2010, officials forced the closure of the daily Amar Desh, an oppositionlinked
newspaper that had reported critically on the government. The editor,
Mahmudur Rahman, was arrested under the Anti-Terrorism Act, and he later
claimed in court that police officers beat him and that RAB officers blindfolded
him, handcuffed him to window bars in a cell, and deprived him of food and
water. At this writing the newspaper’s closure is under court appeal.
In another assault on free expression, the police in Dhaka, the capital, temporarily
shuttered the Drik Picture Library on March 22, shortly before the opening of an
exhibit titled “Crossfire” by Shahidul Alam. Police claimed the show, which featured
photographs and installations relating to alleged extrajudicial killings by
the RAB, would “create anarchy.” After a public outcry and a legal challenge by
the gallery, the exhibit was finally able to open on March 31.
Harassment and Intimidation of Apparel Industry Workers
In 2010 the government continued to severely restrict the work of trade unionists
pressing for an increase in the minimum wage. On June 3 the government’s NGO
Affairs Bureau suddenly revoked the operating license of the Bangladesh Centre
for Workers Solidarity (BCWS), a group with ties to international trade union and
labor rights groups and representatives of foreign clothing brands sourcing from
Bangladeshi factories.
In July the government raised the monthly minimum wage for garment workers
from 1,662 to 3,000 taka (US$24 to $43). Workers contended that the increase
was inadequate to meet the rising urban cost of living. On July 30 and 31, as they
have often done in the past, angry garment workers took to Bangladesh’s streets.
283
ASIA
They blocked roads and damaged factories and other property. Government security
forces responded with force, injuring scores of protesters.
On July 30 the government accused Kalpona Akhter, Babul Akhter, and Aminul
Islam, the directors of the BCWS, of inciting workers to protest, which the directors
denied. Babul Akhter later alleged that on the night of August 28, he was
beaten in custody. Kalpona and Babul Akhter were released on bail in September
and are awaiting trial at this writing. Islam, who had managed to escape police
custody after being detained and allegedly physically abused by the police in
June, remains in hiding.
Impunity
In 2010, members of the security forces regularly escaped accountability for
killings, acts of torture, and illegal detentions. Several legal provisions effectively
shield members of the security forces and other public officials from prosecution
by requiring government approval for criminal actions to be initiated.
Military and police regularly employ torture and cruel, inhuman, or degrading
punishment against detainees, despite constitutional guarantees against torture
and Bangladesh’s ratification of the United Nations Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. The government
failed to investigate the causes of numerous deaths in custody, and there
was little action to hold accountable those responsible for the deaths of alleged
mutineers from the Bangladesh Rifles border force.
In 2009 the parliament passed amendments to the International Crimes
(Tribunals) Act of 1973 in order to bring to trial those responsible for human rights
crimes in the war of 1971, but the law still falls short of international standards.
Five members of Jamaat-e-Islami, a religious right-wing political group alleged to
have collaborated with Pakistani forces, were in 2010 charged with war crimes,
including genocide, and at this writing are awaiting trial before a special war
crimes tribunal established in March to investigate crimes committed during
Bangladesh’s battle for independence four decades ago.
WORLD REPORT 2011
284
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
Discrimination against women remains common in both the public and private
spheres, despite the presence of women in several key government positions.
Bangladesh maintains a reservation against article 2 of the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, which requires it to
effectively adopt laws and policies to provide equal rights for women and men.
Domestic violence is a daily reality for many women, and there was no progress
made in adopting laws on domestic violence and sexual harassment during 2010.
The Acid Survivors Foundation reported 86 acid attacks, primarily against women,
between January and September. The courts convicted only 15 perpetrators of
acid attacks in 2009.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Section 377 of Bangladesh’s criminal code punishes consensual homosexual conduct
with penalties up to life imprisonment.
Border Killings
According to Odhikar, a Bangladesh human rights monitoring group, at least 930
Bangladeshi nationals were killed by India’s Border Security Force between the
year 2000 and September of 2010. A number of Indian nationals have also been
killed by Indian forces deployed at the border.
Acute poverty and unemployment prompts millions of Bangladeshi nationals to
cross the border into India in search of jobs and commerce. While some of those
killed are engaged in smuggling goods and contraband, Indian border forces systematically
use lethal force without justification.Bangladeshi authorities have
repeatedly complained about killings of Bangladeshis, as have human rights
groups in both countries. Bangladeshi Home Minister Sahara Khatun in May 2010
said that she would again ask officials in New Delhi, India’s capital, to stop these
incidents. Indian authorities declared that their forces have been instructed to
exercise restraint, but there was little sign of progress in ending violations during
2010.
285
ASIA
Discrimination in Corruption Cases
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina and her Awami League party reiterated the government’s
strong commitment to address the problem of corruption in 2010. Yet the
government recommended that the courts and the Anti-Corruption Commission
withdraw hundreds of corruption cases initiated against Awami League supporters
on the grounds that they were “politically motivated” cases filed under previous
governments. The government has not recommended similar cases against
the political opposition for withdrawal, raising significant concerns about discriminatory
treatment and politically motivated prosecutions.
Refugees
Bangladeshi authorities did little to prevent a wave of intensifying violence and
discrimination against Rohingya refugees from Burma, and refugees were driven
out of communities and into makeshift camps. Newly arriving Rohingya were systematically
denied the right to seek asylum in 2010.
Key International Actors
Foreign governments–including the US and members of the European
Union–raised concerns about extrajudicial executions, stressed the importance of
addressing impunity, and called for respect for human rights, but also continued
to view the RAB as an important anti-terrorism force. The US has provided training
on investigation methods and human rights to the RAB, but has failed to vigorously
enforce the Leahy Law and deny US assistance and training to all RAB units
credibly implicated in human rights abuses where justice has not been done.
After the arrests of key labor leaders in the garment industry, the US Congress
sent a letter in August to US garment importers urging them to put economic
pressure on Bangladesh to secure the release of the prisoners. The US Congress
also called for action to withhold Generalized System of Preferences trade benefits
for Bangladesh on labor rights grounds.
WORLD REPORT 2011
286
287
ASIA
Burma
Burma’s human rights situation remained dire in 2010, even after the country’s
first multiparty elections in 20 years. The ruling State Peace and Development
Council (SPDC) continued to systematically deny all basic freedoms to citizens
and sharply constrained political participation. The rights of freedom of expression,
association, assembly, and media remained severely curtailed. The government
took no significant steps during the year to release more than 2,100 political
prisoners being held, except for the November 13 release of Nobel Peace Prize
winner Aung San Suu Kyi.
Calls mounted for an international commission of inquiry into serious violations
of international law perpetrated by all parties to Burma’s ongoing civil conflict.
The Burmese military was responsible for ongoing abuses against civilians in conflict
areas, including widespread forced labor, extrajudicial killings, and forced
expulsion of the population. Non-state armed ethnic groups have also been
implicated in serious abuses such as recruitment of child soldiers, execution of
Burmese prisoners of war, and indiscriminate use of anti-personnel landmines
around civilian areas.
The November 2010 Elections
In November Burma held long-planned elections. These took place in an atmosphere
of intimidation, coercion, and widespread corruption, with laws and regulations
strongly favoring military controlled parties.
In March the SPDC formed the Union Electoral Commission (UEC) and released a
series of laws governing the conduct of the elections, which included provisions
barring any person serving a prison sentence from party membership. This effectively
forced the National League for Democracy (NLD) to decide whether to dismiss
Aung San Suu Kyi–who was under house arrest–and more than 430 of its
jailed members, in order to re-register with the UEC. The NLD ultimately did not
re-register, and the UEC declared it illegal.
Other provisions tightly regulated the campaigning of parties and candidates,
warned against public disturbances, and expressly outlawed public criticism of
WORLD REPORT 2011
288
the constitution and the military. The government declared illegal a boycott campaign
that some NLD members organized, and warned the public that election
boycotters could face one year in prison.
In April Prime Minister Lt. Gen. Thein Sein and 27 SPDC and government cabinet
ministers resigned their military commissions and formed the Union Solidarity
and Development Party (USDP). In August the USDP absorbed all the assets and
infrastructure of the Union Solidarity and Development Association (USDA), a
mass-based social welfare movement formed by the military in 1993 with more
than 26 million nominal members. The military conducted its biggest reshuffle in
years, with scores of senior officers resigning in order to run as USDP candidates.
The USDP was the only party that fielded candidates for virtually all 1,168 seats
open for contest in the national bicameral assembly and 14 regional assemblies.
The remaining seats, out of a total of 1,551, are reserved for serving military officers
as stipulated in the 2008 constitution.
By November 37 parties had registered and were contesting the elections. Many
were small, ethnic-based parties only contesting a limited number of regional
seats. Voting was not conducted in parts of 32 townships in ethnic border areas
where the government alleged there was armed conflict and instability.
Widespread irregularities, such as advance bulk voting by local officials, were
reported in some regional areas.
The USDP won more than 80 percent of the seats in the bicameral national parliament.
Results were mixed in the 14 state and regional assemblies, with some ethnic
parties gaining half the number of seats, particularly in Arakan and Shan
states. Burman-dominated regions had majority USDP candidates elected. Many
opposition parties lodged official complaints with the electoral commission citing
widespread corruption, particularly by USDP members and officials.
Ethnic Conflict, Displacement, and Refugees
The Burmese military continues to direct attacks on civilians in ethnic areas, particularly
in Karen, Karenni, and Shan states of eastern Burma, and parts of western
Burma in Chin and Arakan states. Tensions increased with ethnic armed
groups that had agreed to ceasefires with the government, such as the Kachin
289
ASIA
Independence Organization (KIO) and the United Wa State Army (UWSA), over the
government’s plans to transform these militias into Border Guard Force units
under direct Burmese army control. By the end of 2010 only five militias had
agreed, leaving large groups such as the Kachin, Wa, and Mon facing increased
military pressure to transform, partly demobilize, and surrender territory. As a
result of increased tensions, parts of 32 townships in Burma– including most of
the Wa area on China’s border–did not conduct polls in November. There are
widespread fears of resumed conflict in 2011 in ethnic areas that have experienced
uneasy peace for the past two decades.
Abuses by the Burmese military against civilians in violation of international
humanitarian law include the widespread use of anti-personnel landmines, sexual
violence against women and girls, extrajudicial killings, forced labor, torture,
beatings, targeting of food production and means of civilian livelihood, and confiscation
of land and property. All parties to Burma’s conflicts continue to actively
recruit and use child soldiers, with the Tatmadaw (state military) continuing to
use them even as the SPDC cooperates with the International Labour
Organization (ILO) on demobilizing child soldiers.
Approximately half-a-million people are internally displaced due to conflict in
eastern Burma, with more than 140,000 refugees in camps in Thailand. In
Bangladesh, there are 28,000 Rohingya refugees in official camps, and another
200,000 live in makeshift settlements or mixed in with the local population
around border areas. Millions of Burmese migrant workers, refugees, and asylum
seekers live in Thailand, India, Bangladesh, Malaysia, and Singapore.
Humanitarian Assistance
Burma’s humanitarian situation did not markedly improve in 2010 despite
attempts by international relief agencies and Burmese civil society to expand
operating space and programs in the country.
The Tripartite Core Group (TCG), a multilateral mechanism formed by the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), the SPDC, and the United
Nations in the aftermath of Cyclone Nargis in May 2008, concluded its operations
in July. The UN continued to slowly expand its humanitarian initiative in Northern
WORLD REPORT 2011
290
291
ASIA
Arakan State to assist Rohingya, who have been denied citizenship and suffered
abuses by state and paramilitary forces for decades, including restrictions on
movement, livelihoods, and freedom of religion. Abuses against Rohingya
women, including restrictions on the right to marry and access maternal health,
are particularly grave. Humanitarian space throughout Burma constricted markedly
ahead of the November elections, with international humanitarian organizations
being denied work visas for staff, travel permits, and permission to expand
programs in some areas.
Calls for Accountability
In his report to the UN Human Rights Council (HRC) in March, Tomás Ojea
Quintana, the special rapporteur for the situation of human rights in Myanmar,
outlined a “pattern of gross and systematic violation of human rights which has
been in place for many years.” He concluded that “UN institutions may consider
the possibility to establish a commission of inquiry (CoI) with a specific fact finding
mandate to address the question of international crimes.” At this writing more
than 13 countries publically supported the formation of a CoI, including the
United States, the United Kingdom and several other European countries,
Australia, and Canada. UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has not publically commented
on Quintana’s call.
During a general debate at the UN Human Rights Council in Geneva on September
17, Burmese ambassador U Wunna Maung Lwin denied the situation in Burma
warranted an inquiry, saying there were “no crimes against humanity in
Myanmar... (w)ith regard to the issue of impunity, any member of the military who
breached national law was subject to legal punishments...there was no need to
conduct investigations in Myanmar since there were no human rights violations
there.”
Quintana’s report to the UN General Assembly in October elaborated on the possible
parameters of a CoI, possible areas of investigation, and time frames. In late
October US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said she wanted to “underscore the
American commitment to seek accountability for the human rights violations that
have occurred in Burma by working to establish an international Commission of
Inquiry.” China has actively tried to block the proposal. The European Union,
WORLD REPORT 2011
292
which drafted the annual Burma resolution, did not pursue calls for the CoI to be
included in the resolution in the UN General Assembly.
Key International Actors
UN Secretary-General Ban expressed “disappointment” and “frustration” with the
SPDC’s lack of cooperation in responding to the UN’s long-standing call for
release of political prisoners; a free, fair, and inclusive election; and the start of a
genuine process of national reconciliation. Despite requests to the SPDC, Ban’s
special advisor on Burma, Vijay Nambiar, was not permitted to visit Burma in
2010.
Tomás Ojea Quintana visited Burma in February, but the SPDC denied him access
for further visits after his report to the HRC.
China continued to be Burma’s most supportive international ally, routinely blocking
criticism of Burma’s human rights record in multilateral forums. Chinese
Premier Wen Jiabao conducted a state visit to Burma on June 2, and Burmese
President Than Shwe visited China from September 7-11. Than Shwe paid his second
state visit to India in late July, where he signed numerous bilateral investment
deals with Prime Minister Manmohan Singh. India failed to voice criticism or
concerns over Burma’s elections.
US Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs Kurt Campbell
visited Burma in May and met senior military leaders and Aung San Suu Kyi as
part of the Obama administration’s “pragmatic engagement” policy with the
SPDC. Campbell expressed his “profound disappointment” at the SPDC’s lack of
reciprocity, and the US government was consistently critical of the election
process. US Senator Jim Webb, who had been conducting private visits to Burma
to talk with senior SPDC leaders, postponed a trip in June due to media allegations
over Burma’s suspected nuclear program and cooperation with North Korea.
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) reduced its previous criticism of
Burma in 2010. In a statement, Vietnam, the current chair of the association, stated
that ASEAN emphasized the importance of “national reconciliation in
Myanmar” and “holding general elections in a free and fair manner with the participation
of all interested parties,” which it said contributed to the country’s sta-
293
ASIA
bility and development. However, Indonesia and the Philippines criticized the
lack of reform in Burma, particularly the elections which Philippines President
Benigno Aquino III called a “farce.”
Burma’s neighbors China, India, and Thailand, continued to invest and trade
extensively, especially in the extractive and hydro-electric energy industries.
China is building two energy pipelines from western Burma to Yunnan, and a
series of massive hydro-electric dams on the Irrawaddy River in upper Burma.
Sales of natural gas to Thailand still account for the largest share of the SPDC’s
foreign exchange earnings, which will increase markedly when the Chinese gas
pipeline project is completed in 2013.
Russia and North Korea continued to sell arms to the SPDC, despite US concerns
that North Korean sales could breach UN Security Council Resolution 1874, which
imposes curbs on weapons proliferation.
WORLD REPORT 2011
294
Cambodia
The Cambodian government increased its repression of freedoms of expression,
assembly, and association in 2010, tightening the space for civil society to operate.
Prime Minister Hun Sen’s ruling Cambodian People’s Party (CPP) used the judiciary,
new laws, and threats of arrest or legal action to restrict free speech, jail government
critics, disperse workers and farmers peacefully protesting, and silence
opposition party members.
Cambodia also regressed in respecting international rights treaties. In December
2009 the government deported 20 Uighur asylum seekers at risk of torture and
mistreatment to China, violating Cambodia’s obligations under the 1951 Refugee
Convention. The controversial refoulement took place on the eve of a visit by senior
Chinese officials that finalized a massive aid package to Cambodia.
Freedoms of Expression, Association, and Assembly
Journalists who criticize the government face biased legal action, imprisonment,
and violence. At least 10 opposition journalists have been killed in the past 15
years.
Under a new penal code that came into force in November 2009, government critics
who peacefully express views about individuals and government institutions
risk criminal prosecution for defamation and disinformation. These include the
editor of Khmer Amatak newspaper who was charged in March with defamation
and disinformation for a feature on governmental corruption, and the editor of
Prey Nokor newspaper, which covers Khmer Krom affairs, who was forced to
resign in August. In May authorities banned a public screening in Phnom Penh of
a documentary about the 2004 assassination of labor leader Chea Vichea. There
was no progress in his murder investigation or that of two other union leaders
murdered in 2004.
Pending legislation on nongovernmental organizations and trade unions is
expected to further tighten restrictions on freedom of association.
295
ASIA
In September tens of thousands of garment workers seeking a higher minimum
wage began a legal strike, which union leaders suspended after government officials
agreed to negotiate. However, employers suspended or fired more than 200
union leaders and members for their roles in the strike, fueling worker protests.
Authorities continue to forcibly and often violently disperse public protests. A
new law allows local officials to ban protests deemed threats to “security, safety,
and public order.”
Judiciary
The government made no efforts during 2010 to improve the judiciary’s impartiality
or independence.
Politically motivated court cases continue to target opposition members. In
January a provincial court convicted opposition leader Sam Rainsy and two villagers
on charges of racial incitement and destroying border demarcation posts.
In a closed trial, the court refused to consider defense evidence and sentenced
Rainsy to two years in jail in absentia. In September he was sentenced to 10 more
years for disinformation and falsifying maps.
The judiciary’s lack of independence was further highlighted in August, when the
Takeo provincial court convicted four people on unfounded charges of disinformation.
A long-awaited anti-corruption law hastily passed in March, with little time for
public comment. The government threatened to expel the UN resident coordinator
when UN agencies called for more public debate on the law, which lacks adequate
protections for whistle-blowers and fails to ensure independence for legally-
created anti-corruption agencies.
Arbitrary Detention and Torture
Police and military police routinely use torture to extract confessions from
detainees. Courts fail to address the illegal torture and use coerced confessions
to convict the accused. The Cambodian League for the Promotion and Defense of
WORLD REPORT 2011
296
297
ASIA
WORLD REPORT 2011
298
Human Rights (LICADHO) received reports of 60 cases of torture in the first half of
2010 alone.
More than 2,000 people were arbitrarily detained in 11 government drug detention
centers. Mandated to treat and “rehabilitate” drug users, the centers subject
detainees to violence (including electric shocks and whippings), forced labor, and
military-style drills. Many detainees are children and people with mental illnesses.
In December 2009, 21 drug users were illegally detained and forced to test an
unregistered Vietnamese herbal formula purported to “cure” drug dependence.
Women and girls, including transgender women, involved in sex work face beatings;
rape; sexual harassment; extortion; arbitrary arrest; and detention by
police, government-hired security guards, and employees in social affairs centers.
A 2008 law on trafficking and sexual exploitation criminalizes trafficking but also
makes “solicitation” illegal, exposing sex workers to arbitrary detention and
abuse. Police crackdowns on “trafficking” focus on closing brothels and arbitrarily
detaining sex workers rather than prosecuting traffickers.
Homeless children, families, beggars, the mentally ill, and other indigent people
gathered in police sweeps are also detained and mistreated in government social
affairs centers.
Cambodia’s prisons continue to be overcrowded and lack sufficient food, water,
sanitation, and healthcare. Prey Veng prison experienced a major cholera outbreak
in July, while 15 prisoners in Kampong Thom, who tried escaping in early
2010, were shackled to iron bars for over a month.
Land Confiscation and Forced Evictions
Illegal land confiscation and forced evictions continue to escalate. During the first
half of 2010, more than 3,500 families – approximately 17,000 people – were
newly affected by land grabbing, according to a survey of 13 of Cambodia’s 24
provinces by LICADHO.
Land rights activists faced violence and arrest, with more than 60 people imprisoned
or awaiting trial for protesting forced evictions and land grabbing.
299
ASIA
In Kampong Speu, more than 800 families had their land confiscated due to
sugar concessions granted to a CPP senator. Soldiers, military police, and courts
facilitated the arrest and charging of farmers protesting seizure of their land.
In January company guards and soldiers from Brigade 31 wounded at least four
people when they forcibly evicted 116 families from their land in Kampong Som
which is slated for development by a Chinese-owned company. Using military
force to conduct evictions is illegal in Cambodia.
Land conflicts affecting indigenous peoples continue unabated. In March the
United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination criticized
the government for granting numerous concessions on indigenous peoples’ lands
without their consent and harassing peaceful protesters. In Kampong Speu, a
Singaporean concession holder partnered with PM Hun Sen’s sister to oversee
the clearing of farmland belonging to indigenous Suy people, threatening the
resource base of 350 families.
On April 26, unknown assailants in Battambang shot and killed community
activist Pich Sophan, who had led fellow villagers to contest military confiscation
of their land, and was a witness to the April 4 shooting of fellow activist Sim Mey.
Mey survived but was jailed in May on charges of destruction of property.
Khmer Rouge Tribunal
In July the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC), the UNbacked
Khmer Rouge tribunal, sentenced the former chief of Tuol Sleng (S21)
prison, Kaing Gech Eav, known as Duch, to 35 years in prison for crimes against
humanity and war crimes. He faces just 19 more years because of time served
and deducted for his illegal detention before his transfer to the ECCC.
In September the tribunal announced indictments for four other former Khmer
Rouge leaders in custody. Charges against them include genocide, crimes against
humanity, torture, and murder. Despite the international co-prosecutor’s submission
of six additional suspects for indictment, Hun Sen continued to publicly
oppose further trials beyond the five persons in custody and reiterated this view
to the UN Secretary General during a meeting in October.
WORLD REPORT 2011
300
Refugees and Asylum Seekers
Asylum seekers, especially from Vietnam and China, face forced repatriation in
violation of the Refugee Convention. Uighurs were forcibly returned to China three
days after Hun Sen signed the refugee sub-decree.
The authorities also refused asylum for Khmer Krom (ethnic Khmers from southern
Vietnam) who fled to Cambodia from Vietnam. Despite promises to treat
Khmer Krom as Cambodian citizens, authorities failed to grant many Khmer Krom
citizenship and residence rights, including 24 who were deported to Cambodia in
December 2009 after a failed asylum bid in Thailand. In February 2010 authorities
rejected the group’s request to receive documents needed to rent housing, get
jobs, and access healthcare, education, and other services.
Key International Actors
In June Cambodia’s donors pledged US$1.1 billion in development aid for 2010.
Years of donor funding for judicial reform have had little effect. Japan,
Cambodia’s largest donor and the single largest funder of the ECCC, maintained
its practice of not publicly confronting the government about its rights violations.
China, another major investor and donor, continued to increase aid to Cambodia
with no conditions made to improve human rights.
Besides supporting rule of law, health, and human rights projects, the United
States continued to aid and train Cambodia’s armed forces – including units with
records of serious rights violations such as Brigade 31, Battalion 70, and Airborne
Brigade 911 – in violation of the Leahy law. Responding to the deportation of
Uighur asylum seekers in April, the US cancelled shipment of 200 surplus military
trucks to Cambodia. In July US-funded regional peacekeeping exercises took place
on land transferred from a military unit involved in illegal land seizures.
In August the European Union convened its first public consultations in Cambodia
with civil society ahead of its annual rights dialogue with the government. Rights
groups criticized the EU’s tax-free policy for imported Cambodian sugar, some of
which is grown on plantations that have displaced thousands of rural
Cambodians.
301
ASIA
In March Cambodia officially accepted all 91 recommendations that UN member
states made during the Universal Periodic Review of its rights record by the UN
Human Rights Council. Yet when the country representative from the UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights criticized the deportation of two Thais in June the
government threatened to expel him. According to the Foreign Minister, Hun Sen
demanded the expulsion of the representative and closure of the office in a meeting
with the UN Secretary General in October. In September a report by the special
rapporteur on human rights in Cambodia strongly criticized the lack of judicial
independence.
WORLD REPORT 2011
302
China
Imprisoned dissident Liu Xiaobo’s selection as the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize winner
in October was a defining moment for China’s human rights movement. It also
focused global attention on the extent of human rights violations in China, and
on its unreformed, authoritarian political system as it emerges as a world power.
The Chinese government tried to censor news about the prize domestically,
immediately placing Liu’s wife Liu Xia under house arrest and clamping down on
rights activists and Liu’s supporters. It then attempted to portray the prize as part
of a conspiracy by Western countries, insisting that Chinese citizens do not value
civil and political freedoms.
That argument was significantly challenged by a public letter that circulated the
next week: written by retired Chinese Communist Party (CPC) elders, it called for
political reforms to defend the right to free expression and a free press as guaranteed
by the constitution. The letter cited the domestic censorship of comments
that Premier Wen Jiabao made in New York in October, in which he acknowledged
that “the people’s wishes for, and needs for, democracy and freedom are irresistible.”
In an unprecedented move, several newspapers printed Wen’s comments
the next day, openly challenging censorship orders.
The Nobel Prize and the letter highlighted the growing importance of debate within
mainstream society, the party, and the government about the role of “universal
values.” These ideas were also advocated by Charter 08, the landmark document
that called for a gradual overhaul of China’s political system. Liu’s participation in
drafting the charter prompted his December 2008 arrest and his 11-year prison
sentence one year later.
Freedom of Expression
The government continued to restrict the rights and freedoms of journalists, bloggers
and an estimated 384 million internet users, in violation of domestic legal
guarantees of freedom of press and expression. The government requires state
media and internet search firms to censor references to issues ranging from the
June 1989 Tiananmen massacres to details of the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize.
303
ASIA
On January 12, 2010, the US search engine company Google announced it would
seek an agreement with China’s government to end the firm’s self-censorship of
Chinese internet users’ search results, which it undertook partly because of government
requirements. The government refused. On March 22, 2010, Google
stopped censoring searches on its http://www.google.cn site and began redirecting
them to its uncensored Hong Kong-based site.
On April 22, 2010, the government approved an amendment to the revised draft
Law on Guarding State Secrets. The revised law requires internet and telecom
firms to “cooperate with public security organs, state security agencies [and]
prosecutors” on suspected cases of state secrets transmission.
At least 24 Chinese journalists are jailed on ambiguous charges ranging from
“inciting subversion” to “revealing state secrets.” They include Gheyret Niyaz, a
Uighur journalist and website editor, sentenced to 15 years in June for “endangering
state security” related to a foreign media interview he gave after the July 2009
protests in Xinjiang. That same week a Xinjiang court convicted three Uighur bloggers
on the same charge. Dilshat Perhat, webmaster of Diyarim; the webmaster of
Salkinm who goes by the name Nureli; and Nijat Azat, webmaster of Shabnam,
received sentences of five, three, and ten years respectively.
Journalists who overstepped censorship guidelines continued to face official
reprisals. Zhang Hong, a deputy editor with the Economic Observer newspaper,
was fired after co-writing a March 1, 2010, editorial carried in 13 Chinese newspapers
advocating the abolition of China’s discriminatory hukou (household registration)
system. China Economic Times editor Bao Yuehang was fired in May 2010
in apparent retaliation for a March 17, 2010, story that exposed vaccine quality
shortfalls in Shanxi province linked to four children dying and at least 74 others
falling ill.
Chinese journalists also continued to face physical violence for reporting on “sensitive”
topics. On April 20, 2010, 10 unidentified assailants attacked Beijing News
reporter Yang Jie while he photographed the site of a forced eviction. Police at the
scene briefly detained the assailants before releasing them, characterizing their
actions as a “misunderstanding.” On September 8, 2010, security guards beat
WORLD REPORT 2011
304
three reporters from Jilin and Changchun television stations attempting to cover a
fire at the City College of Jilin Architecture and Civil Engineering.
Foreign correspondents in China continue to face reporting restrictions despite
the government’s October 2008 decision to eliminate requirements for official
permission to travel the country and interview Chinese citizens. Those restrictions
include a prohibition on foreign correspondents visiting Tibet freely.
Legal Reforms
Legal awareness among citizens continues to grow and legal reforms progress
slowly, although the government’s overt hostility towards genuine judicial independence
undercuts legislative improvements. It also defeats efforts to progressively
curtail the Chinese Communist Party’s authority over all judicial institutions
and mechanisms.
Two potentially significant reforms progressed on paper but not in practice. In
May the Supreme People’s Court, the Supreme People’s Procuratorate (the state
prosecution), and the ministries of public security, state security, and justice
issued two directives regarding excluding evidence obtained through torture. This
includes confessions of defendants and testimonies of prosecution witnesses,
which underpin most criminal convictions in China.
However, these new regulations were not followed in the case of Fan Qihang, who
in a video made public by his lawyer, described daily torture for six months and
failed attempts to retract his forced confession during trial. The Supreme People’s
Court refused to investigate the torture allegations and upheld the original death
sentence.
In August the government announced a draft amendment to China’s criminal law
that would eliminate the death penalty for 13 “economy-related non-violent
offences.” But in September a senior member of the legislature’s Legal Affairs
Committee announced the government would not pursue this initiative. China
leads the world in executions: five to eight thousand take place every year.
305
ASIA
Human Rights Defenders
Most human rights advocates, defenders, and organizations endure varying
degrees of surveillance, harassment, or suppression by police and state security
agencies. Several leading figures have been jailed in the past three years, and
several NGOs shuttered or constrained. Yet the domestic “rights defense movement”—
an informal movement connecting lawyers, activists, dissidents, journalists,
ordinary citizens, and peasant and workers’ advocates—continues to expand
as demands grow for the state to respect its own laws.
Despite pervasive state censorship, rights advocates helped generate public and
media debate on issues including illegal detention centers for petitioners travelling
to the capital to lodge grievances (known as “black jails”), abnormal deaths
in custody, widespread torture to extract confessions, use of psychiatric facilities
to detain dissenters, socioeconomic discrimination against ethnic minorities in
Xinjiang, and endemic abuses linked to forced demolitions and eviction.
Activists nonetheless paid a heavy price for these advances. In addition to routine
harassment, they endure aggressive police surveillance, illegal home confinement,
interception of communications, warnings and threats, repeated summons
for “discussions” with security officers, and short-term detention.
Human rights lawyer Gao Zhisheng has been missing for two years. He reemerged
in Beijing in early April 2010 after a year of official obfuscation about his status,
telling journalists and supporters that security agents had repeatedly tortured
and kept him captive. He disappeared again a few days later. In October police
rejected his brother’s effort to register him as a missing person.
The blind legal activist Chen Guangcheng was freed from prison in September,
only to be confined with his entire family in his home village and denied medical
treatment for ailments he developed in prison. Unidentified men working at the
behest of local police officials threatened and roughed up journalists and
activists who tried visiting him.
On November 10 Zhao Lianhai, the father of a child who developed kidney stones
due to the contaminated milk scandal, was sentenced to two-and-a-half years’
WORLD REPORT 2011
306
imprisonment on charges of “causing a serious disturbance” for his role in organizing
a victims association to file a class action lawsuit.
Migrant and Labor Rights
The All-China Federation of Trade Unions (ACFTU) remains the sole legal representative
of workers in China; independent labor unions are banned. Labor
activism–mainly by migrant workers–in several foreign-invested factories in
southern Guangdong province in the summer of 2010 challenged that prohibition,
resulting in improved pay and benefits for strikers at production facilities for
Japan’s Honda and Denso Corporation. In August the ACFTU announced reforms
aimed at developing a more democratic selection process for union leaders. Yet
its insistence that reforms “not deviate from the leadership of the Communist
Party” indicates that restrictions on independent union activity will remain.
The government has yet to deliver on longstanding promises to abolish the hukou
system. Access to public benefits such as education and healthcare are linked to
place of birth; China’s 230 million migrant workers are denied access to these
services when they move elsewhere in the country.
In June 2010 the State Council, China’s cabinet, announced a proposal to replace
the hukou system with a residential permit system, which would extend public
welfare benefits to migrants in China’s cities. However, the proposal lacks a
timetable and financial provisions for the hukou system’s elimination.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
The government decriminalized homosexuality in 1997 and removed it from the
official list of mental disorders in 2001 but does not allow same-sex marriage. In
March 2010 former vice-minister of health Wang Longde told state media the government
needed to end discrimination against gay men in order to more effectively
combat the country’s HIV/AIDS epidemic.
Despite such indications of progress, entrenched social and official discrimination
against lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people in China limits them
from realizing fundamental rights of expression and association. Beijing police
307
ASIA
forced cancellation of the first Mr. Gay China pageant in January 2010 without
explanation. In September 2010 Beijing police detained hundreds of gay men
rounded up in a Haidian district park in an apparent effort to harass and intimidate
homosexuals. The men were reportedly released only after providing identification
and submitting to blood tests.
Women’s Rights
Entrenched gender-based discrimination and violence continue to afflict Chinese
women. Inequality is particularly serious in rural areas, where gender-based discrimination,
unequal access to services and employment, trafficking into forced
prostitution, and violence are more common than in cities. In June 2001 the nongovernmental
Anti-Domestic Violence Network of China Law Society (ADVN) called
for revisions to domestic violence provisions of the Marriage Law. The ADVN criticized
the current Marriage Law for requiring victims of domestic violence to provide
what the organization considers to be impossibly high standards of proof of
long-term physical abuse.
Police typically subject suspected female sex workers to public “shaming”
parades in violation of their rights of privacy and due process. Public criticism of
the practice peaked after a widely publicized June 2010 incident in which police
forced two suspected sex workers to walk bound and barefoot through the streets
of Dongguan. On July 27, 2010, state media announced an official ban on the
practice, although it remains uncertain whether it will be enforced.
Health
The Chinese government moved in 2010 to protect the rights of people with
HIV/AIDS. On April 27, 2010, it lifted its 20-year-old entry ban on HIV-positive foreign
visitors. And on August 30, 2010, an Anhui provincial court accepted China’s
first-ever job discrimination lawsuit on the grounds of HIV-positive status. In
November the provincial court ruled against the defendant.
However, HIV/AIDS activists and nongovernmental advocacy organizations continued
to face government harassment. In May 2010 Wan Yanhai, China’s leading
HIV/AIDS activist, fled to the United States, citing official harassment of his NGO,
WORLD REPORT 2011
308
309
ASIA
the Aizhixing Institute. On August 16, 2010, police in Henan province detained
Tian Xi, a veteran HIV/AIDS rights activist pursuing state compensation for victims
of the province’s blood contamination scandal, on charges of “intentionally damaging
property” after a minor altercation at a hospital. Tian faces up to three
years in prison.
Government officials and security forces continue to incarcerate suspected users
of illicit drugs without trial or judicial oversight in drug detention centers for up to
six years under China’s June 2008 Anti-Drug Law. Detainees in drug detention
centers suffer widespread human rights abuses, including arbitrary detention,
forced labor, physical violence, and denial of medical services, including evidence-
based drug dependency treatment and treatment for HIV/AIDS.
China’s rapid economic growth has led to widespread industrial pollution. The
government is failing to address the public health repercussions resulting from
severe environmental degradation. Lead has poisoned tens of thousands of
Chinese children, many of whom suffer permanent physical and mental disabilities
as a result. Despite Chinese and international law that purport to protect people
from polluted and hazardous environments, Human Rights Watch research to
be published next year shows that local governments across China have prioritized
concealing the problem, turning children away from hospitals, refusing to
test them for lead, and withholding or falsifying test results.
Freedom of Religion
Despite a constitutional guarantee of freedom of religion, China’s government
restricts spiritual expression to officially registered churches, mosques, monasteries,
and temples. Religious personnel appointments require government
approval. Religious publications and seminary applications are subject to official
review. The government subjects employees, membership financial records, and
activities of religious institutions to periodic audits. It deems all unregistered religious
organizations illegal, including Protestant “house churches,” whose members
risk fines and criminal prosecution. Certain groups, including the Falun
Gong, are seen as “evil cults,” and their followers are subject to official harassment
and intimidation.
WORLD REPORT 2011
310
Police and government officials raided a training session on law and theology
organized by a Christian house church in Henan’s Fangcheng County on March 11,
2010, and temporarily detained three attendees. On May 9, 2010, Guangzhou
police broke up an outdoor house church service in a local park and later temporarily
detained the church’s leader for questioning. On October 10, 2010,
Beijing International Airport immigration officials blocked five Protestant house
church leaders from boarding planes en route to an international evangelical conference
in South Africa.
Tibet
The Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR) and the neighboring Tibetan autonomous
areas of Qinghai, Sichuan, Gansu, and Yunnan province, remained tense. The
Chinese government gave no indication it would accommodate the aspirations of
Tibetan people for greater autonomy, even within the narrow confines of the
country’s autonomy law on ethnic minorities’ areas. There were no mass arrests
in 2010 of the kind that followed the spring 2008 protests, but the government
maintains a heavy security presence across the Tibetan plateau and continues to
sharply curtail outside access to most Tibetan areas.
Tibetans suspected of being critical of political, religious, cultural, or economic
state policies are targets for persecution. In June the 15-year sentence given to
Karma Sandrup, a prominent art dealer and environmental philanthropist, on
unfounded charges of “grave robbing” signaled a departure from the government’s
previous willingness to embrace economically successful Tibetan elites
who abstained from political pursuits. Multiple due process violations marred the
trial, including evidence the suspect and witnesses had been tortured.
In July 2010 the government rejected the findings of a comprehensive Human
Rights Watch report, which established that China had broken international law in
its handling of the 2008 protests. The report, based on eyewitness testimonies,
detailed abuses committed by security forces during and after protests, including
use of disproportionate force in breaking up protests, firing on unarmed protesters,
conducting large-scale arbitrary arrests, brutalizing detainees, and torturing
suspects in custody. The government accused Human Rights Watch of “fabricating
material aimed at boosting the morale of anti-China forces, misleading the
311
ASIA
WORLD REPORT 2011
312
general public and vilifying the Chinese government,” but failed to respond to any
of the report’s substantive allegations.
Xinjiang
The Urumqi riots of July 2009—the most lethal episode of ethnic unrest in recent
Chinese history—continued to cast a shadow over developments in the Xinjiang
Uighur Autonomous Region. The government has not accounted for hundreds of
persons detained after the riots, nor investigated serious allegations of torture
and ill-treatment of detainees that have surfaced in testimonies of refugees and
relatives living outside China. The few publicized trials of suspected rioters were
marred by restrictions on legal representation, overt politicization of the judiciary,
failure to publish public notification of the trials, and failure to hold genuinely
open trials as mandated by law.
Pervasive ethnic discrimination against Uighurs and other ethnic minorities persisted,
along with sharp curbs on religious and cultural expression and politicallymotivated
arrests under the guise of counterterrorism and anti-separatism efforts.
In April Beijing installed a new leader for the autonomous region, Zhang
Chunxian, to preside over an ambitious economic overhaul. In May the first
national Work Conference on Xinjiang unveiled numerous measures that are likely
to rapidly transform the region into an economic hub but also risk further marginalizing
ethnic minorities and accelerating migration of ethnic Han Chinese into
the region.
By the end of 2011, 80 percent of traditional neighborhoods in the ancient Uighur
city of Kashgar will have been razed. Many Uighur inhabitants have been forcibly
evicted and relocated to make way for a new city likely to be dominated by the
Han population.
Key International Actors
China’s government became more brazen in thwarting international norms and
opinion. In late December 2009 it successfully pressured Cambodia to forcibly
return 20 Uighur asylum seekers, despite its record of torturing Uighurs and vocal
313
ASIA
opposition from the US and others. A few months later, when the US suspended
a shipment of trucks to punish Cambodia for violating the 1951 Refugee
Convention, China provided a comparable shipment within a few weeks.
The Chinese government also continued to obstruct international efforts to
defend human rights by taking steps to derail growing international momentum
for a commission of inquiry into war crimes and crimes against humanity in
Burma. China’s United Nations delegation also opposed the release of a UN
report documenting use of Chinese ammunition in Darfur in violation of an arms
embargo. The Chinese government has still not issued invitations to the UN high
commissioner for human rights or a half-dozen other special rapporteurs who
requested visits in the wake of the Tibet and Xinjiang protests.
Although more than a dozen countries continue to pursue human rights dialogues
with the Chinese government, few of these opaque discussions produced
meaningful outcomes in 2010. While most of these governments offered strong
support for the Nobel Committee’s choice of Liu Xiaobo as winner of the peace
prize, many failed to seize other opportunities, such as conducting high-profile
visits to China or meeting senior Chinese officials to raise human rights concerns.
WORLD REPORT 2011
314
India
India, the world’s most populous democracy, has a vibrant media, active civil
society, a respected judiciary, and significant human rights problems.
The government’s agenda in 2010 was dominated by continuing insurgency and
armed conflict in several regions, including Jammu and Kashmir, Maoist-afflicted
areas in central India, and Manipur and other parts of the volatile northeast.
Impunity for abuses committed by security forces in the context of these conflicts
remains a pressing concern.
Authorities made little progress in reforming the police; improving healthcare,
education, and food security for millions still struggling for subsistence; ending
discrimination against Dalits (“untouchables”), tribal groups, and religious
minorities; and protecting the rights of women and children.
In many parts of the country, communities protested forcible acquisition of land
by state governments for infrastructure and mining projects. These projects frequently
go ahead without proper safeguards to protect the rights of those at risk
of displacement.
Legislators and officials proposed new laws to prevent torture, ensure food security,
and prosecute those responsible for sexual violence, but have yet to repeal
laws providing effective immunity from prosecution to government officials,
including soldiers and police, responsible for human rights violations.
Accountability for Security Force Abuses
The security forces have at times used excessive force in suppressing violent
street protests in Indian-administered Kashmir; the clashes resulting in more than
100 deaths and thousands of injuries to both civilians and security forces. Deaths
and injuries to protesters, many of them children, prompted anger and renewed
protests, deepening a cycle of tit-for-tat violence. In September the government
sought to calm tempers by announcing dialogue, releasing arrested protesters,
and providing financial compensation for deaths.
315
ASIA
Maoist insurgents (Naxalites), operating in seven states, killed more than 100
police and paramilitary personnel in 2010, prompting a massive government
security response. Civilians were often caught up in the fighting.
In Manipur, conflicting separatist demands by rival groups led to repeated unrest,
with the security forces continuing to operate under the Armed Forces Special
Powers Act (AFSPA). Separatist groups and security forces committed serious
abuses against civilians; no members of the security forces were held accountable.
Activists in all of the conflict areas and in major cities demanded repeal of the
AFSPA and a larger commitment by officials to holding security forces accountable
for abuse, but repeal efforts were stymied by opposition from the army and
extreme nationalist political parties.
Bombings and Other Attacks
Prosecutors made some progress in 2010 in pursuing justice for a series of bombings
targeting civilians that killed 152 persons in 2008, responsibility for which
was claimed by an Islamist militant group called Indian Mujahedin (IM). Police
have charged more than 70 alleged IM members or associates from nine states in
the 2008 attacks and continue to seek the arrest of more than three dozen fugitives.
The IM is also suspected in a February 2010 attack in Pune city that claimed
17 lives and has apparently claimed responsibility for a September attack that
injured two foreign tourists in New Delhi.
There were repeated allegations of unlawful detention, torture, and other ill-treatment
by police to secure confessions in response to such attacks. In several
cases, the police themselves appear to have drafted the confessions. The suspects
suffered further abuses while in jail awaiting trial and even in court.
On an encouraging note, the trial of Ajmal Kasab, the sole surviving Pakistani
gunman in the November 2008 Mumbai attack that claimed 166 lives, was conducted
in a professional manner and was not the summary proceeding that critics
had feared.
WORLD REPORT 2011
316
Police in 2010 reported that extremist Hindu groups may have been responsible
for bombing attacks in Ajmer and Hyderabad, prompting the Home Minister to
warn against these previously ignored militant groups.
Other Accountability Issues
Impunity for abusive policing remains a pressing concern in India, with continuing
allegations in 2010 of police brutality, extrajudicial killings, and torture. While
some policemen were prosecuted for human rights abuses, legal hurdles to prosecution
remained in place and long-promised police reforms remained in draft
form or unimplemented. Alleged perpetrators use political influence, corruption,
and intimidation to obstruct investigations, delay proceedings, discourage plaintiffs,
and ultimately escape prosecution.
The long backlog and slow progress of cases in India’s courts also discourages
potential complainants. Victims’ family members and human rights lawyers needed
several years, for example, to force an investigation into allegations that the
Gujarat police summarily executed four persons in 2004. Only after the Supreme
Court ordered the Central Bureau of Investigation to investigate the summary execution
of an alleged terrorist in 2005 were a state minister and several senior
Gujarat police officials arrested.
The government has yet to prosecute those responsible for the mass killings of
Sikhs that followed the 1984 assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi by her
Sikh bodyguards. Delivery of justice for mass violence against Muslims in
Mumbai in 1992-93 and in Gujarat in 2002 has been slow.
In a positive development, a legislator from the ultra-nationalist Bharatiya Janata
Party was convicted in June 2010 for his role in violence against Christians in
Orissa in 2008 that left at least 40 people dead and thousands displaced when a
Hindu mob attacked Christians. In August, 16 others were sentenced to three
years in prison for their role in the violence.
317
ASIA
Women’s Rights
While many serious issues remain, Indian officials took some positive steps on
women’s rights in 2010. In March long-awaited legislation reserving seats for
women in parliament was passed by the upper house and awaits lower house
approval. In April authorities introduced nationwide guidelines for maternal death
investigations and introduced a separate mechanism to track pregnancies and
their outcomes.
“Honor” killings of women and girls continued in 2010, mostly in the northern
states of Haryana, Punjab, and Uttar Pradesh. Khap panchayats (unofficial village
councils) issued edicts condemning couples for marrying outside their caste or
religion and censured marriages within a gotra (kinship group) as incestuous
even though there was no biological connection. To enforce these decrees, family
members threatened couples, filed false cases of abduction, and killed spouses
to protect the family’s “honor.” Some local politicians and officials were sympathetic
to the councils’ edicts, implicitly supporting the violence.
India still lacks comprehensive legislation on sexual violence and child sexual
abuse, but authorities in 2010 began to consider reforms to the existing sexual
violence law. Among a host of other problems, rape survivors continue to suffer
from use of an unscientific and degrading “finger test” in many hospitals to determine
whether they are “habituated” to sexual intercourse; the findings of the test
can be used in rape cases and other criminal proceedings.
Children’s Rights
In Jammu and Kashmir, several children were among those killed or injured during
anti-government demonstrations. Children detained for alleged participation
in the violent protests were held in jail with adults, in violation of juvenile justice
laws.
Although the government issued a directive preventing security forces from occupying
and using schools as long-term outposts during anti-Maoist operations in
states such as Chhattisgarh, Bihar, and Jharkhand, it failed to effectively implement
the measure, resulting in continued disruptions in education. Maoist insurgents
continued to bomb government schools and to recruit children into armed
WORLD REPORT 2011
318
combat. The government failed to effectively implement policies that provide for
free and compulsory primary education.
Access to Pain Relief
Hundreds of thousands of persons with advanced cancer suffer unnecessarily
from severe pain because the Indian government has failed to ensure access to
safe, effective, and inexpensive pain drugs. More than half of government-supported
regional cancer centers do not offer palliative care or pain management,
even though more than 70 percent of their patients need it. Numerous patients
told Human Rights Watch that their suffering from cancer and other conditions
was so severe that they would rather die than live with the pain. The government
also failed to integrate palliative care into HIV treatment programs.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Building on a 2009 decision of the Delhi High Court, government officials promised
to drop section 377—a provision too often abused to treat consensual homosexual
conduct between adults as a crime—in proposed amendments to the
Penal Code.
India’s Foreign Policy
Despite its considerable influence, India continues to miss opportunities to raise
concerns about even egregious human rights violations in other countries or to
assert leadership on human rights at the United Nations. In several cases, it has
actively opposed international efforts to pressure human rights violators.
India played an important role in Afghanistan, providing aid for humanitarian and
infrastructure projects. In July the Foreign Minister called on all parties to abjure
violence, end links to terrorism, and accept the “democratic and pluralistic values
of the Afghan Constitution, including women’s rights.”
After the conclusion of a Sri Lankan military campaign to defeat the Tamil Tigers
in 2009, India provided humanitarian assistance for the rehabilitation of displaced
persons and called for political reconciliation. India, however, has contin-
319
ASIA
ued to be weak on accountability for atrocities committed during the conflict by
both Sri Lankan and Tamil Tiger forces.
In July India hosted a state visit by Burma’s authoritarian leader, General Than
Shwe. India failed to demand greater protection for human rights by the military
junta, support an international commission of inquiry into war crimes in Burma,
or condemn the deeply flawed processes and rules for Burma’s national election
held on November 7, 2010.
Relations with Pakistan remained tense, particularly when new evidence showed
that Pakistani military intelligence officials may have been involved in supporting
the Lashkar-e-Taiba attack in Mumbai in November 2008.
Key International Actors
India’s policy in the subcontinent is heavily influenced by its strategic and economic
concerns about China’s growing influence in countries like Burma, Nepal,
Pakistan, and Sri Lanka.
Relations between India and China suffered setbacks in 2010. China disapproves
of India’s continued support to Tibetan refugees and its hosting of the Tibetan
government in exile. However, both China and India agreed to resolve differences
through continued dialogue.
India continued to build strong ties with the United States and Europe, built on
increasing trade and business opportunities. Both the US and EU insisted they
privately pressed India to address a range of domestic rights concerns and to
become more of a champion of human rights issues internationally. But there was
no evidence such efforts resulted in changes in Indian policy or practice.
WORLD REPORT 2011
320
Indonesia
Over the past 12 years Indonesia has made great strides in becoming a stable,
democratic country with a strong civil society and independent media. However,
serious human rights concerns remain. While senior officials pay lip service to
protecting human rights, they seem unwilling to take the steps necessary to
ensure compliance by the security forces with international human rights and
punishment for those responsible for abuses.
New allegations of security force involvement in torture emerged in 2010. But the
military consistently shields its officers from investigations and the government
makes little effort to hold them accountable. The government has also done too
little to curb discrimination against and attacks on religious, sexual, and ethnic
minorities.
In July the US government lifted its ban on military assistance to Kopassus,
Indonesia’s elite special forces, despite continuing concerns about its human
rights record.
Freedom of Expression
While Indonesia today has a vibrant media, authorities continue to invoke harsh
laws criminalizing those who raise controversial issues, chilling peaceful expression.
Indonesia has imprisoned more than 100 activists from the Moluccas and
Papua for “rebellion” for peacefully voicing political views, holding demonstrations,
and raising separatist flags.
In August Indonesian police arrested 21 individuals for planning to float pro-independence
flags attached to balloons during a visit to the Moluccas by President
Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono. Police subjected them to severe beatings that lasted
for days including with wooden sticks and bars and forced them to hold painful
stress positions. In September Papuan activist Yusuf Sapakoly, convicted of
“rebellion” in 2007 for assisting activists who displayed a pro-independence flag,
died of kidney failure after prison authorities denied him medical treatment. In
July, after 10 months of delay, prison authorities in Papua permitted political prisoner
Filep Karma to travel to Jakarta for necessary surgery.
321
ASIA
Indonesia’s criminal libel, slander, and “insult” laws prohibit deliberately “insulting”
a public official and intentionally publicizing statements that harm another
person’s reputation, often even if those statements are true. In early 2010 Tukijo,
a farmer from Yogyakarta, was sentenced to six months’ probation and a threemonth
suspended prison sentence for criminal defamation after he asked a local
official to disclose the results of a land assessment.
Military Reform and Impunity
Indonesia still does not credibly investigate most allegations of serious human
rights abuse by security forces. Despite parliament’s recommendation in
September 2009, President Yudhoyono failed in 2010 to authorize an ad hoc
court to investigate the 1997-98 enforced disappearances of student activists. Nor
was there any progress on a bill before parliament that would give civilian courts
jurisdiction to try soldiers accused of committing abuses against civilians. In
November a military court in Papua convicted four soldiers for beating unarmed
civilians in Papua to sentences of between five and seven months in prison, the
incident was captured on film. Other videos of security forces torturing or killing
civilians emerged this year but few perpetrators have faced justice.
Ignoring recommendations from a National Human Rights Commission team,
police and prosecutors took no steps to reopen the case against former deputy
state intelligence chief and one-time Kopassus commander Maj. Gen. Muchdi
Purwopranjono, implicated in the 2004 murder of prominent human rights
activist Munir Said Thalib.
In January President Yudhoyono appointed Maj. Gen. Sjafrie Sjamsoeddin, implicated
in the 1997-98 student disappearances and in serious human rights abuses
in East Timor, to the position of deputy defense minister.
Of 18 Kopassus personnel convicted of human rights abuse since 1999, at least 11
continue to serve in the military. On March 22 Defense Minister Purnomo
Yusgiantoro publicly pledged to suspend from active duty military officials credibly
accused of gross human rights abuses in the future, discharge those convicted
of abuse, and cooperate with their prosecution. Six days later soldiers in
Depok were accused of severely assaulting four boys who had allegedly stolen a
WORLD REPORT 2011
322
323
ASIA
WORLD REPORT 2011
324
bicycle. Military police said they investigated the soldiers but released no information
suggesting that they were prosecuted or disciplined.
The armed forces retain extensive business holdings despite a law requiring the
government to shut down these businesses or take them over by October 2009.
The government merely ordered a partial restructuring of the entities—cooperatives
and foundations—through which the military holds many of its investments.
The team overseeing the restructuring failed to meet an August deadline to complete
its work, which remains incomplete at this writing.
Freedom of Religion
Senior government officials justify restrictions on religious freedom in the name
of public order. In April Indonesia’s Constitutional Court upheld a law prohibiting
“blasphemy,” which criminalizes the practice of beliefs deviating from the central
tenets of one of six officially recognized religions, on the grounds that it protects
public order.
On several occasions militant Islamist groups mobilized large groups of private
citizens and attacked places of worship of minority religious communities. Police
frequently failed to arrest the perpetrators of the violence. In July the local authorities
tried to seal a mosque where members of the Ahmadiyah religious community
worship in Kuningan, West Java. When Ahmadiyah members blocked them,
hundreds of anti-Ahmadiyah protesters then attempted to forcibly close the
mosque, resulting in minor injuries. Police made no arrests, and in August
Indonesia’s religious affairs minister called for a ban on Ahmadiyah religious
practice, claiming that the violence resulted from the Ahmadiyah’s failure to
adhere to a 2008 decree requiring them to refrain from spreading their faith.
Several minority congregations alleged that local government officials arbitrarily
refused to issue them permits required by law to build a “house of worship.”
Those who attempted to worship without a permit faced harassment and violence.
In August protesters assaulted a Protestant congregation that had begun holding
services in a vacant lot after officials in Bekasi, a Jakarta suburb, denied their permit
request and sealed two sites they used for services. Approximately 20 congre-
325
ASIA
gants were injured, but police made no arrests. In September assailants attacked
two leaders of the congregation, injuring one critically. Police arrested 10 suspects,
including the leader of the local chapter of the militant Islamic Defenders
Front.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In a sign of rising social intolerance, threats by the Islamic Defenders Front forced
cancellation of a regional meeting of the International Lesbian, Gay Bisexual,
Trans and Intersex Association (ILGA) in Surabaya in March and a National Human
Rights Commission workshop on transgender issues in April.
Papua/West Papua
In 2010 Indonesia maintained restrictions on access to Papua by foreign human
rights monitors and journalists, facilitating a climate of impunity. Indonesia
expelled the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) from Papua in 2009;
its office there remained closed in 2010.
In May government officials transferred Anthonius Ayorbaba, the warden at
Papua’s Abepura prison, after the Papua office of the National Commission on
Human Rights found him responsible for frequent beatings of prisoners by
guards. However, authorities did not investigate Ayorbaba further and took no
other steps to address allegations of prisoner abuse at Abepura.
In July Papuan journalist Ardiansyah Matra’is’s body was found in a river. Matra’is
had reported on plans for a large agri-business development in Papua and illegal
logging involving police officers. Police claimed he had committed suicide, but an
autopsy revealed he had died before entering the river.
Despite the wide circulation of a video showing police paramilitary (Brimob) officers
taunting Yawan Wayeni after they had cut open his stomach, police officials
made no effort to investigate or prosecute those responsible for his killing.
In October a 10-minute cell phone video showed Indonesian soldiers brutally torturing
two Papuan farmers, Tunaliwor Kiwo and Telangga Gire, as they asked them
WORLD REPORT 2011
326
about weapons. Kiwo screams as a piece of burning wood is repeatedly jabbed at
his genitals. The Indonesian government promised to prosecute the soldiers.
Aceh
Aceh’s provincial government continued to implement a repressive Shariainspired
dress code and law on “seclusion”—banning association between
unmarried men and women in “isolated” places—primarily through a Sharia
police force that harasses, intimidates, and arbitrarily arrests and detains women
and men. Local community groups also forcibly enter homes and assault and
publicly humiliate couples they suspect to be committing “seclusion.” Police
make little effort to deter such behavior.
In January 2010, three Sharia police officers raped a young woman they had
detained overnight on suspicion of “seclusion.” Officials replaced the head of the
local Sharia police and two of the perpetrators were tried and sentenced to
imprisonment for eight years, but authorities declined to implement broader
remedial measures.
In July the West Aceh district government forbade women from wearing tight
pants and authorized the local Sharia police to require women wearing pants to
immediately change into a government-issued skirt.
In a positive development, Aceh’s governor refused to implement an October
2009 draft law that would have added new Sharia offenses that raise human
rights concerns, including criminalizing adultery by a married person and imposing
penalties including death by stoning.
Migrant Domestic Workers
Migrant domestic workers continue to confront a range of abuses both during the
recruitment process in Indonesia and while employed abroad. The government
has failed to stop local recruiters from charging prospective migrants exorbitant
fees that leave them highly indebted, which contributes to situations of forced
labor abroad. Citing concerns about abuse, the government has maintained bans
of new migration to Malaysia and Kuwait, and in 2010 imposed and lifted a ban
327
ASIA
WORLD REPORT 2011
328
on migration to Jordan. Negotiations to revise a 2006 memorandum of understanding
with Malaysia on domestic workers, initially expected to be concluded in
2009, have repeatedly stalled on establishing a minimum wage and a recruitment
fee structure.
Child Domestic Workers
Hundreds of thousands of girls in Indonesia are employed as domestic workers.
Many work long hours, with no day off, and are forbidden from leaving the house
where they work. In the worst cases, girls are physically, psychologically, and sexually
abused by their employers. Presently, Indonesia’s labor law excludes all
domestic workers from the basic labor rights afforded to formal workers.
The parliament failed to enact a draft Domestic Worker’s Law. The committee considering
the bill ceased its deliberations in July 2010 following internal disagreements,
particularly over a provision that would require domestic workers to be
paid the minimum wage.
Migration and Refugees
Indonesia does not offer asylum for refugees and has not ratified the 1951
Refugee Convention. Increasingly, Indonesia has detained asylum seekers, largely
as a result of foreign pressure. Indonesia detained nearly 1,300 migrants between
January and June 2010, many of whom were attempting to reach Australia. Some
organizations have reported mistreatment and substandard care in detention.
Key International Actors
Indonesia continued its leadership role in ASEAN and appointed an independent
expert supported by civil society groups as its representative to the ASEAN
Intergovernmental Commission on Human Rights (AICHR), which held its first formal
session in Jakarta in April. Yet Indonesia failed to press for strengthening the
AICHR’s weak mandate or for substantial participation by civil society organizations
in its work.
329
ASIA
The United States broadened bilateral relations with Indonesia by implementing
the US-Indonesia Comprehensive Partnership. In July the US lifted an 11-year ban
on military aid to Kopassus, despite continuing concerns about impunity and the
unit’s human rights record. The US requested that Indonesia shift soldiers previously
convicted of human rights abuse out of the force but not that they be discharged
from the military entirely. In November President Barack Obama visited
Jakarta to discuss the US-Indonesia Comprehensive Partnership, signaling closer
cooperation between the two nations. He did not raise specific human rights concerns.
The US also continued to provide significant support to Detachment 88,
Indonesia’s counterterrorism police, but revealed that it cut off aid for the unit in
the Moluccas in 2008 as a result of human rights concerns.
In September the US House of Representatives Committee on Foreign Affairs held
a hearing to discuss abuses by security forces in Papua and shortcomings in the
implementation of special autonomy.
The Australian government continued to cooperate with Kopassus and
Detachment 88. In September Australia noted concern about torture allegations
in the Moluccas but did not announce a suspension of aid in response.
In June the European Union held the first EU-Indonesia Human Rights Dialogue in
Jakarta. The EU reported that it raised areas of concern but did not indicate
whether it had called for any specific human rights improvements.
WORLD REPORT 2011
330
Malaysia
Nearly two years after Malaysian Prime Minister Seri Najib Tun Razak assumed
office pledging to “uphold civil liberties,” there has been only limited progress.
Promised amendments to the Internal Security Act (ISA) and other laws permitting
preventive detention have not been enacted. Restrictions on freedom of expression
continue to be used to limit the right of government critics to express their
views. Local police chiefs continue to restrict public assemblies and processions,
often on political grounds.
Detention without Charge or Trial
Malaysia’s 50-year-old ISA permits indefinite detention without charge or trial of
any person deemed by officials to be a threat to national security. Officials in
2010 reiterated their opposition to repeal of the ISA but agreed to consider
reforms in five areas, including limiting detention without trial, providing guarantees
against mistreatment of detainees, and more precisely defining what behavior
triggers application of the ISA. However, in March the home minister declared
that the ISA could not be amended without also reviewing six other laws affecting
security and permitting preventive detention, including the Emergency (Public
Order and Crime Prevention) Ordinance, the Dangerous Drugs (Special
Preventative Measures) Act, and the Restricted Residence Act.
The United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention visited Malaysia in June
2010 and reported that it was “seriously concerned” by the laws permitting preventive
detention and recommended their repeal or, if amended, their “conformity
with article 10 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.” The working
group expressed concerns that Malaysian authorities resort to the Emergency
Ordinance even when the alleged crimes, such as stealing, fighting, or involvement
in organized crime, fall under the purview of Malaysia’s penal code.
331
ASIA
Migrant Workers, Refugees, Asylum Seekers,
and Trafficking Victims
The Malaysian Immigration Act 1959/1963 fails to differentiate between refugees,
asylum seekers, trafficking victims, and undocumented migrants. While other
laws and policies provide some protections for some groups, the government
does not effectively or consistently screen alleged immigration offenders; resulting
in many ostensibly protected individuals end up arrested, detained, and
deported.
In October 2010, in an attempt to “prove to the international community
Malaysia’s commitment to fighting human trafficking,” police used the ISA to
detain seven Malaysian immigration officers and two foreigners for trafficking
offenses. The same month the government implemented amendments to the Anti-
Trafficking in Persons Act that conflate trafficking victims with smuggled migrant
workers, reduce protections for both groups, and make it less likely that trafficking
victims will be able to cooperate in identifying and prosecuting perpetrators.
The government continues to hold trafficking victims in closed shelter facilities
that resemble detention centers.
Despite announcements to the contrary, some 300,000 migrant domestic workers
in Malaysia still lack important protections. Domestic workers are excluded from
key protections under Malaysia’s Employment Act, including limits on working
hours, public holidays, a mandatory day off per week, annual and sick leave,
maternity protections, and fair termination of contracts.
In 2009 Indonesia suspended migration of domestic workers to Malaysia until a
2006 Memorandum of Understanding could be revised with stronger protections
for workers. Negotiations have stalled repeatedly over the establishment of a minimum
wage structure, employees’ rights to retain their passports, and division of
responsibility for recruitment and placement costs.
Drug Policy
The National Anti-Drugs Agency maintains some 28 Puspens (drug detention centers)
where detainees are held for a minimum of two years. Although rates of
WORLD REPORT 2011
332
relapse to drug use have been estimated in Malaysia at 70-90 percent, people
who are subsequently rearrested for drug use face long jail terms and caning.
Freedom 0f Assembly and Police Abuse
Police continued in 2010 to restrict the right to peaceful assembly guaranteed in
Malaysia’s constitution. On several occasions, local police refused to issue permits
to activists for public assemblies, marches, and meetings, and used excessive
use of force to break up unlicensed events.
On August 1, police dispersed eight candlelight vigils commemorating the 50th
anniversary of the ISA, detaining more than 30 people. At some sites, they failed
to give proper warning or allow sufficient time for participants to disperse.
Lawyers on hand to represent detained individuals were prevented from doing so.
There was no progress on plans announced in August 2009 by Home Minister
Hishamuddin Hussein to remove restrictions on public gatherings at certain designated
locations.
Freedom of Expression and the Media
As blogs, Twitter, YouTube, and other websites continue to challenge mainstream
newspapers, television, and radio for readers and listeners, officials continue to
fall short in fulfilling their pledge to preserve an open internet and to realize
Prime Minister Najib’s vision of a media sector in which journalists are “empowered
to report what they see, without fear of consequence.”
Officials in 2010 harassed journalists, confiscated published materials for
“review,” and banned publications outright or suspended them for activities
allegedly beyond the scope of their publishing licenses. The 1984 Printing
Presses and Publications Act requires that all publications renew their licenses
annually.
In September Najib explained the gap between his rhetoric and the government’s
noticeably more vigorous crackdown on free expression, saying, “I did say that
press must be responsible. I did not say that we will waive all the laws in
Malaysia… if you go against the law, whether it is defamation or whether it is
333
ASIA
inciting racial hatred, religious hatred, then you have to be responsible for your
action.”
In June and July the government temporarily shut down newspapers published by
the opposition coalition’s three major parties. Printing license renewals came
with restrictive conditions, such as requirements that sales be limited to party
offices and party members.
Also in June, the Home Ministry banned 1Funny Malaysia, a book of political cartoons,
and two other books by Malaysiakini cartoonist Zulkifli Anwar Ulhaque,
popularly known as Zunar. In September, hours before the launch of Cartoon-ophobia,
a another Zunar book, police raided his office, seized copies of the work,
and arrested him on sedition charges for publishing books detrimental to public
order. In October Home Minister Hishamuddin denied application for yet another
book by Zunar.
That same month the Malaysian Communications and Multimedia Commission
investigated Malaysiakini, a popular online newspaper often critical of government
policy, over its reporting on Prime Minister Najib’s opening speech at the
general assembly of the ruling coalition, the United Malays National Organization.
The Home Ministry has repeatedly refused Malaysiakini’s applications to publish
a daily print version.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
The government continued to reject efforts to repeal article 377 of the penal code,
which criminalizes consensual “carnal intercourse against the order of nature,” or
to replace the law’s section on non-consensual sexual acts with a modern, gender-
neutral law on rape. The government ceased banning gay-themed films, but
only if certain acts are not depicted and gay characters repent by the movie’s end.
Due Process and Trial of Anwar Ibrahim
The trial of Anwar Ibrahim, leader of Malaysia’s political opposition, continued on
the charge of “sodomy” in a case involving alleged consensual homosexual conduct.
The prosecution refused to hand over documents crucial to the defense,
WORLD REPORT 2011
334
including a list of witnesses, witness statements, and clinical notes and specimens
from the medical examination of the accuser two days after the alleged incident
took place. Malaysia’s Criminal Procedure Code, section 51A, includes a provision
requiring the prosecution to turn over “any” document it will use as evidence
and a written statement of facts favorable to the defense with the exception
of any act that “would be contrary to public interest.”
Freedom of Religion
Although Islam is Malaysia’s official state religion, the constitution affirms that
Malaysia is a secular state protective of religious freedom for all. However,
Malaysia’s dual-track legal system permits Sharia courts, in which non-Muslims
have no standing, to rule on religious and moral offenses involving Muslims and
on issues involving marriage, inheritance, divorce and custody battles, and burial
rites, many of which involve interreligious disagreement. In a widely publicized
and potentially far-reaching decision in March, Malaysia’s high court awarded
custody of three children to a Hindu woman whose husband had, without her
knowledge, converted to Islam and had the children converted, but other cases
remained mired in the courts.
Key International Actors
United States officials emphasized trade and investment, nuclear non-proliferation,
and regional security in discussions in 2010 with their Malaysian counterparts,
but did address some concerns relating to human rights, democracy, and
rule of law. In a visit in November US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton did not
meet with human rights groups or with Anwar Ibrahim.
Malaysia invited the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention to visit but then
tried to stop civil society representatives from meeting privately with visiting
group members.
In May Malaysia was elected to the UN Human Rights Council.
Malaysia continued to play the primary role in thwarting efforts by the intergovernmental
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Committee on Migrant
335
ASIA
Workers to negotiate a legally binding ASEAN instrument for the protection and
promotion of the rights of migrant workers.
WORLD REPORT 2011
336
Nepal
Nepal’s political and peace processes remained stalled in 2010, resulting in instability,
weak governance, and no progress on accountability for human rights violations.
Prime Minister Madav Kumar Nepal of the Unified Marxist-Leninist party
(CPN-UML) resigned on June 30, under pressure from the Maoists who demand a
unity government with themselves at the helm. At this writing the parliament has
failed to form a new government, despite 16 rounds of parliamentary votes. The
Constituent Assembly missed the May 28 deadline to draft a new constitution. In
a last-minute deal, political parties concluded a three-point agreement to extend
the Constituent Assembly by another year.
The government made little progress in 2010 on realizing people’s economic,
social, and cultural rights though economic development. Reports of lawlessness
persist in many parts of the country, especially in the southern plains of the Terai
and the eastern hills. Armed groups and ethnically based organizations have
been involved in killings and extortion with impunity.
Accountability for Past Abuses
The government and political parties still fail to show the will to establish
accountability for human rights violations committed during the war. No one from
the security forces or among the Maoists has been held criminally responsible for
abuses committed during the conflict. In many cases, those accused of violations
actively receive protection from the security forces or political parties.
In October the Nepal Army extended the tenure of Colonel Raju Basnet by two
years, though he was at the Maharajgunj army barracks in 2003 and 2004 when
various cases of torture, arbitrary detention, and enforced disappearance took
place. The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) and the UN Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) have repeatedly requested that
the government start proceedings against Basnet.
In spite of a court order, the army refused to hand over Major Niranjan Basnet,
accused in 2004 of the torture, rape, and murder of 15-year-old Maina Sunwar.
After Basnet was returned at the request of the UN from a peacekeeping mission
337
ASIA
in late 2009, the army took him into its custody. In July a military tribunal, established
to probe the circumstances of Basnet’s return from Chad, concluded he
was “innocent.”
The Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) (UCPN-M) leadership has likewise
failed to cooperate with criminal investigations into alleged crimes committed by
Maoists during and after the conflict.
Although the Comprehensive Peace Agreement does not provide a broad amnesty
for serious crimes, the government continues to discuss the withdrawal of cases
deemed “political,” including cases of murder. In January the Supreme Court
upheld the conviction of Maoist Constituent Assembly member Balkrishna
Dhungel for the 1998 murder of Ujjwal Kumar Shrestha. However, police have
failed to arrest him, and Maoists claim the case is against the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement and interim constitution.
In September police and the NHRC exhumed the bodies of four people in
Dhanusha district. The four are believed to be among five students that security
forces allegedly disappeared and killed in 2003. So far, the police have failed to
question officials and claim they are waiting for DNA results to pursue further
investigations.
The draft bills to establish a Truth and Reconciliation Commission and a
Disappearances Commission have been tabled in parliament but await debate by
the Statute Committee. While the bills are a step towards ensuring justice for war
victims, several provisions remain that are inconsistent with international law.
Integration of Maoist Combatants
For more than four years, 19,602 Maoist former combatants have been held in
UN-monitored cantonment sites. In January 2010 the process began of discharging
4,008 of them, who were disqualified as children (2,973 of them) and as late
recruits. A UN monitoring mechanism was formed to scrutinize UCPN-M compliance
with its commitment to a 2009 action plan with the government and the UN
representatives, including a provision on the non-recruitment of children. A special
committee established in mid-2009 to address the integration of Maoist com-
WORLD REPORT 2011
338
batants into the security forces was unable to function for several months due to
the continuous absence of UCPN-M from meetings.
Dalits
Dalits (“untouchables”) suffer from discrimination in economic, social, and cultural
spheres. In September 2009 Nepal announced its support for the UNagreed-
upon guidelines on the elimination of caste discrimination. However,
Nepal has yet to implement recommendations made in 2004 by the Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, including adopting relevant statutory law
to enable the National Dalit Commission–a state agency–to fulfill its mandate.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
The Nepal government has made significant strides towards ensuring equality for
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people in recent years. The government
has promised that the 2011 national census will allow citizens to identify themselves
as male, female, or transgender.
Yet progress remains tenuous. According to local NGOs, there are 280 discriminatory
legal provisions affecting the LGBT community. In September sexual minorities
alleged that the Home Minister refused to issue citizenship cards to transgender
people, contravening a Supreme Court directive three years ago. In response,
dozens of LGBT individuals staged protests in the capital. Police detained some
protesters without charge for several hours.
Women’s Rights
While women have constitutional guarantees and a strong representation in the
Constituent Assembly, women and girls continue to face widespread discrimination.
Violence and exploitation, including trafficking, domestic violence, dowryrelated
violence, rape, and sexual violence remain serious problems. Sexual violence
cases are often settled in private, and even when complaints are filed,
police rarely carry out effective investigations.
339
ASIA
Female members of the Constituent Assembly have formed a caucus to pressure
committees to discuss women’s concerns. Some of the members’ demands
include for women’s perspectives to be included on the issues of citizenship and
property, and for the government to reserve positions for women in administration
and the judiciary, and to provide dedicated public services for sexual and
reproductive health.
Many women migrate to the Middle East as workers through recruitment agencies;
once they arrive in these countries, they are often vulnerable to abuse and
have very few legal protections.
Terai
Tensions persist over the rights of the different ethnic groups, including Madheshi
communities near the Indian border in the Terai, who want greater autonomy and
proportionate representation in government jobs. Public security remains a major
concern in many districts of the Terai. The UN secretary-general, in his periodic
report to the UN Security Council expressed concern that the extortion of officials,
teachers, and business people by armed groups and ethnic organizations is on
the rise despite increased police patrols.
According to human rights groups, the government’s special security policy,
which aims to address the deteriorating security situation, has led to increased
human rights violations. For instance, OHCHR documented 57 cases of deaths as
a result of the unlawful use of lethal force by security forces between January
2008 and June 2010. In several Terai districts, armed groups have recruited children
as messengers for extortion notes and ransom collection, and for enforcing
bandhs (strikes) called by the armed groups.
Tibetan Refugees
The current administration continued to endorse the “One China Policy” and
Tibetan refugees faced increased harassment by Nepali authorities in efforts to
appease China. Several instances of arrests, criminalization of entry, detention,
refoulement, and attempted refoulement of Tibetan refugees were reported in
2010. In June Nepali authorities forcefully deported three Tibetan new arrivals
WORLD REPORT 2011
340
from Humla district. Two of them are believed to be in detention in China. In
October police in Kathmandu confiscated ballot boxes during annual elections
held by Tibetan refugees to nominate candidates for the government in exile. The
Home Minister reportedly issued a statement saying the polling “violated Nepal’s
foreign policy and existing laws of the host country.”
Key International Actors
Nepal is dependent on aid and relies heavily on its traditional donors, such as
Japan, the United States, the United Kingdom, India, and the European Union. It
has to maintain a balance in its relations with its two powerful neighbors, India
and China. In an effort to correct their heavy dependency on India, Nepali political
parties–particularly the Maoist-led government–have attempted to strengthen
ties with China. In December 2009 China provided military aid of about US$3 million,
including training for the Nepal Army.
In December 2009 the US president signed into law the 2010 Consolidated
Appropriations Act, which includes a prohibition on assistance to the Nepal army
unless, among other things, it fully cooperates with investigations and prosecutions
by civilian judicial authorities of violations of internationally recognized
human rights.
India played a positive role in bringing about the comprehensive peace agreement
between political parties to end the Maoist conflict. But since then, India
stands accused of meddling in the selection of a consensus prime minister,
adding to the political instability.
The UK continues to provide military assistance to Nepal. In October Nepal’s army
chief, Gen. Chhatraman Gurung, visited the UK to boost military ties.
The UCPN-M remains on the US list of banned terrorist organizations. In June, the
US embassy in Kathmandu denied a visa to Agni Sapkota, a senior Maoist member,
for his alleged involvement in the extrajudicial killing of Arjun Bahhadur
Lama during the Maoist insurgency.
Nepal continues to be a key troop-contributing country to UN peacekeeping missions.
341
ASIA
In June the government renewed OHCHR’s mandate for a year but demanded a
phased closure of all offices outside Kathmandu, thus weakening human rights
monitoring in the field.
The mandate of the UN Mission in Nepal is ending in January 2011. UN Under
Secretary-General for Political Affairs B. Lynn Pascoe visited Nepal in October to
discuss the peace process with the prime minister.
WORLD REPORT 2011
342
North Korea
Despite lip service to human rights in its constitution, conditions in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (North Korea) remain dire. There is no
organized political opposition, free media, functioning civil society, or religious
freedom. Arbitrary arrest, detention, lack of due process, and torture and ill-treatment
of detainees remain serious and endemic problems. North Korea also practices
collective punishment for various anti-state offenses, for which it enslaves
hundreds of thousands of citizens in prison camps, including children. The government
periodically publicly executes citizens for stealing state property, hoarding
food, and other “anti-socialist” crimes.
Vitit Muntarbhorn, then-United Nations special rapporteur on human rights in
North Korea, wrote in his final report in February 2010 that the country’s human
rights situation “can be described as sui generis [in its own category], given the
multiple particularities and anomalies that abound.” He added that, “simply put,
there are many instances of human rights violations which are both harrowing
and horrific.”
Inter-Korea relations plunged after 46 South Korean sailors died when their warship,
the Cheonan, sank in March 2010. A South Korea-led team that included
investigators from the United States, the United Kingdom, Australia, and Sweden
blamed North Korea for the attack. In July the UN Security Council adopted a
statement condemning the attack. However, North Korea’s strongest ally, China,
declined to name North Korea as the party responsible, and shielded it from significant
Security Council action.
A campaign for a UN commission of inquiry on North Korea gained momentum in
2010, with a growing number of international and South Korea-based human
rights organizations pressing governments to support the initiative.
Monetary Devaluation and Food Shortages
Reports of deaths from starvation surfaced in the months following North Korea’s
ineptly managed monetary devaluation scheme, which effectively demonetized
savings in the old currency in November 2009. North Korea abolished its old
343
ASIA
bank notes with virtually no advance notice and only allowed North Koreans to
exchange up to 100,000 won (approximately US$25 to US$30 according to the
then-market exchange rate) of the old currency for the new bills. Authorities also
banned the use of foreign currencies and closed markets. It later lifted those
bans.
Many people saw their entire private savings wiped out overnight, while prices for
food and other basic commodities skyrocketed as merchants stopped selling
goods in expectation of further price hikes.
South Korea-based NGOs and media with informants inside North Korea reported
on new hunger-related deaths, especially among vulnerable groups. North Korea
reportedly executed Pak Nam Ki, the former finance minister who implemented
the currency revaluation, accusing him of being a South Korean spy intent on
wrecking the economy. Although several international humanitarian agencies
continued to deliver food and services, they have continued to have difficulty
confirming delivery to the most needy.
Torture and Inhumane Treatment
Testimony from escaped North Koreans indicates that persons arrested on criminal
charges often face torture by officials aiming to enforce obedience and to
extract bribes and information. Common forms of torture include sleep deprivation,
beatings with iron rods or sticks, kicking and slapping, and enforced sitting
or standing for hours. Detainees are subject to so-called “pigeon torture,” in
which they are forced to cross their arms behind their back, are handcuffed, hung
in the air tied to a pole, and beaten with a club. Guards also rape female
detainees.
Executions
North Korea’s Criminal Code stipulates that the death penalty can only be applied
to a few crimes, such as “crimes against the state” and “crimes against the people,”
although at least one scholar believes a December 2007 law extended the
penalty to many more. In reality, North Koreans are executed for a wide range of
crimes, including vaguely defined non-violent offenses.
WORLD REPORT 2011
344
Forced Labor Camps
Testimony from escapees has established that persons accused of political
offenses are usually sent to a forced labor camp, known as gwalliso.
The government practices collective punishment, which results in an offender’s
parents, spouse, children, and even grandchildren also being sent to a forced
labor camp. These camps are notorious for abysmal living conditions and abuse,
including severe food shortages, little or no medical care, lack of proper housing
and clothes, mistreatment and torture by guards, and executions. Death rates in
these camps are very high.
North Korea has never acknowledged these camps exist, but US and South
Korean officials estimate some 200,000 people may be imprisoned in these facilities,
which include No. 14 in Kaechun, No. 15 in Yodok, No. 16 in Hwasung, No.
22 in Hoeryung, and No. 25 in Chungjin.
Refugees and Asylum Seekers
North Korea criminalizes leaving the country without state permission. Those who
leave face grave punishment upon repatriation such as lengthy terms in horrendous
detention facilities or forced labor camps with chronic food and medicine
shortages, harsh working conditions, and mistreatment and torture by camp
guards. Some are even executed, depending on their offense and who they met
abroad.
Most North Koreans who leave do so across the country’s northern border with
China. Hundreds of thousands have fled since the 1990s, and some have settled
in China’s Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture. Beijing categorically labels
North Koreans in China “illegal” economic migrants and routinely repatriates
them, despite its obligation to offer protection to refugees under both customary
international law and the Refugee Convention of 1951 and its 1967 protocol, to
which China is a party.
Many North Korean women in China live with local men in de facto marriages.
Even if they have lived there for years, they are not entitled to legal residence and
face arrest and repatriation. Some North Korean women and girls are trafficked
345
ASIA
into marriage or prostitution in China. Many children of such unrecognized marriages
are forced to live without a legal identity or access to elementary education
in order to avoid their mothers being identified and repatriated.
Government-Controlled Judiciary
North Korea’s judiciary is neither transparent nor independent. All personnel
involved in the judiciary, including judges, prosecutors, lawyers, court clerks, and
jury members are appointed and tightly controlled by the ruling Workers’ Party of
Korea. In cases designated as political crimes, suspects are not even sent
through a nominal judicial process; after interrogation they are either executed or
sent to a forced labor camp with their entire families.
Labor Rights
The ruling Korean Workers’ Party firmly controls the only authorized trade union
organization, the General Federation of Trade Unions of Korea. South Korean companies
employ some 44,000 North Korean workers in the Kaesong Industrial
Complex (KIC), where the law governing working conditions falls far short of international
standards on freedom of association, the right to collective bargaining,
and gender discrimination and sexual harassment.
Restrictions on Information, Association, and Movement
The government uses fear—generated mainly by threats of forced labor and public
executions—to prevent dissent, and imposes harsh restrictions on freedom of
information, association, assembly, and travel.
North Korea operates a vast network of informants to monitor and punish persons
for subversive behavior. All media and publications are state-controlled, and
unauthorized access to non-state radio or TV broadcasts is severely punished. The
government periodically investigates the “political background” of its citizens to
assess their loyalty to the ruling party, and forces Pyongyang residents who fail
such assessments to leave the capital.
WORLD REPORT 2011
346
Key International Actors
The UN Human Rights Council reviewed North Korea’s human rights record at a
Universal Periodic Review session in December 2009. North Korea failed to formally
state whether it accepts any of the 167 recommendations that it took under
advisement from that session. The same month the UN General Assembly adopted
a resolution against North Korea for the fifth straight year, citing member
states’ serious concerns about continuing reports of “systemic, widespread, and
grave violations of civil, political, economic, social, and cultural rights.” In April
2010 the council adopted a resolution against North Korea for the third year for
abysmal, systematic human rights violations.
In July 2010 the European Parliament adopted a resolution calling for the
European Union to sponsor a resolution to establish a UN commission of inquiry
to assess past and present human rights violations in North Korea.
The Six-Party talks on denuclearizing the Korean peninsula remain stymied. Citing
the attack on the Cheonan, the US announced new sanctions targeting Office 39,
a secretive Korean Workers’ Party organization known to raise foreign currency for
the party. North Korea jailed Aijalon Mahli Gomes, a US citizen who crossed the
border, on charges of illegal entry and other unspecified crimes. Former US
President Jimmy Carter secured Gomes’ release in August 2010.
North Korean leader Kim Jong Il visited Chinese leaders in Beijing in May and
August 2010 to discuss economic and other cooperation schemes. Observers
speculate the trips were tied to building support for a future transfer of power
from Kim to his third son, Kim Jong Un.
North Korea’s relations with Japan remained frosty, largely due to a dispute over
abductees. North Korea admitted in 2002 that its agents had abducted 13
Japanese citizens in the 1970s and 1980s to use them for training North Korean
spies. It returned five to Japan, but claimed the other eight had died. Japan
insists the number of abductees is higher. No legal means of immigration
between the two countries exists; of the nearly 100,000 migrants from Japan to
North Korea between 1959 and 1984, only 200 have been able to return to Japan
by escaping clandestinely.
347
ASIA
Pakistan
In July Pakistan experienced a devastating flood that swamped one-fifth of the
country, displacing 20 million people and causing billions of dollars in damage.
Already reeling from attacks by militant groups and skyrocketing food and fuel
prices, the fragile civilian government struggled to cope. Although criticized as
chaotic, the flood relief effort was largely free of systematic discrimination against
at-risk minorities.
The security situation continued to deteriorate in 2010 with militant groups carrying
out suicide bombings and targeted killings across the country. The Taliban
and affiliated groups increasingly targeted civilians and public spaces, including
marketplaces, hospitals, and religious processions. In Karachi targeted killings of
political activists escalated.
Ongoing rights concerns include the breakdown of law enforcement in the face of
terror attacks; confrontations between the judiciary, lawyers’ groups, and the government;
continuing torture and mistreatment of criminal suspects; unresolved
enforced disappearances of terrorism suspects and opponents of the former military
government; abuses by the military during operations in the tribal areas and
Swat; and discriminatory laws and violence against religious minorities.
Militant Attacks, Counterterrorism, and Reprisals
Suicide bombings, armed attacks, and killings by the Taliban, al Qaeda, and their
affiliates targeted nearly every sector of Pakistani society, including journalists
and religious minorities, resulting in hundreds of deaths. The country’s largest
cities bore the brunt of these attacks. Two attacks in late May against the
Ahmadiyya religious community in Lahore claimed nearly 100 lives. On July 1 a
suicide bombing at Data Darbar, shrine of the patron saint of Lahore, killed 40
people.
In the tribal areas and the Swat valley, suicide bombings against and targeted
killings of police and civilians deemed to be army informants or peace activists
were commonplace. On July 15 at least five people were killed and nearly 50
WORLD REPORT 2011
348
wounded in a suicide bomb attack near a crowded bus stop in Mingora, the main
town of the Swat valley.
Security forces routinely violated basic rights in the course of counterterrorism
operations. Suspects were frequently detained without charge or convicted without
a fair trial. Credible reports emerged that a few thousand suspected members
of al Qaeda, the Taliban, and other armed groups were rounded up in a countrywide
crackdown that began in 2009 in Swat and the Federally Administered Tribal
Areas, but few were prosecuted before the courts. The army repeatedly refused to
allow lawyers, relatives, independent monitors, and humanitarian agency staff
access to persons detained in the course of military operations.
Since the military regained control of Swat in September 2009, Taliban-perpetrated
abuses such as public floggings and hangings have mostly ended. Despite
this, Human Rights Watch continued to receive credible reports of military and
police abuses in the district, including summary executions, arbitrary detention,
forced evictions, and house demolitions. Human Rights Watch investigated some
of these allegations and documented scores of executions. Army chief Gen.
Ashfaq Parvez Kayani promised to investigate a video allegedly documenting soldiers
executing a group of men and boys in Swat. At this writing, however, no perpetrators
have been held accountable for the killings.
Abuses by Pakistani police, including cases of extrajudicial killing, also continued
to be reported throughout the country in 2010.
Aerial drone strikes by the United States on suspected members of al Qaeda and
the Taliban near Pakistan’s border with Afghanistan escalated in 2010. As of
October 15, 2010, 87 strikes had been reported, many more than in any other previous
year. These strikes were accompanied by persistent claims of large numbers
of civilian casualties but lack of access to the conflict areas has prevented independent
verification.
In July the federal government presented amendments to anti-terrorism laws to
the Senate (upper house of Parliament) that would enable authorities to place
suspects under pre-charge detention for 90 days without judicial review or the
right to bail. Confessions made before the police or military would be deemed
349
ASIA
admissible as evidence despite evidence that torture is routine. At this writing the
amendments remain before the Senate.
Balochistan
A package of reforms aimed at improving provincial autonomy and providing
redress for ethnic Baloch grievances was passed by Parliament in 2010. But civilian
authorities struggled to implement the reforms as conditions markedly deteriorated
in Balochistan. Armed groups launched several attacks against security
forces in the province. Pakistan’s military publicly resisted government reconciliation
efforts and attempts to locate ethnic Baloch “disappeared” during Gen.
Pervez Musharraf’s military rule, a key source of continued tension.
As documented by Human Rights Watch, Pakistan forces continued to be implicated
in the enforced disappearance of suspected ethnic Baloch militants.
Militant groups increased attacks against non-Baloch civilians, teachers, and education
facilities. At least nine education personnel were killed between January
and October 2010. Many teachers, particularly ethnic Punjabis, Shia Muslims,
and other targeted minorities, sought transfers out of fear for their safety.
Legal Reforms and the Judiciary
In April parliament unanimously passed the 18th Amendment to the Constitution,
limiting presidential power and giving parliament, the prime minister, the judiciary,
and provincial governments greater autonomy. Politicians and civil society
groups hailed the amendment as an important step in restoring Pakistan’s parliamentary
system of democracy. The Supreme Court sparked a confrontation with
parliament by voluntarily agreeing to hear legal challenges to parts of the amendment,
including those dealing with mechanisms for judicial appointments.
In June Pakistan ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
and the Convention Against Torture. However, Pakistan made its ratification contingent
on a number of broad and vaguely defined reservations, including excluding
“anything repugnant” to the Constitution of Pakistan.
WORLD REPORT 2011
350
351
ASIA
Relations between the judiciary and some of its erstwhile allies in the “Lawyer’s
Movement,” which helped restore Chief Justice Iftikhar Mohammad Chaudhry to
office in 2009, deteriorated markedly during the year. In October lawyers attempted
to physically attack the chief justice of the Lahore High Court in his chambers.
The following day provincial police permitted into the court premises by the
Lahore chief justice beat and arrested some 100 lawyers and charged them under
Pakistan’s Anti-Terrorism Act.
In October Asma Jahangir, a highly regarded human rights activist and former UN
rapporteur was elected the first woman president of the Supreme Court Bar
Association, the country’s most prominent forum for lawyers. Jahangir emphasized
the need to create professional distance between lawyers and the judges
they helped restore to office in 2009.
Treatment of Minorities and Women
Violence and mistreatment of women and girls, including rape, domestic violence,
and forced marriage, remain serious problems. The Domestic Violence
(Prevention and Protection) Bill, unanimously passed by the National Assembly in
August 2009, lapsed after the Senate failed to pass it within three months as
required under Pakistan’s constitution.
On November 7, 2010, Aasia Bibi, a Christian from Punjab province, became the
first woman in the country’s history to be sentenced to death for blasphemy. The
sentence was greeted with international and domestic condemnation amid
renewed calls by rights groups for repeal of Pakistan’s infamous blasphemy laws.
In 2010 Ahmadis continued to be the primary target for prosecutions under various
provisions of the blasphemy laws across Pakistan. Islamist armed groups
also targeted them for attack. On May 28, militants attacked two Ahmadiyya
mosques in Lahore, killing 94 people and injuring well over a hundred. Three
days later, unidentified gunmen attacked Lahore’s Jinnah Hospital where victims
and one of the alleged attackers were under treatment. A Taliban statement “congratulated”
Pakistanis for the attacks, calling people from the Ahmadiyya and
Shia communities “the enemies of Islam and common people.”
WORLD REPORT 2011
352
Media Freedom
Pakistan’s media remained a vocal critic of the government and experienced less
interference from the elected government than in previous years. However, the
media rarely reported on human rights abuses by the military in counterterrorism
operations.
As in previous years, journalists known to be critical of the military continued to
be harassed, threatened, and mistreated by military-controlled intelligence agencies.
On April 12, shots were fired at the house of journalist Kamran Shafi, a vocal
critic of the armed forces and their influence over the state. In September investigative
journalist Umar Cheema, who had reported critically on civilian and military
authorities in 2010, was abducted, tortured, and then dumped 120 kilometers
from his residence in Islamabad. Cheema alleged his abductors were from
one of Pakistan’s secret intelligence agencies.
Throughout 2010 the Taliban and other armed groups threatened media outlets
over their coverage, a practice documented by Human Rights Watch in 2009, and
a number of journalists were killed in the tribal areas and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
province. On April 19 reporter Azmat Ali Bangash was killed in a suicide bombing
in Orakzai tribal agency while reporting on food delivery at a displaced persons
camp. On July 28, grenade attacks on the homes of journalist Zafarullah Buneri
and Imran Khan injured at least six women and children. Journalists Mujeebur
Rehman Siddique and Mirsi Khan were both shot dead in September.
Bomb blasts in Quetta claimed by Islamist armed groups killed cameraman Malik
Arif on April 16 and cameraman Ejaz Raisani and television station driver
Mohammad Sarwar during a religious procession on September 3.
British-Pakistani documentary filmmaker Asad Qureshi was finally released on
September 9 after being held captive for five months by a group calling itself the
“Asian Tigers.”
In October the ruling Pakistan Peoples Party announced a boycott of Geo TV, an
anti-government television channel, and affiliated newspapers. When the government’s
former information minister Sherry Rehman appeared on the channel,
353
ASIA
President Asif Ali Zardari in retaliation ordered PPP activists to besiege Rehman’s
Karachi home for several hours, threatening her and her family.
Chief Justice Chaudhry and provincial high courts effectively muzzled criticism of
Pakistan’s judiciary in the media. Journalists told Human Rights Watch that major
television channels were informally advised by judicial authorities that they
would be summoned to face contempt of court charges for criticizing or commenting
unfavorably on judicial decisions or specific judges. Publications including
the English-language newspapers Dawn and the News had to apologize publicly
to the court and editors of the former faced contempt proceedings for publishing
a story alleging misuse of office by the chief justice of the Sindh High Court.
Key International Actors
The US remained Pakistan’s most significant ally and was the largest donor to
Pakistan’s flood relief effort in 2010. However, as documented by Human Rights
Watch throughout 2010, there were several instances where US aid to Pakistan
appeared to contravene the Leahy Law. That law requires the US State
Department to certify that no military unit receiving US aid is involved in gross
human rights abuses, and when such abuses are found, they are to be thoroughly
and properly investigated. In October the US sanctioned six units of the Pakistani
military operating in the Swat valley under the Leahy Law even as it announced a
US$2 billion military aid package for Pakistan to help the country meet unprecedented
counterterrorism challenges.
On July 6, British Prime Minister David Cameron announced a judicial inquiry into
Britain’s role in torture and rendition in Pakistan since September 2001. Several
of the cases involve allegations of torture committed against British citizens in
Pakistan with British complicity.
In April a three-member United Nations inquiry commission concluded its investigation
into the December 2007 assassination of Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto.
The commission concluded that not only did Pakistani authorities fail to provide
Bhutto the security that could have saved her life, but elements within the powerful
military may have played a role in her assassination. The panel was highly critical
of the “pervasive role” played by Pakistan’s intelligence agency, Inter-
Services Intelligence.
WORLD REPORT 2011
354
Papua New Guinea
As construction of a US$15 billion project to tap Papua New Guinea’s rich liquefied
natural gas (LNG) reserves got underway in 2010, Prime Minister Michael
Somare predicted that his troubled country was on the verge of transformation.
But longstanding problems that have consistently hobbled progress in the country
were on display throughout the year. Corruption scandals grabbed the headlines,
a UN investigation highlighted by now familiar patterns of brutal police
abuse, and violence against women and girls continued to be widespread.
Just as troubling are signs that the government is more committed to avoiding
accountability than improving its capacity to govern responsibly. In 2010 the government
moved to curtail the powers of its own widely-praised Ombudsman
Commission, while also trying to enact legislation that would strip citizens of their
right to challenge the legality of controversial extractive industry projects in court.
Extractive Industries
The government has staked the country’s future on its extraordinary abundance of
natural resources. Extractive industries are the main engine of the economy, but
the government has a long track record of failing to adequately regulate them. In
2010 there were already worrying signs that the LNG project could generate violent
disputes among landowners over compensation payments, this a full four
years before the gas is expected to flow.
In many ways the government has left large multinational extractive companies to
regulate themselves. For instance private security forces at the sprawling Porgera
gold mine—operated by Barrick Gold, a Canadian company—have been implicated
in incidents of gang rape and other human rights abuses. Yet the government
provides no meaningful oversight of such private security forces or effective,
accessible channels for victims to report such abuses.
In 2010 a group of citizens filed suit to prevent the Chinese-owned Ramu nickel
mine from building a pipeline that would deposit mine waste into the ocean. The
government responded by introducing amendments to the country’s Environment
Act that would strip citizens of their right to challenge government-sanctioned
355
ASIA
projects in court. At this writing the amendments have been passed by parliament
but not signed into law. Supporters of the Ramu mine also reportedly intimidated
and harassed the plaintiffs in the case.
Torture, Rape, and Other Police Abuses
Human Rights Watch has previously documented widespread patterns of abuse
by Papua New Guinea’s police force, including use of excessive force, torture, and
sexual violence, against children as well as adults. These abuses remain rampant
and almost all of those responsible continue to enjoy impunity. In the face of
widespread violent crime, such tactics have deeply eroded the public trust and
cooperation crucial to effective policing.
In May the UN special rapporteur on torture visited the country and documented
routine beatings of criminal suspects that often rise to the level of torture, extortion
of sex from female detainees, corruption, and other abuses. Police sometimes
deliberately disable suspects of serious crimes and escapees by cutting
their tendons with bush knives and axes. The UN special rapporteur found that
conditions in correctional institutions were “poor” and in police lockups
“appalling.” Children are regularly detained with adults in police lockups.
In July mobile police squads housed and fed by Barrick Gold at the company’s
Porgera gold mine allegedly kidnapped and raped three teenage girls. In an
unusual and positive move, the police suspended the alleged culprits from duty
and opened a criminal investigation into the incident. More than five years after
the police beat and sexually assaulted several dozen women and girls (and gang
raped at least four in detention) in a raid on the Three-Mile Guest House in Port
Moresby in March 2004, the Ombudsman Commission issued a report finding
that police had unlawfully arrested and detained the victims, used excessive
force, and raped and humiliated them. The Commission also found that senior
officials failed to supervise or control the officers under their command.
Violence against Women
Violence against women and girls is epidemic in Papua New Guinea, with studies
indicating that more than half of all women in Papua New Guinea have suffered
WORLD REPORT 2011
356
physical assault by a male partner. Sexual violence against women and girls is
also commonplace. Support services such as shelters and emergency health care
are grossly insufficient and victims face formidable barriers to obtaining redress
through the justice system, including lack of information, limited legal aid, and
geographic distance. Many village courts rely on customary laws that fail to protect
women’s rights. The system often leaves perpetrators unpunished, a problem
exacerbated by some police officers’ own propensity to engage in sexual violence.
Government Corruption and Institutional Decay
The government has regularly become embroiled in corruption scandals over the
years and 2010 was no exception. A judicial report that came to light in April
detailed how top-level government officials and others siphoned off some $300
million through phony compensation claims. Meanwhile the capacity of key public
institutions continues to decay, especially in rural areas where the government
often fails to provide basic services like health and education. The
government–against widespread civil society protests–supported moves to curtail
the powers of its Ombudsman Commission, the very institution tasked with
unearthing patterns of government corruption and abuse.
The Rights to Health and Education
Papua New Guinea performs poorly on most indicators of economic and social
well-being. Rates of maternal and child mortality are among the highest in the
region. The closure of rural aid posts and health centers, declining transportation
infrastructure, the failure of allocated funds to reach local governments, and a
shortage of drugs, medical equipment, and trained health professionals all limit
access to quality healthcare.
The country has the highest prevalence of HIV/AIDS in the Pacific: around 34,100
people are living with the disease (0.92 percent of adults in 2010), with young
women most likely to be diagnosed. Gender-based violence and discrimination,
as well as poor access to healthcare, fuel the virus’s spread. People living with
HIV/AIDS often face violence and discrimination. Antiretroviral therapy is inaccessible
to most. Despite training, police undermine prevention efforts by targeting
female sex workers and men and boys suspected of homosexual conduct for
357
ASIA
beatings and rape. Police do so in part because they can threaten arrest using
laws criminalizing homosexual conduct and certain forms of sex work, and
because social stigma against homosexuals and sex work shields the police from
public outrage.
Primary education is neither free nor compulsory. Recent estimates of net primary
school enrollment rates range from around 45 to 55 percent. Barriers include long
distances to schools, a shortage of upper secondary placements, high school
fees, and school closures due to insecurity. Girls in particular suffer from sexual
abuse by other students and teachers, lack of water and sanitation facilities, and
face daily dangerous journeys to and from school.
The Role of Key International Actors
Australia, Papua New Guinea’s former colonizer, is the country’s most important
international partner. Australia provides some $450 million in assistance annually,
more than it provides to any other country.
The home governments of most multinational companies working in the country
provide few if any enforceable human rights standards to govern overseas corporate
behavior. In 2010 Canada’s parliament rejected a bill that would have taken
modest steps towards establishing such standards for Canadian companies,
including companies with operations in Papua New Guinea. The bill encountered
fierce resistance from the mining industry.
In 2011 Papua New Guinea’s human rights record is due to be examined at the UN
Human Rights Council.
WORLD REPORT 2011
358
The Philippines
Benigno Aquino III, the son of the late president Corazon Aquino, swept to power
in the May presidential elections on a platform of fighting corruption and promoting
justice for victims of crime. The national and local elections were considered
largely free and fair, though marred by violence, including dozens of killings prior
to election day. Political violence continued after the elections as more than 20
activists, journalists, party members, and politicians were killed since Aquino
took office on June 30.
The Philippines is a multiparty democracy with an elected president and legislature,
a thriving civil society sector, and a vibrant media. But several key institutions,
including law enforcement agencies and the justice system, remain weak
and the military and police commit human rights violations with impunity.
In September Andal Ampatuan Jr. and 18 others went on trial for the November
23, 2009, massacre of 58 people, including more than 30 media workers in
Maguindanao on the southern island of Mindanao. Several witnesses to the massacre
and their family members were killed in late 2009 and 2010.
Extrajudicial Killings and Enforced Disappearances
Hundreds of leftist politicians and political activists, journalists, and outspoken
clergy have been killed or abducted since 2001. So far only 11 people have been
convicted of these killings—none in 2010—and no one has been convicted of the
abductions. While soldiers, police, and militia members have been implicated in
many of these killings, no member of the military active at the time of the killing
has been brought to justice.
In December 2009 the Philippines enacted the Crimes Against International
Humanitarian Law, Genocide, and Other Crimes Against Humanity Act (Republic
Act 9851), which defines and penalizes war crimes, genocide, and crimes against
humanity. It provides for senior officers to be held criminally liable for abuses
committed by subordinates if they knew or should have known of the abuses and
did not take the necessary steps to stop them.
359
ASIA
At least five witnesses and family members of witnesses to Ampatuan family
abuses, including the Maguindanao massacre have been killed since December
2009. On June 14 an unidentified gunman shot and killed Suwaib Upahm, an
Ampatuan militia member who had participated in the massacre and had offered
to testify for the government if afforded witness protection. Three months before
he was killed, Human Rights Watch had raised concerns with Justice Department
officials in Manila about his protection. The department was still considering his
request for protection at the time of his killing.
President Aquino has proposed an 80 percent budget increase for the witness
protection program, but his administration has not taken steps to make the program
independent and accessible and to extend protection from the onset of a
police investigation until it is no longer necessary, including after the trial.
Optimism over Supreme Court writs to compel military and other officials to
release information on people in their custody and take steps to protect people at
risk continued to be dampened by hesitancy to grant inspection orders and difficulty
in enforcing them. In two cases, the Supreme Court held that investigations
had been inadequate, but simply referred the case to the national Commission on
Human Rights for further investigation and monitoring—a role that the commission
should already be carrying out. One of these cases involved the 2007 abduction
of leftist activist Jonas Burgos who remains missing.
“Private Armies”
In numerous provinces, ruling families continue to use paramilitary forces and
local police as their private armies. By recruiting, arming, and paying members of
these various militias, often with national government support, local officials
ensure their continued rule, eliminate political opponents, and engage in corruption.
The Maguindanao massacre, the most egregious atrocity implicating a ruling
family in recent years, was allegedly carried out by a private army consisting of
government-endorsed paramilitary members, as well as police officers and soldiers.
In 2010 the government created task forces to dismantle private armies in
Masbate and Abra provinces, but they continue to operate. In July President
WORLD REPORT 2011
360
361
ASIA
Aquino directed the police and military to take control of paramilitary forces,
properly train them, and ensure that all forces are insulated from political entities.
Aquino continues to defend the use of these forces, which often provide
manpower for private armies and have a history of perpetrating rights abuses.
Torture
The August release of a cell phone video showing a Manila precinct chief pulling
on a rope tied around a suspect’s genitals and beating him during interrogation
focused public attention on police torture. Investigators have filed charges of torture
against nine of the police officers involved in the video. The victim, Darius
Evangelista, is thought to be dead.
The 2009 Anti-Torture Act criminalizes torture and introduces mechanisms to prevent
against torture. For example, it requires the police and military to declare
each month the location of all detention facilities to the Commission on Human
Rights. The police and military conducting trainings on the law but have yet to
declare the location of detention facilities.
Targeted Killings of Petty Criminals and Street Youths
So-called death squads operating in Davao City, General Santos City, Digos City,
Tagum City, and Cebu City continued to target alleged petty criminals, drug dealers,
gang members, and street children. The number of killings has declined following
a Commission on Human Rights investigation.
In January the Ombudsman preventatively suspended 26 police officers for failing
to solve the summary killings in Davao City, but this order was reversed by the
Court of Appeals in July.
At this writing the Commission on Human Rights has not reported on the outcome
of the investigations of the multi-agency task force into summary killings in Davao
City, which commenced in April 2009.
WORLD REPORT 2011
362
Armed Conflict in Mindanao
A ceasefire remained in place between the Philippine government and the Moro
Islamic Liberation Front and peace talks are expected. However, at this writing
more than 100,000 people remained displaced after the escalation of the conflict
in 2008 and 2009.
The army continued to fight Abu Sayyaf, an armed group implicated in numerous
attacks and abductions against civilians, particularly in Sulu and Basilan.
Conflict with the New People’s Army
Military clashes between government forces and the communist New People’s
Army (NPA) continued in 2010, especially in Central and Northern Luzon,
Southern Tagalog, Bicol, Eastern Visayas, Negros, and on Mindanao. Around
1,100 people in Surigao del Sur, Mindanao, were displaced twice this year for several
days each time after government forces moved into their area.
On February 6 the military and police arrested 43 men and women on firearms
charges, and accused them of being NPA members. All but five of the detainees
say they are health workers and deny links to the armed group. The arresting officers
detained them blindfolded and without access to communication for the initial
36 hours, and refused them legal counsel during this time. Rather than investigating
these allegations of abuse, the military granted awards to the two officers
that led the arrests.
The NPA continued to kill civilians and extort “taxes” from individuals and businesses.
For example, on July 13, NPA members killed the former mayor of
Giporlos, Mateo Biong, Jr., in Eastern Samar province. The NPA said that it killed
Biong after he was sentenced to death by a rebel “people’s court.”
Reproductive Rights and Access to Condoms
Restricted access to condoms continues to impede HIV/AIDS prevention efforts in
the Philippines, where more than 90 percent of HIV transmission occurs through
unsafe sexual contact and both rates of transmission and overall HIV prevalence
have increased sharply in recent years, particularly among the most at-risk popu-
363
ASIA
lations. In September President Aquino pledged to enhance access to all forms of
family planning, including condoms. At this writing the Philippines continues to
prohibit abortion.
Filipino Workers Abroad
Approximately 2 million Filipinos work abroad, including hundreds of thousands
of women who serve as domestic workers in other parts of Asia and the Middle
East. While the Philippine government has made some effort to support and protect
migrant domestic workers, many women continue to experience abuses
abroad including unpaid wages, food deprivation, forced confinement in the
workplace, and physical and sexual abuse (see Saudi Arabia, United Arab
Emirates, Lebanon, Kuwait, and Malaysia chapters).
Key International Actors
The United States remains the most influential ally of the Philippines and, together
with Australia and Japan, one of its three largest bilateral donors. The US military
has access to Philippine lands and seas under a Visiting Forces Agreement,
and the two militaries hold annual joint exercises. The United States Senate
appropriated US$32 million for the Philippines in fiscal year 2009-2010 under
Foreign Military Financing for procurement of US military equipment, services,
and training. Of that sum $2 million is contingent on the Philippine government
showing progress in addressing human rights violations, including extrajudicial
killings. In September the Millennium Challenge Corporation granted a five-year
economic development compact to the Philippines, totaling $434 million.
Implementation continued on the 2009-11 European Union €3.9 million (US$5.3
million) program to address extrajudicial killings and strengthen the criminal justice
system by providing training and technical assistance.
Relations with China, particularly Hong Kong, have remained strained since a dismissed
police officer took a busload of Hong Kong tourists hostage in Manila. The
police response was incompetent and eight tourists were killed, plus the hostage
taker, and nine tourists were injured.
WORLD REPORT 2011
364
Singapore
In January 2010 Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong said that “updating” the political
system to “ensure a more diverse set of voices in Parliament” was a top priority
but did not commit to far-reaching changes. Current Singaporean laws and policies
on freedom of expression, assembly, and association sharply limit peaceful
criticism of the government and have been used repeatedly to stymie the development
of opposition political parties and dissenting voices. Of particular concern
is the 2009 Public Order Act, which requires a permit for any “cause-related
activity,” defined as a show of support for or against a position, person, group, or
government, even if only one person takes part.
The ruling People’s Action Party (PAP) has been in power since 1959, occupies 82
of the 84 parliamentary seats that have full voting rights, controls all mainstream
media outlets, and presides over a government with extensive powers to regulate
citizen’s lives.
Freedoms of Assembly, Expression, and Association
Singapore’s constitution guarantees rights to free expression, peaceful assembly,
and association, but also permits restrictions in the name of security, the protection
of public order, morality, parliamentary privilege, and racial and religious harmony.
The restrictions are interpreted broadly.
Censorship extends to broadcast and electronic media, films, videos, music,
sound recordings, and computer games. The Newspaper and Printing Presses Act
requires yearly registration and permits authorities to limit circulation of foreign
papers which “engage in the domestic politics of Singapore.”
The Films Act, which since revisions in March 2009 allows some room for political
themes and online election advertising, still restricts political speech. Films and
video must still be submitted to censors, “partisan… references” on any political
matter are still off-limits, and the Ministry of Information, Communication and the
Arts may still ban any film deemed to run contrary to public interest. In July 2010
the Media Development Authority ordered a Martyn See video, “Ex-political prisoner
speaks out in Singapore,” removed from Youtube and from See’s blog.
365
ASIA
In November 2010 British author and journalist Alan Shadrake was found guilty
on charges of “scandalizing the judiciary” and sentenced to six weeks in jail in
addition to a fine and court costs. He claimed in his book, Once a Jolly Hangman:
Singapore Justice in the Dock, that Singapore’s mandatory death penalty for murder,
treason, and some 20 drug trafficking-related offenses is not being applied
as equitably as the government contends. Shadrake’s book concludes that the
judicial process is subject to political and economic pressures, including from the
ruling party, and biased against the “weak,” “poor,” or “less-educated.” During
the trial, the prosecution warned media outlets that publicizing Shadrake’s allegations
could lead to charges against them.
Government authorities continue to closely regulate public meetings, demonstrations,
and processions. In May 2010 Vincent Cheng, held under the Internal
Security Act in 1987 as the alleged leader of a Marxist conspiracy, agreed for the
first time to speak publicly about his treatment in detention at a seminar,
Singapore’s History: Who Writes the Script, organized by students from the
History Society of the National University of Singapore. The National Library
Board, the venue’s sponsor, however, rescinded the invitation and the event went
ahead without Cheng’s participation.
A lower court’s 2009 acquittal of three leaders and two supporters of the opposition
Singapore Democratic Party (SDP) charged with conducting a procession
without a permit became in 2010 yet another setback for free assembly when a
high court reversed the decision on appeal. Siok Chin Chee, a member of the central
committee of the SDP, was sentenced to five short jail terms in 2010 for distributing
political flyers without a permit.
The liberalization of regulations governing Singapore’s “Speakers’ Corner” in
Hong Lim Park in 2008 has had little impact. Although processions and demonstrations
are permitted and a police permit is no longer required, the park site is
ringed with five CCTVs and speakers must register online and show their IDs
before they begin. Speaking at the Corner provides no protection from application
of sedition and criminal defamation laws.
The Societies Act requires any organization with more than 10 members to register.
However, registration may be denied on grounds that an organization’s “pur-
WORLD REPORT 2011
366
poses [are] prejudicial to public peace, welfare or good order” or that registration
would be “contrary to the national interest.”
Criminal Justice System
Singapore’s Internal Security Act and Criminal Law (Temporary Provision Act and
Undesirable Publications Act) both permit arrest and detention without warrant or
judicial review. The Misuse of Drugs Act permits confinement of suspected drug
users in “rehabilitation” centers for up to three years without trial. Second-time
offenders face prison terms and may be caned.
Singapore continues to implement its mandatory death sentences for some 20
drug-related offenses, which has been repeatedly criticized by United Nations
human rights bodies and experts. In August a court postponed the scheduled
execution of Malaysian Yong Vui Kong, 22 years old, accused of transporting 47
grams of heroin into Singapore in 2007, following international attention to the
case.
Judicial caning, an inherently cruel punishment, is a mandatory additional punishment
for medically fit males between 16 and 50 years old who have been sentenced
to prison for a range of crimes including drug trafficking, rape, and immigration
offenses. In addition, a sentencing official may at his discretion order caning
in cases involving some 30 other violent and non-violent crimes. The maximum
number of strokes at any one time is 24.
The US State Department reported that “through November [2009] 4,228 convicted
persons were sentenced to caning, and 99.8 percent of caning sentences were
carried out.” The case of Oliver Fricker, a Swiss national, drew international attention
in June 2010 when he was sentenced to five months in jail and three strokes
of the cane for breaking into a subway system depot and spray painting one of its
cars. On appeal, Fricker’s sentence was increased by two months.
367
ASIA
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In violation of international standards, Penal Code section 377A criminalizes sexual
acts between consenting adult men. In September a defendant brought a constitutional
challenge to the law on grounds that it is discriminatory.
On May 15, 2010, the second annual Pink Dot festival, bringing together over
4,000 LGBT individuals and their families and friends, took place at the government-
established Speaker’s Corner in Hong Lim Park.
Migrant Domestic Workers and Trafficking
Singapore continues to make improvements in working conditions for some
196,000 foreign domestic workers through vigorous prosecution of employers
and recruiters who physically abuse workers or fail to pay wages. However, it
refuses to include domestic workers under the Employment Act or to regulate
recruitment fees, which can run to 40 percent of the total salary a worker will earn
during a two-year contract. Instead, it preserves a sponsorship system that ties a
domestic worker to a specific employer who, in turn, retains the right to cancel
the migrant worker’s contract, making her subject to immediate deportation.
Unscrupulous employers often use the threat of contract cancellation to intimidate
workers to accept unlawful work conditions, restrict their movements, and
prevent them from filing complaints.
A government-mandated standard contract for migrant workers does not address
issues such as long work hours and poor living conditions. Instead of guaranteeing
one day off per month and a set number of rest hours a day, it makes such
breaks a matter of negotiation between employer and employee. It also fails to
provide protections against denial of annual or medical leave, requires immediate
deportation of pregnant workers, and stipulates that no foreign domestic workers
may marry a Singaporean.
Human Rights Defenders
To actively defend human rights in Singapore is to risk being repeatedly fined,
jailed, bankrupted, and forbidden from travel outside the country without govern-
WORLD REPORT 2011
368
ment approval. Although the number of human rights defenders has increased,
the community remains small.
Key International Actors
In March 2010 confirmation hearings before the US Senate, US Ambassador-designate
Daniel Adelman said he would “use public diplomacy to work for greater
press freedom, greater freedom of assembly and ultimately more political space
for opposition parties” in Singapore. Following his confirmation, Adelman backtracked,
stating that democracy and press freedom “are for Singaporeans to
decide for themselves.”
Singapore continues to play an important role in the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN), driving forward its economic integration agenda and
pressing for full implementation of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) Free Trade Agreement. As an important financial center for Southeast
Asia, Singapore continues to face criticism for reportedly hosting bank accounts
containing ill-gotten gains of corrupt leaders and their associates, including billions
of dollars of Burma’s state gas revenues hidden from national accounts.
369
ASIA
Sri Lanka
The aftermath of the quarter-century-long civil war, which ended in May 2009 with
the government defeat of the separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE),
continued to dominate events in 2010. As pressure mounted for an independent
investigation into alleged laws of war violations, the government responded by
threatening journalists and civil society activists, effectively curtailing public
debate and establishing its own commission of inquiry with a severely limited
mandate. When United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon established his
own panel to advise him on accountability issues in Sri Lanka, the government
refused to cooperate.
Sri Lanka held presidential and parliamentary elections in January and April
respectively. President Mahinda Rajapaksa easily won re-election, and the ruling
United People’s Freedom Alliance party remained in power with a significant
majority in parliament. Two weeks after the presidential election, the main opposition
candidate, former army chief Sarath Fonseka, was arrested and in August
found guilty before a court martial of engaging in political activity while still in
uniform, and was stripped of his rank and pension. In a second court martial in
September, he was found guilty of corrupt military supply deals and sentenced to
30 months imprisonment.
In September, at the Rajapaksa administration’s urging, parliament passed the
18th amendment to the constitution, which removed restrictions on central government
control over important independent bodies, such as the police, judiciary,
electoral bodies, and national human rights commission. The amendment consolidated
central government power, in particular executive power.
Accountability
Sri Lanka made no progress toward justice for the extensive laws of war violations
committed by both sides during the long civil war, including the government’s
indiscriminate shelling of civilians and the LTTE’s use of thousands of civilians as
human shields in the final months of the conflict.
WORLD REPORT 2011
370
371
ASIA
Senior government officials have repeatedly stated that no civilians were killed by
Sri Lankan armed forces during the final months of the fighting, despite overwhelming
evidence reported by Human Rights Watch and others that government
forces frequently fired artillery into civilian areas, including the governmentdeclared
“no fire zone” and hospitals. When in late 2009, former commander
Fonseka, then a presidential candidate, stated he was willing to testify about the
conduct of the war, the defense secretary threatened to have him executed for
treason.
Rajapaksa established the Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation Commission (LLRC)
in May 2010. The LLRC’s mandate, which focuses on the breakdown of the 2002
ceasefire between the government and the LTTE, does not explicitly require it to
investigate alleged war crimes during the conflict, nor has the LLRC shown any
apparent interest in investigating such allegations in its hearings to date.
Internally Displaced Persons
After illegally confining more than 280,000 civilians displaced by the war in military-
controlled detention camps–euphemistically called “welfare centers”–the
government released most of the detainees in 2010. Many of those who returned
to their homes in the north and the east face serious livelihood and security
issues. About 50,000 people remained in the camps, primarily families that could
not return to their former homes.
Arbitrary Detention, Enforced Disappearances, and Torture
The government continues to detain without trial approximately 7,000 alleged
LTTE combatants, in many cases citing vague and overbroad emergency laws. The
detainees are denied access by the International Committee of the Red Cross, and
little is known of camp conditions or their treatment. They typically have access to
family members but not to legal counsel. While the government asserts that it has
withdrawn some of its emergency regulations, the Prevention of Terrorism Act
enables security forces to circumvent basic due process.
There were reports in 2010 of new enforced disappearances and abductions in
the north and the east, some linked to political parties and others to criminal
WORLD REPORT 2011
372
gangs. The government continues to restrict access to parts of the north, making
it difficult to confirm these allegations. Witnesses testified before the LLRC that
relatives last known to be in government custody at the end of the war were
forcibly disappeared and were feared to be dead.
The emergency regulations, many of which are still in place, and the Prevention of
Terrorism Act give police broad powers over suspects in custody. Sri Lanka has a
long history of custodial abuse by the police forces, at times resulting in death. In
a particularly shocking case in January, a video camera caught police officers brutally
beating to death an escaped prisoner.
Attacks on Civil Society
Free expression remained under assault in 2010. Independent and opposition
media came under increased pressure, particularly in the run-up to elections. Sri
Lankan authorities detained and interrogated journalists, blocked access to news
websites, and assaulted journalists covering opposition demonstrations.
News outlets associated with opposition parties came under the most vigorous
and sustained attacks. The government particularly targeted Lanka-e-News, a
news website published in English, Tamil, and Sinhalese, often aligned with the
opposition party People’s Liberation Front (JVP). A contributor to Lanka-e-News,
Prageeth Ekneligoda, left his office on January 24 and has been missing ever
since.
Lanka-e-News was one of six news websites blocked by the state-controlled Sri
Lanka Telecom internet provider for several days starting on January 26, the day
of the presidential election. Even after the elections commissioner ordered Sri
Lanka Telecom to unblock the website, the editor of Lanka-e-News, Sandaruwan
Senadheera, was subjected to threats and intimidation. Following several abduction
attempts, Senadheera went into hiding.
The government also targeted another JVP-owned bi-weekly newspaper, Irida
Lanka. On January 29, police questioned senior news editor Chandana
Sirimalwatte and two editorial assistants about a recently published article. While
police released the assistants after several hours, Sirimalwatte was held without
373
ASIA
charge for 18 days. The police also sealed the newspaper’s offices until a court
ordered them opened again.
Some 20 journalists, media workers, and civil society actors went into hiding in
the days following the January election out of concern for their safety. At least four
journalists left the country, adding to the several dozen who have fled in recent
years.
Arrests and Harassment of Opposition Members and
Supporters
The sudden emergence of Sarath Fonseka as a plausible political challenger to
Rajapaksa in November 2009 galvanized the opposition, bringing together such
disparate parties as the left-wing Sinhalese-nationalist JVP and the right-leaning
United National Front (UNP). Even the Tamil National Alliance (TNA), previously
sympathetic to LTTE goals, pledged its support to Fonseka. Although Rajapaksa
won the election by a comfortable margin, his administration targeted Fonseka
and his supporters in what seems to have been an effort to remove not only
Fonseka, but any strong opposition voice, from the public arena.
A few weeks after the January elections the government raided opposition offices
and arrested dozens of staff members, including Fonseka. Some were arrested
when security forces surrounded the hotel where Fonseka’s staff were staying on
election night; another 13 staff members were arrested and accused of conspiring
to stage a military coup.
Key International Actors
Mounting pressure from the United States, some European governments, and
intergovernmental bodies contributed to the Sri Lankan government’s decision to
establish the LLRC in May. Other influential international actors, including India
and Japan, adopted a “wait and see” approach, failing to insist on more serious
justice efforts. A US State Department report issued in August acknowledged that
the government had not taken effective steps toward accountability and noted
the LLRC’s shortcomings. In October Human Rights Watch, Amnesty International,
and the International Crisis Group declined an invitation to testify before the
WORLD REPORT 2011
374
LLRC, citing its limited mandate and lack of impartiality. Also in October, United
Kingdom Prime Minister David Cameron stated in parliament that there was a
need for an independent investigation into the conduct of the war, seemingly
retreating from parliament’s prior commendation of the LLRC.
In June UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon established a three-member panel to
advise him on accountability issues in Sri Lanka. The Sri Lankan government publicly
castigated the newly created panel and, in early July, Housing Minister Wimal
Weerawansa led a protest outside a UN office in Colombo, preventing staff from
entering the building. It was only a few days later, after Ban recalled the UN resident
coordinator to New York, that President Rajapaksa intervened and the
protests stopped.
In June Japan announced that it would donate 100 million yen (US$1.23 million)
through the UN High Commissioner for Refugees for humanitarian assistance to
internally displaced persons in Sri Lanka. In July the European Union decided to
withdraw Sri Lanka’s preferential trade relations, known as the Generalised
System of Preferences Plus, effective from mid-August, after it identified “significant
shortcomings” regarding Sri Lanka’s implementation of three UN human
rights conventions. The government responded that the decision amounted to foreign
interference and that Sri Lanka could manage without the trade benefits.
In September the International Monetary Fund announced that it had approved a
US$2.6 billion loan to Sri Lanka following a two-week mission to the country.
375
ASIA
Thailand
Political instability and polarization continued in 2010, and occasionally resulted
in violence. There were at least 90 deaths and 2,000 injuries of civilians and
security personnel during politically motivated street battles between March and
May. Public pledges by the Thai government to prioritize human rights, political
reconciliation, and accountability for abuses have largely been unfulfilled.
Political Violence
After a month of largely peaceful rallies, on April 7, anti-government protesters
from the United Front for Democracy against Dictatorship (UDD)–backed by former
prime minister Thaksin Shinawatra–stormed Parliament, forcing cabinet ministers
and parliamentarians to flee the building. In response, Prime Minister
Abhisit Vejjajiva declared a state of emergency and created the Center for the
Resolution of Emergency Situations (CRES), an ad hoc body made up of civilians
and military officers, to handle the crisis and enforce emergency powers.
On April 10 the CRES deployed thousands of soldiers in an attempt to reclaim
public space occupied by the red-shirted UDD, sparking violent clashes around
Phan Fa Bridge. At nightfall the soldiers were ambushed by the heavily armed
“Black Shirt” militants, apparently connected to the UDD and operating in tandem
with it. At the same time some UDD security guards and protesters used
weapons such as pistols, homemade explosives, petrol bombs, and slingshots to
attack the soldiers. The panicked soldiers withdrew, firing live ammunition at the
protesters. The government reported that 26 people (including five soldiers) were
killed, and at least 860 wounded (including 350 soldiers).
Between April 23 and 29, groups of armed UDD security guards searched King
Chulalongkorn Memorial Hospital every night, claiming hospital officials had sheltered
soldiers and pro-government groups. The hospital relocated patients and
temporarily shut down most services.
Negotiations in early May, based on Prime Minister Abhisit’s five-point proposal,
ultimately foundered when Maj.-Gen. Khattiya Sawasdipol, who claimed to represent
Thaksin’s interests, and other hardliners attempted to seize control of the
WORLD REPORT 2011
376
377
ASIA
UDD from more moderate leaders. On May 12 the prime minister warned that the
government planned to disperse UDD protesters at Ratchaprasong junction.
As government troops moved to encircle UDD-controlled areas on May 13, an
unknown sniper shot Major-General Khattiya, who died four days later. Violence
escalated as UDD protesters and the Black Shirts began to openly fight the security
forces surrounding their camps. The CRES set out rules of engagement, permitting
security forces to use live ammunition as warning shots to deter protesters
from moving closer; for self-defense; and when troops had clear visuals of “terrorists,”
a term the government failed to define. In reality, the military deployed
snipers to shoot anyone who breached “no-go” zones between the UDD and army
barricades, or who threw projectiles towards soldiers. Sometimes soldiers also
shot into crowds of protesters.
On May 19 the government launched a military operation to reclaim areas around
Ratchaprasong junction, sparking another round of street battles, in which soldiers
used live ammunition, and some UDD protesters and the Black Shirts fought
back. Around midday key UDD leaders surrendered and thousands of protesters
sought sanctuary in the Wat Pathum Wanaram temple, which had been declared
a safe zone by agreement with the government. A Human Rights Watch investigation,
based on eyewitness accounts and forensic evidence, found that soldiers
later opened fire on persons sheltering in the temple. Many were wounded, and
six people, including a volunteer medic, were killed.
After the surrender of UDD leaders, groups of UDD protesters and the Black Shirts
launched a coordinated campaign of looting and arson attacks on the Central
World shopping complex and other locations across Bangkok for two days, starting
on May 19. Previously key UDD leaders had urged their supporters to loot and
burn should the government forcibly disperse the UDD protests.
Street battles injured at least nine reporters and photographers and led to the
deaths of two foreign journalists. On May 19, UDD protesters burned the headquarters
of Bangkok’s TV Channel 3 and provincial branches of NBT TV, accusing
both stations of bias.
That same day UDD supporters outside Bangkok rioted and burned government
buildings in reaction to events in the capital, inflicting damage in Khon Kaen,
WORLD REPORT 2011
378
Ubon Ratchathani, Udorn Thani, and Mukdahan provinces. The security forces
opened fire on the protesters, killing at least three, and wounding dozens more.
Throughout the year bomb attacks in Bangkok and other provinces targeted government
and military locations, as well as political groups, companies, and properties
associated with anti-UDD elements. For example, on April 22, M79
grenades fired at pro-government groups near Saladaeng junction killed one person
and wounded 85.
As a means to reconciliation, Prime Minister Abhisit endorsed an impartial investigation
into the violence committed by all sides. However, the UDD said the
inquiry was not fully independent or impartial, and in any case, the military was
not fully cooperative. Separate inquiries by the National Human Rights
Commission and the specifically appointed Independent Fact-Finding
Commission for Reconciliation made little progress.
Emergency Decree Detention
On April 7 the government proclaimed the Emergency Decree on Public
Administration in Emergency Situation in Bangkok and other provinces.
The decree allows the CRES to hold suspects without charge for up to 30 days in
unofficial places of detention, and gives officials effective immunity from prosecution
for most acts committed while implementing the decree.
The CRES questioned, arrested, and detained UDD leaders and members who
took part in the protests, as well as accused sympathizers. The CRES summoned
hundreds of politicians, former officials, businessmen, activists, academics, and
radio operators for interrogation; froze individual and corporate bank accounts;
and detained some people in military-controlled facilities. The CRES ordered foreign
and Thai journalists and volunteer medics to report to the CRES headquarters
and substantiate their public statements that they witnessed abuses committed
by the security forces.
At this writing the government has failed to provide the exact number and whereabouts
of those detained without charge by the CRES.
379
ASIA
Repressions of Media Freedom and Freedom of Expression
The CRES used the emergency decree to shut down more than 1,000 websites, a
satellite television station, online television channels, publications, and more
than 40 community radio stations, most of which are considered to be closely
aligned with the UDD.
In addition, the government continued to use the Computer Crimes Act and the
charge of lese majeste (insulting the monarchy) to enforce online censorship and
persecute dissidents, particularly those connected with the UDD, by accusing
them of promoting anti-monarchy sentiments and posing threats to national
security. Chiranuch Premchiaporn, webmaster of online news portal Prachatai,
was arrested on September 24 and charged with violating the act because of
reader comments on the site deemed offensive to the monarchy in 2008.
Abusive Anti-Narcotics Policy
The government supported reopening investigations into the 2,819 extrajudicial
killings that allegedly accompanied the 2003 “war on drugs.” However, little
progress was made to bring perpetrators to justice, or end systematic police brutality
and abuse of power in drug suppression operations. In June Ratchaburi
province police officers shot and killed Manit Toommuang, a suspected drug trafficker,
while he was handcuffed and in their custody.
Concerns remained about the detention of drug users in compulsory drug “rehabilitation”
centers, mostly run by the military and the Interior Ministry.
“Treatment” is based on military-style physical exercise, with little medical assistance
for drug withdrawal symptoms.
Violence and Abuses in the Southern Border Provinces
Human Rights Watch expressed concern about the alleged mistreatment of insurgent
suspects in custody after Sulaiman Naesa was found dead at the
Inkhayuthboriharn army camp in Pattani on May 30. Muslim people and human
rights groups also made a growing number of complaints about the unlawful use
of force by Thai security personnel, including assassinations of religious teachers
WORLD REPORT 2011
380
and community leaders suspected of involvement in the insurgency. There have
been no successful criminal prosecutions in these cases. On September 1, police
dropped criminal charges against army-trained militiaman Suthirak Kongsuwan,
who had been accused of leading an attack on Muslim worshippers at Al Furqan
Mosque in June 2009, killing 10 people and wounding 12 others.
Separatist groups continued to attack and kill civilians, including teachers from
government-run schools, and threaten teachers and principals, forcing them to
close schools temporarily. Government security forces frequently occupied
schools, impairing education by turning schools into armed camps. Insurgents
recruited children from private Islamic schools to participate in armed hostilities,
serve as spies, and carry out arson. Thai security forces raided private Islamic
schools, and detained teachers and students for questioning.
Refugees, Asylum Seekers, and Migrant Workers
Thai authorities violated the international principle against refoulement by returning
refugees and asylum seekers to countries where they were likely to face persecution.
Despite international outcry, including strong protests by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the UN secretary-general,
the Thai army on December 28, 2009, forcibly returned 4,689 Lao Hmong, including
158 UNHCR-designated “persons of concern,” to Laos. In November Thai
authorities sent back to Burma thousands of Burmese fleeing armed conflicts in
border areas before UNHCR could assess whether they were returning voluntarily.
In October the Immigration Police arrested 128 Tamils for illegal entry, including
many registered with UNHCR, and threatened to send them back to Sri Lanka.
The Thai government failed to fulfill its promise to conduct an independent investigation
into allegations in 2008 and 2009 that the Thai navy pushed boats laden
with Rohingyas from Burma and Bangladesh back to international waters, which
allegedly resulted in hundreds of deaths. A group of 54 Rohingyas have been held
at the Immigration Detention Center since January 2009, without access to any
mechanism for refugee determination or sufficient medical care. Two of them died
in detention in 2009.
381
ASIA
Migrant workers from Burma, Cambodia, and Laos continue to be abused with
impunity by local police, civil servants, employers, and thugs; with little enforcement
of Thai labor laws. A poorly designed and implemented “nationality verification”
registration scheme caused hundreds of thousands of migrant workers to
lose their legal status, deepening their vulnerability to exploitation. Female
migrant workers are also vulnerable to sexual violence and trafficking.
Human Rights Defenders
The government made little progress in official investigations into the cases of 20
human rights defenders killed, including the 2004 “disappearance” and presumed
murder of Muslim lawyer Somchai Neelapaijit.
International Actors
The UN, the United States, Australia, and the European Union expressed strong
support for political reconciliation and the restoration of human rights and
democracy in Thailand, including by urging the government and the UDD to
engage in dialogue and refrain from using violence. The UN provided training and
technical assistance to the inquiry process, which aims to bring to justice those
responsible for politically motivated violence and abuses.
The UDD, through an international law firm hired by Thaksin, submitted a report
to the prosecutor of the International Criminal Court in October, calling for an
investigation into the alleged crimes against humanity committed by Thai authorities
during the dispersal of the UDD protests.
Thailand made a significant number of human rights pledges in its successful
campaign to join the UN Human Rights Council, and expectations for progress
were further raised when Sihasak Phuangketkeow, Thailand’s ambassador to the
UN in Geneva, was selected as the president of the Council in June, but little has
been implemented at this writing.
WORLD REPORT 2011
382
383
ASIA
Vietnam
The Vietnamese government tightened controls on freedom of expression during
2010, harassing, arresting, and jailing dozens of writers, political activists, and
other peaceful critics.
Cyber-attacks originating from Vietnam-based servers disabled dissident websites
and the government introduced new restrictions on public internet shops while
continuing to restrict access to numerous overseas websites.
Public protests over evictions, confiscation of church properties, and police brutality
were met at times with excessive use of force by police. Police routinely tortured
suspects in custody.
Vietnam, which served as the chair of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) in 2010, demonstrated little respect for core principles in the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Charter to “strengthen democracy” and “protect
and promote human rights and fundamental freedoms.”
Repression of Dissent
2010 saw a steady stream of political trials and arrests as the government
stepped up suppression of dissent in advance of the 11th Communist Party congress
in January 2011. In December 2009 and January 2010, five activists linked to
the banned Democratic Party of Vietnam, including lawyer Le Cong Dinh, were
sentenced to prison on subversion charges, followed by the January 29 sentencing
of democracy campaigner Pham Thanh Nghien for disseminating anti-government
propaganda. On February 5 writer and former political prisoner Tran Khai
Thanh Thuy, who was arrested after trying to attend the trials of fellow dissidents
in 2009, was sentenced to three-and-a-half years’ imprisonment on trumped-up
assault charges.
In February police arrested three activists for distributing anti-government leaflets
and organizing worker strikes in Tra Vinh province. They were tried and sentenced
to long prison sentences in October on charges of “disrupting security.” In April
WORLD REPORT 2011
384
the Lam Dong court sentenced four people to prison for alleged links to the
Vietnam Populist Party.
In July and August police arrested land rights petitioners Pham Van Thong and
Nguyen Thanh Tam in Ben Tre, Tran Thi Thuy in Dong Thap, and Mennonite pastor
Duong Kim Khai in Ho Chi Minh City. On August 13 Ho Chi Minh City math professor
Pham Minh Hoang was arrested. He had been an active contributor to a website
critical of Chinese-operated bauxite mines in the Central Highlands. The five
were charged with subversion, with the banned Viet Tan Party claiming all but
Pham Van Thong as members.
Authorities harassed, detained, and interrogated online critics during the year. In
October police arrested blogger Phan Thanh Hai and Vi Duc Hoi, an editorial
board member of Fatherland Review, and extended the imprisonment of Nguyen
Van Hai (Dieu Cay), a founding member of the Club of Free Journalists. In
November police arrested outspoken legal activist Cu Huy Ha Vu on charges of
disseminating anti-government propaganda and detained and interrogated former
political prisoner Le Thi Cong Nhan about her poems and interviews on the
internet.
Ethnic minority activists also faced arrest and imprisonment. In January the Gia
Lai provincial court handed down prison sentences to two Montagnards, Rmah
Hlach and Siu Koch, on charges of violating the country’s unity policy. After conflicts
broke out in June between Montagnards and a rubber plantation company in
Gia Lai, authorities reinforced the security presence in three districts and arrested
Montagnards belonging to independent Protestant house churches, who they
accused of using religion to forward a political agenda. In November the Phu Yen
provincial court sentenced Ksor Y Du and Kpa Y Ko to prison for “undermining
national unity.”
In March land rights activist Huynh Ba, a member of the Khmer Krom (ethnic
Khmer) minority group, was sentenced to prison in Soc Trang on charges of
“abusing democratic rights.” In July authorities in Tra Vinh defrocked and arrested
Khmer Krom Buddhist abbot Thach Sophon, charging him with illegal confinement.
He was sentenced in September to a nine-month suspended sentence.
385
ASIA
Freedom of Expression, Information, and Association
The government does not allow independent or privately-owned domestic media
to operate and exerts strict controls over the press and internet. Criminal penalties
apply to authors, publications, websites, and internet users who disseminate
materials that oppose the government, threaten national security, reveal state
secrets, or promote “reactionary” ideas. The government blocks access to politically
sensitive websites, requires internet cafe owners to monitor and store information
about users’ online activities, and subjects independent bloggers and
online critics to harassment and pressure.
In April the Hanoi People’s Committee–the executive arm of the municipal government–
issued Decision 15, which requires all internet cafes in Hanoi to install
internet monitoring software approved by the authorities and prohibits the use of
the internet to “call for unauthorized protests, strikes, and slow-downs.” Since
September 1 all internet service providers in Hanoi have been required to shut
down internet transmissions at all internet retail providers from 11 p.m. to 6 a.m.
every day.
The government bans independent trade unions and human rights organizations,
as well as opposition political parties. Current labor law makes it almost impossible
to declare a legal strike, and while illegal “wild-cat” strikes do occur, workers
found to be leading such work stoppages face retaliation from the authorities and
their employers. Activists who promote workers’ rights and independent unions
are frequently harassed, arrested, or jailed.
Freedom of Religion
The government restricts religious practices through legislation, registration
requirements, harassment, and surveillance. A special centrally directed police
unit (A41) monitors groups the authorities consider religious “extremists.”
Religious groups are required to register with the government and operate under
government-controlled management boards. The government bans any religious
activity deemed to oppose “national interests,” harm national unity, cause public
disorder, or “sow divisions.”
Adherents of some unregistered religious groups and religious activists campaigning
for internationally guaranteed rights are harassed, arrested, imprisoned,
WORLD REPORT 2011
386
or placed under house arrest. During Buddhist festivals in May and August Da
Nang police blocked access to Giac Minh Buddhist pagoda and interrogated the
pagoda’s abbot, who is the provincial representative of the banned Unified
Buddhist Church of Vietnam (UBCV). In May religious leader Cam Tu Huynh was
sentenced to prison on charges of slander for criticizing police crackdowns
against followers of the unrecognized branch of the Cao Dai religion.
Those currently in prison for their religious or political beliefs—or a combination
of the two—include more than 300 Montagnard Christians, as well as Hoa Hao
Buddhists, and members of the Cao Dai religion. Religious leaders under house
arrest include UBCV Supreme Patriarch Thich Quang Do, Catholic priests Nguyen
Van Ly and Phan Van Loi, and Khmer Krom Buddhist Abbot Thach Sophon.
Members of officially recognized religious groups, including Roman Catholics,
also face harassment, especially church leaders and lay people attempting to protect
church property. In January police used tear gas and electric batons to disperse
villagers from Dong Chiem parish near Hanoi who were trying to stop police
from taking down a crucifix.
In May police violently dispersed villagers conducting a funeral procession and
protest march to a cemetery located on disputed land in Con Dau parish in Da
Nang. Police used truncheons and electric shock batons to beat people and
arrested more than 60 persons. Most of those arrested were subsequently
released, but seven were charged with opposing law enforcement officers and
disturbing public order. Afterwards one of the villagers, Nguyen Thanh Nam, was
interrogated and beaten by police on several occasions; he died in July from
injuries suffered during a beating by civil defense forces.
Criminal Justice System
Police brutality—including torture and fatal beatings—was reported in all regions
of the country, at times sparking public protests and even riots. In July demonstrations
erupted in Bac Giang provincial town after a man was beaten to death in
police custody after being arrested for a minor traffic violation.
Political and religious prisoners, and others whose cases are considered sensitive,
are routinely tortured during interrogation, held without access to communications
prior to trial, and denied family visits and access to lawyers. Vietnamese
387
ASIA
courts remain under the firm control of the government and the Vietnam
Communist party, and lack independence and impartiality. Political and religious
dissidents are often tried without the assistance of legal counsel in proceedings
that fundamentally fail to meet international fair trial standards.
The use of dark cells, shackling, and transfer of political prisoners to remote prisons
far from family continue to be used as punitive measures. In March, for example,
journalist Truong Minh Duc was transferred to K4, a more isolated and harshly
supervised section of Xuan Loc prison.
Vietnamese law continues to authorize arbitrary “administrative detention” without
trial. Under Ordinance 44, peaceful dissidents and others deemed threats to
national security or public order can be involuntarily committed to mental institutions,
placed under house arrest, or detained in state-run “rehabilitation” or “reeducation”
centers.
Between 35,000 and 45,000 people are detained in centers for drug dependence
“treatment.” Detainees are sentenced for up to four years without a lawyer, court
hearing, or an opportunity to appeal the decision. Detainees are forced to perform
long hours of “therapeutic labor” with punishments for those who do not
meet production quotas. Independent reviews of Vietnam’s system of compulsory
drug treatment have found that some 90 percent of former detainees relapse to
drug use.
Defending Human Rights
At considerable personal risk, a number of activists and former prisoners of conscience
in Vietnam continued to publicly denounce ongoing rights abuses in
2010. After his release from prison for medical reasons in March, Father Nguyen
Van Ly issued a series of public reports detailing torture in prisons. In August Ho
Chi Minh City police detained and questioned another former prisoner, Nguyen
Bac Truyen, after he publicly advocated on behalf of peaceful dissidents serving
long prison terms.
Vietnam exerted pressure on neighboring countries to repress Vietnamese dissidents
and human rights defenders living in those countries. Ongoing requests by
Vietnam for the Cambodian government to crack down on Khmer Krom activists in
Cambodia, for example, played a role in the conviction of four people—including
WORLD REPORT 2011
388
a Khmer Krom monk—by a Cambodian court in August for allegedly distributing
leaflets criticizing Cambodia’s relations with Vietnam. In September, in response
to a request from the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry, Thai authorities pressured the
Foreign Correspondents Club of Thailand to cancel a press conference by
Vietnamese human rights activists and barred them from entering Thailand.
Key International Actors
Vietnam continued its rocky relationship with China. In 2010 tensions mounted
over China’s increasingly aggressive claims to oil—and gas—rich offshore islands,
signaled in July by Chinese military exercises in the South China Sea.
Vietnam remained the leader of the Cambodia/Laos/Myanmar/Vietnam bloc in
ASEAN.
In July and August United Nations independent experts on minority issues and on
human rights and extreme poverty visited Vietnam. Despite repeated requests for
invitations, the government continued to refuse access to other UN special procedures,
including those on freedoms of religion and expression, torture, and violence
against women. Although Japan has considerable leverage as Vietnam’s
largest donor, it did not publicly comment on Vietnam’s deteriorating rights
record.
The United States continued to develop its trade, defense, and security ties with
Vietnam while also pressing Vietnam—one of the largest recipients of US aid in
East Asia—to improve its rights record. Steady improvement in US-Vietnam bilateral
relations addressed mutual objectives to offset China’s military and economic
influence in the region. Vietnam continued its delicate balancing act in order to
avoid angering China, its single largest trading partner, or the US, its largest
export market.
In October, during US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s second trip to Vietnam in
2010, she expressed concerns about the arrests of activists—including several
shortly before she arrived—attacks on religious groups, and internet censorship,
and secured a written commitment from the government to sign and implement
the UN Convention Against Torture.
389
ASIA

WORLD REPORT
2011
EUROPE
AND CENTRAL ASIA
H U M A N
R I G H T S
W A T C H
391
Armenia
Armenian authorities have yet to ensure meaningful investigations into excessive
police force during March 2008 clashes in Yerevan, the capital, when opposition
supporters protested alleged fraud in the previous month’s presidential election.
Twelve opposition supporters remain imprisoned following the events.
Torture and ill-treatment in police custody remains a serious problem.
Amendments to the Law on Television and Radio threaten to limit media pluralism.
Authorities continue to restrict freedom of assembly.
Armenia’s international partners did not fully use their leverage to influence the
human rights situation. The European Union and Armenia launched negotiations
on an association agreement to strengthen ties.
Lack of Accountability for Excessive Use of Force
Authorities have yet to ensure a meaningful investigation into, and full accountability
for, excessive use of force by security forces during clashes with protestors
in March 2008. Ten people were killed, including two security officials and eight
protestors. Only four police officers have been convicted of excessive use of force,
in December 2009. They were sentenced to three years, but were amnestied
immediately, and are only barred from working in law enforcement.
More than 50 civilians were prosecuted in relation to the March 2008 violence,
with some sentenced to lengthy prison terms. Although a June 2009 presidential
pardon released many of them, local human rights groups maintain that 11 opposition
supporters remain imprisoned on politically motivated charges.
On January 19, a court sentenced Nikol Pashinyan, opposition leader and editorin-
chief of the Haykakan Zhamanak newspaper, to seven years imprisonment for
allegedly organizing “mass disorders” during the March 2008 events. An appeals
court upheld the decision but halved his sentence. In November 2010 Pashinyan
claimed two masked men attacked and beat him in Kosh prison; the government
denied the allegation.
WORLD REPORT 2011
392
In April 2010, relatives of nine victims killed in the March 2008 violence, the eight
protestors and one of the soldiers, appealed unsuccessfully to court for a thorough
investigation into the deaths.
In a March 2010 report analyzing the post-March 2008 trials, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) called on authorities to, among other
things, comprehensively investigate allegations of ill-treatment and ban in court
evidence obtained through ill-treatment.
Torture and Ill-Treatment
Local human rights groups report continued ill-treatment in police custody. For
example, on April 13, 2010, police detained 24-year-old Vahan Khalafyan and four
others in Charentsavan, north of Yerevan, on suspicion of robbery. Khalafyan died
of knife wounds some hours later. Police say he stabbed himself with a knife
obtained in the station, and deny allegations of ill-treatment.
On April 23, investigators charged the head of Charentsavan’s Criminal
Intelligence Department and three others with abuse of authority. The trial is
ongoing at this writing. Khalafyan’s relatives and human rights groups want additional
murder and torture charges. An internal police investigation led to the dismissal
of Charentsavan’s police chief and three officers. The Helsinki Citizens’
Assembly (HCA) Vanadzor Office reported that police ill-treated two other men
detained with Khalafyan. Police failed to conclusively investigate these incidents.
On August 27 a court ordered the investigation into the death in custody of Levon
Gulyan be reopened. In May 2007, Gulyan was found dead following a police
interrogation. Authorities say he jumped from the second-story of a police station
trying to escape. Gulyan’s relatives deny this, insisting he was tortured.
During a September 2010 visit the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention interviewed numerous detainees and prisoners who alleged beatings,
other ill-treatment in police custody, and refusal by prosecutors and judges to
admit evidence of the ill-treatment into court.
In September a YouTube video showed Army Major Sasun Galstyan beating and
humiliating two conscripts. An investigation into abuse of power is ongoing.
393
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
In June the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) found Armenia had twice violated
the prohibition against inhuman or degrading treatment in the case of
Ashot Harutyunyan. Convicted of fraud and tax evasion in 2004, Harutyunyan
died of a heart attack in prison in January 2009. The court determined authorities
had denied him necessary medical care for his multiple chronic health problems,
including heart disease, an ulcer, and diabetes. The court also found the government’s
public restraint of Harutyunyan in a metal cage during his appeal hearings
amounted to degrading treatment.
On July 26, 14 human rights groups issued a statement citing a 20 percent rise in
the national prison population, which is leading to overcrowding, health problems,
and conflicts among detainees.
Media Freedom
In early 2010, as part of the transition to mandatory digital broadcasting, parliament
convened a working group to revise the Law on Television and Radio that
included NGOs and opposition parliamentarians. Parliament adopted the legislation
in a June 10 emergency session before thorough discussion of the draft.
The amendments reduced the number of available television stations, and stipulate
that existing broadcasters or those with at least three years experience
receive preference in future licensing competitions, creating a barrier for new
broadcasters.
In March the Gyumri-based television station GALA reported advertisers withdrew
business under pressure from local officials. 26 companies pulled their ads in
one month alone. Since 2007, GALA has been subject to apparently politically
motivated court cases and harassment by state agencies, seemingly in retaliation
for the station’s regular coverage of opposition party activities.
The independent television station A1+ remained off the air for an eighth year,
despite a June 2008 ECTHR judgment that Armenia had violated freedom of
expression due to repeatedly arbitrarily denying the station a broadcast license.
WORLD REPORT 2011
394
Freedom of Assembly
Authorities continue to restrict freedom of assembly by frequently denying
requests to hold demonstrations. Opposition parties and some NGOs allege particular
difficulties securing indoor events venues.
On May 31, riot police forcibly prevented opposition demonstrators from entering
Yerevan’s Liberty Square. They detained 15 demonstrators following clashes with
riot police, holding them for several hours and denying them access to lawyers.
During the operation police detained Ani Gevorgian, a correspondent for the
opposition Haykakan Zhamanak newspaper, and two opposition activists,
Gevorgyan’s brother, Sargis, and Davit Kiramijyan. Amid local media outrage,
police did not press charges against Ani Gevorgyan. Authorities charged
Kiramijyan with hooliganism and Sargis Gevorgyan with using force against a
police officer. Their joint trial is ongoing.
On November 9, police briefly detained four youth opposition activists protesting
outside a Yerevan hotel at the start of an EU-organized human rights seminar. The
activists claimed police punched and kicked them in the police station.
Human Rights Defenders
Police closed the investigation into the May 2008 attack on Armenian Helsinki
Association Chairman Mikael Danielyan, who was wounded when an assailant
shot him with a pneumatic gun after an argument. The investigation was allegedly
closed due to lack of criminal intent. A court rejected Danielyan’s appeal against
the decision.
Mariam Sukhudyan, primarily an environmental activist, publicized on national
television in November 2008 the case of two girls who alleged sexual harassment
at a Yerevan school. Police charged Sukhudyan with falsely reporting a crime. On
March 10, 2010, the United States Embassy awarded Sukhudyan its first ever
Woman of Courage Award. A day later, the criminal case against her was dropped.
395
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Key International Actors
Armenia’s international partners did not make full use of their leverage to press
Armenia to fulfill its human rights commitments.
The EU’s annual assessment of Armenia—published in May to report on its
progress in meeting benchmarks in the European Neighbourhood Policy Action
Plan— commended Armenia for certain progress, but urged the government to try
harder to ensure that there is a comprehensive investigation into the March 2008
events. On July 19 the EU launched negotiations on an Association Agreement
with Armenia to strengthen political and economic ties.
The May 2010 Universal Periodic Review of Armenia at the UN Human Rights
Council raised concerns about investigations and prosecutions related to the
March 2008 violence; torture and ill-treatment by police; judicial independence;
and freedom of assembly and expression. Armenia said it would “examine all recommendations
and implement them.”
Following his May visit to Armenia, Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe (PACE) President Mevlüt Çavusoglu called on the authorities to adopt a
new electoral code; reform police; and ensure judicial independence, freedom of
assembly, and media independence and pluralism. In June the PACE rapporteurs
on Armenia welcomed the government’s “roadmap” of reforms following the
March 2008 election violence, but expressed concerns about the new electoral
code and amendments to the broadcasting laws. The rapporteurs acknowledged
progress on police and judicial reforms.
In March the Council of Europe’s Committee for the Prevention of Torture published
a report on its ad hoc visit to Armenia in March 2008, finding that practically
all people detained on March 1, 2008, alleged physical ill-treatment during
arrest, and some alleged ill-treatment during police questioning.
During a July 4-5 visit to Yerevan, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton met
President Serzh Sargsyan, and separately with civil society leaders. Secretary
Clinton discussed the US government’s concerns that recent changes to the Law
on Television and Radio could hinder freedom of expression.
WORLD REPORT 2011
396
On August 20 Russian President Dmitry Medvedev and President Sargsyan agreed
to extend Moscow’s lease of a military base in Armenia until 2044, and Russia
committed to updating Armenia’s military hardware.
In April 2010 Armenia suspended the ratification process for two protocols it
signed with Turkey in 2009 to establish bilateral relations. The unresolved conflict
between Armenia and Azerbaijan in Nagorno-Karabakh continues to impede normalization
of Armenian-Turkish relations. The EU commended Armenia’s commitment
to pursuing normalization of relations, but expressed concern about loss of
momentum.
397
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Azerbaijan
Azerbaijan’s human rights record remained poor in 2010. The government continued
to use criminal defamation and other charges to intimidate and punish journalists
expressing dissenting opinions; an outspoken journalist remained in
prison on spurious criminal charges, apparently in retaliation for his work. The
parliamentary elections of November 7 failed to meet international standards.
Other serious problems persisted, including restrictions on freedoms of religion,
assembly, and association, and torture and ill-treatment in custody.
The European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) found Azerbaijan had violated freedom
of expression by imprisoning journalist Eynulla Fatullayev and called for his
immediate release.
Media Freedom
Government officials initiated 26 criminal defamation cases against journalists
and other critics in the first half of 2010; courts delivered 14 sanctions. In addition
officials filed 36 civil defamation claims, 30 of which were successful. For
example, in February 2010 a Baku court convicted Ayyub Karimov, editor in chief
of the Femida 007 newspaper, of slander and ordered him to pay a fine, in
response to a Ministry of Internal Affairs complaint regarding Karimov’s articles
criticizing the ministry. Also in February Ministry of Education officials filed a criminal
complaint against Alovsat Osmanli, a mathematician, for articles in the
Azadlig newspaper criticizing the ministry for mistakes in mathematics textbooks.
In July a court sentenced Eynulla Fatullayev, chief editor of two newspapers and
an outspoken government critic, to an additional two-and-a-half years in prison
on spurious drug charges brought by prison authorities. Fatullayev was sentenced
to eight-and-a-half years in prison in 2007 on charges of fomenting terrorism and
other criminal charges, which were widely believed to be politically motivated. In
April the ECtHR found that Azerbaijan “grossly” and “disproportionately” restricted
freedom of expression by imprisoning Fatullayev and ordered his immediate
release. In October the decision became final after the court’s Grand Chamber
refused to admit the government’s appeal. Fatullayev remains imprisoned at this
writing.
WORLD REPORT 2011
398
Political activists and bloggers Emin Milli and Adnan Hajizade who were victims
of an apparently staged attack in July 2009 and subsequently convicted of hooliganism
were released in November 2010 after serving over half of their sentences.
Several journalists suffered physical attacks by police and others; the government
failed to meaningfully investigate these incidents. In February a police officer
attacked Leyla Ilgar, a correspondent for the Yeni Musavat newspaper, as she
reported at a local market. Police interrogated her and deleted the photographs
from her camera. In May police detained Seymur Haziev, a reporter for the Azadlig
newspaper, at an opposition rally in Baku. Haziyev was questioned without his
lawyer, charged with resisting arrest, and sentenced to seven days imprisonment.
Haziyev reported that two officers kicked and hit him periodically during the interrogation.
In July unidentified men attacked Elmin Badalov, a reporter for Yeni Musavat, and
Anar Garayli, the deputy editor of Milli Yol, while they took photographs for an
investigative story about luxury villas near Baku believed to be built by the transportation
minister. In August an unidentified assailant stabbed Rasul Shukursoy,
a sports writer for Komanda newspaper, in the arm. Shukursoy links the incident
to his article criticizing a famous football player.
Police interfered with journalists’ efforts to document public protests. In June as
police broke up a Baku demonstration by opposition party Musavat, they also
shoved journalists and prevented them from filming. In July presidential administration
guards detained and erased the recordings of four journalists filming a
protest by Sabirabad region residents complaining about the government’s
response to severe flooding in southern Azerbaijan.
In May Baku airport security forced Norwegian journalist Erling Borgen to place
his camera and recorded DVD footage in his checked bags. Upon arrival in Oslo
Borgen discovered that all footage from his visit to Azerbaijan for a documentary
on Eynulla Fatullayev had disappeared.
In February the parliament approved amendments to several laws that ban media
representatives from videotaping, photographing, or audio recording without a
subject’s prior knowledge or consent, except in “operative-investigative cases”
399
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
carried out by law enforcement. In June the government placed restrictions on
street newspaper vending in central Baku, allegedly for aesthetic reasons, limiting
many newspapers’ distributions and revenues.
Elections to Milli Mejlis (Parliament)
The ruling Yeni Azerbaijan Party won an overwhelming majority in the November 7
parliamentary elections; only one clear opposition candidate gained a seat in the
country’s 125-member parliament. Restrictions on political parties and free
expression of political views, due to restrictions on the freedoms of assembly and
association, marred the pre-election campaign. International observers criticized
the elections for failing to meet international standards.
In September the ECtHR found Azerbaijan violated the right of opposition candidate
Flora Karimova to free elections when it invalidated 2005 parliamentary election
results in the district she had won.
Freedom of Assembly and Association
The government restricted freedom of assembly. Officials did not authorize any
demonstrations in central Baku and police quickly dispersed unauthorized
protests. On April 26 the Baku police rounded up about 80 people traveling to a
rally on free expression and assembly, releasing some immediately on the outskirts
of Baku and detaining others for five hours. Police charged 10 with resisting
the police and violating public order. Four days later police briefly detained
dozens of political activists outside the State Oil Academy, where they had been
commemorating the 2009 deadly shooting there.
The government interfered with the work of NGOs. The Ministry of Justice refused
to register the Television and Alternative Media Development Center three times.
In August police briefly detained several employees of the Kur Civil Society organization
as they monitored flood damage in southern Azerbaijan.
In December 2009, several unknown people beat Ilgar Nasibov and Vafadar
Eyvazov of the Democracy and NGO Development Resource Center in the
Nakhichivan Autonomous Republic, a landlocked region in southwestern
WORLD REPORT 2011
400
Azerbaijan. The activists believe the attack came in retaliation for their planned
anti-corruption seminar.
In September 2010 Elman Abassov and Hekimeldostu Mehdiyev, Nakhichivanbased
employees of the Institute for Reporters’ Freedom and Safety, a media
monitoring organization, reported that security officials regularly interrogate people
with whom the activists meet, pressuring them to cease further contact for
“their own safety.”
Freedom of Religion
All religious communities were forced to re-register with the State Committee for
Work with Religious Organizations by January 1, 2010, or face potential liquidation.
The 450 communities that successfully re-registered included 433 mosques
and two Protestant churches. The state denied registration to Baku’s Baptist
Church, its Catholic Parish, and its Seventh-day Adventists, Jehovah’s Witnesses,
and others. Authorities threatened to close several mosques, including the
Fatima Zahra Mosque in Baku and a Sunni mosque in the town of Mushfigabad,
after refusing to register them.
In March police detained and prosecuted two Jehovah’s Witnesses for “distributing
religious literature without state permission,” fining each US$250. In
September an appeals court upheld the decision to sentence Farid Mammedov, a
Jehovah’s Witness, to nine months in prison for refusing compulsory military service
on religious grounds. In October two Muslim men from the northern
Azerbaijan region of Zakatala reported being detained by local police, who
harassed them for their long beards and forcibly shaved them off. In October
police raided a Baptist harvest festival in the northern Azerbaijani town of Qusar,
arresting four participants and sentencing them to five days’ imprisonment.
Torture and Ill-Treatment
Widespread torture and ill-treatment in custody continue with impunity. In 2010
the Azerbaijan Committee against Torture, an independent prison monitoring
group, received over 150 complaints alleging torture and ill-treatment in custody.
401
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Police disciplined several officers, but failed to criminally prosecute any. At least
one prisoner reportedly died in custody in 2010 after alleged ill-treatment.
Political Prisoners
The government continued to hold political prisoners. At this writing, NGO
activists counted between 23 and 45 political prisoners, including former government
officials, businessmen, and opposition politicians arrested prior to the
November 2005 parliamentary elections on allegations of attempting to overthrow
the government.
Key International Actors
International and regional institutions and bilateral partners voiced concerns
about and criticism of Azerbaijan’s human rights record, especially regarding
media freedoms. In June 2010 Thomas Hammarberg, the Council of Europe commissioner
for Human Rights, published a report on his May visit to Azerbaijan,
urging the government to remedy a range of abuses, including police misconduct
and violations of freedom of expression and association and fair trial norms.
In a June resolution the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe called
on the government to release imprisoned journalists, decriminalize libel, and
refrain from new criminal defamation charges against journalists.
During his United Nations General Assembly speech in September, United States
President Barack Obama expressed hope that Azerbaijan would implement democratic
reforms and increase human rights protections, including the release of the
imprisoned bloggers Milli and Hajizade. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton visited
Baku in July and raised a number of concerns with the government, including the
imprisonment of the bloggers.
The European Union’s April 2010 European Neighbourhood Policy Action Plan
progress report commended Azerbaijan for improvements in economic and social
governance, but expressed concern about the penitentiary system; torture in custody;
and freedoms of expression, assembly and religion. In July 2010 Azerbaijan
WORLD REPORT 2011
402
and the EU began negotiations for an Association Agreement to further strengthen
economic relations.
Following its December 2009 review of Azerbaijan’s torture record, the UN
Committee against Torture urged the government to, among other things, ensure
that all allegations of torture are subjected to prompt, impartial, and effective
investigation.
403
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Belarus
The situation for civil society and independent media remains dismal, with
Belarusian authorities continuing pressure and threats ahead of the December
2010 presidential elections. Journalists and civil society activists face harassment
in the form of interrogations, detentions, arrests, and seizure of personal property.
NGOs struggle with registration procedures, and media outlets have been
threatened with closure.
Elections
In September the Belarusian parliament scheduled presidential elections for
December 2010. President Aleksandr Lukashenka will run for a fourth term. First
elected in 1994, Lukashenka was re-elected in 2001 and 2006 despite protests of
election fraud from activists, international NGOs, and concerned governments,
such as those of the United States and most European Union member states.
Government crackdowns on civil society and independent media preceded previous
presidential elections, and activists reported continued punitive measures in
the run up to the December elections.
Some positive amendments, including eliminating the need for candidates to
obtain permission for public events, were made to the electoral code in January,
and more candidates were allowed to register in the April 2010 local elections.
However, electoral code violations and lack of transparency marred the April elections.
In the Maladziechna district, four members of the Divisional Electoral
Commission ran for the Council of Deputies, in violation of electoral law. Belarus
refused long-term election monitoring proposed by the Organization for Security
and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). The only long-term election-monitoring presence
was provided by local observers, who were forced to maintain a distance of
3 to 10 meters from ballot counting.
Freedom of Association
Independent civil society groups report government pressure, but many remain
active in Belarus. Four activists—Zmicier Dashkevich, Yauhien Afnahiel, Artur
WORLD REPORT 2011
404
Finkievich, and Uladzimir Lemiesh—from the youth opposition movements Young
Front, Young Belarus, and European Belarus, were kidnapped in public in
November and December 2009. Assailants in civilian clothes pulled the men into
waiting cars, and dumped them outside the city limits. The kidnappers warned
three of the men to cease political activities before releasing them.
In May authorities in more than 20 cities raided apartments and confiscated computer
equipment from activists for the “Speak the Truth Campaign,” founded in
February 2010 to encourage public discussion about social problems. Leaders of
the movement were detained for three days on suspicion of disseminating false
information. The campaign’s founder, Uladzimir Niaklayau, has voiced interest in
running for president.
In March 2010 the Ministry of Justice refused for the third time to register the
Belarusian Assembly of Pro-democratic NGOs, citing procedural violations in its
creation, and alleging that the organization’s name does not describe its activities.
The assembly serves as an unofficial umbrella organization for more than
250 Belarusian NGOs and provides legal guidance and conducts advocacy on
their behalf.
Freedom of Assembly
Activists are required to apply for demonstration permits, but the onerous application
process restricts the right to hold peaceful assemblies. Civil society
activists are frequently arrested, fined, and detained for participating in unsanctioned
assemblies. In January 2010, 43 activists and leaders of the unofficial
Union of Poles in Belarus (UPB) were detained while en route to an assembly to
re-elect Teresa Sobol as chairperson of the Ivenets Polish House, a culture and
education center for the Ivenets region. In February authorities arrested 40 UPB
activists for an unsanctioned protest over Sobol’s closed trial, in which the court
ordered her to hand over control of the Polish House building to the officiallysanctioned
Union of Poles in Belarus.
Authorities used force to disburse three unsanctioned democratic opposition
demonstrations in February, and detained several participants in an unsanctioned
Minsk parade supporting lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender rights in
405
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
May. When authorities do sanction opposition rallies, they grant permission for
locations far from public view.
Media Freedom
The government tightened its control on media through stricter internet controls,
harassing and detaining independent journalists, and issuing warnings to publications.
In July 2010 a presidential edict restricting the internet came into force. It requires
registration of online resources, identification of users at internet cafes and storage
of their internet history for a year, and restricts access to “banned” information
on the internet.
Independent news sources –theCharter97 news website, and Narodnaya Vola and
Novaya Gazeta newspapers—were all investigated for criminal defamation against
the former head of the Homel Region KGB Department in 2010. Authorities repeatedly
interrogated editors and staff, searched their apartments, and confiscated
their electronic equipment. In March police forcibly broke into Charter97’s editorial
office, injuring web-site editor Natalia Radzina. In September 2010 Aleh
Biabienin, founder of Charter97, was found hanged in his dacha. Bebenin’s colleagues
and international NGOs have called for a criminal investigation of his e
death, which was officially ruled a suicide. In an unprecedented development,
the authorities have allowed the OSCE to send two forensic experts to participate
in the investigation. Death threats against other Charter97 journalists have been
posted anonymously to the website since Bebenin’s death.
In a positive development, the majority of news publications were able to register
under a 2009 law requiring them to re-register, and 107 new publications were
registered in the first half of 2010. However, authorities denied registration to at
least eight independent newspapers, citing insufficient qualifications of the editors
or improper premises for the editorial offices. Additionally, the number of
official warnings against news outlets increased in 2010. Under the 2009 law, two
official warnings constitute sufficient grounds to close a media outlet.
Independent newspapers Narodnaya Vola and Nasha Niva have already received
WORLD REPORT 2011
406
three warnings, and dozens of other papers, including Komsomolskaya Pravda in
Belarus, Va-Bank, Novy Chas, and Tovarishch, have received at least one warning.
Political Prisoners
Two activists arrested on politically-motivated charges in 2009 were sentenced to
prison in May 2010.
The court sentenced civil activist Mikalaj Autukhovich to five years and two
months in a maximum security prison for illegal possession and transportation of
five shotgun shells and a hunting rifle, despite claims that witness testimony was
obtained through intimidation. Autukhovich went on a hunger strike in June to
protest prison conditions and demand dental treatment, which he has not
received as of this writing.
His co-defendant, Uladzimir Asipienka, received a three-year prison sentence for
possessing and transporting firearms and explosives. The men’s convictions
appear connected with their civil society activism. Asipienka had previously been
imprisoned for involvement in an entrepreneurs’ movement, while Autukhovich
attempted to unite veterans in an opposition organization and ran in parliamentary
elections as an independent candidate.
Siariej Kavalenka, a Conservative Christian party activist, was sentenced to three
years of house arrest for displaying a white-red-white Belarusian flag, a symbol of
protest against the Lukashenka administration.
Death Penalty
Belarus remains the only country in Europe that still allows the death penalty. In
March 2010 Belarusian authorities executed Andrej Zhuk and Vasilii Yuzepchuk
for murder, even though their cases were pending before the United Nations
Human Rights Committee. In May, the Hrodna Regional Court sentenced Aleh
Hryshkaucou and Andrej Burdyka to death for murder. The executions and sentences
occurred after the Belarus National Assembly established a task force to
explore a possible death penalty moratorium—a stipulation for full suspension of
EU and Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe sanctions. In 2010, the
407
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Ministry of Justice reported that 321 people had been sentenced to death
between 1990 and 2009, with the number of sentences declining in the last
decade from its peak of 47 in 1998. The ministry did not provide information on
the number of actual executions.
Palliative Care
Belarus’ low consumption of morphine and other opioid medicines, reported
annually to the International Narcotics Control Board, indicates that access to
medicine for pain treatment is available to less than 20 percent of its terminal
cancer patients.
Key International Actors
Belarus’ relations with both Europe and Russia deteriorated in 2010, and foreign
governments failed to hold Belarus accountable for its domestic human rights situation.
Belarus came up for Universal Periodic Review by the UN Human Rights Council in
May 2010. The resulting report offered recommendations on freedom of speech,
association, and assembly, as well as a moratorium on the death penalty, but
Belarus rejected any commitment to implement them. Belarus accepted the recommendations
to absolutely prohibit torture and introduce a definition in line
with the Convention Against Torture in its legislation, but failed to recognize flaws
in investigating complaints of torture.
In October 2010 the EU called on Belarus “to fully cooperate” with the presidential
election monitoring of the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human
Rights (part of OSCE). The EU also extended its existing travel restrictions against
high-level officials, but simultaneously suspended restrictions through October
2011.
US President Barack Obama extended existing travel restrictions against highlevel
Belarusian officials until June 2011 due to concerns about detentions, disappearances,
and political repression.
WORLD REPORT 2011
408
The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) suspended high-level
contact with Belarus in April, declaring the lack of international observers at the
April elections, state discrimination against the country’s Polish minority, and the
execution of Zhuk and Yuzepchuk as “concrete steps backwards.” PACE also withdrew
its earlier recommendation that the Council of Europe restore Belarus’s
“special guest status,” initially suspended in 1997 over human rights concerns.
In June Belarus signed a customs agreement with Russia and Kazakhstan that
removes trade barriers between the three countries. Despite their economic cooperation,
Belarus distanced itself from Russia in August after Russia cut oil and gas
subsidies to the country.
409
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Bosnia and Herzegovina
The protracted political crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina continued to stall necessary
reforms in 2010, including constitutional changes initiated after a ruling by
the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) that eligibility restrictions for political
candidates discriminate against ethnic minorities. Effective local war crimes
prosecutions were again a bright spot, but the intimidation of independent journalists,
the slow rate of return of refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs), and the arbitrary detention of national security suspects continued to
stain the country’s human rights record.
War Crimes Accountability
The pace of war crime trials continued to be good on both central and local (both
cantonal and municipal) levels, despite practical impediments, such as staffing
and funding shortages, and political sensitivities surrounding the topic. On July
11, 2010, the remains of 775 victims of the Srebrenica massacre were buried in
the Potocari area, at a ceremony marking the 15th anniversary of the worst atrocity
in Europe since World War II. Ratko Mladic, an indicted architect of the massacre,
remains at large. Another indicted architect, Radovan Karadzic, faced trial at the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). Karadzic made his
opening statement in March and the prosecution began presenting its case in
April.
In June the ICTY convicted Vujadin Popovic and Ljubisa Beara, two high-ranking
Bosnian Serb army officials, of genocide, murder, extermination, and persecution
for their roles in the massacre at Srebrenica, sentencing them to life imprisonment.
A third defendant, Drago Nikolic, was convicted of aiding and abetting
genocide, murder, extermination, and persecution, and sentenced to 35 years in
prison. Four others were also convicted of a range of crimes committed during
and following the fall of Srebrenica and Zepa.
The War Crimes Chamber in Sarajevo continued to prioritize the most serious
cases of war crimes and crimes against humanity, and reached final verdicts in
eight cases between November 2009 and September 2010, bringing its total
WORLD REPORT 2011
410
number of completed cases to 46. Sixteen new cases began during this period,
with 53 ongoing trials as of September 2010.
Local courts in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina commenced five war
crimes cases and issued verdicts in three cases between November 2009 and
September 2010. During the same period Republika Srpska local courts began six
cases and completed eight, and Brcko District began two new cases. According to
the national war crimes strategy, the most sensitive and serious cases are to be
tried centrally, while less controversial and complex ones are to be handled at
municipal and canton levels.
Return of Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons
The return of refugees and IDPs to their areas of origin remained slow, and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) registered
the return of only 181 refugees and 177 IDPs during the first six months of 2010.
As of June 2010 there were more than 113,465 registered IDPs (including some
7,000 in collective centers): 48,659 in the Federation, 64,560 in Republika Srpska
and 246 in Brcko. There are no reliable estimates of the number of refugees outside
Bosnia.
Lack of economic opportunity, inadequate housing, and people’s reluctance to
return to areas where most residents are of a different ethnicity remain the key
impediments to return. As of September 2010 Bosnia hosted 129 Kosovo Roma
under temporary protection status.
In June the House of Peoples (the upper house of parliament) amended the
national returns strategy to reflect the current challenges to returns of the remaining
displaced, designating 2014 as the year by which displaced people should be
given housing or financially compensated. The strategy also reiterates the need to
provide more livelihood opportunities and maintain security for returnees.
National Security and Human Rights
Seven North African and Middle Eastern men were subject to indefinite detention
without charge on national security grounds during 2010. At least five of the men
411
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
had been previously stripped of their acquired Bosnian nationality. In February,
Omar Frendi, an Algerian detainee, accepted voluntary departure to Algeria. A
second Algerian, Noureddine Gaci, was detained in June; an Egyptian, Muhamed
Elfarhati Othman, was detained in October; and in August, in the case of Imad
Husin–a Syrian who remains in detention–the ECtHR indicated that it might intervene
if Husin was not charged or released by years’ end, despite the court’s earlier
intervention in 2008.
In June a bomb exploded at a police station in the town of Bugojno, killing one
police officer and injuring six others. One of seven men subsequently arrested
confessed to planting explosives and at this writing is in detention awaiting trial
with two others whom were arrested later.
Ethnic and Religious Discrimination in the Political System
October general elections were organized in direct contravention of a binding
December 2009 ruling by the Grand Chamber of the ECtHR in the case of Sejdic
and Finci v Bosnia Herzegovina. The court ruled that the inability of the applicants–
a Jew and a Roma– to stand for the presidency or the House of Peoples in
Bosnia and Herzegovina amounted to illegal discrimination, and called on Bosnia
to make constitutional and electoral reforms to remove discriminatory provisions
and allow candidates who are not Serb, Bosniak, or Croat.
Media Freedom
Threats and harassment of independent journalists continued throughout 2010.
In February a policeman verbally and physically assaulted Osman Drina, a
reporter for Independent Television IC (Nezavisna Televizja IC), while he was
reporting on a sporting event. The Ministry of Interior opened an investigation
into this incident, which is still ongoing at this writing.
In March a car belonging to Rade Tesic, a journalist for the Euroblic daily newspaper,
was burned while parked near Tesic’s house in Doboj. No one was injured in
the attack. The editorial staff of Euroblic also received several anonymous, threatening
phone calls in March regarding Tesic’s articles about the activities of local
criminal networks.
WORLD REPORT 2011
412
Bakir Hadziomerovic, the editor in chief of the popular “60 Minutes” TV program,
which exposes links between politicians and organized crime, received repeated
anonymous death threats against him and his family in writing and by telephone.
Police opened an investigation and inspected the program’s premises, but at this
writing has made no arrests in the case.
Human Rights Defenders
No attacks on human rights defenders were recorded in 2010. The community of
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender rights defenders, including Association Q,
the main LGBT organization, maintain a low profile and remain weak and vulnerable
to intimidation and harassment.
International Actors
The combined Office of the High Representative/European Union Special
Representative, backed by the United States and the Peace Implementation
Council continue to focus on assisting the country to overcome the protracted
political stalemate and forge closer integration with the EU.
An April high-level meeting between US Deputy Secretary of State James
Steinberg, Spanish Foreign Minister Miguel Angel Moratinos (whose country then
held the EU rotating presidency), and key Bosnia and Herzegovina politicians in
Butmir failed to produce significant results, with Bosnian leaders unwilling to
support any transfer of power from the governments of the Federation and
Republika Srpska to the central government ahead of the October elections. The
success of ethnic nationalist parties in the elections underscored the obstacles to
such reform.
During a March visit to Bosnia Jean-Charles Gardetto, the Council of Europe
Parliamentary Assembly (PACE) rapporteur, identified witness protection as a key
challenge to accountability for war crimes in Bosnia and Herzegovina. This concern
was echoed in a report by the OSCE Mission to Bosnia and Herzegovina,
released in May, which called on the Bosnian authorities to do more to protect
witnesses in war crime trials from harassment and violence. PACE also adopted
resolutions on the functioning of democratic institutions in Bosnia in January and
413
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
April, highlighting the urgent need for constitutional reform, and sent a pre-election
assessment mission to the country in September.
In February Bosnia and Herzegovina was subject to Universal Periodic Review by
the UN Human Rights Council. Recommendations included the need to implement
constitutional reforms, address the continued lack of sustainable financial and
social support for the internally displaced, respond adequately to threats and
attacks against independent journalists, and remove the death penalty from the
constitution of Republika Srpska.
The European Commission’s annual progress report, released in November, criticized
Bosnia and Herzegovina for failing to implement constitutional reforms, the
slow pace of reforms of the justice and penitentiary systems, and political interference
and pressure on independent media. The EU commended ongoing efforts
to process remaining war crimes cases and cooperation with the ICTY and highlighted
improvement in the government’s efforts to facilitate the return of remaining
IDPs and refugees.
WORLD REPORT 2011
414
Croatia
The election in January of a new president pledging to promote human rights, and
the opening of a crucial chapter on European Union membership talks in June,
put human rights on the agenda in Croatia. But the gap between commitments
and progress remained. There was little movement towards deinstitutionalizing
persons with intellectual or mental disabilities, and questions about access overshadowed
a long-awaited program to benefit Serb former tenancy rights holders.
In absentia trials and concerns over fairness undercut domestic war crimes prosecutions,
and the EU called into question Croatia’s commitment to freedom of
expression and information.
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
More than 9,000 persons with intellectual or mental disabilities remained in institutions
as of September, with numbers rising. A master plan for deinstitutionalization
and extensive social welfare reforms, both expected in 2010, have yet to
be published at this writing. There were also few advances in creating communitybased
housing and support programs, such as personal assistants and other help
with daily activities that would allow people to leave institutions.
There was no progress in reforming the legal capacity system, which routinely
results in persons with intellectual or mental disabilities being denied the ability
to make decisions and exercise rights, contributing to their institutionalization.
In September the State Attorney’s Office in Rijeka brought criminal charges
against the former director of Lopaca Psychiatric Hospital for 2008 abuses
against Ana Dragicevic, who was forcibly institutionalized because of her sexual
orientation, and four other unnamed patients.
The Croatian government and parliament again failed to amend the official
Croatian translation of article 19 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, which erroneously allows confinement in a residential institution to
be categorized as a “community living option.”
415
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Return and Reintegration of Serbs
In September Croatian authorities issued a decision to permit former tenancy
rights holders to buy apartments at discounts of up to 70 percent. The decision
could remove a long-standing obstacle to Serbs returning to urban areas,
although the United Nations High Commisioner for Refugees (UNHCR) noted that
application deadlines and evidential requirements could impede access. The program
has yet to commence at this writing.
In the first six months of 2010, 203 refugees—all ethnic Serbs—returned to
Croatia. UNHCR estimates that 10,000-15,000 of the approximately 70,000 registered
Croatian Serb refugees might consider returning to Croatia if problems with
housing and pensions are addressed. As of June there were 2,246 internally displaced
persons in Croatia, of whom approximately 1,600 were Serbs.
There were ongoing delays in government-sponsored social housing programs for
returnees. As of June, 7,456 of the 13,187 families who applied had been allocated
housing, of which 4,623 were Serbs. Around 3,300 families were still waiting for
eligibility decisions.
The slow process of recognizing wartime work by Serbs in formerly rebel-held
areas for pension eligibility continued. As of May, 18,848 of approximately
22,000 requests had been processed, although only 56 percent were resolved
positively, in part because of disputes about admissible evidence. In some
regions, positive outcomes were as low as 30 percent, compromising the financial
security of returnees.
War Crimes Accountability
The trial of Croatian generals Ante Gotovina, Ivan Cermak, and Mladen Markac at
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for war crimes
and crimes against humanity against Serbs concluded in September, with a decision
expected at the end of 2010. At the request of Croatian Prime Minister
Jadranka Kosor, the Croatian government created a task force in October 2009 to
search for documents related to the case that the ICTY prosecutor alleged were in
the government’s possession. The trial concluded without these documents.
WORLD REPORT 2011
416
In March 2010 the Croatian Supreme Court confirmed the acquittal of General
Rahim Ademi, and reduced the sentence of General Mirko Norac for war crimes
against Serb civilians from seven to six years, relying on his service in the
Croatian Armed Forces as mitigation. It remained the only case transferred from
the ICTY to Croatia.
Croatian investigations into war crimes committed by members of the Croatian
Armed Forces increased in 2010. In the first nine months of the year, Croatian
authorities issued new war crimes indictments against 25 individuals, 11 of whom
were Serbs. But Serbs remained the majority of defendants in domestic war
crimes prosecutions. Ten trials, involving 13 Serb and 5 other defendants were
completed in the same period, 16 of whom were convicted. Another 17 trials
involving 29 Serbs and 14 Croats were still ongoing. In absentia war crimes trials
remained a problem, with 23 Serbs and 7 others not present to defend themselves.
In September the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina enforced a Croatian war
crimes conviction and eight-year sentence against former Croatian MP Branimir
Glavas, following a request from the Croatian Justice Ministry. Glavas, a Bosnian
citizen, fled to Bosnia in May 2009 on the same day he was convicted in the
Zagreb district court. Bosnian police arrested him after the court ruling which,
barring a successful appeal, will see Glavas serve his sentence in Bosnia.
Asylum and Migration
Croatia passed amendments to its asylum legislation in July 2010, requiring
quicker judicial review of detention decisions of asylum seekers and increased
support to those granted asylum or subsidiary protection, in an effort to move
closer to European and international standards. But there were continuing problems
with its practices, including delays in processing claims and a lack of access
to a state-funded lawyer at first instance and for those seeking to challenge their
detention. The refugee recognition rate remained below 10 percent in the second
half of 2009 and the first half of 2010.
Croatia lacked a strategy to respond effectively to the increasing numbers of
unaccompanied migrant children (160 in 2009, with very few in previous years).
417
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Key problems included an overstretched guardianship system, the absence of a
tracking system (with some children disappearing), and lack of access to a statefunded
lawyer for children who do not claim asylum.
Media Freedom
Journalists faced government pressure because of their reporting. Sergej Trajkovic
and Tomislav Kukec, two journalists from the newspaper Jutarnji List, faced government
attempts to block publication of reports about commercial abuses within
the meat industry, including lack of government oversight in regulating the industry.
In April police in Zagreb interrogated and searched the home of Marko Rakar, a
prominent blogger, after he published a leaked list of registered war veterans. The
government had resisted efforts to release the list, which civil society activists
believe contains people fraudulently receiving pensions as war veterans.
The trial of six suspects in the double murder in 2008 of prominent journalist Ivo
Pukanic and his marketing director Niko Franjic ended in November, with the conviction
of all six for first degree murder. Sentences ranged from 15 to 40 years.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders in Croatia remained free to operate but reported difficulties
accessing information from Croatia’s national and local authorities.
In May, for the third successive year, Croatia’s parliament examined but then
failed to adopt the People’s Ombudsman’s annual human rights report.
Parliament offered no explanation for its decision.
Key International Actors
The EU remained the most influential international actor in Croatia. The opening
of the justice and fundamental rights chapter in June offered encouragement to
Croatia, although the challenges of closing the chapter were highlighted in the
European Commission progress report released in November, which identified
WORLD REPORT 2011
418
domestic war crimes accountability, freedom of expression, deinstitutionalization
of persons with disabilities, and treatment of the Serb and Roma minorities as
ongoing areas of concern.
The UN Human Rights Council conducted its first universal periodic review of
Croatia in November, calling on Croatia to address concerns about the fairness of
domestic war crimes trials and improve its treatment of persons with disabilities
and the Serb and Roma minorities.
During a visit to Croatia in April, the Council of Europe commissioner for human
rights Thomas Hammarberg identified the importance of addressing housing and
other obstacles to return of IDPs and refugees; the need to improve fairness in
war crimes proceedings; and the need to tackle access to housing, employment,
education, and statelessness of Roma.
After her July visit to Croatia the UN special rapporteur on the right to housing
identified the need for available and transparent post-war housing programs for
Serb returnees as a key challenge.
419
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
European Union
The EU gained new architecture to protect human rights, with the Charter of
Fundamental Rights entering into force in January, a greater role for the European
Parliament, and the creation of an EU commissioner for fundamental rights. New
commissioner Viviane Reding promised a “zero tolerance” policy for EU states
violating the charter.
Infringement proceedings against Greece over its asylum system indicated the
European Commission’s willingness to hold member states to account for rights
violations. The commission publicly faulted France over expulsion of Roma,
emphasizing procedural safeguards when limiting free movement of EU citizens,
rather than non-discrimination obligations.
The scale of the challenge to ensure full respect of human rights in the EU was
underscored by evidence of growing intolerance—manifest in electoral success by
far-right parties, including in ruling coalitions, and policies targeting Roma,
Muslims, and migrants—and ongoing concerns over abusive counterterrorism
policies, inadequate access to asylum, and uneven protection against discrimination.
Common EU Asylum and Migration Policy
Efforts to reform and harmonize asylum procedures across the EU remained
stalled. Studies by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
in March and the European Commission in September found significant differences
and shortcomings in the way asylum claims are handled across the EU.
Around three-quarters of all irregular migrants entered the EU through Greece in
2009, with early estimates for 2010 suggesting a rising trend. Arrivals by sea
dropped significantly in 2010, with the EU border agency, Frontex, reporting a 75
percent decrease in maritime arrivals in the first half of the year. Only 150 people
reached Italy and Malta in the first quarter of the year, down from 5,200 in the
same period in 2009. Sea arrivals in Spain were also down sharply.
WORLD REPORT 2011
420
421
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
The Dublin II Regulation, which requires asylum claims to be made in the first
country of entry into the EU, exacerbated the burden placed on Greece’s already
broken asylum system (discussed below). But European Commission-led efforts
to initiate modest reform encountered strong opposition from some member
states.
As of mid-2010 the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) had issued orders to
states to suspend more than 750 “Dublin” returns to Greece, with thousands
more pending or blocked at national level. In September the United Kingdom government
halted all such returns to Greece. As of early November the Netherlands,
Belgium, Finland, Sweden, Iceland, and Norway (the latter two not EU countries)
had done the same.
In September the ECtHR heard a challenge to the policy brought by an Afghan
returned by Belgium to Greece, where he claims he was subjected to ill-treatment
and risked being returned to Afghanistan without proper examination of his asylum
claim. A ruling is pending at this writing.
The European Commission’s May action plan on unaccompanied migrant children
called for a common European approach to ensure durable solutions in children’s
best interests.
The UK and other EU countries (as well as Norway) pursued plans to build reception
centers in Kabul, Afghanistan, in order to repatriate unaccompanied children,
despite concerns over security and lack of safeguards.
Dozens of rejected asylum seekers were returned to Iraq in at least three joint
flights between April and September, despite objections by UNHCR. Frontex coordinated
at least one of these charter flights. The UK and the Netherlands organized
their own flights, in addition to participating in joint returns. In November
the Netherlands announced a halt to such deportations after the ECtHR intervened.
The UK said it would suspend removals if ordered to do so by the ECtHR.
New guidelines for Frontex operations at sea, adopted in April, included a ban on
return to persecution and the obligation to consider the needs of vulnerable
groups, including asylum seekers, children, and trafficking victims.
WORLD REPORT 2011
422
Malta withdrew from Frontex missions in March over the guidelines, which require
those rescued in international waters to be taken to the mission’s host country
rather than the closest port. But in July, Malta participated in a controversial joint
rescue operation with Libya, which led to some Somali migrants being returned to
Libya, while others were brought to Malta.
The European Parliament approved an EU readmission agreement with Pakistan
in September, despite serious concerns about respect for human rights clauses.
There were also concerns that the agreement would facilitate the repatriation of
Afghans, including children, who transited through Pakistan.
The European Commission signed a cooperation agreement with Libya in October,
including €50 million (approximately US$67 million) for border management and
refugee protection, despite the forced closure of UNHCR’s office in Tripoli in June.
Discrimination and Intolerance
The Roma, Europe’s largest minority, continued to face discrimination, exclusion,
and extreme poverty across the region. In April the European Commission adopted
a communication on Roma for the first time, ahead of the second EU Summit
on Roma held later that month in Spain, calling for more effective policies to
address multiple sources of marginalization of Roma. EU countries, notably
Germany, continued to repatriate Roma to Kosovo despite UNHCR guidelines,
while France targeted Roma for repatriation to Eastern Europe.
Despite concerns about interfering with the right to freedom of religion and personal
autonomy, efforts to restrict face-covering veils in Europe gained political
momentum in 2010. France’s parliament approved legislation in September banning
the wearing of such veils in all public places and making it a crime to coerce
women to cover themselves. The Constitutional Council ruled in early October that
the law was compatible with France’s constitution.
The lower house of the Belgian parliament approved similar legislation in May. At
this writing, it has yet to be examined by the Senate. A ban was included in the
coalition agreement in the Netherlands in September, with proposals also on the
table in Spain, Italy, and Denmark.
423
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
In May Germany’s interior minister ruled against a similar ban, but a December
2009 Federal Labor Court ruling, which upheld a ban on a teacher in North-Rhine-
Westphalia wearing a headscarf in the classroom, underscored the continued
presence of state-level restrictions on headscarves for teachers and civil servants.
Germany and other EU states blocked efforts to upgrade EU anti-discrimination
laws to prohibit discrimination on grounds of religion, age, disability, and sexual
orientation. National obstacles to ending discrimination against lesbian, gay,
bisexual, and transgender people also remained, including in the Netherlands,
where transgender persons could only officially change gender if they undergo
irreversible sex reassignment surgery, and Italy, which still lacked explicit protection
against discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation.
Counterterrorism Measures and Human Rights
UN special rapporteurs on torture and on human rights while countering terrorism
concluded in a joint February report that Germany (one case, 2002) and the UK
(several cases, from 2002 onward) had been complicit in secret detentions of terrorism
suspects. In June the Council of Europe commissioner for human rights
criticized the lack of progress towards full accountability for complicity in United
States abuses in Poland, Romania, and Sweden. A criminal investigation was
launched in January in Lithuania after a parliamentary committee concluded in
December 2009 that the CIA had established two secret detention facilities in
that country in 2005 and 2006.
Resettlement of Guantanamo Bay detainees in Europe continued. Between
January and September, 10 detainees were resettled in EU countries, three each
in Spain and Slovakia, two in Germany, one in Bulgaria, and one in Latvia. Italy
and Spain both pledged to take two more.
As part of the action plan to counter radicalization and recruitment to terrorism,
the Council of the EU agreed in April to systematically collect and share information
on radicalization, raising right to privacy concerns.
In September the EU General Court annulled a November 2008 European
Commission terrorism finance regulation freezing the assets of Saudi national
WORLD REPORT 2011
424
Yassin Abdullah Kadi, the second EU Court ruling against his asset freeze, in both
cases for lack of procedural fairness.
Human Rights Concerns in Select EU Member States
France
In July the government launched a highly-publicized campaign to expel Roma
from France following riots sparked by the fatal shooting of a member of the community
of French gens du voyage (“travelers”) that month by a gendarme (now
under criminal investigation). By the end of August, 128 informal settlements had
been dismantled–including those occupied by French gens du voyage–and
almost 1,000 Roma sent back to Romania and Bulgaria. An August 5 directive
from the interior minister, leaked in early September and subsequently annulled,
ordered prefects to take “systematic action to dismantle illegal camps, priority
given to those of Roma” linked to the expulsions, showing discriminatory intent.
In September France agreed to improve procedural safeguards after the European
Commission threatened infringement proceedings over its failure to properly
implement EU law on freedom of movement. The changes have yet to be introduced
at this writing.
Following its August review of France, the UN Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination expressed concern over what appeared to be collective
expulsion, as well as the difficulties Roma and French gens du voyage face exercising
their rights and accessing education and decent housing. The committee
also expressed broader concern about discriminatory political discourse in France
and increased racist and xenophobic violence.
In October the National Assembly approved a government draft immigration law
weakening the rights of asylum seekers and migrants, despite criticism from UN
Committee against Torture in May and ECtHR in 2009 about inadequate safeguards
for fast-tracked asylum claims. The Senate is to debate the law in early
2011.
425
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
The bill also contained last-minute government amendments designed to widen
the grounds for expelling EU citizens to include “abusing” France’s welfare system,
exploitation of begging, and “abusive” occupation of land. The amendments’
timing and focus and statements made by government ministers strongly
suggested the measures were aimed at Roma.
In late December 2009, French authorities expelled a Tunisian man to Senegal on
national security grounds, despite an order from the ECtHR to suspend his
removal. Earlier that month the court ruled that France would violate its obligations
under the European Convention if it deported an Algerian man who served
six years in France on terrorism charges. France complied.
In July the Constitutional Council declared the inadequate safeguards in ordinary
criminal cases, including denial of the presence of a lawyer during interrogations,
unconstitutional. In October the government introduced draft legislation to reform
police custody. Legislation remains pending at this writing. The ECtHR subsequently
ruled in October that the current rules violated fair trial standards. Also in
October the Court of Cassation, the highest criminal court, ruled that weaker safeguards
in terrorism, organized crime, and drug trafficking cases violate the right
to an effective defense. At this writing the current draft law does not address
these issues.
Germany
In a February report the UN special rapporteur on racism underscored persistent
racism, xenophobia, and discrimination when it comes to housing, employment
and education, living conditions, and movement restrictions for asylum seekers.
The Grand Chamber of the ECtHR ruled in June that Germany had violated the ban
on ill-treatment when it only fined a deputy police chief (later promoted) and his
subordinate for threatening a kidnapper with torture in 2002, concluding that the
punishment lacked the necessary deterrent effect.
In a judgment that became final in May, the ECtHR ruled that a German law allowing
convicted prisoners deemed dangerous to be detained indefinitely after they
have served their sentences violated the right to liberty and prohibition on arbitrary
detention.
WORLD REPORT 2011
426
In July Germany lifted its restrictions on the application of the UN Convention on
the Rights of the Child, covering a variety of issues, including asylum-seeking
children. German rights groups continue to call on the government to bring the
treatment of unaccompanied migrant children in line with the convention, including
ending accommodation with adults and detention pending deportation of
those aged between 16 and 18.
Greece
In September UNHCR described the situation facing migrants and asylum seekers
in Greece as a “humanitarian crisis.” There were no concrete improvements
despite the government’s repeated commitments to overhaul its broken asylum
system, restore appeal rights, ensure humane treatment for migrants, and police
accountability for ill-treatment.
A presidential decree containing modest reforms, including addressing a backlog
of more than 46,000 cases, remained stalled, in part because of the country’s
budget crisis. Only 11 of 30,000 applicants (0.04 percent) were granted asylum at
first instance in 2009. Wider reforms have been pushed back to 2011 or later.
The European Commission continued infringement proceedings against Greece
for its breach of EU asylum rules, sending the government a second letter of formal
notice on June 24. In response to a request from Greece, Frontex deployed
175 border guards to the Greece-Turkey border in November.
Migrants and asylum seekers continued to be detained in substandard conditions.
There is little or no assistance for unaccompanied migrant children and
other vulnerable groups, many of whom live in destitution or on the streets, at
risk of exploitation and trafficking. Following a visit in October, the UN special
rapporteur on torture called conditions in many immigration detention facilities
inhuman and degrading.
Violence by armed opposition groups, as well as strikes and demonstrations,
marked a year of increasing economic crisis and austerity measures in Greece.
There were several deadly bomb attacks against public buildings, killing a
bystander in March and the assistant to the minister of citizen protection in June.
Other attacks caused structural damage. In November police in Greece and else-
427
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
where intercepted over a dozen letter bombs addressed to foreign embassies in
Athens, the Greek parliament, heads of state, and institutions in Europe.
A policeman was sentenced in October to life in prison for intentionally shooting
a 15-year-old boy in Athens during a demonstration in December 2008, sparking
nationwide riots. Another officer was sentenced to 10 years in prison for complicity.
In May the Council of Europe European Committee of Social Rights made public
conclusions from December 2009 condemning Greece for widespread discrimination
against Roma in access to housing. The same committee had condemned
Greece in 2004.
Italy
Racist and xenophobic violence and hostile political discourse remained a pressing
problem. In January, 11 African seasonal migrant workers were seriously
injured in drive-by shootings and mob attacks over a three day period in Rosarno,
Calabria. At least 10 other migrants, 10 law enforcement officers, and 14 local residents
required medical treatment. Over 1,000 migrants left the town following
the violence, most of them evacuated by law enforcement personnel. Numerous
countries expressed concern about racism and xenophobia in Italy during its
Universal Periodic Review at February’s UN Human Rights Council (HRC).
Roma and Sinti continued to suffer high levels of discrimination, poverty, and
deplorable living conditions in both authorized and unauthorized camps. Eastern
European Roma, primarily from Romania and living in informal settlements, faced
forced evictions and financial inducements to return to their countries of origin. In
October the Council of Europe European Committee of Social Rights published
conclusions from June condemning Italy for discrimination against Roma in housing
and access to justice, economic, and social assistance.
Italy continued to deport terrorism suspects to Tunisia, including Mohamed
Mannai in May, despite the risk of ill-treatment, persistent interventions from the
ECtHR, and condemnation by the Council of Europe. A June resolution from its
Committee of Ministers reiterated Italy’s obligation to comply with European Court
decisions.
WORLD REPORT 2011
428
The European Committee for the Prevention of Torture said in an April report that
Italy violated the prohibition on refoulement when it intercepted boat migrants
attempting to reach Italy and returned them to Libya without screening for people
needing international protection. Two Italian officials faced prosecution in a Sicily
court for their role in the return of 75 people to Libya on an Italian Financial Police
boat in August 2009.
Italy failed to offer asylum to approximately a dozen Eritreans it had pushed back
to Libya in 2009, where alongside hundreds of other Eritreans they suffered illtreatment,
abusive detention, and threat of deportation to Eritrea.
In May a Genova appeals court convicted 25 out of 29 police officers for violence
against demonstrators at the 2001 G8 summit, overturning acquittals by a lower
court. The Interior Ministry said it would not suspend the officers. Appeals against
the May decision are pending at this writing.
The Netherlands
General elections in June left the anti-immigrant Freedom Party in third place with
24 parliamentary seats. In late September, after months of negotiations, the
Liberal Party and Christian Democrats announced a center-right coalition government
resting on Freedom Party support.
In October Freedom Party leader Geert Wilders appeared in court for inciting discrimination
and hatred against Muslims, non-Western immigrants, and specifically
Moroccans, as well as for group defamation of adherents to Islam. Later that
month new judges were appointed following a challenge by Wilders over alleged
bias; the case remains pending at this writing.
New rules in July extended the 48 hour accelerated asylum procedure to eight
days while making it the default procedure, despite domestic and international
criticism that eight days are insufficient for a proper assessment, particularly in
complex cases and those involving vulnerable groups. In February the UN
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women criticized Dutch
accelerated procedures as unsuitable for women victims of violence and unaccompanied
children, and urged the government to recognize formally domestic
violence and gender-based persecution as grounds for asylum.
429
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
The ECtHR ruled in July that the expulsion to Libya of a Libyan man, acquitted of
terrorism charges by a Dutch court in 2003, would violate the ban on returns to
risk of torture.
In September, under a new policy announced in July, the government deported a
Somali who had been refused asylum to Mogadishu, despite UNHCR guidelines
advising against all returns to south-central Somalia.
Poland
Official flight records obtained by two national human rights groups in February
confirmed that at least six CIA rendition flights landed in Poland in 2003. A criminal
investigation launched in 2008 into complicity in a CIA secret prison continued,
with reports suggesting the prosecutor was considering war crime charges
against former president Aleksander Kwasniewski and other former senior officials.
In September the prosecutor in charge of the case said his investigation
would include the alleged detention and torture of a Saudi man while in CIA custody
in Poland.
Discrimination based on race, gender, and sexual identity remained serious problems.
In June the Council of Europe’s European Commission against Racism and
Intolerance (ECRI) expressed concern over Poland’s failure to adequately address
discrimination against Roma and non-citizens in education, housing, employment,
and health. The European Commission referred Poland to the EU Court of
Justice in May for failing to implement the EU directive on race equality. At this
writing a government-sponsored anti-discrimination bill is pending final approval
in parliament and is expected to come into force in January 2011. A coalition of 40
rights groups criticized the bill as failing to protect against discrimination on the
basis of sexual orientation, disability, age, or religion in a variety of spheres, or
against gender discrimination in education.
Warsaw hosted a landmark gay rights rally in July. The first EuroPride parade in a
former Eastern Bloc country was peaceful, despite strong opposition. In
December 2009 the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights had
expressed concerns about discrimination against lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender persons in Poland. The ECtHR ruled in March that Poland discriminat-
WORLD REPORT 2011
430
ed unlawfully against same-sex couples by denying them the same protection in
relation to housing and succession rights afforded to unmarried heterosexual
couples.
In a May report the UN special rapporteur on the right to health criticized Poland
over the lack of access to legal abortions, contraception, and prenatal testing.
Spain
The violent Basque separatist group ETA announced a unilateral ceasefire in early
September after a year of relative inactivity and significant arrests under continuing
France-Spain cooperation. A French gendarme was killed in March near Paris
in a shoot-out with suspected ETA members. In January the Spanish Supreme
Court ruled that 2006 negotiations between elected Basque officials and
Batasuna, the Basque nationalist party declared illegal in 2003 for alleged ties to
ETA, did not constitute a crime. Three ETA members were convicted for the
December 2006 bombing of a Madrid airport. They will serve a maximum of 4o
years in jail each, despite the symbolic 1,000 year sentences.
Spain rejected recommendations from peer governments during its Universal
Periodic Review at the HRC in May. The rejected recommendations included the
improvement of safeguards for terrorism detainees held without access to communication
and the implementation of the 2008 justice reform in terrorism cases
recommendations made by the UN special rapporteur on human rights while
countering terrorism. The Spanish government similarly rejected recommendations
to create an independent police complaints mechanism.
Parliament approved in June an overhaul of Spain’s criminal code effective
December 2010, increasing sentences for over 30 crimes, creating a new system
of post-sentence “supervised liberty” for terrorism and sex offenses, and creating
a new crime of disseminating information to “provoke, foment or foster” the commission
of a terrorism offense.
Judge Baltasar Garzón, known internationally for his efforts to bring former
Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet to justice, was suspended in May and faced
trial for investigating alleged cases of illegal detention and forced disappearances
of more than 100,000 people during Spain’s civil war and under the subsequent
431
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
WORLD REPORT 2011
432
Franco regime, despite a 1977 amnesty law. The UN Working Group on Enforced or
Involuntary Disappearances expressed concern in May over Garzón’s suspension
and criticized Spain’s amnesty law.
Around 200 unaccompanied migrant children, mainly from sub-Saharan Africa
and Morocco, remain in “emergency” centers set up in 2006 in the Canary Islands
despite repeated pledges by the local government to close them. Around half live
in La Esperanza, a substandard, large, isolated former detention facility. The UN
Committee on the Rights of the Child expressed concern in September over inadequate
reception conditions and neglect of children in the Canaries. It recommended
that Spain establish child-friendly centers and introduce effective complaints
mechanisms for children in care to report ill-treatment.
A new law came into force in July removing restrictions on abortion to make it
legal on request up to the fourteenth week of pregnancy. It also increased access
to, and information about, reproductive rights and family planning. Prior to the
reform, abortion was lawful only on the grounds of serious health risks for the
woman, fetal malformations, or in rape cases.
United Kingdom
General elections in May resulted in a coalition between the Conservative and
Liberal Democrat parties, Britain’s first coalition government since 1945.
In July the new government announced a judge-led inquiry into allegations of
complicity of UK intelligence agencies in torture, and for the first time published
guidance for intelligence officers on interrogating detainees abroad. The inquiry,
whose detailed terms of reference have yet to be published at this writing, is not
expected to begin until all ongoing criminal investigations into alleged complicity
by British agents in overseas torture were resolved. In November the UK’s top
prosecutor announced there was insufficient evidence to prosecute a Security
Service (MI5) officer over the abuse of Binyam Mohamed. The same month the
government announced it would pay former Guantanamo Bay detainees compensation
to settle civil suits and avoid disclosure of classified documents, without
UK authorities admitting culpability.
433
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Concerns remained that current guidelines on overseas interrogations give too
much latitude to intelligence officers, appear to create ministerial discretion to
permit use of abusive techniques, and foresee assurances as a means of mitigating
the risk of torture or ill-treatment, despite their inherent unreliability.
The Equality and Human Rights Commission warned the government in
September that it would seek judicial review by the courts if the guidance was not
amended. Lawyers representing civilians detained and allegedly tortured by
British forces in Iraq also threatened action because the guidelines do not
unequivocally prohibit hooding, an issue central to the public inquiry into the
2003 death of Iraqi hotel receptionist Baha Mousa while in British military custody
in Basra. The inquiry’s hearings ended in October and a final report is pending
at this writing.
Heavily redacted documents were published in July and September following a
High Court order in a civil case brought against the UK government by six former
Guantanamo Bay detainees. The documents provided evidence that the government
was aware as early as January 2002 of allegations that UK citizens and residents
were being tortured in US custody but failed to object to transferring UK
nationals to Guantanamo Bay. The documents also included 2002 guidance to UK
intelligence officers that if they observed the “mistreatment” of prisoners in foreign
custody “the law does not require you to intervene to prevent this.”
In July the Home Office launched a review of much-criticized counterterrorism
measures, including control orders, extended pre-charge detention, stop and
search without suspicion, and deportation with assurances. At this writing the
government has yet to present its reform proposals to parliament. The government
suspended the terrorism stop and search power in July, following the
ECtHR’s confirmation that the powers violated privacy rights, was too broad, and
lacked safeguards.
Despite the Home Office review, the coalition government agreement endorsed
the use of diplomatic assurances to deport terrorism suspects.
In May the Special Immigration Appeals Commission (SIAC) blocked the deportation
on the basis of diplomatic assurances to Pakistan of two Pakistani terrorism
suspects. In July the US government began extradition proceedings against one of
WORLD REPORT 2011
434
435
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
the suspects. The case is ongoing at this writing. SIAC ruled in September that an
Ethiopian terrorism suspect could be safely deported to Ethiopia despite the risk
of torture, the first case involving a 2008 agreement between the two countries.
An appeal is pending at this writing.
In June the UK High Court confirmed a moratorium on transfers of terrorism suspects
to the National Directorate of Security (NDS) facility in Kabul following allegations
of torture. In March the ECtHR ruled that the UK violated the rights of two
Iraqis by transferring them from UK military custody in Basra to Iraqi authorities in
December 2008. The court rejected the UK government’s appeal in October.
The prime minister publicly apologized in June for the “unjustified and unjustifiable”
1972 killing of 14 unarmed protestors in Northern Ireland by British soldiers,
following the long-awaited report from the Bloody Sunday Inquiry published the
same month. The 12 year inquiry concluded the soldiers did not face any threat
and gave no warnings before firing.
The death in October of an Angolan man as he was being deported by private
security guards working for the Home Office prompted an inquiry by the
Parliamentary Home Affairs Committee into restraint techniques used during such
removals. A criminal investigation into the death was ongoing at time of writing.
Children continued to be detained in immigration centers despite the government’s
pledge in May to stop the practice. Women, including survivors of sexual
violence in Pakistan, Sierra Leone and Uganda, continued to be placed in the
“detained fast-track” asylum procedure unsuited to considering such complex
claims.
The Supreme Court ruled in July that two gay asylum seekers from Iran and
Cameroon could not be denied protection on the grounds that they could conceal
their sexuality in their countries of origin. The Home Office announced new rules
to prevent removals to countries where individuals face persecution based on
their sexual orientation or gender identification.
WORLD REPORT 2011
436
Georgia
Georgia’s human rights record remained uneven in 2010. The government evicted
hundreds of internally displaced persons (IDPs) from state-owned collective centers
in Tbilisi, the capital, often leaving them homeless or without adequate compensation.
State actors hindered activists’ right to assembly and attacked and
harassed journalists and opposition newspapers. Municipal elections on May 30
largely met international standards, but observers also identified significant
shortcomings.
More than two years after the August 2008 Georgian-Russian conflict over South
Ossetia, the government has not effectively investigated international human
rights and humanitarian law violations. Russia strengthened its military presence
in and effective control over Georgia’s breakaway regions. The European Union
started negotiations with Georgia to deepen economic and political ties.
Forced Evictions of Internally Displaced People
Since June the authorities have evicted hundreds of IDPs from state-owned temporary
collective centers in Tbilisi, supposedly to provide them with durable housing
solutions. The authorities failed to respect international standards regarding
evictions: they did not engage in genuine consultation with IDPs, did not provide
reasonable advance notice of eviction, and failed to provide adequate alternatives.
Some IDPs received no alternative housing; others were sent to homes in
remote regions, some of which had damaged roofs or lacked electricity or gas.
Georgia has some 246,000 IDPs as a legacy of conflicts in the 1990s and in 2008.
Over 40 percent live in 1,658 state or private collective centers, 515 of which are
in Tbilisi.
In June officials gave IDPs verbal warnings five days prior to eviction. August 2
amendments to Ministry of Interior Decree No. 747 abolished the five-day warning
requirement. Thereafter some IDPs received only a few hours’ warning prior to
eviction. The evictions violated Georgia’s Law on the Internally Displaced, which
prohibits the removal of IDPs without written consent and the placement in
homes inferior to their current residences.
437
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
The Ministry of Refugees and Accommodation says it offered those evicted in
August either financial compensation or housing in rural areas. Many IDPs
refused to relocate to rural areas citing lack of employment opportunities. They
received no financial compensation and became homeless after eviction.
Freedom of Assembly and Police Violence
The authorities interfered with peaceful assembly and failed to meaningfully
investigate past excessive use of force by law enforcement. On August 14, police
arrested Georgian activists and writers Irakli Kakabadze, Shota Gagarin, and
Aleksi Chigvinadze as they peacefully protested on George W. Bush Street in
Tbilisi. Police charged the three with disobeying police orders and released them
the next day after a court fined each of them GEL400 (US$220). At the closed
hearing, the judge heard only police evidence and refused to watch video showing
the men cooperating with police at the moment of arrest. Kakabadze alleged
that police verbally and physically abused him in the police car. An
Ombudsman’s representative visited Kakabadze in detention and confirmed
injuries on his shoulder and arm.
On November 23, 2009, police arrested Dachi Tsagauri, Jaba Jishkariani, and Irakli
Kordzaia– activists from a pro-opposition youth group–as they protested government
policies near the parliament. At the time of arrest police told the activists
that they had violated the law on rallies, which bans holding rallies in a 20-meter
radius from the Parliament building. However, the arrest protocol indicated that
the protestors stood 30 meters away from the building. The Tbilisi City Court
found the men in violation of rules for holding a rally and for resisting police and
fined each GEL500 (US$280). The court did not consider video footage from journalists
present at the rally showing that the activists had not obstructed movement
of pedestrians and had obeyed police orders at the moment of arrest.
On August 19, 2010, police detained two opposition activists allegedly for resisting
police orders also outside parliament, where IDPs and others peacefully
protested the spate of evictions. The protestors had informed the city municipality
about the rally in advance and did not block the road. The Tbilisi City Court
fined the activists GEL400 (US$220) each for resisting police orders.
WORLD REPORT 2011
438
The government has refused to launch a comprehensive investigation into events
of November 7, 2007, when police used excessive force against largely peaceful
demonstrations in Tbilisi, resulting in at least 500 injured. The authorities have
also failed to conduct an effective investigation into a June 15, 2009 police attack
against 50 opposition supporters outside the police headquarters, when at least
17 demonstrators were injured. The government has also failed to conduct a thorough
investigation into the March 2006 operation to quell a riot in Tbilisi Prison
No. 5, which left seven prisoners dead and dozens injured.
Municipal Elections
National municipal elections took place on May 30, 2010 to elect 63 local councils,
including the mayor of Tbilisi, who was directly elected for the first time. The
ruling National Movement party won an overwhelming majority in all municipalities.
International observers concluded that the polls marked progress towards
international standards, but significant shortcomings remained, including legal
deficiencies, unlimited campaigning and the use of administrative resources by
some public officials, and isolated cases of election-day fraud.
Lack of Accountability for Laws of War Violations
Over two years since the Georgian-Russian conflict over South Ossetia, Georgian
authorities have yet to ensure a comprehensive investigation into and accountability
for international human rights and humanitarian law violations by their
forces.
During the war the Georgian military used indiscriminate force, including firing
multiple rocket launchers, an indiscriminate weapon that should not be used in
civilian areas. The military also used cluster munitions against the Russian military,
including in civilian-populated Georgian territories adjacent to the administrative
border with South Ossetia.
The Office of the Prosecutor at the International Criminal Court—to which Georgia
is a party—continued with its preliminary examination of the situation and sent
delegations to Russia in March and to Georgia in June 2010 to obtain additional
information on domestic proceedings.
439
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Some 20,000 ethnic Georgians from South Ossetia remain displaced.
Media Freedom
The media environment remains mixed, with diverse print media, but nationwide
television broadcasting limited to the state-owned Public Broadcaster and progovernment
Rustavi 2 and Imedi stations. Transparency of media ownership
remains a concern.
Several journalists alleged pressure and attacks. On June 25, police assaulted
Gori-based Trialeti television journalist Lado Bichashvili and cameraman Imeda
Gogoladze as they filmed the removal of a Stalin statue from the city center.
About eight policemen beat the journalists and confiscated their camera, which
they later returned with materials deleted.
In July Vakhtang Komakhidze, a long-time Georgian investigative journalist,
received asylum in Switzerland, citing threats by the authorities. The threats
allegedly intensified after Komakhidze started work on an investigative film
regarding the August 2008 war in South Ossetia.
In February the opposition newspaper Guria News, published in Western Georgia,
alleged that local authorities threatened and intimidated the private distributors
who distribute the newspaper. On February 8, police briefly detained Guria News
correspondent Irakli Dolidze as he photographed a police official, confiscating his
photo camera and cell phone temporarily.
On November 25, 2009, the Ministry of Interior’s Special Operations Department
called in Tedo Jorbenadze, head of the investigations unit at the independent
Batumi-based weekly newspaper Batumelebi, and threatened to publish photos
of near-naked men, Jorbenadze allegedly among them, if he refused to cooperate
with intelligence services.
Criminal Justice System
Prison overcrowding remains a problem, leading to poor conditions. Courts’ low
number of acquittals is a key factor in overcrowding. In September the Council of
Europe’s Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading
WORLD REPORT 2011
440
Treatment or Punishment published a report on its February visit to Georgia, noting
a number of positive developments, but expressing concern regarding little or
no progress on overcrowding in Georgian prisons and lack of meaningful activities
for prisoners.
In February Georgia restored the minimum age of criminal responsibility to 14,
after reducing it to 12 in 2008, making it consistent with the country’s international
commitments. In 2009 the state trained 430 investigators in juvenile interrogation
techniques and made the presence of a lawyer and a legal guardian mandatory
during interrogation.
Key International Actors
The United States and the EU deepened their engagement and economic ties with
Georgia. Meanwhile, Russia continued to occupy Georgia’s breakaway regions of
South Ossetia and Abkhazia and strengthened its military presence in the region
by establishing a military base and placing an advanced surface-to-air missile
system in Abkhazia.
In July US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton visited Georgia and met with women
leaders from civil society and government. She also met President Mikheil
Saakashvili to emphasize the US commitment to Georgia’s territorial integrity and
pledging support for democracy and economy. Working groups met in Tbilisi and
Washington in 2010 to discuss the implementation of the U.S.-Georgia Charter on
Strategic Partnership, signed in January 2009, envisaging increased cooperation,
including on strengthening human rights.
The April 2010 European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) Action Plan progress report
commended Georgia for improvements in judicial reform and fighting corruption,
but raised concerns on several issues including: prison overcrowding, minority
rights, and media transparency. In July 2010 Georgia and the EU began negotiations
for an Association Agreement, which enhances the ENP, aiming at strengthened
economic and political relations.
A report on Georgia by the Council of Europe’s European Commission against
Racism and Intolerance issued in June expressed concern about discrimination
441
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
against ethnic and religious minorities and the absence of mechanisms for
addressing abuses.
In September Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights Thomas
Hammarberg published a report on disappearances during and after the August
2008 armed conflict, calling for impartial investigations by both sides. In October
Hammarberg published another report on human rights issues following the conflict,
including the right to return, rights of displaced persons to care and support,
and protection and release of detainees.
In August the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees expressed concern
about forced evictions of IDPs in Tbilisi.
WORLD REPORT 2011
442
Kazakhstan
During its 2010 chairmanship of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in
Europe (OSCE), Kazakhstan’s human rights record was marred by continued disappointments.
Restrictive amendments to media and Internet laws remained, and
a number of websites and weblogs were blocked on a regular basis. The government
punished activists for breaking restrictive rules on freedom of assembly.
Several activists were put on trial in 2010 and Kazakhstan’s leading human rights
defender, Evgeniy Zhovtis, remains in prison.
Freedoms of Expression and Information
Government loyalists dominate broadcast media outlets; independent journalists
who criticize government policies and practices face threats and harassment;
there are prohibitive penalties for civil defamation; and criminal penalties for libel
remain in force. Combined, these conditions chill the environment for freedom of
expression. In the first half of 2010 five journalists were physically attacked and
another five accused of criminal libel, according to the media watch dog Adil Soz.
One of the attacked journalists is Igor Larra, of the independent daily Svoboda
Slova. On March 22, 2010, three unidentified men assaulted him in Aktobe,
breaking his nose and jaw and inflicting multiple contusions to his head. In the
weeks prior to the attack Larra had been covering a 19-day strike by oil workers
employed by OzenMunaiGaz. The workers had demanded that the company’s
director resign and that management take back cuts in wages. The biggest shareholder
at OzenMunaiGaz is the state-owned company KazMunaiGaz. According to
Adil Soz, Larra did not file a complaint because he did not trust the authorities to
conduct a proper investigation.
In July 2010 a court upheld an April 21 ruling ordering the independent weekly
Uralskaya Nedelya to pay 20 million tenge (US$136,000) in “moral damages” to
Tengizneftestroi, an oil company. The weekly had published an article in August
2009 criticizing the company for being so sure of winning a tender that it had
hired workers and bought equipment before the tender was even published. The
company confirmed these facts during the trial hearing, raising doubt about the
grounds for the ruling.
443
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
The authorities denied parole to imprisoned journalist Ramazan Yesergepov, editor
of the newspaper Alma-Ata Info, after he had completed one-third of his sentence.
Yesergepov was sentenced to three years in prison in 2009 for disclosing
state secrets, because his newspaper had published information from a letter
from the Committee for National Security in which the agency appeared to be
attempting to sway a criminal investiation against a local businessman.
Yesergepov’s trial was not open to the public, and he was denied access to a
lawyer of his choice.
On March 1, 2010 the head of the government’s Agency for Information and
Networks stated that a computer emergency response team had been established
and had started to develop “a blacklist of destructive websites.” The same official
mentioned that religious and political websites in particular would be considered
for the list. Currently blocked are more than a dozen websites, including the popular
Russian-language blogging platform Livejournal and the website of the independent
weekly Respublika.
Freedom of Assembly
On March 26, 2010, a court sentenced Vladimir Kozlov, a leading activist with the
opposition party Alga!, to 10 days of administrative arrest on charges of holding
an unsanctioned protest. The charges were brought because Kozlov had distributed
leaflets criticizing the trial and sentencing of Mukhtar Dzhakishev, the former
director the state-owned nuclear company KazAtomProm, whose imprisonment
many believe is politically motivated. Kozlov had distributed the leaflets
along a pedestrian zone in Almaty; other individuals distributing commercial
leaflets at the same time where not arrested.
On May 2, 2010, Yermek Narymbaev, leader of the Arman (Dream) social movement,
was sentenced to 15 days’ administrative arrest for allegedly holding a
peaceful unsanctioned mass gathering of 500 people on May 1. During his arrest,
he was additionally charged with resisting the police and offending the judge at
his trial on May 2. On June 23, a court sentenced him to four years’ imprisonment.
WORLD REPORT 2011
444
In June 2010, courts fined at least five individuals—three journalists and two
human rights activists—for organizing and participating in unsanctioned meetings
and disobeying the authorities. In each case, the individual had staged a
one-person picket on Almaty’s main square protesting the highly controversial
law, adopted that month, giving President Nursultan Nazarbaev lifetime immunity
from prosecution.
Detention of Activists
In July 2010 a court in Aktobe sentenced Aidos Sadykov, a longtime opposition
political activist who had assisted oil workers in creating an independent union,
to two years’ imprisonment for “hooliganism accompanied by resistance to the
police,” in what appears to be a politically motivated set-up. On May 27, Sadykov
was arrested for attacking an unknown man, despite evidence that he was himself
attacked and did not retaliate against the attacker. When Sadykov was
already handcuffed he resisted police attempts to put the cell phone of the
attacker in his pocket. During his court hearing the judge twice declined to show
a video that a journalist had recorded shortly after the arrest, which could have
proved Sadykov’s innocence.
September 3, 2010 marked the one-year anniversary of the imprisonment of
Kazakhstan’s most prominent human rights defender, Evgeniy Zhovtis. On
September 3, 2009, Zhovtis, founding director of the Kazakhstan International
Bureau for Human Rights and the Rule of Law, was found guilty of vehicular
manslaughter, following an unfair trial marred by serious procedural flaws that
denied him the right to present a defense. Zhovtis was sentenced to four years in
a settlement colony, a penal establishment which allows for more freedoms than
an ordinary prison. The facilty’s director had the discretion to allow Zhovtis to live
and work outside the establishment but chose not to do so.
On April 26, 2010, the Supreme Court of Kazakhstan declined to review Zhovtis’
verdict.
445
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Risk of Refoulement
Since the entry into force in January 2010 of the Law on Refugees, the Kazakh
government renewed pressure on refugees and asylum seekers from Uzbekistan
who are devout Muslims and fear religious persecution in Uzbekistan. More than
70 asylum seekers and refugees signed a letter to Human Rights Watch stating
that when they applied for asylum, migration officials tried to convince them that
they have nothing to fear in Uzbekistan.
In June Kazakh authorities rounded up more than 40 Uzbek nationals in Almaty,
almost all of whom were registered asylum seekers. Some were released, and at
this writing some 31 remain in detention in Kazakhstan, pursuant to extradition
requests from the Uzbek government. While the charges on which the Uzbek
authorities are seeking extradition have not been made public, they are reportedly
related to religious extremism. There is significant, credible evidence that persons
prosecuted in Uzbekistan on religious extremism charges face a grave risk of
torture or other forms of ill-treatment in detention. Despite these risks,
Kazakhstan extradited to Uzbekistan four men; two of them are ethnic Uzbeks but
citizens of Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan.
Labor Abuses and Child Labor in Agriculture
Farmers employing migrant workers from Kyrgyzstan on farms supplying tobacco
to Philip Morris Kazakhstan (PMK), a subsidiary of Philip Morris International
(PMI) did not provide workers with written contracts or pay them for periods of
eight to nine months of employment. They confiscated some workers’ passports
and subjected some to forced labor. Child labor remains a serious problem in
tobacco and cotton farming, which employs children as young as 10. Experts
agree that tobacco and cotton farming are two of the worst forms of child labor
worldwide owing to the difficulty of the work and the risks associated with exposure
to pesticides and tobacco leaves. Beginning in 2010 PMI and PMK
have revised their contracts with tobacco farmers to ensure that migrant workers
receive regular wages and other protections. PMI and PMK have also committed
to implement a mechanism for complaints; to expand training for workers, farmers,
and PMK employees regarding labor rights and hazards of child labor; and
WORLD REPORT 2011
446
447
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
to develop summer camps and work with the government to facilitate access to
schools for migrant workers’ children to prevent child labor.
Key International Actors
Key international actors, notably members of the OSCE, uncritically pledged their
support for and cooperation with Kazakhstan during its OSCE chairmanship in
2010. They generally failed to use the chairmanship and Kazakhstan’s bid to hold
a summit at the end of 2010 as a lever to push for outstanding reforms.
During a United Nations Security Council discussion on February 5, the United
Kingdom stressed that the role of the OSCE chairmanship “brings with it important
responsibilities to promote and embody the principles of human rights … on
which the OSCE is founded.” During a meeting with President Nursultan
Nazarbaev on April 11, 2010, United States President Barack Obama said the US
would continue to support democratic reforms in Kazakhstan, but fell short of
expressing concern about Kazakhstan’s human rights performance.
On February 12, during Kazakhstan’s Universal Periodic Review at the UN Human
Rights Council, UN member states raised many concerns about media freedoms.
They recommended that Kazakhstan adopt a moratorium on criminal libel, establish
a cap on defamation awards in civil suits, stop any attempt to filter internet
content or block access to websites, and refrain from adding further unwarranted
restrictions to Kazakhstan’s media law. Kazakhstan committed to implement
most of these recommendations, but denied that its laws criminalize defamation
by journalists and rejected allegations of abusive regulation of Internet content.
During a visit to Kazakhstan in April, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon urged the
government to implement the UPR recommendations, noting that “a robust and
engaged civil society—with full guarantees of free speech and media, and tolerance
for ethnic and religious diversity—is a powerful force for modernization.”
Following its May 2010 review of Kazakhstan, the UN Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights noted “with concern the low level of awareness of
human rights in general, and of the Covenant in particular” and expressed deep
concern about “the precarious situation of migrant workers.”
WORLD REPORT 2011
448
Kyrgyzstan
In 2010 Kyrgyzstan experienced its worst violence and upheaval since independence
in 1991, with disastrous results for human rights.
Unrest surrounding President Kurmanbek Bakiyev’s ouster in early April led to 85
deaths, hundreds of injured, and contining violence. Between June 10 to 14 ethnic
violence shook southern Kyrgyzstan, killing hundreds, injuring thousands,
destroying more than 2,600 homes, and resulting in the temporary mass exodus
to Uzbekistan of nearly 100,000 ethnic Uzbeks from the country’s southern
provinces. For several days Kyrgyz authorities failed to contain or stop the killings
and large-scale destruction, and did not appear to take every possible measure to
protect all citizens.
The country remained extremely volatile after the June violence, especially in the
south, where lack of security and accountability has allowed vigilantism and rule
of force to prevail over the rule of law. As trials related to the violence began,
angry mobs—mostly comprised of relatives of ethnic Kyrgyz killed in June violence—
attacked defendants and their relatives, human rights defenders, journalists,
and lawyers.
A constitutional referendum on June 27, 2010—just two weeks after the mayhem—
transformed Kyrgyzstan to the first parliamentary republic in Central Asia.
Parliamentary elections on October 10 were largely peaceful despite the tense
atmosphere. With five parties passing the five percent threshold, international
observers praised the elections as “pluralistic.”
April Turmoil
On April 7, 2010, demonstrators ousted President Bakiyev from office, throwing
the country into political turmoil. In precedeing weeks, the political opposition
had held a series of demonstrations to air various grievances, including concern
regarding President Bakiyev’s growing authoritarianism, persecution and imprisonment
of influential opposition political leaders, alleged government nepotism
and mismanagement, increased energy tariffs, growing corruption, and government
closure of several media outlets.
449
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Authorities detained several opposition leaders on the eve of nationwide opposition
gatherings planned for early April. Political violence erupted in response to
the first detention and was eventually quelled on April 6 in Talas, a city in northwestern
Kyrgyzstan. Violence erupted again on April 7 in Bishkek, when security
forces tried to disperse a peaceful protest against the detention of more opposition
leaders. Thousands of people eventually gathered in front of the White
House, the main government building in Bishkek, in a standoff with security
forces. Some demonstrators were armed with weapons they had seized from
police. As the situation escalated security forces fired on the demonstrators with
live ammunition.
Clashes ended in the early morning hours of April 8 when opposition supporters
took control of the White House, forcing Bakiyev to abandon his office. He fled
the country on April 15, and a 14-member interim government of opposition leaders
took charge.
The authorities’ investigation into April’s events has focused on members of the
ousted government. It is unclear to what extent, if any, the authorities have investigated
crimes committed by demonstrators, including illegal seizure and use of
weapons.
Mayhem in Southern Kyrgyzstan in June
The political power struggle that followed Bakiyev’s ouster acquired an ethnic
dimension in southern Kyrgyzstan when the area’s large Uzbek minority sided
with the interim government and helped prevent Bakiyev staging a comeback. The
growing role of the ethnic Uzbek community in the political arena led to escalating
tensions and violent clashes between ethnic Uzbeks and Kyrgyz in May 2010.
On the evening of June 10, violence erupted in Osh when a large crowd of ethnic
Uzbeks gathered in the city center in response to several fights between small
groups of ethnic Kyrgyz and Uzbek men earlier that day; the fighting escalated,
with crowds clashing throughout the night.
Outraged by the violence and concerned about their bretheren in Osh, crowds of
ethnic Kyrgyz from neighboring villages descended on the city and joined local
WORLD REPORT 2011
450
451
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
residents in clashing with ethnic Uzbeks, looting and torching Uzbek shops and
neighborhoods, and even killing Uzbeks.
Widespread use of heavy military vehicles in the attacks on Uzbek neighborhoods
indicated that, in at least some cases, government forces facilitated the attacks
by knowingly or unwittingly giving cover to violent mobs. It remains unclear
whether government forces actively participated in these attacks, and if so, to
what extent.
On June 13, 2010, violence spread to neighboring Jalal-Abad province, causing
more deaths, injuries, and destruction.
According to official statistics, more than 400 people died during the violence
and around 2,600 homes were destroyed, most of them owned by ethnic Uzbeks.
Aftermath of the Violence
The government’s investigation into the violence has included serious violations
of Kyrgyz and international law. Arbitrary arrests and extortion were widespread,
and there is credible evidence in numerous cases that detainees were ill-treated
and tortured. One man died from injuries he sustained in custody.
The authorities systematically denied defendants due process rights, such as the
right to representation by a lawyer of their choice and the right to consult with a
lawyer in private, which made it impossible for clients to complain confidentially
about ill-treatment, extortion, and other violations. Lawyers also said the authorities
have routinely refused to order medical examinations of detainees in cases of
suspected ill-treatment.
In the vast majority of cases authorities claimed that they had been unable to verify
allegations of torture and ill-treatment, and refused to launch criminal investigations.
At this writing no official has been charged or prosecuted for the use of
torture and ill-treatment.
In August the government acknowledged that most individuals detained in connection
with the violence were ethnic Uzbeks, raising concern that the investigation
into the violence was biased. As the post-violence crackdown by police on
WORLD REPORT 2011
452
the ethnic Uzbek community intensified in late June and July, ethnic Uzbeks wanting
to flee to Uzbekistan could not do so due to the closed land border.
At numerous trials related to the June violence, aggrieved relatives of ethnic
Kyrgyz victims attacked ethnic Uzbek defendants, defendants’ relatives, lawyers,
and journalists, before, during, and after trial hearings. Police did little to stop or
prevent these attacks.
For example, on September 15, 2010, a court in southern Kyrgyzstan sentenced
Azimjon Askarov, an ethnic Uzbek human rights defender and head of the NGO
Air, to life in prison for his alleged role in an incident in which an ethnic Kyrgyz
policeman was killed during the June violence. During the trial the victim’s relatives
and supporters threatened and struck Askarov’s lawyer, shouted threats and
insults at the defense team, and beat relatives of the defendant. Police were present
but did not act. The court heard numerous witnesses for the prosecution, but
defense lawyers felt they could not endanger witnesses by calling them to the
stand. On two occasions prior to the trial angry groups, allegedly including the
policeman’s relatives, threatened and physically attacked Askarov’s lawyer. Local
authorities did not respond.
Similar attacks continued at trials through October.
Threats to Human Rights Defenders
Several of Kyrgyzstan’s most prominent human rights leaders received threats in
connection with their investigation into the June violence and its aftermath.
In late June Tolekan Ismailova of Citizens Against Corruption, a human rights NGO,
fled the country for several months with her family after the Osh prosecutor’s
office falsely accused her and Aziza Abdirasulova of Kylym Shamy, another
human rights NGO, of distributing inaccurate information about a police operation
that followed the violence. A few days later Ismailova’s neighbors in Bishkek
reported that strangers had come to the neighborhood to inquire about her family
and where she lived. Abdirasulova received numerous threats. For example in
August, angry residents of Bazar-Kurgan threatened to kill one of Abdirasulova’s
children if their mother monitored Askarov’s trial.
453
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
In October two unknown men threatened the program coordinator of
Spravedlivost (Justice), based in the southern city of Jalal-Abad, for providing free
legal assistance to defendants in cases related to the June violence.
Elections
Parliamentary elections on October 10 and the election campaign that preceded
them were conducted in a peaceful and rather pluralistic manner—an important
step towards future free and fair elections. The Office for Democratic Institutions
and Human Rights of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) noted a number of shortcomings though, especially regarding election
legislation and the accuracy of voter lists.
Key International Actors
A unified international community expressed concern about the April 2010 disturbances,
quickly condemned the June violence, and called for the restoration of
law and order. It also called for objective investigations into the events. However,
key governments and international organizations such as Russia, the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), and the UN Security Council were much more
hesitant to take necessary measures to protect the civilian population. Despite
calls from the Kyrgyz authorities during the June violence, no international body
proved ready to deploy stabilization forces.
Six weeks after violence erupted in June OSCE participating states reached an
agreement, at the Kyrgyz government’s request, to deploy a small unarmed international
police force to the region in a monitoring and advisory role. The Kyrgyz
government also requested the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly’s special envoy for
Central Asia establish an independent international commission of inquiry into
the June 2010 violence. Due to disagreement within the Kyrgyz government about
both initiatives, their deployment was postponed until after the October 10 election.
At this writing the international commission has commenced its work, while
the government continues to hold up the deployment of the police advisory
group.
WORLD REPORT 2011
454
During his visit to Kyrgyzstan on April 3, 2010—just before the overthrow of the
Bakiyev government—United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon said he was
“troubled” by the crackdown on independent media in Kyrgyzstan and urged
authorities to respect all human rights, including free speech and freedom of the
media.
On May 3, 2010, during Kyrgyzstan’s Universal Periodic Review (UPR) at the UN
Human Rights Council, UN member states issued a number of important recommendations,
including ensuring an early return to constitutional order; rule of law
and respect for human rights; ending all forms of intimidation, harassment,
aggression, arbitrary arrest and detention, and torture against all persons, especially
human rights defenders, peaceful demonstrators, and journalists; ensuring
judicial independence; ensuring the rights of minorities; and inviting the special
rapporteur on torture to visit in 2010. Kyrgyzstan accepted these and other recommendations.
On June 18, 2010, the Council adopted a resolution condemning ethnic
violence in Kyrgyzstan and called on the high commissioner to keep it
appraised of the situation.
455
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Russia
In 2010 Russia demonstrated increased openness to international cooperation on
human rights, but the overall human rights climate in the country remained
deeply negative. President Dmitry Medvedev’s rhetorical commitments to human
rights and the rule of law have not been backed by concrete steps to support civil
society. The year 2010 saw new attacks on human rights defenders, and the perpetrators
of brazen murders in the previous year remained unpunished.
Civil Society
Despite the Kremlin’s repeated statements about the importance of normal working
conditions for NGOs, human rights defenders remain vulnerable to harassment
and attacks, and those working to end impunity in the North Caucasus are
especially at risk.
In September Oleg Orlov, chairman of the Memorial Human Rights Center, stood
trial for criminal slander, a charge that carries up to three years in prison. The
charge stems from Orlov’s statement that Ramzan Kadyrov, the leader of
Chechnya, was politically responsible for the July 2009 murder of Natalia
Estemirova, a leading Memorial researcher in Chechnya. No one has yet been
held accountable for Estemirova’s murder. It is unclear if the investigation has
examined possible official involvement or complicity in the crime.
Memorial resumed its activities in Chechnya in late 2009, following a six-month
suspension after Estemirova’s murder and threats against other staff. Under the
leadership of the Nizhny Novgorod Committee Against Torture, 12 Russian human
rights organizations established mobile groups that worked by rotation in
Chechnya throughout 2010. The groups assist Memorial in investigating human
rights violations in the republic and provide legal aid to victims.
In a May 2010 meeting with NGOs working on the North Caucasus, President
Medvedev urged local authorities to cooperate with civil society organizations.
However, Kadyrov and other high-level Chechen officials continued to make
threatening statements about rights groups. In a televised interview in July,
WORLD REPORT 2011
456
Kadyrov described human rights defenders and Memorial activists as “enemies of
the state, enemies of the people, enemies of the law.” The Kremlin failed to react.
Rights activists in the republic of Dagestan, particularly the Mothers of Dagestan
for Human Rights, continue to receive threats. In June 2010, human rights lawyer
Sapiyat Magomedova was severely beaten by police in the city of Khasavyurt. The
alleged perpetrators, although identified, have not been held to account.
Human rights defenders working in other regions also faced harassment and
attacks. In February 2010 Vadim Karastelev, a human rights advocate in the port
city of Novorossiisk, served seven days of administrative detention for organizing
an unsanctioned demonstration in support of Aleksei Dymovsky, a former police
officer whose YouTube video exposé of police corruption received nationwide
attention. The day after Karastelev’s release, unknown assailants brutally beat
him, causing serious injuries.
Responding to public outcry about police violence and lawlessness, the government
pledged to undertake major reforms. However, the draft law on police proposed
in 2010 falls short of what is necessary to best prevent human rights violations
by law enforcement officials and ensure civilian oversight over policing.
In May 2010 a court in the Sverdlovsk region sentenced Alexei Sokolov, a prisoners’
rights advocate from Ekaterinburg, to five years in prison on spurious criminal
charges after an unfair trial. The charges appear to be in retaliation for his work
exposing police and prison abuse.
Throughout 2010, police continued to disperse, sometimes violently, the public
rallies held in large cities on the thirty-first day of each month in support of Article
31 of the constitution, which guarantees freedom of assembly. The year 2010
opened with the detention of Ludmilia Alexeeva, Russia’s leading human rights
defender, then aged 82, at a Moscow rally on New Year’s Eve. Prominent activist
Lev Ponomarev twice faced administrative detention in 2010 for participating in
rallies.
Yet there was also a breakthrough in autumn 2010, when the authorities allowed
an October 31 rally that drew at least 1,000 peaceful protesters to Triumfalnaya
Square in central Moscow. This development stands as a great victory for Russia’s
457
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
civil society movement and its international supporters. Incidentally, the authorities
consented to this rally just as the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR)
issued a stinging rebuke to Moscow in the Alexeev v Russia ruling, saying that the
Russian authorities repeatedly denied activists the right to hold gay pride marches,
in violation of the right to freedom of assembly.
In June a Moscow court found the co-organizers of the Forbidden Art-2006 exhibition,
Yuri Samodurov and Andrei Erofeev, guilty of inciting religious hostility. The
court maintained that the artworks on display contained images offensive to
Christians, and fined Samodurov and Erofeev 200,000 (US$6,452) and 150,000
($4,839) rubles respectively.
NGOs and the media remain vulnerable to vague anti-extremist legislation, which
the authorities use to silence critics. In July 2010, new provisions to the law on
the Federal Security Service (FSB) were adopted allowing the FSB to issue warnings
to individuals, organizations, and media outlets. The warnings require individuals
or organizations to stop activities the FSB considers actually or potentially
extremist. In September 2010, the Moscow prosecutor’s office launched an
unprecedented wave of intrusive inquiries into foreign-funded NGOs.
The North Caucasus
The Islamist insurgency in the North Caucasus republics remained active in 2010.
In countering it, law enforcement and security agencies continued to commit
grave violations of fundamental human rights, such as torture, enforced disappearances,
and extrajudicial killings.
The use of unlawful counterinsurgency methods coupled with rampant impunity
for abuses, antagonizes the people of Chechnya, Ingushetia, and Dagestan, and
widens the gap between the public and the government. On March 29, for the
first time since 2004, a major attack was perpetrated in Russia’s capital. Two suicide
bombers from Dagestan exploded themselves in the Moscow metro during
morning rush hour, killing 40 and wounding dozens.
Despite the fact that their monitoring capacity is severely hampered by security
concerns, human rights groups continued to document abductions and extrajudicial
killings in 2010.
WORLD REPORT 2011
458
The Chechen government has brazenly adopted a policy of collective punishment.
In 2010, high-level Chechen officials, including the president, stated publicly that
insurgents’ families should expect punishment unless their relatives surrender.
Stopping short of directly instructing law enforcement agencies to destroy the
house of insurgents’ families and apply other collective punishments, such statements
encourage lawless actions by police and security personnel.
Violations of women’s rights in Chechnya intensified in 2010. Women not wearing
headscarves are harassed on the street. Local authorities unambiguously condoned
the pelting of unveiled women on the streets with paintball guns, which
resulted in the hospitalization of at least one woman in June. In a July television
interview, Kadyrov said that the women deserved such treatment for failing to
dress appropriately. The Chechen authorities have banned those refusing to wear
headscarves from working in the public sector or attending schools and universities.
In the republic of Ingushetia, despite President Yunus-Bek Yevkurov’s stated commitment
to uphold the rule of law and improve the working climate for human
rights NGOs, law enforcement and security agencies continue to perpetrate
abductions, torture, and killings. According to Memorial, 12 civilians were abducted,
three forcibly disappeared, and 11 were extrajudicially executed between
January and September 2010.
The year 2010 saw new insurgent attacks in Dagestan and new abductions of residents
by law enforcement and security officials. The appointment of
Magomedsalam Magomedov as the republic’s new president in early 2010 has
had no noticeable impact on the human rights and security situation in Dagestan.
Salafi Muslims are especially vulnerable to persecution in Dagestan because the
authorities suspect them of ties to the insurgency. In May seven Salafi men were
arbitrarily detained and severely beaten by Kazbekovsky district police officials;
one victim died of his injuries. Police torture is endemic beyond unlawful counterinsurgency
practices. In July, police detained a 14-year-old boy in the village of
Khotoba on suspicion of theft, and severely beat him, causing serious injuries
and the loss of hearing in one ear.
459
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Cooperation with the European Court of Human Rights
In January 2010 – after years of delay – Russia ratified Protocol 14 to the
European Convention for Human Rights, becoming the last Council of Europe
(CoE) member state to do so. Protocol 14 streamlines the case review process at
the ECtHR and strengthens the enforcement mechanisms of the CoE’s Committee
of Ministers.
To date the EctHR has issued more than 150 judgments holding Russia responsible
for grave human rights violations in Chechnya. Russia continues to pay the
required monetary compensation to victims but fails to meaningfully implement
the core of the judgments, in particular conducting effective investigations and
holding perpetrators accountable. The Russian authorities have also failed to take
sufficient measures to prevent the recurrence of similar abuses and new complaints
are lodged with the ECtHR every year. The failure to fully implement the
court’s judgments denies justice to the victims and fuels the climate of impunity
in Chechnya.
Lack of Accountability for Laws of War Violations
Over two years since the Russian conflict with Georgia over South Ossetia,
Russian authorities have yet to ensure a comprehensive investigation into and
accountability for international human rights and humanitarian law violations by
their forces.
Russian forces used cluster bombs in areas populated by civilians in Georgia,
leading to civilian deaths and injuries. Russia also launched indiscriminate rocket
attacks on civilian areas, causing casualties. Russian forces in Georgia failed to
protect civilians in areas under their effective control whilst also preventing
Georgian forces from policing these areas.
Health Issues and HIV/AIDS
In 2010 the Russian government continued to violate the rights of hundreds of
thousands of drug users who are denied access to effective drug treatment and
HIV prevention. The government’s 2009 decision to shift funding away from HIV
WORLD REPORT 2011
460
prevention services resulted in the closure of 42 health centers in August 2010. A
number of other sites operate under an extended grant from the Global Fund to
Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, but these programs also face closure. The
government’s opposition to drug treatment using methadone or buprenorphine
puts injection drug users at grave risk of HIV infection. Unnecessarily restrictive
narcotics laws unduly limit the accessibility of morphine for patients with pain
due to cancer, HIV/AIDS, and other illnesses, condemning many to severe suffering.
Migrant Worker Rights
Russia has between 4 and 9 million migrant workers, over 80 percent of whom
come from the region of the former Soviet Union. Forty percent of migrant workers
labor in construction, where they face abuses that include confiscation of passports,
denial of contracts, non-payment or delayed payment of wages, and unsafe
working conditions. Migrant workers have few effective options for redress.
Legislative changes adopted in May tie foreign workers more closely to their
employers and may discourage a worker from leaving an abusive employer. Other
legislative changes introduced a system for simplifying legal employment of workers
employed by private persons as nannies, contractors, and in other non-commercial
jobs.
To complete the large-scale construction projects necessary for Russia to host the
2014 Winter Olympic Games in Sochi, employers are hiring large numbers of
migrant workers from other parts of Russia and from other countries. Some workers
have reported employers’ failure to provide contracts, non-payment or severe
delays in payment of wages, and substandard employer-provided housing.
Expropriation of Property and Evictions in Advance of the 2014
Olympic Games
To make way for venues for the 2014 Winter Olympics, hundreds of families living
in the Adler region of Sochi will lose their property through state expropriations.
Some will also lose their livelihoods, such as small hotels and farms. Although
the regional government has in most cases promised compensation, serious con-
461
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
cerns remain about the compensation amounts and procedures, and the means
of challenging official actions.
International Actors
In 2010 Russia showed some improved cooperation on human rights, but
Russia’s international partners did not do enough to encourage human rights
reform.
In February, after two years of stalled negotiations, Russia allowed a delegation
from the United Kingdom’s parliament to conduct a fact-finding visit to Chechnya.
In March Dick Marty, the rapporteur on human rights in the North Caucasus for
the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE), made a long-awaited
visit to Chechnya, Ingushetia, and Dagestan. Marty’s critical report on the lack of
legal remedies for victims of human rights violations was unanimously adopted at
the June session of PACE, marking the first time the Russia delegation voted in
favor of a critical report on the North Caucasus.
The European Union held two rounds of human rights consultations with Russia.
While the consultations provide an important forum for working-level discussions
on human rights, the lack of follow-up mechanisms, isolation from high-level
political meetings, and the absence of high-level Russian participation undermine
their effectiveness. The EU continued negotiations on its Partnership and
Cooperation Agreement with Russia, which expired in 2007.
The United States and Russia initiated a civil society working group for government
representatives and civil society experts to discuss thematic issues in both
countries. The working group convened in Washington, DC in January to focus on
corruption and children’s rights. It met in May in the Russian city of Vladimir to
discuss prison reform and migration. The meetings, while providing a good platform
for discussion, have not had any practical outcome to date.
The Office of the Prosecutor at the International Criminal Court continued its preliminary
examination of the 2008 armed conflict between Russia and Georgia
over South Ossetia and sent delegations to Russia in March 2010 and to Georgia
in June to obtain additional information on domestic remedies and proceedings.
WORLD REPORT 2011
462
Serbia
In March the Serbian parliament adopted a resolution condemning the Srebrenica
massacre in Bosnia and apologizing to its victims and their relatives. However the
resolution and the parliament’s continuing domestic efforts to tackle war crimes
were overshadowed by the government’s ongoing failure to arrest Ratko Mladic,
the Bosnian Serbs’ wartime military leader. The European Union nevertheless
took steps to strengthen ties with Serbia by unfreezing a trade agreement, relaxing
its visa regime, and asking the European Commission to begin assessing
Serbia’s application for EU membership. These steps were prompted in part by a
shift in the Serbian government’s stance on Kosovo. Acts of intimidation of independent
journalists persisted, along with discrimination against the Roma minority.
War Crimes Accountability
At this writing Serbia has failed to arrest Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic, the two
remaining fugitives wanted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). In a June briefing to the United Nations Security Council, ICTY
prosecutor Serge Brammertz noted Serbia’s cooperation with requests for assistance,
but indicated that efforts to arrest the fugitives “have thus far produced
few tangible results.” In September Brammertz reiterated his dissatisfaction with
Serbia’s efforts to secure the arrests of fugitives and called on the EU to press
Serbia for cooperation. On a more positive note, Serbian authorities recovered
Mladic’s wartime notebooks during a search operation in February and provided
them to the ICTY, which will likely introduce them as evidence in several trials.
The trial of Zdravko Tolimir, the last suspect in custody of the ICTY to face prosecution,
began in February. Tolimir faces charges of genocide, war crimes, and
crimes against humanity related to 1995 events in Srebrenica and Zepa.
The Serbian War Crimes Chamber convicted a total of five suspects in three war
crimes trials in 2010 the Malic case, the Banski Kovacevac case, and the Medak
case, and acquitted a sixth. The Appellate Court of Belgrade reached final decisions
in two cases, the Ovcara case and the Podujevo case. There were eight first
463
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
instance trials ongoing at the chamber during 2010, and a further 10 cases subject
to ongoing appeal.
In September the Serbian War Crimes Prosecutor indicted nine men in connection
with killings of ethnic Albanians in the village of Cuska (Qyshk in Albanian) in May
1999, during the war in Kosovo. In total, 26 men are currently being investigated
for murder and theft in Cuska.
In May the prosecutor indicted six Serbs for war crimes against Croat civilians in
Licki Osik, Croatia, in October 1991.
In August the prosecutor indicted Veljko Maric, a former member of the Croatian
Armed Forces, for the wartime killing of Serb civilians in the Croatian village of
Rastovac. Maric was arrested in April at the Serbian border with Bulgaria. He is
the first ethnic Croat to face war crime charges in a Serbian court.
Treatment of Minorities
Throughout the month of June Roma residents of an informal settlement in the village
of Jabuka, north of Belgrade, were harassed by local Serbs after a Roma
teenager killed a 17-year-old Serb boy and protests escalated into stone-throwing
and threats to destroy Roma homes. At this writing, the Roma neighborhood
remains under 24-hour police protection. The Serbian local and central level
authorities condemned the violence.
In May the Serbian authorities and the European Investment Bank reached an
agreement committing the City of Belgrade to provide sustainable housing by the
end of 2010 for Roma evicted from an informal settlement under the Gazela
Bridge in August 2009. The evicted residents are currently living in metal containers
in various municipalities outside Belgrade. In October Belgrade’s development
agency, with the help of police, demolished a separate Roma informal settlement
and evicted its 36 residents without offering them any alternative accommodation,
despite interventions from NGOs, Roma political representatives, and
the Ministry for Human and Minority Rights.
In February an ethnic Albanian police officer in the Albanian-majority Presevo
Valley was injured when a bomb planted under his police vehicle exploded, frac-
WORLD REPORT 2011
464
turing his legs and ribs and hurting his wife and two other female passers-by. At
this writing no group has claimed responsibility and no one has been charged for
the attack.
Integration of Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons
As of September 2010 there were 82,699 refugees registered in Serbia, according
to the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), and around 225,000 internally
displaced persons (IDPs), mainly from Kosovo, according to the Serbian
authorities. Refugees and IDPs continued to face problems throughout 2010
obtaining personal documentation and accessing sustainable housing and social
services. According to UNHCR, 3,500 remain in collective centers. Roma IDPs from
Kosovo face particularly difficult economic and social conditions.
Deportations to Serbia from Western Europe continued in the absence of assistance
programs, with 637 persons (around half of them Roma) deported in the
first 9 months of 2010, according to the Serbian Comissariat for IDPs and
Refugees.
Media Freedom
In July Teofil Panic, a political commentator for the Serbian weekly Vreme, was
beaten by two men with metal bars on a packed bus in Belgrade. The reason for
the attack remains unclear. Panic suffered a concussion and injuries to his entire
body. The perpetrators fled the scene and currently remain at large, despite a
criminal investigation.
In February Serbian minister for infrastructure Milutin Mrkonjic assaulted Milan
Ladjevic, a journalist at the daily Kurir, slapping him across the face and using
obscene language after Ladjevic pursued him for an interview. Mrkonjic subsequently
apologized publicly for his behavior.
In December 2009 reporter Brankica Stankovic and her staff from the B92 TV
channel received repeated death threats after airing a program about football
hooligans. In August the Higher Court of Appeal jailed one suspect over the
threats and ordered the first instance court to look again at charges against five
465
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
other suspects, reversing an April ruling by the lower court dismissing charges
against all six.
In June the Serbian Parliament adopted a new Electronic Communication Law,
which permits the creation of a national database of personal email and internet
communication and allows police to view its contents. Serbian and international
media organizations argued that the law is unconstitutional and could jeopardize
the confidentiality of journalists’ sources.
Human Rights Defenders
A June event organized by the Queeria lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
organization to collect 10,000 signatures in support of a Belgrade Pride Parade in
2010 was dispersed after a bomb threat, which proved to be false. The 2009
pride event was cancelled over security concerns.
The interior minister and the human rights minister publicly stated their support
for the Pride Parade, which took place in October. A few hundred LGBT demonstrators
and their supporters marched through the streets of Belgrade, heavily
guarded by police and security forces. Violent counterdemonstrators shouting
homophobic language attacked police and wounded many officers, but failed to
disrupt the parade. The counterdemonstrators also attacked the Democratic Party
headquarters and destroyed many shops and vehicles.
In March the Serbian Ministry of Labor and Social Policy denied the NGO Mental
Disability Rights International–Serbia access to monitor social care institutions
for persons with disabilities, on the grounds that the institutions were too busy
implementing reforms. The group had previously had informal access. The ministry
promised access at a later unspecified time once reforms were implemented,
but at this writing, despite further requests, at this writing the group has yet to
gain access.
Key International Actors
In December 2009 the Council of the EU decided to unfreeze implementation of
the Interim Trade Agreement with Serbia and to lift visa requirements for all
WORLD REPORT 2011
466
Serbian citizens. The Serbian government submitted its formal application for EU
membership the same month. In October the Council asked the European
Commission to begin considering Serbia’s application, despite Belgrade’s failure
to hand over Mladic. In November the European Commission published its annual
progress report on Serbia, highlighting the continued liberty of Mladic and
Hadzic. The report noted the lack of progress on prison reforms and widespread
employment discrimination against women, while marking improvements to
media freedom and progress on domestic war crimes trials.
In July the International Court of Justice issued an advisory opinion in a case
brought by Serbia and stated that Kosovo’s 2008 declaration of independence
did not violate international law. Serbia’s initial response was a draft UN General
Assembly resolution condemning Kosovo’s declaration of independence, but after
significant diplomatic pressure by the EU and the United States, Serbia agreed to
a joint UN General Assembly resolution with the EU calling for negotiations
between Sebia and Kosovo that would allow them to normalize their relations.
The General Assembly unanimously adopted the resolution in September.
Kosovo
Kosovo’s justice system remained weak in 2010, despite efforts to try perpetrators
of war crimes and postwar abuses against minorities. Deportations of
Kosovars from Western Europe continued, with a disproportionate impact on
Kosovo’s most vulnerable minorities: Roma, Askhali and Egyptians, the latter, a
Romani Albanian-speaking group with mythical origins in ancient Egypt. The finding
of the International Court of Justice that Kosovo’s declaration of independence
“did not violate general international law, Security Council resolution 1244 or
[Kosovo’s] Constitutional Framework,” had little discernible impact on human
rights in Kosovo.
Protection of Minorities
Minorities in Kosovo, including Serbs, Roma, and Albanian-speaking Ashkali and
Egyptians, remained at risk of discrimination, marginalization, and harassment.
According to the Kosovo Police Service, 40 inter-ethnic incidents (including four
murders) were reported during the first eight months of 2010: 31 in the divided
467
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
city of Mitrovica, which remains a flashpoint for violence; as well as five in
Pristina, one in Gnjilane, one in Prizren, and one in Pec.
In April ethnic Albanians pelted stones at the tents of Serbian returnees to the village
of Zac, in Istok municipality, and also staged protests against the returnees
following rumors that there were war criminals among them. UNHCR denied these
allegations, and Kosovar and international authorities robustly condemned the
violence. But in August, in the same village, a bulldozer was used to demolish
three houses of Kosovo Serb returnees. The police arrested two Kosovo Albanian
teenagers in the incident, and Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci condemned
the destruction.
In July as Serbs in northern Mitrovica protested the opening of a Pristina government
office, an explosion killed one demonstrator and injured 11. Nobody was
arrested in the immediate aftermath of that attack. Just three days later Petar
Miletic, a Serb member of the Kosovo Assembly, was shot and injured as he left
his home in northern Mitrovica. At this writing the perpetrators remains at large.
In September an ethnic Albanian man was shot dead in an ethnically mixed area
of northern Mitrovica.
The government made limited progress implementing its Roma, Ashkali, and
Egyptian integration strategy. Roma, Ashkali, and Egyptians continue to face persistent
discrimination, particularly in employment and access to public services,
and have the highest unemployment, school dropout, and mortality rates in
Kosovo.
In June, 5,000 people demonstrated in the municipality of Pristina following the
Municipal Assembly’s adoption and implementation of a headscarf ban on both
students and teachers in all public schools.
Return of Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons
Voluntary returns to Kosovo increased, though the overall numbers remain small.
During the first six months of 2010, UNHCR Kosovo registered a total of 1,036 voluntary
minority returns: 417 Serb, 99 Roma, 257 Ashkali/Egyptian, 32 Bosniak,
152 Gorani, and 79 Albanian (to Serbian majority areas, mainly Mitrovica).
WORLD REPORT 2011
468
469
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Meanwhile, deportations of Kosovars from Western Europe continued with little
assistance for returnees once they are in Kosovo. According to UNHCR, 1,694
Kosovars were deported from Western Europe during the first nine months of
2010, including 347 people sent to areas where they were in a minority: 193
Roma, 55 Ashkali, 2 Egyptians, 7 Bosniaks, 25 Gorani, 5 Turks, 29 Albanians, and
1 Serb. Deportations have a particularly adverse effect on Roma, Ashkali and
Egyptians.
The Kosovo authorities signed a bilateral readmission agreement with the government
of Germany in late April 2010. It awarded Kosovo a better visa facilitation
regime in exchange for accepting deportations of all persons originating from
Kosovo. Around 16,000 people are expected to be returned under it, many of
them Roma, Ashkali, and Egyptian. Similar agreements were signed with Albania,
Belgium, France, and Switzerland in late 2009 and 2010.
In October a lead-contaminated Roma, Ashkali, and Egyptian camp in Cesmin Lug
was closed and demolished after a decade. Most of its inhabitants are being
rehoused in reconstructed homes in the original Roma neighborhood (Mahalla) in
South Mitrovica, together with some residents from a second lead-contaminated
camp at Osterode, which remains open at this writing. A group of Cesmin Lug residents
unwilling to return to the Mahalla have been moved to Osterode and are
pending their resettlement elsewhere at this writing. Funding comes from a €5
million European Commission project announced in December 2009, including
medical treatment, education, community safety, and income generation, and a
complementary project funded by the US Agency for International Development.
Impunity, Accountability, and Access to Justice
In July the ICTY Appeals Chamber partially quashed the acquittals of Ramush
Haradinaj, a former commander of the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) and former
Kosovo prime minister; Idriz Balaj, a former member of the KLA in command of a
special unit known as the Black Eagles; and Lahi Brahimaj, who served as a
deputy commander of the KLA in the Dukagjin area of Kosovo. The appeals court
ordered a partial retrial of the case, accepting the prosecution’s contention that
the trial court had failed to take adequate measures to secure the testimony of
WORLD REPORT 2011
470
two crucial witnesses. In September the ICTY denied Haradinaj’s motion for provisional
release, citing the integrity of the trial.
In May the EU Rule of Law and Police Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) announced that
its investigation into the so-called “Yellow House” case, involving the alleged
transfers by the KLA in 1999 of around 400 Serbian and other captives to detention
facilities in Albania, had failed to produce evidence to substantiate allegations
of organ-trading. At this writing the status of the investigation into the other
allegations remains unclear. Investigations into the case by Dick Marty, the rapporteur
of the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly, and the Serbian war
crimes prosecutor continued, but no new facts were made public.
EULEX investigations into separate allegations of abuses in KLA-run camps in
Albania resulted in three arrests. In May EULEX police in Pristina arrested Sabit
Geci for the alleged torture of civilians in a KLA-run camp in the town of Kukes,
northern Albania, in 1999. The same month, EULEX police arrested Zhemsit
Krasniqi in Prizren in connection with crimes against civilians of various ethnicities
in KLA bases in Albania in 1999. The third arrest took place in June in the
municipality of Djakovica. The suspect’s name has not been made public.
In the year prior to September 2010, EULEX completed five war crime cases, with
eight more ongoing and 27 in pretrial stages. EULEX completed eight cases related
to the March 2004 riots during the same period.
The long-running trial of Albin Kurti, a leader of the Vetevendosje movement for
self-determination, concluded in June. A mixed judicial panel including EULEX
and Kosovo judges convicted Kurti of a minor charge and sentenced him to time
served, releasing him immediately. There were credible allegations that the KPS
used excessive force during Kurti’s arrest earlier in June, prompting an investigation
by the Ombudsperson Institution, which remains pending at this writing.
While EULEX took steps to improve collaboration with Kosovo police, judges, and
prosecutors, the justice system continued to be hampered by longstanding problems
including a lack of skill in judicial policing, the assisting of prosecutors in
investigations, and the failure of court staff to systematically use electronic case
management software. Witness protection and security remained serious concerns,
with few Western states consenting to host witnesses (no new states
471
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
agreed to do so during 2010), an inconsistent use of protective measures by the
courts, and the continued lack of a comprehensive witness protection law.
According to the International Committee of the Red Cross, 1,837 persons remain
missing from the 1999 conflict, the majority Kosovo Albanians.
In May EULEX and the Serbian authorities jointly announced the discovery of a
suspected mass grave in southern Serbia believed to contain the remains of as
many as 250 Kosovo Albanians who went missing during the war. In September
the Kosovo authorities began excavating in a coal mine in the Vucitrn municipality,
where the bodies of 20 Kosovo Serbs killed during the 1999 war are believed
to have been buried. At this writing no human remains have been found at either
site.
Media Freedom
In February Vehbi Kajtazi, a journalist for the daily newspaper Koha Ditore, was
allegedly threatened by Sabit Geci, a former KLA member, in response to Kajtazi’s
article criticizing an amnesty for a group of prisoners, including Geci’s son, Alban.
Kajtazi was discouraged by KPS when he tried to file a complaint against Geci.
In July an explosive device was thrown into the courtyard of the home of Caslav
Milisavljevic, editor-in-chief of Radio Kosovska Mitrovica. The device exploded,
damaging three vehicles. Nobody was injured. KPS opened an investigation into
the incident but no perpetrators have been arrested at this writing.
Human Rights Defenders
In late November 2009 the Council of the EU agreed on the EULEX Human Rights
Review Panel (HRRP). The panel reviews complaints of human rights abuse by
EULEX from individuals. In May 2010 three members of HRRP (and one alternate)
were appointed by the acting EULEX head of mission. The first regular session of
HRRP took place in June. At this writing, HRRP had received 16 cases and deemed
12 admissible, including 7 relating to the functioning of the justice system.
The filling of a vacancy in the three-member UN Human Rights Advisory Panel,
which hears similar complaints against UN Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), allowed it
WORLD REPORT 2011
472
to resume functioning. But its effectiveness remained hampered following restrictions
introduced by the UN in October 2009.
There were continued instances of the Kosovo authorities ignoring the interventions
of the Kosovo Ombudsperson Institution, or responding late.
Key International Actors
In May 2010 peacekeepers from NATO-led Kosovo Force intervened in Mitrovica to
assist KPS and EULEX police to quash the week-long civil unrest sparked by
Serbian local elections in North Mitrovica.
An April report to the UN Security Council from Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
warned that deportations to Kosovo undermine the country’s stability. Thomas
Hammarberg, the Council of Europe’s human rights commissioner, made similar
statements and repeatedly called for a moratorium on deportations.
In June the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe released a critical
report emphasizing the need for Kosovar authorities to cooperate with war crime
investigations, combat discrimination and abuse against minorities, create conditions
for the safe return of IDPs and refugees, ensure media freedom, promote
women’s rights, and take urgent steps to close lead-contaminated Roma camps in
North Mitrovica.
In November the European Commission’s annual progress report highlighted the
ongoing weakness of Kosovo’s justice system, inadequate attention to war
crimes; continued threats to independent journalists; slow progress on missing
persons; and widespread discrimination and marginalization of Roma, Ashkali
and Egyptians.
473
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Tajikistan
Despite a few small positive steps, Tajik authorities continue to violate rights
affecting areas ranging from elections and media freedoms to religious liberty
and women’s rights.􀀀
In February 2010 Tajikistan held parliamentary elections that were marked by
fraud, resulting in the ruling party’s victory by an overwhelming margin and the
further strengthening of President Emomali Rahmon’s nearly 20-year rule. The
authorities continued to suppress the press, especially in the run-up to the election.
The government began enforcing a repressive law that tightens state control
over religious activity. Domestic violence against women remains rampant in Tajik
society. The judiciary is neither independent nor effective.
In September 2010, Islamist militants attacked a convoy of government troops in
the Rasht Valley, killing between 25 and 40 soldiers, and scattered clashes continued
through October. The troops had been sent to track down militants who
had escaped from a Dushanbe prison in August and were believed to have fled
into the valley. The violence marks the first major clash in a decade between government
and insurgent forces, giving rise to concerns about creeping instability in
Tajikistan, especially in light of the war in neighboring Afghanistan.
Justice System
A report published in March 2010 by the Bureau on Human Rights and Rule of
Law, a Tajik nongovernmental organization, revealed a judicial system with little
advance notification of hearings, patchy explanations of process and rights, erratic
access to interpreters, and efforts by judges to exclude observers.
The politicization of the Tajik justice system was underscored by the treatment of
Nematillo Botakozuev, a Kyrgyz human rights activist who had sought asylum in
Tajikistan. Botakozuev disappeared in late February 2010; his relatives only
learned one month later that he was in the custody of the Tajik police for allegedly
lacking identification. He was held without access to communications or a
lawyer. When a source known to Human Rights Watch finally saw him in mid-
March, Botakozuev appeared to have been tortured. In May Tajikistan extradited
WORLD REPORT 2011
474
Botakozuev to Kyrgyzstan, where he was held for two weeks, released, and
warned by state security to refrain from human rights work.
Fair Elections
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) monitored the
February 28, 2010, parliamentary election and found it “failed to meet key… international
standards for democratic elections.”
District electoral commissions were often staffed by local officials and members
of the ruling People’s Democratic Party of Tajikistan (PDPT). Registration fees were
onerously high. Free television time was allocated late in the campaign.
In its final report on the election, the OSCE noted credible accounts of violations
of campaign rules by the authorities: “instances [in which] police prevented
activists of the Islamic Revival Party of Tajikistan from campaigning and in some
cases detained them for a short time” and “credible allegations of pressure on
government employees and voters to vote for or facilitate the victory of PDPT candidates.”
On election day OSCE and other observers found widespread proxy voting,
instances of attempts to influence voters, multiple voting, ballot-box stuffing,
and premarked ballots, among other infractions. Furthermore, the OSCE found
that vote-counting procedures “were not properly followed in half of the polling
stations observed.”
Media Freedoms
The press in Tajikistan faced a clampdown in early 2010 in connection first with
the parliamentary elections, and later with the clashes in the Rasht Valley. In
February Reporters Without Borders issued a statement noting “an all-out drive to
intimidate news media and get [independent media outlets] to [self-]censor their
coverage of state authorities.”
While one independent researcher found the government did not formally shut
down any media outlets and even permitted the registration of new ones, debilitating
defamation awards resulting from civil suits brought by government offi-
475
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
cials are threatening the livelihood of independent outlets and seem aimed at
muffling the media.
In late January a Tajik court fined the newspaper Paykon 300,000 somonis
(US$69,000) in a libel suit regarding a report on corruption. The case was
brought by Tajikstandart, the state agency that monitors the quality of imported
goods. At around the same time two Supreme Court judges and one city court
filed libel suits against three independent newsweeklies that ran stories about a
press conference regarding alleged corruption within the Tajik judiciary. 􀀀The
Agriculture Ministry brought a libel suit against the Millat newspaper, in which it
is seeking 1 million somonis ($229,000) in damages.
On October 29, 2010, United States and European ambassadors issued a joint
statement raising concern about the “deteriorating climate for independent
media in Tajikistan.” The statement noted, among other things, that “three newspapers,
Farazh, Paikon, and Nigoh, have been effectively shut down by being
unable to print their papers, reportedly on orders by government officials,” that
senior government officials had made public statements “attacking independent
media outlets,” and that a deputy minister had ordered the blocking of five major
news websites. The websites – Tojnews.tj, Avesta.tj, Tjknews.com, Centrasia.ru,
and Ferghana.ru – were blocked in the wake of the violence in the Rasht Valley.
Freedom of Religion
Hewing to a new religion law adopted in 2009, the state continued its repression
of faith groups. Tajikistan has long curtailed freedom of religion and, under the
pretext of battling terrorism, has banned several peaceful Muslim organizations.
Certain Christian denominations, such as Jehovah’s Witnesses, continue to be
banned in Tajikistan. At this writing the law bans all religious activity by unregistered
religious groups. The government now determines where mosques can be
built and how many, and where Muslim sermons can be given, and it has censorship
authority over religious literature (including material from abroad) and control
over children’s religious education; faith groups in Tajikistan must register
with the state and get government permission to contact foreign religious groups.
WORLD REPORT 2011
476
Underscoring the importance of state control over religious activity, the new law
removed oversight of religious groups from the Ministry of Culture and placed it
with the Committee for Religious Affairs, which reports directly to the president.
The state has relied on investigations, arrests, and convictions to squelch certain
kinds of Muslim religious activity. In January a Dushanbe criminal court convicted
Imam Sirojiddin Abdurahmonov (known as Mullo Sirojiddin), a leader of the
banned Salafi Muslim religious movement, and six other followers. An Islamic
Revival Party leader told Forum 18, an independent religious news service, that
Sirojiddin received a seven-year prison term, and his six co-defendants received
prison terms of up to six years for “arousing national, racial, local or religious
hostility.” In April 2009, about 92 followers of the banned Jamaat Tabligh Islamic
group were arrested. In March 2010, according to Forum 18, a group of 56 of them
were convicted by the Supreme Court and were sentenced on charges of “organisation
of banned extremist religious organizations.” 23 defendants were given
prison terms of between three and six years, and the other 33 defendants were
fined between 25,000 somonis(US$5,340) and 50,000 somonis ($10,680), astronomical
sums for the average Tajik. In May the remaining 36 Jamaat Tabligh
defendants were convicted and received comparable prison and financial penalties.
Rights groups in Tajikistan maintain that Jamaat Tabligh is peaceful and the
ban on it was never published.
In May 2010, criminal investigations by the state secret police against 17
Jehovah’s Witnesses in Khujand were reopened. The group was arrested, interrogated,
and threatened in September 2009, but the cases had been suspended
after the group complained to the prosecutor general.
Women’s Rights
The government took a few small steps forward to protect women from domestic
violence, but overall the rights of women remain precarious. A November 2009
Amnesty International report estimated that one-third to one-half of Tajik women
“may at some time experience physical, psychological or sexual violence at the
hands of husbands or other family members.” The report said that given women’s
severely restricted access to law enforcement and the general practice within the
police to blame the victim and preserve the family, perpetrators can harm women
with near impunity.
477
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Still, in August 2010 five special police stations with staff trained by the OSCE to
deal specifically with domestic violence were opened in Dushanbe, the capital,
and other cities. The stations are the only ones of their kind in Central Asia,
according to the OSCE, which urged the Tajik government to pass a law on domestic
violence that has been pending since 2007. In August officials at a governmental
research center said that preliminary results of their research show an increase
in polygamy, although the practice is technically illegal, and that at least 10 percent
of Tajik men have more than one wife.
In June 2010 President Rahmon signed a law that would raise the age of marriage
for girls from 17 to 18 and would also require children to attend school for a minimum
of 11 years, starting at age 7.
Key International Actors
The European Union upgraded relations with Tajikistan in early 2010 by concluding
a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement. The EU describes the agreement
as “enhanc[ing] bilateral relations and heighten[ing] the EU profile in Tajikistan.”
Its stated aim is also to “promote bilateral trade and investments.” Meanwhile,
the EU’s record in speaking out about abuses remained poor. Human rights concerns
appeared to be largely relegated to once-yearly human rights dialogues,
held at a relatively low level, with an obscure content and outcome.
In a January report on Tajikistan, the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child
(CRC) commended the country on passing several important laws over the years
to protect children. But the report went on to document that, in reality, children
lack safeguards against abuse and neglect in almost every sphere of their lives.
The UN CRC recommended that Tajikistan do more to protect children from institutionalization,
violence, and child labor. It urged the state to take more serious
action against polygamy, and to do more in general to protect women, girls, and
children with disabilities.
WORLD REPORT 2011
478
Turkey
Turkey’s human rights record remained mixed in 2010. Arbitrary detentions, prosecutions,
and convictions under terrorism laws and for speech crimes persisted,
while the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) partially amended the constitution.
In September voters approved by referendum significant amendments to the 1982
constitution, including lifting immunity from prosecution for military and public
officials for crimes committed during and after the September 12, 1980 coup, a
reduced role for military courts, changes to judicial appointments, the right of
individual petition to the constitutional court, and the creation of a new
ombudsperson institution. The amendments open the way for further reform. The
need for complete revision of the 1982 constitution to further human rights has
been a recurring political discussion since the 2007 general election.
The government made little concrete progress towards realizing its 2009 plan to
improve the human rights of Kurds in Turkey. The Constitutional Court in
December 2009 closed down the pro-Kurdish Democratic Society Party (DTP) for
alleged separatist activities, and hundreds of officials from the DTP and its successor,
the Peace and Democracy Party (BDP), faced trial for membership of the
Union of Kurdistan Communities, a body connected with the armed Kurdistan
Workers’ Party (PKK).
There is increasing agreement across the political spectrum on the need for a
rights-based and non-military approach to ending the conflict with the PKK.
Armed clashes between the Turkish military and the PKK continued. Disagreement
erupted over whether the September attack on a minibus in Hakkari province,
which killed nine civilians, was staged by the PKK, or by elements of the security
forces. The PKK was suspected of the August and September killings of two
imams in Hakkari and Sırnak.
In July workplaces and property belonging to Kurds in 􀀀negol, Bursa province, and
in Dörtyol, Hatay province, were attacked. Following police investigations into the
incidents–resembling similar ethnically-motivated attacks in recent years–four
479
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
people were tried for the Dortyol attacks and 21 are imprisoned pending trial for
the Inegol attacks at this writing.
Freedom of Expression, Assembly, and Association
Despite a climate of increasingly open debate, individuals continued to be prosecuted
and convicted for non-violent speeches, writings, and participating in
demonstrations. The practice of holding suspects charged with non-violent crimes
in prolonged pre-trial detention continued.
Journalists and editors remained targets for prosecution. Legitimate news reporting
on trials was deemed “attempting to influence a judicial process,” reporting
on criminal investigations was judged as “violating the secrecy of a criminal
investigation,” and news reports on the PKK was deemed “terrorist propaganda.”
Some editors and journalists faced scores of ongoing legal proceedings in 2010.
The case of Vedat Kursun stands out among those convicted in 2010. The editor
of Kurdish daily Azadiya Welat, Kursun received a 166-year prison sentence in May
for 103 counts of “terrorist propaganda” and “membership” in the PKK. At this
writing he remained in prison pending an appeal.
Long-term restrictions on access to websites, including YouTube, continued.
Leftist and pro-Kurdish political newspapers and journals were subject to arbitrary
closure. In 2010 the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) condemned
Turkey twice for using its Anti-Terror Law to ban publication of entire periodicals,
saying the move was censorship that violated free expression. The court found
Turkey had violated free expression in at least 10 other rulings in 2010.
Courts continued to use terrorism laws to prosecute hundreds of demonstrators
deemed to be PKK supporters as if they were the group’s armed militants. Most
spent prolonged periods in pre-trial detention, and those convicted received long
prison sentences. A legal amendment by parliament in July will mean that convictions
of children under the laws will be quashed. The laws remain otherwise
unchanged.
Hundreds of officials and activist members of the pro-Kurdish party DTP and its
successor BDP (which has 20 parliamentary members) were prosecuted during
WORLD REPORT 2011
480
the year, including for links to the Union of Kurdistan Communities (KCK/TM), a
body associated with the PKK’s leadership.
In October seven mayors, several lawyers, and a human rights defender (see
below) were among 151 officials and activists tried in Diyarbakir for alleged separatism
and KCK membership. At this writing the mayors have spent 10 months -
–and the 53 other defendants have spent 18 months–in pre-trial detention, while
around 1,000 DTP/BDP officials and members suspected of KCK affiliation were in
pre-trial detention nationwide, raising concerns about the right to political participation.
Human Rights Defenders
The ECtHR ruled in September that Turkey had failed to protect the life of Hrant
Dink, a Turkish-Armenian journalist and human rights defender, or to conduct an
effective investigation into his January 2007 murder. The three-year murder trial of
the alleged killer and 19 others continued in Turkey. The ECtHR also found that
Dink’s conviction for “insulting Turkishness” violated his right to free expression.
Muharrem Erbey, vice-president of the Human Rights Association (HRA) and chair
of its Diyarbakir branch, was arrested in December 2009 for alleged KCK/TM
membership and held in detention until his trial in October. He remains in detention
at this writing. Vetha Aydin, chair of HRA’s Siirt branch, was arrested in March
for alleged KCK membership. She remained in pre-trial detention at this writing.
Torture, Ill-Treatment, and Use of Lethal Force by Security
Forces
Police ill-treatment remained a problem, particularly during street stops, demonstrations,
and arrests. Torture and ill-treatment in detention was less common,
but at this writing there are at least four cases of deaths in custody in disputed
circumstances in 2010.
In May police beat five transgender members of Ankara-based NGO Pembe Hayat
(Pink Life Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and Transsexual Solidarity
Association) in the street in front of witnesses before detaining them. Following a
481
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
familiar pattern, the five were promptly charged with resisting police before the
prosecutor had concluded an investigation into their ill-treatment, which remains
ongoing at this writing. They were acquitted at their October trial. Use of firearms
by police and the gendarmerie remained a matter of concern, particularly against
unarmed suspects. There was no progress on tightening rules governing use of
force. Gendarmes shot dead at least nine suspected smugglers in the border
regions of Van, Sırnak, and Urfa during the year.
Impunity
Several of the constitutional changes made in September have implications for
ending impunity. Restricting the jurisdiction of military courts is an important step
towards ensuring that trials of military personnel for human rights abuses take
place in civilian courts. The repeal of a provision in the constitution granting
immunity from prosecution to military and public officials for crimes committed
during and after the 1980 military coup is significant, although jurists debate
whether existing statutes of limitations for torture and murder will impede prosecution.
In a landmark ruling on June 19 prison guards, gendarmes, police officers, and a
doctor were convicted in connection with the October 2008 beating to death of
Engin Çeber, and the torture of three other political activists arrested with him in
Istanbul. Nine guards, including a senior prison official, and police officers
received sentences ranging from two-and-a-half years to life imprisonment.
The verdict in the Çeber case remains an exception and impunity remains a formidable
problem in Turkey. In general, prosecutors failed to conduct effective, timely,
and independent investigations of allegations against the police and gendarmerie,
and prosecutions against state officials remained protracted. Two
police officers who severely beat lawyer Muammer Öz in Istanbul in July 2007
were given suspended sentences in January 2010, effectively escaping sanction.
Three trials of alleged anti-government coup plotters (the “Ergenekon” gang, comprising
senior retired military, police, mafia, journalists, and academics) continued.
In related prosecutions, 69 naval officers faced trial for plotting a 2008 campaign
of violent attacks aimed at destabilizing the government, and 196 retired
WORLD REPORT 2011
482
and serving military personnel were due to stand trial starting in December 2010
for a 2003 coup plot. Willingness to pursue these cases offers potential for wider
efforts to end impunity.
The most significant attempt at bringing to justice state perpetrators of extrajudicial
killings and “disappearances” continued with the ongoing trial in Diyarbakır
of a now-retired colonel, village guards, and informers for the murder of 20 individuals
between 1993 and 1995 in Cizre, Sırnak province.
Key International Actors
Despite concerns about Turkey “turning east,” European Union membership and
maintaining good relations with the United States and other traditional allies
remain stated priorities for the government.
The US failed in 2010 to build on the momentum of President Barack Obama’s
2009 visit, focusing on Turkey’s foreign policy in the Middle East and Armenia
rather than its domestic human rights record.
The EU praised the constitutional reforms, and remains an influential actor in
Turkey. But the stalemate over Cyprus stalled Turkey’s accession negotiations in
many areas, and leading member states such as France and Germany continued
to oppose Turkey’s membership bid. The European Commission’s November
progress report on Turkey concluded that reforms made that year were “of limited
scope,” called for the wholesale revision of the constitution, and raised concerns
about freedom of expression, long pre-trial detention, gender equality, and use of
anti-terror laws.
In its July review of Turkey, the UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women (CEDAW) recommended that Turkey “continue to accord priority
attention to the adoption of comprehensive measures to address violence against
women.”
Following its Universal Periodic Review by the UN Human Rights Council in May,
Turkey argued that it was already implementing many of the recommendations
made, but notably refused those that would bring its definition of minorities in
483
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
line with international law, or to wave its reservations to international law that
upholds minority rights.
WORLD REPORT 2011
484
Turkmenistan
In 2010 the Turkmenistan government continued a return to the repressive methods
of a previous era. President Gurbanguly Berdymukhamedov has ruled
Turkmenistan for nearly four years, since the 2006 death of dictator Saparmurad
Niazov. During his first two years in office, Berdymukhamedov began to reverse
some of Niazov’s most ruinous social policies. But then his course appeared to
reverse. The government increasingly repressed NGOs and Turkmen activists, and
prevented citizens from leaving the country; indeed freedom of movement sharply
declined in 2009 and 2010. Instead of continuing needed reforms in education in
2010, the government introduced burdensome requirements for students seeking
to travel abroad for university, and allowed “Ruhnama” (The Book of the Soul),
Niazov’s propaganda book, to remain a subject in university entrance exams.
Instead of expanding access to the internet and other media, the government
blocked websites and banned the import of some printed materials. Prisons
remained closed to the outside for observation. Turkmenistan continued to
expand relations with foreign governments and international organizations, but
with no meaningful outcomes for human rights.
Civil Society
The repressive atmosphere makes it extremely difficult for independent NGOs to
operate. Almost no organizations have applied for registration in recent years.
On September 30, 2010, Berdymukhamedov instructed the Ministry of National
Security to lead an “uncompromising fight against those who slander our democratic…
secular state.” His speech came the day after a satellite channel broadcast
an interview with exiled Turkmen activist Farid Tukhbatullin, chair of the
Vienna-based Turkmen Initiative for Human Rights (TIHR). In subsequent days
hackers disabled the website of the TIHR, and there were credible threats that the
Turkmen security services planned to physically harm Tukhbatullin.
In June 2010, the authorities in Turkmenistan began questioning the former classmates
and teachers of Tukhbatullin’s sons. At least three were threatened with
treason charges if they maintained ties with the family.
485
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
In December 2009 Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF) decided to close its
Turkmenistan office after the Turkmen authorities repeatedly rejected project proposals,
making it impossible for the organization to carry out its work in the country.
MSF was the last remaining international humanitarian organization operating
in Turkmenistan.
Within Turkmenistan, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
(OSCE) and the United Nations can carry out seminars and offer technical assistance,
but little more.
In 2010, for the third year in a row, the Turkmen delegation tried to bar exiled
Turkmen activists from registering for the OSCE human dimension review conference
and walked out when the activists were admitted to the conference.
Media Freedoms
There continues to be a complete absence of media freedoms. Almost all print
and electronic media are controlled by the state. Reporters from foreign media
outlets often cannot access the country and, in recent years, local stringers for
foreign outlets have been beaten, harassed, and otherwise intimidated.
Many websites are blocked, internet cafes require visitors to present their passports,
and the government monitors electronic communications.
It is extremely difficult to obtain foreign newspapers and magazines with any
political content. Border guards are known to confiscate foreign printed materials.
In August 2010 Berdymukhamedov stated that there were enough publications
issued in Turkmenistan to “satisfy domestic demand,” so “there is no need to
import any,” indicating that access to foreign publications would remain limited.
Freedom of Movement
Turkmen authorities arbitrarily interfere with people’s right to travel abroad
through an informal and arbitrary system of travel bans, commonly imposed on
activists and relatives of exiled dissidents.
WORLD REPORT 2011
486
On July 16, 2010, Turkmen border officials stopped Umida Jumbaeva, an activist,
from leaving the country for Kazakhstan. Jumbaeva had helped environmental
activist Andrei Zatoka in 2009, when he was arrested on false charges, given an
unfair trial, and expelled from Turkmenistan. On June 28, Turkmen authorities
barred civic activists Annamamed and Elena Miatiev from traveling abroad for
medical treatment. Following an international outcry the couple was allowed to
depart on July 10.
For years Radio Liberty stringer Gurbansoltan Achilova and her family endured
various forms of harassment by the authorities and were barred from foreign travel.
Her son Mukhammetmyrat, who had repeatedly been denied permission to
travel abroad, committed suicide on June 12, 2010. One month later the family
received a letter from the Turkmen migration services granting him permission to
travel.
In 2009, the authorities prevented hundreds of students bound for foreign private
universities from leaving the country, and introduced new, burdensome requirements
for studying abroad. By August 2010, many of the students were able to
depart, except those pursuing their studies at the American University of Central
Asia in Kyrgyzstan (AUCA). Throughout 2010 the Ministry of Education, the border
services, and the migration service failed explain why students could not leave
for study at AUCA; to written requests for information, students received a standard
reply of “request declined.” By September 2010 the government banned
people from leaving the country if they had valid Kyrgyz visas in their passports.
In July 2010 the Turkmen government barred Turkmen citizens who also held
Russian passports from traveling to Russia unless they had Russian visas.
Turkmenistan abrogated its dual citizenship treaty with Russia in 2003, but had
allowed holders of Russian passports to use them for travel to Russia unitl July
2010.
Political Prisoners and the Penitentiary System
As in previous years, in 2010 it was difficult to determine the number of political
prisoners because of the wall of secrecy that surrounds their detention. Wellknown
political prisoners include Annakurban Amanklychev and Sapardurdy
487
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Khajiev, who worked with human rights organizations, and political dissident
Gulgeldy Annaniazov.
A report published jointly in February 2010 by two independent human rights
groups in exile highlighted serious problems in Turkmenistan’s prison system,
including overcrowding, degrading treatment of inmates, corruption, and lack of
public oversight. In an unprecedented move, Berdymukhamedov responded to
the report by acknowledging problems and promising reform. But amendments
subsequently made to the criminal code did not address the report’s main concerns.
No international agency—governmental or non-governmental—has access
to monitor Turkmen detention facilities.
Interference with Family Life
Turkmenistan has an unwritten policy against registering marriages of foreign
nationals, which, combined with the difficulty of obtaining Turkmen visas, separates
families. In April 2010, the authorities expelled to Uzbekistan approximately
30 female Uzbek nationals married to Turkmen men, along with their young children,
who were born and raised in Turkmenistan.
In October 2009 a group of 500 ethnic Turkmen from Iran issued a statement
against the separation of families of mixed Turkmen-Iranian families. The Iranian
nationals said that Turkmen authorities refused to issue long-term visas to non-
Turkmen family members.
Freedom of Religion
The government’s undeclared campaign against terrorism has involved a crackdown
on Muslims branded “Wahhabi,”a term the Turkmen government uses to
defame followers of a more austere form of Islam and imply their association with
terrorism. For example, in June a mullah in Dashagouz province received a threeyear
prison sentence after security services searched his home and found a fake
grenade, which inexplicably vanished from the case materials. Police officers
compelled all of the mullah’s followers to shave their beards.
WORLD REPORT 2011
488
In April 2010 an Islamic cleric, Shiri Geldimuradov, was arrested with three of his
sons, and all four were convicted on weapons possession charges.
Geldimuradov’s other four sons are also in prison on unknown charges. In June
Geldimuradov died in prison.
The authorities raid sites of worship of unregistered religious groups. Forum 18,
an independent, international religious freedom group, reported a raid on a
Baptist congregation in Dashagouz in December 2009. Officials confiscated religious
books, and congregants were questioned and pressured to sign statements
promising to desist from worshipping with the congregation in the future. In June
2010 the authorities again pressured several members of that church to sign similar
statements.
On October 21, 2010, a court sentenced Ilmurad Nurliev, head of the Light to the
World Pentecostal Church, to four years in prison on what appear to be bogus
swindling charges. The prosecution argued that Nurliev had swindled four people
who visited a shelter run by the church, even though one of the alleged victims
was in prison for much of the time the swindling allegedly took place, and two did
not testify in court. The trial judge refused to allow all but three church members
to testify for the defense, and the court failed to provide the defense with the
written verdict in time to appeal. Light to the World worship services were raided
in 2008, and Nuraliev and congregants have endured harassment by government
agencies in recent years.
On June 20 the security services detained a group of 47 Protestants who had
gathered in Geoktepe for two days of prayer and Bible study. The group was held
overnight in a police station, questioned, and released.
The Turkmen government continues to imprison Jehovah’s Witnesses for refusing
compulsory military service on grounds of religious conscience, and at this writing
holds at least eight in custody.
Key International Actors
Seeking to leverage Turkmenistan’s energy wealth and strategic importance, several
key international actors continued to mute criticism of the government’s
human rights record. The European Union in particular stood out for its failure to
489
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
use the prospect of enhanced relations to advance concrete human rights
improvements, pressing forward with a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement
(PCA), frozen since 1998 over human rights concerns, without requiring any
human rights reforms in exchange. At this writing, the PCA was pending approval
by the European Parliament. An initial draft opinion green-lighting the agreement
stirred significant controversy.
The PCA also requires ratification by two national EU member state parliaments—
France and the United Kingdom—before it can enter into force. In a welcome
move, the French parliament’s Foreign Affairs Committee in April 2010 adopted a
resolution requesting the government to refrain from submitting the agreement
for ratification until it had secured certain human rights improvements, including
the release of political prisoners Amanklychev and Khajiev.
During his early April visit to Turkmenistan, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
was uncharacteristically outspoken about human rights concerns, highlighting in
particular the need to allow access to the country for UN special rapporteurs and
address prison conditions.
In a new country strategy for Turkmenistan, adopted in April, the European Bank
for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) revised its policy of no public sector
investment by reserving the right to increase its engagement with Turkmenistan.
In a welcome move, the EBRD set specific human rights benchmarks for the government
to fulfill, and made clear the bank’s level of engagement would depend
on Turkmenistan’s progress in meeting them.
WORLD REPORT 2011
490
Ukraine
The February 2010 presidential election ended the political turmoil that has characterized
Ukraine in recent years. Viktor Yanukovich won the election over incumbent
Viktor Yushschenko in a contest that international observers declared generally
in accordance with international standards. Upon taking office President
Yanukovich initiated far-reaching reforms, drawing criticism for pushing through
changes without respecting democratic procedures or engaging the opposition.
Ukraine’s relationship with Russia improved significantly in 2010. Russian
President Dmitry Medvedev, who had clashed frequently with Yushschenko,
voiced hope that the “black page” in relations between Russia and Ukraine following
the Orange Revolution of 2005 would be turned. Yanukovich, widely-seen
as pro-Russian, visited Moscow in March and agreed to extend the lease on
Russia’s Black Sea fleet in the Crimea for another 25 years. Medvedev reciprocated
by discounting gas prices to Ukraine.
The human rights situation in Ukraine remains marred by racial profiling; attacks
against foreigners with non-Slavic appearances; government-imposed restrictions
on freedoms of media; and migration issues including access to asylum, detention
conditions, and protection of vulnerable groups.
Migration and Asylum
The European Union-Ukraine readmission agreement that provides for the return
of third-country nationals who enter the EU from Ukraine came into force in
January 2010, but implementing protocols has not yet gone into effect at this writing.
A stalemate between the executive and legislature in 2009 led to a year-long
breakdown in the Ukrainian asylum system until the authority of the State
National Committee on Nationalities and Religions to grant asylum was restored
in August 2010. Asylum seekers with pending cases, or those in the process of
appealing refugee status rejections, remain vulnerable to arbitrary detention,
police harassment, and extortion.
491
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
WORLD REPORT 2011
492
Applying for asylum is riddled with obstacles, including lack of access to lawyers
in detention, and failure by detaining authorities to transmit asylum applications
to regional migration services. Ukraine’s asylum system continues to lack complementary
forms of protection. There are only two known cases of refugee status
granted to Somalis and only one known case of an unaccompanied child receiving
refugee status. Unaccompanied children lack protection, access to state
accommodation, and are often detained. Failure to appoint legal representatives
in some regions leads to unaccompanied children being barred from entering asylum
procedures and forces them to remain undocumented.
A Human Rights Watch fact-finding mission in June 2010 revealed many migrants
and asylum seekers apprehended in the border region between Ukraine,
Slovakia, and Hungary—or returned from these neighboring EU countries—suffer
ill-treatment. In some cases, this includes torture with electric shocks, while in
the custody of Ukraine’s State Border Guard Service and during interrogations
about smugglers’ networks.
Judicial Reform
President Yanukovich pledged to undertake judicial reform in compliance with
European standards and in close consultation with relevant Council of Europe
bodies, particularly the European Commission for Democracy through Law (Venice
Commission). However, judicial reform, a central element of Ukraine’s commitment
to the Council of Europe, is being conducted hastily and without apparent
consideration of the commission’s opinions and recommendations. Authorities
submitted the controversial draft law “On the Judicial System and the Status of
Judges” for Venice Commission review in March 2010. The Venice Commission
and the Directorate General of Human Rights and Legal Affairs of the Council of
Europe recommended substantial changes to the draft law, some of which require
constitutional reform. In July 2010 the government signed the bill into law without
implementing the Council of Europe’s recommendations. The law significantly
reduces the power of the Supreme Court and increases the authority of the High
Council of Justice, a body criticized for lacking independence. In July 2010
Yanukovich appointed Valery Khoroshkovsky—head of the Security Service of
Ukraine (SBU), media owner, and the president’s close ally—to the High Council
of Justice.
493
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Hate Crimes and Discrimination
Racial profiling, non-violent harassment by police, and hate crimes against persons
of non-Slavic appearance and ethnic and religious minorities continue to be
a serious concern. The authorities’ commitment to combating hate crimes weakened
significantly in 2010. The Ministry of Interior Human Rights Monitoring
Department, created in 2008 with a mandate to counter racism and xenophobia,
was dissolved in June 2010. In August 2010 the same ministry disbanded its hate
crimes investigations unit. The government does not gather or publish data on
hate crimes. Ukrainian law provides for sentencing enhancements for violent
crimes where racial, national, ethnic, or religious hatred is an aggravating circumstance,
but this provision is generally not applied by judges due to lack of judicial
training on hate crimes.
Crimean Tatars continue to face discrimination and problems with integrating into
society, including lack of education in their native language.
Civil Society
Despite Yanukovich’s vows to protect freedom and media pluralism, numerous
newspapers and independent journalists reported increased pressure by law
enforcement agencies and some television stations alleged censorship. 2010 also
saw increased pressure and attacks on human rights activists.
In August 2010 Vasyl Klymentyev, editor-in-chief of the Kharkiv-based Noviy Stil
newspaper known for its critical coverage of the authorities, went missing.
Klementyev investigated several high-profile corruption cases involving local officials.
Before disappearing, Klymentyev received threats and bribes not to release
certain materials, increasing concerns that his disappearance is tied to his work.
A national investigation into his disappearance has produced no results at this
writing. The case echoes that of Georgy Gongadze, an online journalist who had
reported on high-level corruption and was killed in 2000. On September 16, 2010,
10 years after his decapitated body was found, the Prosecutor General’s office
issued a statement identifying the late interior minister, Yuri Kravchenko, as the
mastermind behind Gongadze’s murder.
WORLD REPORT 2011
494
In May 2010 Ukrainian disability-rights activist Andrey Fedosov, who was documenting
poor living conditions at several governmental psychiatric institutions in
the Crimea region, was hospitalized after an attack by unknown assailants. He
had previously received anonymous threats not to publicize his findings. In
October Fedosov was informed by the Ministry of Internal Affairs that an inspection
was underway into his organization’s economic affairs.
On October 15, police searched the office of the Vinnytsya Human Rights Group
under the pretext of investigating pornography distribution by the group’s coordinator,
prominent human rights activist Dmytro Groisman. Police, who did not
have a warrant, seized the office’s computers and confidential materials related
to current refugee cases and two pending cases at the European Court of Human
Rights. At this writing, no one has been charged in connection with the alleged
investigation and the group’s materials and equipment has not been returned.
Health Issues and HIV/AIDS Therapy
Ukraine continued to expand provision of antiretroviral therapy for people living
with HIV/AIDS. As of January 2010, 15,871 people were receiving medication. It
also expanded the number of people with opioid drug dependence receiving
mediation-assisted treatment (MAT) with methadone and buprenorphine, from
none in 2004 to about 5,550 in 2010.
However, an increasing number of attacks by law enforcement agencies on drug
treatment clinics called into question the new government’s commitment to the
HIV response.
Police have raided drug treatment clinics; interrogated, fingerprinted, and photographed
patients; confiscated medical records and medications; and detained
medical personnel in cities nationwide. Many raids appear to have been conducted
without probable cause and in violation of Ukraine’s rules for police operations.
The raids resulted in disrupted treatment, and two doctors face drug trafficking
charges punishable by up to 10 years in prison.
Accessibility to palliative care continued to be limited, resulting in tens of thousands
of patients suffering unnecessarily. Human Rights Watch research found
that Ukraine’s narcotics regulations severely limit the availability and accessibility
495
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
of morphine, essential for treating severe pain, and that most healthcare workers
are not properly trained in internationally accepted pain treatment best practices.
Key International Actors
In 2010 the EU and Ukraine continued to seek a closer relationship on economic,
trade, and energy issues. President of the European Commission José Manuel
Durão Barroso and Yanukovich met in Brussels in September to discuss establishing
a visa-free regime between Ukraine and the EU, the vital role of media, and an
independent judiciary for Ukrainian democratic development.
After a June 2010 fact-finding mission to Ukraine, the Monitoring Committee of
the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly (PACE) commented on the
increased allegations of state pressure on freedom of assembly and media. In his
September visit PACE President Mevlüt Çavusoglu raised issues of media freedom,
minority rights, integration of Crimean Tartars, and the integration of
Ukraine in the EU. He called on Ukrainian authorities to seek the opinion of the
Venice Commission before adopting new legislation to ensure compliance with
international standards.
During the second session of the United States-Ukraine Strategic Partnership
Commission in July 2010, the sides agreed to establish working groups on nuclear
power cooperation, political dialogue and the rule of law. US Secretary of State
Hillary Clinton met civil society and independent media leaders to discuss safeguarding
media independence and strengthening civil society in Ukraine.
The UN Committee on Elimination of Discrimination against Women reviewed
Ukraine during its January 2010 session and concluded that gender inequality
and women’s rights violations in Ukraine continue. The committee criticized the
Ukrainian government for not sufficiently addressing the roots of trafficking in
women and girls in the country, and the lack of resources allocated to combating
the problem.
WORLD REPORT 2011
496
Uzbekistan
Uzbekistan’s human rights record remains abysmal, with no substantive improvement
in 2010. Authorities continue to crackdown on civil society activists, opposition
members, and independent journalists, and to persecute religious believers
who worship outside strict state controls. Freedom of expression remains severely
limited. Government-initiated forced child labor during the cotton harvest continues.
The judiciary lacks independence, and the parliament is too weak to curtail the
reach of executive power. In 2010 authorities continued to ignore calls for an
independent investigation into the 2005 Andijan massacre, when authorities shot
and killed hundreds of mostly unarmed protestors. Authorities also harassed families
of Andijan refugees and in April imprisoned a woman who returned to
Uzbekistan four-and-a-half years after fleeing.
While Uzbekistan received praise for cooperating with international actors after
the June 2010 ethnic violence in Southern Kyrgyzstan caused nearly 100,000 ethnic
Uzbek refugees to flee to Uzbekistan, genuine engagement on human rights
remained absent.
Human Rights Defenders and Independent Journalists
Uzbek authorities regularly threaten, imprison, and torture human rights defenders
and other peaceful civil society activists. In 2010 the government further
restricted freedom of speech and increased use of spurious civil suits and criminal
charges to silence perceived government critics.
The Uzbek government has at least 14 human rights defenders in prison, and has
brought criminal charges against another, because of their legitimate human
rights work. Other activists, such as dissident poet Yusuf Jumaev, remain jailed on
politically-motivated charges.
In January 2010 Gaibullo Jalilov, a Karshi-based member of the Human Rights
Society of Uzbekistan, was sentenced to nine years in prison on charges of anticonstitutional
activity and disseminating religious extremist materials. In August
497
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
new charges were brought against him, and he was sentenced to two years, one
month, and five days in prison after a seriously flawed trial.
Members of the Human Rights Alliance were regularly persecuted and subjected
to arbitrary detention and de facto house arrest for their activism in 2010. On
February 23 two men brutally assaulted Alliance member Dmitrii Tikhonov, leaving
him unconscious after choking and hitting him over the head with a metal object.
On September 16 Alliance member Anatolii Volkov was convicted on fraud
charges after an investigation and trial marred by due process violations. He was
ultimately amnestied. Another Alliance member, Tatyana Dovlatova, faces
trumped-up charges of hooliganism.
On February 10 photographer and videographer Umida Ahmedova was convicted
of defamation and insulting the Uzbek people for publishing a book of photographs
in 2007 and producing a documentary film in 2008 that reflect everyday
life and traditions in Uzbekistan, with a focus on gender inequality. Ahmedova
was amnestied in the courtroom.
In October Vladimir Berezovskii, a veteran journalist and editor of the Vesti.uz
website, was convicted of similar charges based on conclusions issued by the
State Press and Information Agency stating that articles on the website were
defamatory and “could incite inter-ethnic and inter-state hostility and create
panic among the population.”
On October 15 Voice of America correspondent Abdumalik Boboev was convicted
of defamation, insult, and preparation or dissemination of materials that threaten
public security. A substantial fine was imposed.
The Andijan Massacre
The government continues to refuse to investigate the 2005 massacre of hundreds
of citizens in Andijan or to prosecute those responsible. Authorities continue
to persecute anyone they suspect of having participated in or witnessed the
atrocities. On April 30 Diloram Abdukodirova, an Andijan refugee who returned to
Uzbekistan in January 2010, was sentenced to 10 years and two months in prison
for illegal border crossing and anti-constitutional activity despite assurances to
WORLD REPORT 2011
498
her family she would not be harmed if she returned. Abdukodirova appeared at
one court hearing with facial bruising, indicating possible ill-treatment in custody.
The Uzbek government also continues to intimidate and harass families of
Andijan survivors who have sought refuge abroad. Police subject them to constant
surveillance, call them for questioning, and threaten them with criminal
charges or home confiscation. School officials publicly humiliate refugees’ children.
Criminal Justice, Torture, and Ill-Treatment
Torture remains rampant in Uzbekistan. Detainees’ rights are violated at each
stage of investigations and trials, despite habeas corpus amendments that went
into effect in 2008. The Uzbek government has failed to meaningfully implement
recommendations to combat torture that the United Nations special rapporteur
made in 2003.
Suspects are not permitted access to lawyers, a critical safeguard against torture
in pre-trial detention. Police use torture and other illegal means to coerce statements
and confessions from detainees. Authorities routinely refuse to investigate
defendants’ allegations of abuse.
In June Yusuf Jumaev, serving a five-year prison sentence since 2008, was put in a
cell with men who regularly beat him. During a harsh beating on June 12 he was
kicked in the chest and head, causing his ear to bleed. Prison authorities ignored
Jumaev’s repeated requests to transfer cells.
On July 20, 37-year-old Shavkat Alimhodjaev, imprisoned for religious offenses,
died in custody. The official cause of death was anemia, but Alimhodjaev had no
known history of the disease. According to family, Alimhodjaev’s face bore possible
marks of ill-treatment, including a swollen eye. Authorities returned his body
to his family’s home at night. They insisted he be buried before sunrise and
remained present until the burial. Authorities have not begun investigating the
death.
499
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Freedom of Religion
Although Uzbekistan’s constitution ensures freedom of religion, Uzbek authorities
continued their unrelenting, multi-year campaign of arbitrary detention,
arrest, and torture of Muslims who practice their faith outside state controls or
belong to unregistered religious organizations. Over 100 were arrested or convicted
in 2010 on charges related to religious extremism.
Continuing a trend that began in 2008, followers of the late Turkish Muslim theologian
Said Nursi were harassed and prosecuted for religious extremism, leading
to prison sentences or fines. Dozens of Nursi followers were arrested or imprisoned
in 2010 in Bukhara, Ferghana, and Tashkent: at least 29 were convicted
between May and August alone.
Christians and members of other minority religions holding peaceful religious
activities also faced short-term prison sentences and fines for administrative
offenses such as violating the law on religious organizations and illegal religious
teaching. According to Forum 18, at least five members of Christian minority
groups are serving long prison sentences, including Tohar Haydarov, a Baptist
who received a 10-year sentence in March 2010 for drug-related charges that his
supporters say were fabricated in retaliation for his religious activity.
Authorities continue to extend sentences of religious prisoners for alleged violations
of prison regulations or on new criminal charges. Such extensions occur
without due process and can add years to a prisoner’s sentence.
Child Labor
Forced child labor in cotton fields remains a serious concern. The government
took no meaningful steps to implement the two International Labour Organization
(ILO) conventions on child labor, which Uzbekistan ratified in March 2008.
The government continues to force hundreds of thousands of schoolchildren,
some of them as young as ten, to help with the cotton harvest for two months a
year. They live in filthy conditions, contract illnesses, miss school, and work daily
from early morning until evening for little or no money. Hunger, exhaustion, and
heat stroke are common.
WORLD REPORT 2011
500
Human Rights Watch is aware of several instances when local authorities
harassed and threatened activists who tried to document forced child labor.
Key International Actors
The Uzbek government’s cooperation with international institutions remains poor.
It continues to deny access to all eight UN special procedures that have requested
invitations, including those on torture and human rights defenders, and
blocks the ILO from sending independent observers to monitor Uzbekistan’s compliance
with the prohibition of forced child labor in the cotton industry.
A March 2010 review by the UN Human Rights Committee resulted in a highly critical
assessment and calls for the government to guarantee journalists and human
rights defenders in Uzbekistan “the right to freedom of expression in the conduct
of their activities,” and to address lack of accountability for the Andijan massacre
and persisting torture and ill-treatment of detainees.
During a visit to Tashkent in April, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon urged the
Uzbek government to “deliver” on its international human rights commitments.
The European Union’s position on human rights in Uzbekistan remained disappointingly
weak, with virtually no public expressions of concern about
Uzbekistan’s deteriorating record. The annual human rights dialogue between the
EU and Uzbekistan, held in May, again yielded no known results and appeared to
have no bearing on the broader relationship. In October the EU Foreign Affairs
Council reviewed Uzbekistan’s progress in meeting human rights criteria the EU
has set for it, noting “lack of substantial progress” on areas the council had outlined
the previous year when remaining sanctions imposed after the Andijan massacre
were lifted. The council reiterated calls for the Uzbek government to take
steps to improve its record, including releasing all jailed human rights defenders,
allowing NGOs to operate freely, and cooperating with UN special rapporteurs.
However, it again stopped short of articulating any policy consequences for continued
non-compliance.
The United States maintains a congressionally-mandated visa ban against Uzbek
officials linked to serious human rights abuses. However, its relationship with
Uzbekistan is increasingly dominated by the US Department of Defense (DOD),
501
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
which uses routes through Uzbekistan as part of the Northern Distribution
Network to supply forces in Afghanistan. US military contracts with Uzbeks as part
of this supply chain are potentially as lucrative for persons close to the Uzbek
government as direct US aid would be. Despite the US State Department’s re-designation
in January 2009 of Uzbekistan as a “Country of Particular Concern” for
systematic violations of religious freedom, the US government retained a waiver
on the sanctions outlined in the designation. The DOD’s prominence in the relationship
with the Uzbek government raises concerns over mixed messages about
human rights issues among different US agencies.
WORLD REPORT 2011
502
503
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA

505
WORLD REPORT
2011
MIDDLE EAST
AND NORTH AFRICA
H U M A N
R I G H T S
W A T C H
Algeria
Algeria continued to experience widespread human rights violations in 2010. A
state of emergency—imposed in 1992 and renewed indefinitely by decree in
1993—created a backdrop for widespread restrictions on freedom of expression,
association, and assembly. Authorities justify the measure as necessary to combat
terrorism.
Members of the security forces and armed groups continued to enjoy broad
impunity for atrocities committed during the violent internal conflict of the 1990s.
The state offered compensation to families of persons forcibly disappeared in the
1990s, but failed to provide answers about their fate. Militant groups continued
their deadly attacks, mostly targeting security forces, albeit on a lesser scale than
in previous years.
Freedom of Expression and Assembly
The state controls broadcast media, which provides live telecasts of parliamentary
sessions but airs almost no critical coverage of government policies.
Privately-owned newspapers enjoy freer scope, but repressive press laws and
dependence on revenues from public sector advertising limit their freedom to criticize
the government and the military.
Prosecutors constantly prosecute journalists and independent publications for
defaming or insulting public officials. Courts of first instance sometimes sentence
them to prison and heavy fines, which appeals courts often overturn or suspend.
Rabah Lemouchi, correspondent for the national Arabic daily Ennahar in Tebessa,
is among the journalists who have been jailed in recent years. While most have
remained provisionally free pending trial, Lemouchi was incarcerated from his
arrest until finishing his sentence six months later. A court of first instance convicted
him on July 14, 2009, of defamation and insulting state institutions, mainly
due to a personal letter he had addressed in 2006 to President Abdel Aziz
Bouteflika. Details of the case indicate that his prosecution and imprisonment
were politically motivated.
WORLD REPORT 2011
506
In the first half of 2010 at least two journalists received prison terms for defamation
but remained free pending appeal. On May 13 a court in the city of
Mostaganem sentenced Belkacem Belhamideche, director of the French-language
Reflexion and one of the daily’s reporters, to six months in prison for coverage of
a letter that a businessman wrote accusing a town mayor of soliciting a bribe
from him. A court in the town of Ain Boucif, in the governorate of Medea, sentenced
Saleh Souadi of el-Khabar, Algeria’s leading independent Arabic-language
daily, to six months in jail for defaming a local hospital director, even though his
articles appeared before the director assumed his post and did not name him.
A 2000 decree banning demonstrations in Algiers remained in effect in 2010.
Despite the ban, SOS Disparu(e)s– an organization comprised of relatives of persons
forcibly disappeared–has held small vigils in front of the Algiers headquarters
of the state human rights commission for most Wednesdays since 1998, in
spite of occasional police harassment. In August police dispersed the gathering
and briefly arrested the protesters, who were demanding the state provide information
regarding the fate of persons whom state security forces abducted in the
1990s and were never seen again.
Authorities require organizations to obtain authorization from the local governor
before holding indoor public meetings, and frequently ban meetings organized by
human rights organizations or rights organizations working on behalf of Algeria’s
Kabyle population. Authorities refused to allow the Algerian League for the
Defense of Human Rights (LADDH) to hold its national congress on March 25-26 at
a public venue in an Algiers suburb. The governorate of Algiers announced the
refusal on the eve of the congress, even though the LADDH had formally requested
permission a month earlier. The LADDH moved its congress to the Maison des
syndicats in Bachdjarrah, a privately owned venue; two months later, the authorities
closed that hall, one of the few in the capital where controversial civil society
organizations had been able to meet.
On July 23, police in the city of Tizi-Ouzou broke up a human rights seminar
organized by the World Amazigh Congress in collaboration with two local Amazigh
(Berber) organizations. Police entered the meeting hall, confiscated materials,
questioned attendees, and expelled two French participants from the country.
Authorities did not explain their action.
507
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Authorities frequently deny journalists and human rights workers entry visas. On
October 2, 2010, the Algerian embassy in Washington refused visas for Human
Rights Watch to conduct general research, explaining they could visit only the
Polisario-run refugee camps near Tindouf. The authorities told Amnesty
International the same thing in 2010. Authorities expelled two journalists with the
Moroccan weekly Assahrae al-Ousbouiya on September 22.
Freedom of Religion
Algeria’s constitution defines the state religion as Islam and requires the president
to be a Muslim. Algerian laws criminalize non-Muslims proselytizing to
Muslims but not the reverse, and forbid non-Muslims from gathering to worship
except in state-approved locations. In practice, authorities rarely authorize
Algerian Protestant groups to use buildings for worship, subjecting worshippers
to possible prosecution. A court in al-Arba Nath Irathen, Tizi-Ouzou province, tried
Mahmoud Yahou and three other Christians for “practicing religious rites without
authorization.” The trial is continuing at this writing. An appeals court in Jijel on
June 22 convicted another Christian, Abdelhamid Bouamama, from Grarem in
Mila province, of trying to convert Muslims and sentenced him to one year in
prison, suspended.
Impunity for Past Abuses
Over 100,000 Algerians died during the political strife of the 1990s. Thousands
more were “disappeared” by security forces or abducted by armed groups fighting
the government and never found. The 2006 Law on Peace and National
Reconciliation provides a legal framework for the continued impunity enjoyed by
perpetrators of atrocities during this era. The law provides amnesty to security
force members for actions they took in the name of combating terrorism and to
armed group members not implicated in the most heinous acts.
The law promises compensation for families of “disappeared” persons, but simultaneously
makes it a crime to denigrate state institutions or security forces for the
manner in which they conducted themselves during the political strife.
Organizations representing the families of the “disappeared” have criticized the
state’s failure to provide a detailed account of the fate of their missing relatives.
WORLD REPORT 2011
508
In one case dating to the civil strife of the 1990s, Malik Mejnoun and Abdelkader
Chenoui have been in pre-trial detention since 1999 in connection with the assassination
one year earlier of Kabyle singer-activist Lounes Matoub. Both men claim
they are innocent and say they were tortured while in detention without access to
communications. Eleven years later they have yet to be brought to trial.
Algeria amended its penal code in 2004 to make torture an explicit crime. The
International Committee of the Red Cross regularly visits ordinary prisons in
Algeria, but not places of detention run by the powerful Department for
Information and Security (DRS), an intelligence agency within the military.
Algerian courts pronounced death sentences during 2010, some of them against
defendants in terrorism cases and most in absentia. Algeria has observed a de
facto moratorium on executions since 1993.
Terrorism and Counterterrorism
Militant attacks were down dramatically compared to the mid-1990s, but al
Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) continued to launch fatal attacks, directed
mostly—but not exclusively—at military and police targets. On June 25, gunmen—
whom Algerian media linked to terrorists—fired on a wedding party in the eastern
wilaya (province) of Tebessa, killing the bridegroom, a young soldier, and four
guests.
In July the United States for the first time sent home an Algerian who had been
held at Guantanamo and opposed his repatriation, fearing persecution. The US
government said Algeria had given “diplomatic assurances” that Abdul Aziz Naji
would be treated humanely. Shortly after arriving, Naji, like other Algerian
returnees from Guantanamo before him, appeared before an investigative judge
to answer accusations of membership in a terrorist group abroad and was
released pending trial, which is continuing at this writing. On November 4 an
Algiers court acquitted an earlier Guantanamo returnee, Sofiane Hadarbache, of
similar charges. Eight Algerian detainees remain in Guantanamo at this writing, of
whom at least five reportedly oppose their return.
509
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Key International Actors
Algeria in 2010 did not extend invitations to five special procedures of the United
Nations Human Rights Council that had requested them, including the Working
Group on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances and the special rapporteurs
on torture and on human rights while countering terrorism. Algeria announced
invitations to visit during 2011 to seven other special rapporteurs, including those
on violence against women and on the right to freedom of opinion and expression.
Algeria and the European Union have an association agreement in effect since
2005. In June they signed an agreement that provides Algeria €172 million
(approximately US$234 million) in aid during 2011-2013. In 2009 the two sides
agreed to create a subcommittee of the Association Council on “Political
Dialogue, Security and Human Rights.”
According to the US government, Algeria “is a major partner in combating extremism
and terrorist networks such as Al Qa’ida and is our second-largest trading
partner in the Arab world.” The US provides almost no financial aid to Algeria, but
is the leading customer of its exports, primarily gas and oil. Other than the annual
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices, the US said almost nothing publicly
on Algeria’s human rights record. In a visit to Algeria in October, Department
of State Special Advisor Judith E. Heumann praised the government for ratifying
the UN Convention of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in December 2009.
WORLD REPORT 2011
510
Bahrain
Human rights conditions in Bahrain deteriorated sharply in the latter half of 2010.
Starting in mid-August authorities detained an estimated 250 persons, including
nonviolent critics of the government, and shut down websites and publications of
legal opposition political societies.
Authorities detained 25 of the most prominent opposition activists and accused
many of them of “spreading false information” and “meeting with outside organizations.”
Some rights activists were among those held and allegedly tortured.
Authorities prevented detainees from meeting with their lawyers prior to the first
session of their trial, and allowed only extremely brief meetings with some family
members.
This crackdown came after months of street protests, which often involved burning
tires and throwing stones and Molotov cocktails. Among the first people
arrested were activists who had just participated in a public meeting in London
where they criticized Bahrain’s human rights record.
The main exception to these dismal human rights developments involved
improved protections for migrant workers.
Torture and Ill-Treatment
Almost all of the 25 prominent activists–whose trial began on October 28–told
the court, some in considerable detail, that they had been subjected to torture.
Lawyers able to attend the public prosecutor’s pretrial interrogations of clients
said that in some cases they observed marks and wounds that appeared consistent
with the allegations.
A Human Rights Watch report released in February 2010 concluded that in the
2007-2009 period, the authorities regularly resorted to torture and ill-treatment
when interrogating security suspects. Officials denied these findings, but apparently
conducted no criminal investigations and ordered no disciplinary measures
against alleged perpetrators.
511
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
On March 28 an appellate court convicted 19 men of the murder of a security officer,
overturning their acquittal by a lower court in October 2009. The lower court
judge determined that there was no evidence linking them to the crimes other
than confessions that appeared to have been coerced.
Counterterrorism Measures
The government charged at least 23 of those detained in August and September
under Law 58/2006, Protecting Society from Terrorist Acts, which allows for
extended periods of detention without charge or judicial review. The United
Nations special rapporteur on human rights and counterterrorism has criticized
the law’s broad definitions of terrorism.
Freedom of Expression
In September the Information Affairs Authority blocked websites and blogs associated
with the opposition. On state-run Bahrain TV on September 20 Abdullah
Yateem, the general director of press and publications at the authority, said that
websites and bloggers had committed 12 crimes, and he specifically mentioned:
offending the person of King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa, incitement to overthrow
the government, publishing information about bomb-making, and slander and
defamation. Yateem also banned publication of the newsletters of several opposition
political societies, which are political groups the government allows, unlike
other opposition groups that have no legal status.
On September 4 Ali Abdelemam, whose popular Bahrain online blog carried information
about human rights developments, responded to a summons to appear at
the headquarters of the National Security Agency, a body that operates outside
the criminal justice system and reports directly to King Hamad. Authorities
refused his request to contact a lawyer, even at his formal interrogation. At the
opening session of the October 28 trial of 25 prominent activists, Abdulemam
said he was subjected to torture and degrading treatment.
Municipal officials ordered one Waad Party candidate in the National Assembly
election scheduled for October 23 to remove billboards with the slogan “Enough
to Corruption,” saying it was “a breach of the law” but not indicating which law. A
WORLD REPORT 2011
512
court ruled on October 4 that the banners did not violate the law, but the government
appealed.
The Ministry of Information suspended the satellite station Al Jazeera on May 18,
the day after the channel broadcast a feature about poverty in Bahrain. On July 2,
police summoned for questioning two volunteers with the Bahrain Women’s
Association who had spoken with Al Jazeera about challenges they face being
married to non-Bahrainis.
On August 16, 2010, Al-Wasat, Bahrain’s one independent newspaper, reported
that the minister of information suspended its online audio reports. The suspension
came after several of the reports featured persons alleging mistreatment of
inmates in Jaw prison.
Freedom of Association
In April the minister of social development denied the request of the Bahrain
Human Rights Society to hold a monitoring workshop for human rights defenders
in the Gulf region, saying it would violate the association law, which prohibits
organizations from involvement in political activities. The ministry subsequently
allowed the workshop to take place in late May.
In August the ministry wrote to the Migrant Workers’ Protection Society saying
that the society’s shelter was not legally registered and would have to close. This
followed an incident in which a migrant domestic worker fled to the shelter from
the home of a high ministry official, claiming she had been abused. The society
responded by providing a copy of the government’s 2005 authorization of the
shelter, noting that in previous years the ministry had donated funds to support
the shelter.
The government continues to deny legal status to the Bahrain Center for Human
Rights (BCHR), which it ordered dissolved in 2004 after the group’s then-president
criticized the prime minister for corruption and human rights violations.
On April 5 Bahrain’s Lower Criminal Court fined Mohammad al-Maskati, president
of the Bahrain Youth Human Rights Society (BYHRS), BD500 (US$ 1,325) for operating
an unregistered NGO. The BYHRS attempted in 2005 to register with the
513
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Ministry of Social Development, as required by law, but received no response to
its application.
Human Rights Defenders
Those detained in the wave of arrests in August and September and allegedly tortured
included Abd al-Ghani al-Khanjar, spokesperson for the National Committee
for the Victims of Torture, and Muhammad Saeed al-Sahlawi, a BCHR board member.
On September 1 the pro-government daily Al Watan featured a front-page article
alleging that BCHR president Nabeel Rajab and former president Abd al-Hadi al-
Khawaja were linked to a “terrorist network” responsible for arson attacks and
plotting sabotage. A similar article appeared on the official Bahrain News Agency
website on September 4, but was removed the following day.
On September 6 Salman Kamaleddin resigned as the head of the newly established
official National Institution for Human Rights to protest the institution’s
failure to criticize the recent arrests.
On September 8–after the Bahrain Human Rights Society (BHRS) criticized the
widespread arrests and alleged torture of detainees–the Ministry of Social
Development dismissed Abdullah al-Dirazi, the group’s secretary general, dissolved
the group’s board of directors, and appointed a ministry official as “interim
director.” The minister accused the organization of “only serving one segment
of society,” communicating with illegal organizations, and conducting “secret
training” of regional rights defenders, referring to the May workshops that the
ministry expressly approved and that were well publicized at the time. The BHRS
had been the main Bahraini organization permitted to monitor parliamentary
elections scheduled for October 23; the government refused to allow international
observers.
Migrant Worker Rights
Over 460,000 migrant workers, primarily from South Asia, work in Bahrain. Many
experience prolonged periods of withheld wages, passport confiscation, unsafe
WORLD REPORT 2011
514
housing, excessive work hours and physical abuse. Government redress mechanisms
remained largely ineffective.
In August 2009 Bahrain adopted Decision 79/2009 allowing workers to change
jobs more freely. The reform does not apply to domestic workers and many workers
remain unaware that they have the right to change employment freely.
A draft labor law circulated in May 2010 extends some rights to domestic workers,
including annual vacation and end-of-term pay, but still excludes them from provisions
mandating maximum work hours and days off. The law also creates a new
“case management” mechanism to ensure the adjudication of labor complaints
within two months, potentially making litigation a more viable option for migrant
workers seeking redress for abuses.
Women’s Rights
Bahrain’s first written personal status law (Law 19/2009), adopted in 2009,
applies only to Sunnis. Shia religious leaders demand a constitutional guarantee
that, should a separate personal status law be passed for Shias, parliament will
not be able to amend any provision of the law. Women’s groups favor a unified
law for all citizens in part because Sharia court judges—generally conservative
religious scholars with limited formal legal training—decide marriage, divorce,
custody, and inheritance cases according to their own individual readings of
Islamic jurisprudence, which consistently favor men. It remains unclear to what
extent codification has alleviated these problems for Sunni women.
Key International Actors
Bahrain hosts the headquarters of the United States Navy’s Fifth Fleet and provides
logistical support for military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan, and the
US provides military aid to Bahrain. The US initially did not publicly criticize the
government’s crackdown on civil society or other serious abuses; on October 31
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton issued a statement congratulating Bahrain for its
recent parliamentary election, but also expressing concern about “efforts in the
lead-up to the elections to restrict freedom of expression and association targeted
at civil society.”
515
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
British officials expressed little concern publicly about the sharp deterioration of
human rights conditions. One of the activists arrested in August, Jaffar al-Hasabi,
is a dual national, and it reportedly took a phone call from British Foreign
Secretary William Hague to Bahrain’s crown prince before a British consular visit
to al-Hasabi was permitted, about a month after his arrest. Bahrain publicly
called on the United Kingdom to investigate and prosecute or extradite two of
those indicted in the alleged terrorism case whom reside in London. The UK
responded that it would investigate if Bahrain provided evidence of criminal activity.
At this writing, Bahrain has provided no such evidence.
WORLD REPORT 2011
516
Egypt
Egypt continued to suppress political dissent in 2010, dispersing demonstrations;
harassing rights activists; and detaining journalists, bloggers, and Muslim
Brotherhood members. Security officers used lethal force against migrants
attempting to cross into Israel and arbitrarily detained recognized refugees.
Despite promising since 2005 to end the state of emergency, the government
renewed Law No. 162 of 1958 in May, but promised to restrict its use. Afterward
authorities released at least 450 individuals detained under the emergency law,
including Bedouin rights defender Mus’ad Abul Fagr and blogger Hany Nazeer.
The government continues to refuse to disclose the number of persons detained
under the emergency law, but Egyptian human rights organizations estimate the
number at around 5,000.
The June 1 elections for the Shura Council, the upper house of parliament, were
marred by reports of fraud and voter intimidation. The High Elections Committee
failed to issue 2,600 of the 4,000 civil society permits requested by the National
Council for Human Rights. People’s Assembly elections took place on November
28 with ineffective judicial supervision.
Freedom of Expression
Security officers targeted bloggers and journalists who criticized government policies
and exposed human rights violations, and activists supporting Mohamed El
Baradei’s Campaign for Change. In March State Security Investigations (SSI)
arrested Tarek Khedr, who had been gathering signatures for the Baradei petition,
and detained him incommunicado at an unknown location for three months. In
April SSI officers arrested publisher Ahmed Mehni for publishing a book, “El
Baradei and the Dream of the Green Revolution.”
In February military intelligence officers arrested Ahmad Mustafa, a blogger and
activist in the April 6 Youth Group, after he blogged about corruption in the
Military Academy. The prosecutor charged Mustafa with “spreading false information”
and transferred the case to a military tribunal, where a judge released him
after 10 days on the condition that he apologize.
517
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
In the run-up to the parliamentary elections, the government on October 13
brought all live broadcasts by private companies under control of state television,
and on November 1 issued directives requiring prior permission for every live
broadcast.
Freedom of Assembly and Association
In April security officials cracked down on a peaceful protest–organized by the
April 6 Youth Group–calling for an end to the state of emergency; more than 100
were arrested and 33 were brought before a prosecutor, who charged them with
demonstrating “to overthrow the regime” and released them. In June a number of
peaceful demonstrations expressed outrage at the police killing of Khaled Said in
Alexandria. Security officials beat and dispersed protestors, arresting at least 101
in one day.
In February SSI arrested 16 senior Muslim Brotherhood members, including
deputy leader Mahmud Ezzat and prominent member Essam El Erian. A state
security prosecutor charged them with leading a Brotherhood faction that promotes
violence against the government. The prosecutor dropped all charges and
released them two months later. After the changes to the emergency law came
into effect, the Ministry of Interior released almost all Muslim Brotherhood members
detained under the law. As of November 18, Egyptian security officers had
arrested 487 members of the Muslim Brotherhood in connection with campaigning
for the members of the group who are running as independents in the parliamentary
elections, and held 288 of them in preventive detention on charges of
“membership in an illegal organization.”
Arbitrary Detention and Torture
Officials of SSI appear to have “disappeared” more political detainees in 2010.
Security officers “disappeared” those accused of membership in Islamic groups
for up to three months and also “disappeared” young political activists for several
days. SSI arrested Amr Salah on September 9 and detained him incommunicado
at an unknown location before releasing him 30 hours later. In a rare case of a
long-term disappearance, the whereabouts and well-being of Mohamed Tork, a
23-year-old student, have been unknown since his arrest in July 2009. Family
WORLD REPORT 2011
518
complaints to the prosecutions and the Interior Ministry have received no
response.
Police and security forces regularly engaged in torture in police stations, detention
centers, and at points of arrest. In March SSI arrested Muslim Brotherhood
member Nasr al-Sayed Hassan Nasr, detained him incommunicado for three
months, and tortured him for 45 days during interrogation. They released him
without charge in June. Also in June two policemen beat 28-year-old Khaled Said
to death on an Alexandria street, causing public outrage. Following widespread
protests, a public prosecutor referred the two policemen to court on charges of
excessive use of force, but failed to indict their superior officer; at this writing two
sessions of the trial have taken place.
Fair Trial and Special Courts
The year 2010 saw increases in the number of trials of civilians before military
courts and in reliance on special courts that do not meet fair trial standards. At
this writing the ongoing trial of 25 defendants accused of membership in a terrorist
organization, the so-called Zeitoun trial, has already been marred by the
incommunicado detention of the defendants, their lack of access to counsel, and
allegations of torture that prosecutors did not properly investigate. In August
prosecutors referred former torture victim Imad al-Kabir to trial before a state
security court on charges of possession of an illegal weapon after a neighborhood
brawl.
Labor Rights
Egypt witnessed waves of worker protests and unauthorized strikes throughout
2010, and security officers dispersed several of these using excessive force. In
August a military court tried eight civilian workers on charges of deliberately stopping
production, going on strike, and “disclosing military secrets.” The case followed
an amendment to the Military Justice Code, after workers from the Helwan
Military Factory participated in a protest against factory conditions following
another worker’s death. The court acquitted three of the workers but gave two
others suspended prison sentences and fines, and recommended disciplinary
measures against a further three.
519
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Freedom of Religion
Although Egypt’s constitution provides for equal rights without regard to religion,
there is widespread discrimination against Egyptian Christians, as well as official
intolerance of heterodox Muslim sects. In January gunmen shot dead six Coptic
Christians as they left a Christmas Mass in Nag’ Hammadi, forcing the government
to acknowledge increasing sectarian violence. Prosecutors charged three
men with premeditated murder in this incident, and transferred the case to a
State Security Court. Authorities responded to a subsequent incident of sectarian
violence in March in Marsa Matrouh in a more typical fashion, merely urging the
parties to drop complaints and not pursuing criminal investigations or holding
perpetrators accountable.
In March SSI arrested at least nine members of the Ahmadi faith and detained
them for 80 days on charges of “showing contempt for the Islamic faith.” Security
officials continued to detain eight adherents of the Shia faith under successive
emergency law detention orders, despite government promises to release all
those detained under the law for reasons other than terrorism and drugs, and
despite successive court orders for their release.
Refugees and Migrants
The treatment of refugees and migrants in Egypt deteriorated further. At this writing
Egyptian border guards have shot dead at least 27 migrants attempting to
cross the Sinai border into Israel since the start of 2010. A government official
said that security forces had “only” killed 4 percent of those attempting to cross
in 2009. Egypt denied the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) access to detained migrants, preventing them from making asylum
claims. Egypt also continues to detain UNHCR-recognized refugees and charge
refugees and migrants alike with illegal entry, bringing their cases before military
courts that do not meet international fair trial standards.
In January SSI officials arrested at least 25 Sudanese refugees and asylum seekers
and detained many incommunicado for up to three months. Among them was
Faisal Mohamed Haroun, a recognized refugee from Darfur, who disappeared
when SSI arrested him on January 7 and did not reappear until April 6, when offi-
WORLD REPORT 2011
520
cials brought him before a state security prosecutor. A prosecutor dropped the
charges against Haroun and closed the investigation, but he and at least 14 other
refugees and asylum seekers remain in detention. Egypt has made four attempts,
one successfully, to deport refugees who have been recognized by UNHCR.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
In February the State Council, Egypt’s highest administrative court, voted to ban
women from serving as judges on the council. The decision was overturned by
Egypt’s Constitutional Court, but women are still not represented on the State
Council and are extremely underrepresented in the Egyptian judiciary.
In June a decision by Egypt’s Supreme Administrative Court allowing Christian
divorcees to remarry prompted an outcry from the Orthodox Coptic Church, which
refused to recognize the decision. In July the Supreme Constitutional Court overruled
the administrative court’s decision, and the Coptic Church approved a draft
personal status law for non-Muslims that only allows for divorce under certain
conditions, such as adultery, and denies Christian divorcees the right to remarry.
In August officials arrested an Egyptian doctor for illegally performing female genital
mutilation on a 13-year-old girl who later died from complications arising from
the procedure. The Egyptian government criminalized performing female genital
circumcision in 2008.
Egypt still lacks a legal environment to protect girls and women from violence,
encourage them to report attacks, and deter perpetrators from committing abuses
against them.
Key International Actors
At Egypt’s Universal Periodic Review before the UN Human Rights Council in
February, the government accepted 140 out of 165 recommendations, but rejected
key ones related to abolishing the death penalty, eliminating the crime of “habitual
debauchery,” and permitting NGOs to receive funding without prior authorization.
The United States condemned the renewal of the emergency law and
pressed for the release of detainees. US Senators Russ Feingold and John McCain
521
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
introduced a Senate resolution with broad support calling for ending the state of
emergency and abuses by security officers, and establishing free elections in
Egypt. Egyptian government lobbyists strenuously opposed the resolution.
European Union Heads of Mission issued a statement in July calling for an impartial
investigation into the police killing of Khaled Said.
WORLD REPORT 2011
522
Iran
Iran’s human rights crisis deepened as the government sought to consolidate its
power following 2009’s disputed presidential election. Public demonstrations
waned after security forces used live ammunition to suppress protesters in late
2009, resulting in the death of at least seven protesters. Authorities announced
that security forces had arrested more than 6,000 individuals after June 2009.
Hundreds–including lawyers, rights defenders, journalists, civil society activists,
and opposition leaders–remain in detention without charge. Since the election
crackdown last year, well over a thousand people have fled Iran to seek asylum in
neighboring countries. Interrogators used torture to extract confessions, on which
the judiciary relied on to sentence people to long prison terms and even death.
Restrictions on freedom of expression and association, as well as religious and
gender-based discrimination, continued unabated.
Torture and Ill-Treatment
Authorities systematically used torture to coerce confessions. Student activist
Abdullah Momeni wrote to Supreme Leader Ayatollah Seyed Ali Khamenei in
September describing the torture he suffered at the hands of jailers. At this writing
no high-level official has been prosecuted for the torture, ill-treatment, and
deaths of three detainees held at Kahrizak detention center after June 2009.
On August 2, 2010, 17 political prisoners issued a statement demanding the
rights guaranteed to prisoners by law, including an end to their solitary confinement
and access to medical facilities. They also complained of severely overcrowded
conditions. Reports by international human rights groups indicate that
prison authorities are systematically denying needed medical care to political
prisoners at Tehran’s Evin Prison and other facilities.
Freedom of Expression
Dozens of journalists and bloggers are currently behind bars or free on short-term
furloughs. On September 28 blogger Hossein Derakhshan received a nineteenand-
a-half year prison sentence for espionage, “propaganda against the regime,”
523
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
and “insulting sanctities.” The judiciary sentenced numerous other journalists,
including Isa Saharkhiz and Hengameh Shahidi who were sentenced to three and
six years respectively, for crimes such as “insulting” government officials. On June
8 a revolutionary court sentenced Jila Baniyaghoub to a year in prison and barred
her from working as a journalist for 30 years.
The Ministry of Islamic Culture and Guidance continued shutting down newspapers
and in August directed the press not to publish items about opposition leaders
Mir Hossein Moussavi, Mehdi Karroubi, and Mohammad Khatami, the former
president.
State universities prevented some politically active students from registering for
graduate programs despite undergraduate test scores that should have guaranteed
them access. The government initiated an aggressive campaign to
“Islamicize” universities, in part by forcibly retiring professors in the social sciences.
The government relied on plainclothes security forces and the Basij, a state-sponsored
paramilitary force, to target Shia clerics critical of the government, such as
Grand Ayatollah Yusef Sanei, Mehdi Karroubi, and Ayatollah Seyed Ali
Mohammad Dastgheib. Ayatollah Kazemini Boroujerdi—whose understanding of
Islam calls for the separation of religion and government—entered his fourth year
in prison following a Special Court for the Clergy conviction on unknown charges.
After years under house arrest and government monitoring, Grand Ayatollah
Hossein-Ali Montazeri died in December 2009. Security forces arrested scores of
mourners who attended his funeral.
The government systematically blocks websites that carry political news and
analysis, slows down internet speeds, jams foreign satellite broadcasts, and
employs the Revolutionary Guards to target dissident websites.
Freedom of Assembly and Association
Authorities continued a blanket policy of denying permits for opposition demonstrations.
Security forces prevented the Mourning Mothers, whose sons and
daughters were killed by security forces during the 2009 unrest, from gathering at
Laleh Park in Tehran. Authorities also prevented women’s rights activists from
WORLD REPORT 2011
524
525
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
publicly petitioning against existing laws or legislation that discriminate against
women.
The government increased restrictions on civil society organizations. On
September 27 the general prosecutor and judiciary spokesman announced a
court order dissolving two pro-reform political parties, the Islamic Iran
Participation Front and the Mojahedin of the Islamic Revolution.
Repression of student groups was particularly harsh. Security forces detained
scores of members belonging to the Office for Consolidating Unity, including Ali
Qolizadeh, Alireza Kiani, Mohammad Heydarzadeh, and Mohsen Barzegar, who
were arrested in early November 2010. The Office for Consolidating Unity is a
national independent student association that authorities declared illegal in
January 2009. In 2010, revolutionary courts convicted Bahareh Hedayat, Majid
Tavakoli, and Milad Asadi, members of Tahkim’s alumni group, to prison terms
ranging from six to eight-and-a-half years on charges that include insulting government
authorities.
Death Penalty
In 2009, the last year for which figures are available, authorities executed 388
prisoners, more than any other nation except China. Iranian human rights defenders
believe that many more executions, especially of individuals convicted of drug
trafficking, are taking place in Iran’s prisons today.
Crimes punishable by death include murder, rape, drug trafficking, armed robbery,
espionage, sodomy, and adultery. Under intense international pressure,
officials suspended the stoning-to-death sentence of Sakineh Mohammadi
Ashtiani who was convicted of adultery in 2006. However, they alleged that
Ashtiani helped murder her husband. She remains on death row at this writing.
Iran leads the world in the execution of juvenile offenders. Iranian law allows
death sentences for persons who have reached puberty, defined as nine years old
for girls and fifteen for boys. According to a human rights lawyer who defended
many juvenile offenders on death row, authorities executed a juvenile offender
named Mohammad on July 10, 2010. There are currently more than a hundred
juvenile offenders on death row, including Ebrahim Hamidi, whom a local court
WORLD REPORT 2011
526
sentenced to death for the alleged rape of another boy in 2010. Hamidi was 16 at
the time of the alleged crime.
Authorities have executed at least nine political dissidents since November 2009,
all of them convicted of moharebeh (“enmity against God”) for their alleged ties
to armed groups. On January 28 the government hanged Mohammad-Reza Ali-
Zamani and Arash Rahmanipour. Although both were arrested prior to the June
2009 presidential election, they were tried as part of the August 2009 mass trials,
where they reportedly confessed to planning a deadly 2008 bombing in Shiraz,
southwest Iran.
Authorities executed Farzad Kamangar, Ali Heidarian, Farhad Vakili, Shirin Alam
Holi, and Mehdi Eslamian by hanging on the morning of May 9 in Evin prison
without informing their lawyers or families. Another 16 Kurds presently face execution
for their alleged support of armed groups.
Human Rights Defenders
Efforts to intimidate human rights lawyers and prevent them from effectively representing
political detainees continued. In September authorities arrested Nasrin
Sotoudeh, who represented numerous political prisoners. In November Sotoudeh
went on a “dry” hunger strike, refusing to eat or drink anything to protest being
held in solitary confinement since her arrest. Mohammad Mostafaei was forced to
flee Iran after authorities repeatedly summoned him for questioning and detained
his wife, father-in-law, and brother-in-law. Mostafaei represented high-profile
defendants such as Sakineh Mohammadi Ashtiani, the woman sentenced to
death by stoning, and numerous juvenile detainees on death row. In October
2010, a revolutionary court sentenced Mohammad Seifzadeh, a colleague of
Nobel-prize winner Shirin Ebadi and co-founder of the banned Center for
Defenders of Human Rights, to nine years imprisonment and banned him from
practicing law for 10 years.
Security forces routinely harassed and arrested human rights activists, often without
charge. Others were swept up in raids and face charges of attempting to overthrow
the government via “cyber-warfare.” On September 21 a revolutionary court
sentenced Emad Baghi to six years in prison for an interview he conducted with
527
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
dissident cleric Grand Ayatollah Montazeri several years earlier. Another revolutionary
court sentenced Shiva Nazar Ahari and Koohyar Goodarzi, both members
of the Committee of Human Rights Reporters, to six years and one year respectively
after months of “temporary detention” for alleged national security offenses.
Treatment of Minorities
The government denies adherents of the Baha’i faith–Iran’s largest non-Muslim
religious minority–freedom of religion. In August the judiciary convicted seven
leaders of the national Baha’i organization to 20 years each in prison; their sentences
were later reduced to 10 years each. The government accused them of
espionage without providing evidence and denied their lawyers’ requests to conduct
a prompt and fair trial.
Iranian laws continue to discriminate against religious minorities, including Sunni
Muslims, in employment and education. Sunni Muslims, about 10 percent of the
population, cannot construct mosques in major cities. In 2010, security forces
detained several members of Iran’s largest Sufi sect, the Nematollahi Gonabadi
order, and attacked their houses of worship. They similarly targeted converts to
Christianity for questioning and arrest.
The government restricts cultural and political activities among the country’s
Azeri, Kurdish, and Arab minorities, including the organizations that focus on
social issues.
Sexual minorities also face a precarious situation. Law enforcement and judiciary
officials discriminate, both in law and in practice, against Iran’s vulnerable lesbian,
gay, bisexual, and transgender communities. Iran’s penal code criminalizes
consensual same-sex acts, some of which are punishable by death. During the
past few years, a steady stream of LGBT Iranians has sought refugee status in
Turkey and are awaiting resettlement in third countries.
WORLD REPORT 2011
528
Key International Actors
Iran’s nuclear program continued to be the center of attention for much of 2010,
overshadowing serious concerns regarding the deepening human rights crisis in
the country. In June 2010 the United Nations Security Council passed a new round
of sanctions against Iran for its failure to comply with previous resolutions on
transparency regarding its nuclear program.
During Iran’s Universal Periodic Review before the UN Human Rights Council
(HRC) in March, Iran rejected 45 recommendations of member states, including
allowing the special rapporteur on torture to visit the country; prosecuting security
officials involved in torturing, raping, or killing; implementing policies to end
gender based violence; and halting the execution of political prisoners.
In October 2010 the UN secretary-general’s office released its report on the situation
of human rights in Iran, pursuant to UN General Assembly resolution 64/176.
The report noted “further negative developments in the human rights situation”
in Iran, including “excessive use of force, arbitrary arrests, and detentions, unfair
trials, and possible torture and ill-treatment of opposition activists” following the
June 2009 election.
In April Iran withdrew its bid to gain a seat on the HRC after strong international
opposition. However, it did gain a seat on the Commission on the Status of
Women. During the June session of the HRC, 56 states joined a statement
expressing concern over “the lack of progress in the protection of human rights in
Iran, particularly since the events surrounding the elections in Iran last June.” In
December 2009 the UN General Assembly passed a resolution criticizing Iran’s
human rights record.
On September 29, 2010, the Obama administration announced “human rights
sanctions” against eight high-level Iranian officials, including individuals from the
ministries of intelligence and interior, the police, the Basij, the Revolutionary
Guards, and the judiciary, who were responsible for systematic and serious
human rights violations.
529
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Iraq
Human rights conditions in Iraq remain extremely poor, especially for journalists,
detainees, displaced persons, religious and ethnic minorities, women and girls,
and persons with disabilities. The United States officially ended its seven-year
combat operations in August 2010, reducing the number of troops to about
49,700.
On March 7, 2010, millions of Iraqis from every part of the country braved mortar
shells and rockets to vote in the national legislative election. In a blow to the
election’s credibility, the Supreme National Commission for Accountability and
Justice disqualified more than 500 candidates because of alleged Ba’ath Party
links, including several prominent politicians who were expected to do well.
Incumbent Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki, whose State of Law Coalition won 89 of
the 325 seats, remained in office pending the formation of a new government,
while Ayad Allawi’s al-Iraqiya list won 91. The Iraqi National Alliance, a Shia coalition
formed by the Islamic Supreme Council of Iraq and the followers of Muqtada
al-Sadr, won 70 seats and the Kurdish parties obtained 57. Overall, the election
results reflected sectarian divisions.
In November 2010 Iraq’s political parties agreed to form a new coalition government
eight months after parliamentary elections. The deadlock had created a
political vacuum that allowed armed groups to reassert themselves in some
areas.
Attacks on Civilians and Displacement
Repeated attacks by armed groups targeted civilians, exploiting the political
stalemate and Sunni Arab discontent. Violence killed and injured hundreds of
civilians each month, in one of the worst periods, more than 500 people died in
August alone. Assailants targeted government buildings and officials, checkpoints,
embassies, hotels, factories, markets, and mosques, as well as people
gathered for religious pilgrimages, weddings, and funerals, mainly in Shia areas.
Violent attacks have caused civilians to flee, creating internally displaced persons
and refugees across borders.
WORLD REPORT 2011
530
Some refugees who had fled to Syria, Jordan, and Lebanon faced economic pressure
and difficulties maintaining legal status abroad and returned home to Iraq.
The Iraqi government has no adequate plan for the return of Iraqis who have been
displaced internally or those who have fled to neighboring countries. Thousands
of displaced persons within Iraq reside in squatter settlements without access to
basic necessities such as clean water, electricity, and sanitation. Many are widows
with few employment prospects. Their desperate situation has contributed to
an increase in sex trafficking and forced prostitution.
The ongoing attacks, along with an abundance of abandoned landmines and
cluster munitions, have created a disproportionately high number of persons with
physical and mental disabilities, many of whom have not received support for
rehabilitation and re-integration into the community.
Detention Conditions and Torture
Reports continued of widespread torture and other abuse of detainees in the custody
of the defense and interior ministries and police. Government-run detention
facilities struggled to accommodate almost 30,000 detainees, and serious delays
in judicial review exacerbated overcrowding; some detainees have spent years in
custody without charge or trial. The situation worsened in 2010 as the US military
transferred most of its remaining prison sites and detainees to Iraqi custody. On
July 15, US forces handed over their last prison, Camp Cropper, which housed
about 1,700 detainees. US forces retained control over about 200 prisoners,
including some former members of Saddam Hussein’s government.
In April Human Rights Watch interviewed 42 detainees who had been tortured
over a period of months by security forces at a secret prison in the old Muthanna
airport in western Baghdad. The facility held about 430 detainees who had no
access to their families or lawyers. The prisoners said security forces personnel
kicked, whipped, and beat them, asphyxiated them, gave them electric shocks,
burned them with cigarettes, and pulled out their fingernails and teeth. They said
that interrogators sodomized some detainees with sticks and pistol barrels. Some
young men said they were forced to perform oral sex on interrogators and guards,
and that interrogators forced detainees to sexually molest one another. As of
November government officials had not prosecuted any officials responsible.
531
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Gender-Based Violence
Violence against women and girls continued to be a serious problem across Iraq.
Women’s rights activists said they remain at risk of attack from extremists who
have also targeted female politicians, civil servants, and journalists. “Honor”
crimes and domestic abuse remain a threat to women and girls, who also remain
vulnerable to trafficking for sexual exploitation and forced prostitution due to
insecurity, displacement, financial hardship, social disintegration, and the dissolution
of rule of law and state authority.
Female genital mutilation is practiced mainly in Kurdish areas of northern Iraq. In
November the Ministry of Health completed a statistical study on the prevalence
of FGM and the data suggests that 41 percent of Kurdish girls and women have
undergone this procedure. On July 6, 2010, the High Committee for Issuing Fatwas
at the Kurdistan Islamic Scholars Union — the highest Muslim authority in Iraqi
Kurdistan to issue religious pronouncements and rulings — issued a religious
edict that said Islam does not prescribe the practice, but stopped short of calling
for an outright ban. At this writing the women’s rights committee of the Kurdistan
parliament had finalized a draft law on family violence, including provisions on
FGM, and the Ministry of Health announced plans to disseminate information on
the practice’s negative health consequences. But the government has not yet
banned FGM or created a comprehensive plan to eradicate it.
Freedom of Expression
In 2010 Iraq remained one of the most dangerous countries in the world to work
as a journalist. Extremists and unknown assailants continue to kill media workers
and bomb their bureaus. On July 26, a suicide car bomber detonated his vehicle
in front of the Al Arabiya satellite television station, killing six and destroying the
Baghdad bureau. The Islamic State of Iraq, an armed umbrella group associated
with al Qaeda in Mesopotamia, later claimed responsibility for this attack on the
“corrupt” channel. In September unknown assailants assassinated two television
presenters and injured another in separate incidents in Baghdad and Mosul. On
March 12, gunmen opened fire in Baghdad on the car of Mu’aid al-Lami, head of
the Iraqi Journalists’ Syndicate, killing his driver.
WORLD REPORT 2011
532
533
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Journalists in Iraq also contended with emboldened Iraqi and Kurdish security
forces and their respective image-conscious central and regional governments.
On May 4, assailants abducted, tortured, and killed Sardasht Osman, a 23-yearold
freelance journalist and student in Arbil. Friends, family, and other journalists
believed Osman died because he wrote critical articles about the Kurdistan
region’s two governing parties, their leaders, and the ingrained patronage system.
Security forces attached to government institutions and political parties
harassed, intimidated, threatened, arrested, and physically assaulted journalists.
Senior politicians sued publications and journalists for unflattering articles.
Iraq’s Communications and Media Commission enforced new restrictions ahead
of the March 7 parliamentary elections, ostensibly to silence broadcasters who
encouraged sectarian violence, but the regulations encroached unduly on media
freedoms. At this writing two pieces of legislation, the Access to Information Law
and the Journalists’ Protection Law, remain stalled in the Iraqi parliament.
Freedom of Assembly
After thousands of Iraqis took to the streets in June to protest the government’s
inability to provide sufficient electricity and other basic services, the authorities
cracked down on demonstrations. On June 25 the Interior Ministry issued onerous
regulations about public protests, and the Prime Minister’s Office apparently
issued a secret order the following day instructing the interior minister to refuse
permits for demonstrations about power shortages. In the months that followed
the government refused to authorize numerous requests for public demonstrations,
with no explanation. Authorities arrested and intimidated organizers and
protesters, and policing actions led to deaths and injuries. The clampdown created
a climate of fear among demonstrators.
Violence against Minorities
Armed groups continued to persecute ethnic and religious minorities with impunity.
In the three weeks leading up to the March 7 national elections, assailants
killed 10 Christians in the city of Mosul in attacks that appeared politically motivated.
The violence prompted 4,300 Christians to flee to the Nineveh Plains, a
disputed area in northern Iraq that is culturally, ethnically, and religiously diverse.
Iraqi and Kurdish government officials condemned the attacks and the govern-
WORLD REPORT 2011
534
ment of Iraq established an investigative committee, but as of October no perpetrators
had been identified or arrested.
On October 31, gunmen identifying themselves as members of the Islamic State
of Iraq attacked a church in Baghdad, taking more than a hundred hostages. Two
priests and 44 worshippers were killed when Iraqi forces stormed the building.
Minorities remained in a precarious position as the Arab-dominated central government
and the Kurdistan regional government struggled over control of disputed
territories running across northern Iraq from the Iranian to the Syrian borders.
Leaders of minority communities complained that Kurdish security forces engaged
in arbitrary detentions, intimidation, and in some cases low-level violence,
against those who challenged Kurdish control of the disputed territories. In other
parts of Iraq, minorities have not received sufficient government protection from
targeted violence, threats, and intimidation. Perpetrators are rarely identified,
investigated, or punished.
Key International Actors
An agreement between the US and Iraq in 2008 calls for a complete US withdrawal—
including non-combat military forces—from Iraq by the end of 2011. As of
September 2010 the United States had about 49,700 troops in the country, down
from 160,000 to 170,000 at the height of the 2007 “surge.”
In October Wikileaks released thousands of documents, mostly authored by lowranking
US officers in the field between 2004 and 2009, revealing many previously
unreported instances in which US soldiers killed civilians, and the torture of
detainees by their Iraqi captors.
The UN Human Rights Council reviewed Iraq under its Universal Periodic Review
mechanism in February 2010. The government accepted most of the recommendations
but rejected abolishing the death penalty.
In August the UN Security Council voted to extend the mandate of the UN
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for another year. The UNAMI Human Rights
Office monitors human rights violations as part of a plan aimed at developing
Iraqi mechanisms for addressing past and current abuses.
535
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Israel/ Occupied Palestinian Territories
The human rights crisis in the Occupied Palestinian Territories (OPT) continued in
2010, despite marginal improvements. After Israeli commandos enforcing the
naval blockade of Gaza killed nine civilians on a flotilla attempting to run the
blockade, Israel announced it would ease the severe import restrictions on the
territory. Still, Israel continued to block exports, having a devastating impact on
the Gaza economy.
Palestinian armed groups in Gaza launched far fewer rocket attacks than in 2009
but continued to target Israeli population centers, killing one civilian, while
Hamas claimed responsibility for the killing of four Jewish settlers in the West
Bank. Hamas authorities carried out judicial executions for the first time in
2010–in some cases after unfair military trials–and allegedly tortured scores of
detainees.
In the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, Israel imposed severe restrictions on
Palestinian freedom of movement, demolished scores of homes under discriminatory
practices, continued unlawful settlement construction, and arbitrarily
detained children and adults. The Palestinian Authority’s (PA) security services
arbitrarily detained hundreds of people and allegations of torture by the PA’s
security services increased.
Gaza Strip
Israel
Israel Defense Forces (IDF) attacks in Gaza, including against smuggling tunnels
and in response to rocket attacks, killed 21 Palestinian civilians as of October 1,
the United Nations reported. The majority of reported cases involved IDF killings
of Palestinian civilians in the “no-go” zone along Gaza’s northern and eastern
borders, often as they were collecting construction material or farming.
On May 31, Israeli naval commandos intercepted a flotilla attempting to break the
Gaza blockade, killing nine civilians. A UN Human Rights Council (HRC) committee
WORLD REPORT 2011
536
of inquiry criticized Israeli forces for unlawful killings, abuse of detainees, and
other violations; an Israeli inquiry is still ongoing at this writing.
Another HRC committee reported in September that Israel’s investigations into
dozens of cases of violations during “Operation Cast Lead,” including alleged
intentional and reckless killings of civilians and wanton destruction of civilian
property in 2008-2009, were incomplete, as the authorities failed to investigate
some cases of alleged wrongdoing and to examine the responsibility of “highlevel
decision-makers.” The committee found a conflict of interest in the role of
the Military Advocate General (MAG), who approved plans for the offensive but
was also responsible for prosecuting alleged violations by Israeli soldiers.
As part of the MAG’s investigations, the IDF’s military justice system convicted
three soldiers for crimes during the conflict: one was sentenced to jail for stealing
a credit card, while two others were demoted and given suspended sentences for
using a boy as a human shield. A fourth soldier was indicted for manslaughter for
shooting a civilian waving a white flag. In January Israel paid US$10.5 million for
its damage to UN facilities during the conflict.
Blockade
Israel’s blockade of the Gaza Strip, imposed since Hamas’s takeover of Gaza in
June 2007, continued to have severe humanitarian and economic consequences
for the civilian population.
International pressure as a result of the May 31 flotilla killings led Israel to ease
import restrictions. However, as of September imports amounted to only onethird
of pre-blockade levels, the UN reported. Israel approved in principle imports
of construction materials for designated UN projects worth $15 million, and work
began on upgrading two waste water treatment plants, but as of October materials
needed for new schools and health clinics had not yet entered Gaza. The UN
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees (UNRWA) reported that Israeli
restrictions had prevented it from building new schools, and that in 2010 it had to
refer 40,000 students to Hamas-run schools due to lack of classroom space in its
own schools.
537
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Israel continued to impose near-total export restrictions. As of August more than
65 percent of Gaza’s factories remained closed, and the rest were working at 20
to 60 percent of their capacity, according to the Palestinian Trade Center. The
number of Gaza residents registered with UNRWA living in “abject poverty” tripled
since 2007 to 300,000, while unemployment in Gaza increased to 44 percent in
the second quarter of 2010.
Israeli officials stated that the blockade, an unlawful form of collective punishment
against residents of an occupied territory, would remain in place until
Hamas releases soldier Gilad Shalit who was captured in 2006. Israel is Gaza’s
major source of electricity (Egypt supplies some as well) and sole source of fuel,
which Israel does not permit from other sources. In addition, Gaza’s sole power
plant operated at low capacity due to the PA’s failure to pay Israel for industrial
fuel shipments. Gaza residents suffered daily blackouts lasting 8 to 12 hours.
Israeli forces regularly shot at Gaza residents up to 1.5 kilometers from the
armistice line, creating a “no-go” zone that comprises 30 percent of Gaza’s agricultural
land. The Israeli navy regularly shot at Palestinian fishing boats that
sailed more than two nautical miles from the coast, prohibiting access to some 85
percent of Gaza’s maritime area.
Egypt shares responsibility for the blockade by restricting the movement of goods
and people at the Rafah crossing it controls on Gaza’s southern border. Egypt
eased movement restrictions in June for Palestinians needing medical care or
with foreign passports and visas, but not others, and continued to restrict imports
and exports of goods.
Hamas’s rocket attacks from Gaza greatly diminished since 2009. As of October
Palestinian armed groups in Gaza had fired 75 largely locally made rockets at
population centers in Israel during 2010. In March Ansar al-Sunna, a previously
unknown armed group in Gaza, claimed responsibility for a rocket attack that
killed a Thai migrant worker in Israel. Israeli police reported that at least four mortars
containing white phosphorus were fired from Gaza.
Hamas released two reports claiming that rocket attacks into Israel during
“Operation Cast Lead” targeted military objectives, and that civilian casualties
were unintended. These claims were belied by repeated attacks toward popula-
WORLD REPORT 2011
538
tion centers by rockets that cannot be targeted with any precision and by statements
from Palestinian armed groups and leaders indicating an intent to harm
civilians as reprisals for Israeli attacks. Rocket, mortar, or other attacks on civilians
are never justified under the laws of war, even as reprisals. In September the
UN found that Hamas had failed to conduct credible investigations into unlawful
rocket attacks or the killings or mistreatment of alleged collaborators or political
rivals.
The Hamas Interior Ministry carried out, for the first time, five judicial death sentences,
all by firing squad. Three of the men executed had been sentenced to
death by military courts for collaboration with Israel, after detentions and trials
that violated due process. Hamas civil and military courts also sentenced a further
six men to death.
The internal security service of the Interior Ministry and Hamas police in Gaza
allegedly tortured 132 people as of August 31, according to complaints received
by the Independent Commission for Human Rights (ICHR), a Palestinian rights
body.
Hamas continued to detain incommunicado Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit, captured
in June 2006, subjecting him to cruel and inhuman treatment by refusing to allow
him to communicate with his family or receive visits by the International
Committee of the Red Cross.
Hamas police continued to harass, detain, and in some cases torture people suspected
of “morality” offenses, including homosexuality and extra-marital sex, and
to arbitrarily close or restrict businesses that allowed unmarried and unrelated
men and women to “mix.” The Interior Ministry closed six NGOs in Rafah in June,
and closed a French NGO that provided medical care in August.
539
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
West Bank
Palestinian Authority
Complaints of torture committed by West Bank PA security services increased in
2010, with the Independent Commission for Human Rights receiving 106 complaints
as of September.
PA courts have not found any security officers responsible for torture or arbitrary
detention. In the one case brought to trial, concerning the death of Haitham Amr,
33, after his arrest by the General Intelligence Service (GIS) in 2009, a PA military
court ordered the GIS to pay compensation to the family but acquitted all five officers
charged with Amr’s death due to “lack of evidence” of torture, despite an
autopsy confirming the cause of death was “directly due to torture.”
The PA’s security services arbitrarily prevented or violently dispersed numerous
nonviolent protests and press conferences during the year, and assaulted and
arbitrarily detained journalists covering the incidents.
Israel
Israeli forces in the West Bank killed at least seven Palestinian civilians as of
October. According to B’Tselem, those killed, including two young men collecting
scrap metal and two children participating in a demonstration inside their village,
posed no danger to Israeli military forces or civilians.
Israeli settlers destroyed or damaged mosques, olive trees, cars, and other
Palestinian property, and physically assaulted Palestinians. In October the UN
reported 204 attacks by settlers resulting in Palestinian injuries or property damage,
almost double the previous year’s number. Israeli authorities arrested
numerous settlers but convicted few.
Home Demolitions and Evacuations
As of October Israeli authorities had demolished 285 Palestinian homes and
other buildings in the West Bank (including East Jerusalem), displacing 340 people,
on the grounds that the structures were built without permits; in practice
WORLD REPORT 2011
540
541
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
such permits are almost impossible for Palestinians to obtain, whereas a separate
planning process available only to settlers grants new construction permits
much more readily. Israeli authorities repeatedly demolished the community of
al-Farsiye in the northern Jordan Valley, displacing approximately 113 people for
living in a “closed military zone.” Some of the displaced families had been living
there since at least the 1960s.
Settlers also continued to take over Palestinian homes in East Jerusalem, including
based on laws that recognize Jewish ownership claims there from before 1948
but that bar Palestinian ownership claims from that period in West Jerusalem.
From November 26, 2009, to September 26, 2010, Israeli authorities “froze” new
residential construction in settlements, not including East Jerusalem or roughly
2,000 homes that had already broken ground, or public buildings and infrastructure.
Freedom of Movement
Israel maintained onerous restrictions on the movement of Palestinians in the
West Bank, especially in “Area C” which is under exclusive Israeli control. It
removed some closure obstacles, but more than 500 remained.
Israel continued construction of the wall or separation barrier. Some 85 percent of
the barrier’s route falls within the West Bank, placing many settlements on the
“Israeli” side of the barrier. The barrier’s confiscation of private land separated
many farmers and pastoralists from their lands.
Arbitrary Detention and Detention of Children as Adults
Israeli military justice authorities arbitrarily detained Palestinians who advocated
non-violent protest against Israeli settlements and the route of the separation
barrier. In October a military court sentenced Abdallah Abu Rahme, from the village
of Bil’in, to one year in prison on charges of inciting violence and organizing
illegal demonstrations, largely on the basis of coerced statements by children. In
January the Israeli military released anti-wall activist Muhammad Othman, after
detaining him for 113 days without charge.
WORLD REPORT 2011
542
While Israeli courts define Israelis under 18 years of age as children in accordance
with international standards, Israeli military courts continue to treat Palestinians
over the age of 16 as “adults,” and sentence them as adults according to their
age at sentencing even if they were children at the time of the offense. Israel
detained at least 286 children under 18, including 20 under the age of 15, as of
September. Human rights groups reported dozens of cases in which Israeli
authorities detained and questioned Palestinian children without a family member
present or access to a lawyer, as required by law, and allegedly mistreated
them in custody to coerce them to sign confessions in Hebrew, which they did not
understand.
As of September Israel held 189 Palestinians in administrative detention without
charge.
Israel
Bedouin citizens of Israel suffered discriminatory home demolitions. From July to
October police and the Israel Land Administration destroyed the Bedouin village
of Al-Araqib six times, displacing 300 people. At the time residents were contesting
in court the state’s claims that they had never owned lands in the area. Some
90,000 Bedouin live in “unrecognized” villages with no basic services and at risk
of demolitions.
Israel also refused to recognize the legal status of thousands of homes owned by
Palestinian citizens of Israel, including the 600-person village of Dahmash in central
Israel, which without legal status lacks any basic services. While residents
legally own the land on which their homes sit, Israel refuses to rezone the land
from its current agricultural status to residential, rendering their homes illegal.
There are an estimated 200,000 migrant workers in Israel, many of whom work in
abusive conditions; employers’ withholding of wages and underpayment is also
reportedly common. The majority of workers are indebted to recruiting agencies
and beholden to a single employer for their livelihood, and are unable to transfer
their employment without their employer’s consent. The government has deported
migrant workers and their children born in Israel, pursuant to policies that
restrict migrant workers from forming families.
543
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Key International Actors
Israel is the largest overall recipient of foreign aid from the United States since
World War II, receiving US$2.775 billion in military aid in 2010. The Obama administration
pushed for a resumption of direct peace negotiations between Israel and
the PA in September, and offered Israel additional aid to renew a partial “freeze”
on settlement construction. The US continued to train and equip Palestinian security
forces, providing $350 million for security and program assistance and an
additional $150 million to the PA in direct budgetary support, while the EU gave
the PA €230 million ($315 million) as of October.
Both the HRC and the UN General Assembly passed follow-up resolutions calling
for Israel and Hamas to investigate serious laws-of-war violations. The PA, apparently
due to external pressure related to negotiations with Israel, conspicuously
failed to refer a Human Rights Council expert report on accountability measures
after the Gaza war to higher-level UN bodies for consideration.
WORLD REPORT 2011
544
Jordan
King Abdullah dissolved parliament on November 24, 2009, halfway through its
four-year term, setting political rights back in 2010. The government ruled by
decree through most of 2010, pending new elections scheduled for November 9.
In a missed opportunity for refom, the government on May 18, 2010, issued a new
election law that maintained higher parliamentary representation for sparsely
populated rural areas– where mainly tribes loyal to the government live–at the
expense of urban population centers, where most Jordanians of Palestinian origin
live.
A new law decreed on June 16 increased the powers of the Ministry of Justice and
diminished judicial independence, over 100 judges said in a protest.
For the first time, a Jordanian court accepted a civil case by an alleged victim of
torture demanding compensation, but at this writing has not yet ruled on it.
Jordan retains the death penalty but since 2006 has observed a moratorium on
its use.
Jordan’s General Intelligence Department (GID) continued to influence decisions
in most aspects of Jordanian public life, including academic freedom, government
appointments, and the issuing of residency permits to non-Jordanians and “good
conduct” certificates required for Jordanians seeking work abroad. The GID
harassed citizens, including one former senior government advisor, over their criticism
of government policies by summoning them for interrogation and threatening
them with unspecified harm.
On April 25 the GID re-arrested Jordanian citizen Samir al-Barq, and detained him
until summarily deporting him to the Israeli-occupied West Bank on July 11, where
Israeli intelligence forces immediately arrested him. On July 18 al-Barq was
charged by an Israeli military court with membership in and training with an
enemy organization and planning terrorist attacks. The GID had previously
detained al-Barq for over two years between 2006 and 2008 without charge.
545
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Deprivation of Nationality
In violation of Jordanian and international law, Jordan continued to arbitrarily
withdraw Jordanian nationality from Jordanians of Palestinian origin, rendering
them stateless and without rights to education, health care, property, or residency
in Jordan. Children of men stripped of their nationality automatically lost theirs
too, even if they were adults. The Interior Ministry said it withdrew the nationality
of 2,700 Jordanians between 2004 and 2008, but did not discuss numbers for
2009 or 2010.
Torture, Arbitrary Detention, and Administrative Detention
Torture, routine and widespread in recent years, continues, in particular at police
stations, where complaints about ill-treatment increased in 2009 and again in
2010, according to the National Center for Human Rights (NCHR).
Perpetrators of torture enjoy near-total impunity, because the police run the system
for accountability in places of detention. The process for redress begins with
a deficient complaint mechanism, continues with lackluster investigations and
prosecutions, and ends in Police Court, where two of three judges on the panel
are police officers appointed by the police (in 2010 a change in law added one
judge from the regular courts, where judges are more independent). Police Court
tends to impose lenient sentences, if any.
Under the Crime Prevention Law, provincial governors can detain people administratively.
The law requires governors to have evidence of criminal conduct, but in
practice, this is not always the case. Administrative detention is frequently used
to circumvent the obligation to present persons suspected of crimes, usually theft
or disorderly conduct, to the prosecutor within 24 hours. It is also used to overrule
judges who have released suspects on bail. In January 2010, the NCHR
reported 16,000 administrative detentions in 2009, up from 14,000 in 2008, and
adding up to around one in five prison inmates over the year.
WORLD REPORT 2011
546
547
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Freedom of Expression and Assembly
Criticism of the king, defamation of government officials and institutions, and
comments deemed to offend Islam or diminish the prestige of the state or harm
international relations carry heavy penalties under the penal code. A June 1 revision
of the penal code increased the penalties for some speech offenses. The
August 29 Law on Information System Crimes extends these provisions to online
expression. Article 5 of the 2007 Press and Publications Law requires publications
to adhere to “Islamic values.”
On July 28 the military prosecutor at the state security court detained university
student Hatim al-Shuli and charged him with insulting King Abdullah and “causing
national strife,” on the basis of a poem al-Shuli denied writing. On September
8 al-Shuli was released and the charges dropped. In July, the state security court
sent Imad al-’Ash to prison for two years for insulting the king in electronic messages
sent to a jihadist website.
Under the Public Gatherings Law of 2008, the governor may deny
permission–without providing a justification–to hold any meeting on public
affairs, including demonstrations. On July 25, police briefly arrested Amina Tariq
under the Public Gatherings Law for conducting an unlicensed peaceful street
protest to promote vegetarianism by covering herself in lettuce. Article 164 of the
penal code also prohibits unlawful gatherings of seven or more persons with the
intention to commit a crime or to disturb public order. The State Security Court on
July 27 used that provision to sentence Muhammad al-Sunaid, head of the
Committee of Day Laborers at Government Offices, to three months in prison for
peacefully demonstrating against the dismissal of day laborers at the Agriculture
Ministry and heckling the minister at a May 10 event in Madaba.
On December 16, 2010, the grace period ends for civic organizations of any type
to comply with a restrictive 2009 Law on Charitable Societies requiring groups
registered as nonprofit companies under the less restrictive Companies Law to
incorporate as charities under the new law, which grants the government discretionary
power to reject applications for new NGOs and to deny their requests for
foreign funding, and wide powers to close existing NGOs.
WORLD REPORT 2011
548
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
A new draft personal status law introduced in April abolishes a 2001 law providing
women with the right to divorce their husbands without having to show fault
(khul). It also continues to allow the marriage of girls as young as 15, if a committee
of Islamic judges approves. In the two years prior to July 2010, 14,000
Jordanian girls under 18 were married, Agence France-Presse reported.
On May 3, 2010, the government decreed amendments to the penal code to
ensure that perpetrators of so-called “honor” crimes receive the full penalty of the
law for killing female relatives suspected of illicit relationships. The new article
345 bis excludes consideration of mitigating circumstances for committing crimes
in a “state of fury” (art. 98) if the victim is under 15 or female. According to Rana
Husseini of The Jordan Times, there were 12 recorded “honor” killings in Jordan
from January to November of 2010.
Changes to the penal code also stiffened penalties for rape from 10 to 15 years in
prison and, in a new provision, stipulated 20 years of hard labor if the victim was
between 15 and 18 years old. New penalties for physical assaults that result in the
death of minors or women were set at a minimum of 12 years in prison.
Labor Rights
Unionized Jordanians may only strike with government permission; non-
Jordanians, although allowed to join unions since 2008, are not allowed to strike.
New regulations on migrant domestic workers, issued in August 2009 following
the inclusion of domestic workers in the Labor Law in July 2008, restricted essential
rights, such as freedom of movement. A Ministry of Labor committee charged
with solving labor disputes failed to secure unpaid salaries of domestic workers,
or adequately protect workers from working long hours and from remaining
trapped in abusive households.
Investigators pursued 34 cases under Jordan’s Anti-Human Trafficking Law of
March 2009 not all of which were prosecuted. The courts had not yet adjudicated
the five cases filed by the Amman prosecutor as of July.
549
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Key International Actors
The United States concluded a five-year agreement, starting in 2010, to provide
Jordan with US$360 million in economic assistance annually, and $300 million in
foreign military financing. This represents an increase over previous annual
requests by the US administration for aid to Jordan, but in the past those were
often supplemented with ad hoc aid, which raised actual US aid to over $1 billion
in 2008 (compared with the European Union’s €265 million, or $369 million for
2007 to 2010).
The EU in November 2009 affirmed its commitment to upgrade relations with
Jordan and in May 2010 signed a €223 million ($310million) aid package over
three years from 2011 to 2013. One of four priority areas is to address democracy,
human rights, media, and justice. This 12 percent increase in EU aid comes
despite a lack of progress, and a number of reverses during 2010, in these areas.
WORLD REPORT 2011
550
Kuwait
Kuwait’s human rights record drew increased international scrutiny in 2010, as
proposed reforms for stateless persons, women’s rights, and domestic workers
remained stalled. Freedom of expression deteriorated as the government continued
criminal prosecutions for libel and slander, and charged at least one individual
with state security crimes for expressing nonviolent political opinions.
Discrimination against women continues in nationality, residency, and family
laws, and in their economic rights, though women gained the right to vote and
run for office in 2005.
Kuwait continues to exclude the stateless Bidun people from full citizenship,
despite their longstanding roots in Kuwaiti territory. The Bidun also face discrimination
accessing education, health care, and employment, as well as violations of
their right to marry and establish a family because they are not allowed to register
births, marriages, or deaths.
Kuwait significantly advanced workers’ rights in 2010 through a new private sector
labor law. Minister of Labor Mohammad al-’Afasi announced in September
2010 the government would abolish the sponsorship system in February 2011 and
supervise migrant labor recruitment through a government authority. However the
new law continued to exclude domestic workers, who make up approximately
one-third of the private sector workforce and face recurring abuses. Labor ministry
officials informed Human Rights Watch that plans for sponsorship reform
also exclude domestic workers.
In May 2010, at the United Nations Human Rights Council in Geneva, Kuwait
promised to sign the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and to
establish an independent human rights institution based on the Paris Principles.
At this writing the government has not made definite progress towards either
measure.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
Kuwait’s nationality law denies Kuwaiti women married to non-Kuwaiti men the
right to pass their nationality on to their children and spouses, a right enjoyed by
Kuwaiti men married to foreign spouses. The law also discriminates against
551
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
women in residency rights, allowing the spouses of Kuwaiti men but not of
Kuwaiti women to be in Kuwait without employment and to qualify for citizenship
after 10 years of marriage.
In 2005 Kuwaiti women won the right to vote and to run in elections, and in May
2009 voters elected four women to parliament. In April 2010 an administrative
court rejected a female Kuwaiti law graduate’s application to become a public
prosecutor based on her gender. The advertisement for the position was open to
male candidates only. The presiding judge found that article two of Kuwait’s constitution,
which cites Islam as the state religion and Islamic Sharia as “a main
source of legislation,” prevented women from holding prosecutorial positions.
Kuwaiti women are also denied the right to become judges.
No government data exists on the prevalence of violence against women in
Kuwait, although local media regularly report incidents of violence.
Bidun
Kuwait hosts up to 120,000 stateless persons, known as the Bidun. The state
classifies these long-term residents as “illegal residents,” maintaining that most
do not hold legitimate claims to Kuwaiti nationality and hide “true” nationalities
from Iraq, Saudi Arabia, or Iran.
Due to their statelessness, the Bidun cannot freely leave and return to Kuwait; the
government issues them temporary passports at its discretion, mostly valid for
only one journey. Furthermore the Bidun face restrictions in their access to public
and private sector employment, as well as to healthcare. Bidun children may not
enroll in free government schools. The Bidun also cannot register births, marriages,
or deaths, obstructing their rights to family life.
Lawmakers in December 2009 failed to reach the quorum required to discuss a
2007 draft law that would grant the Bidun civil rights and permanent residency,
but not nationality. In January 2010 the assembly tasked the Supreme Council for
Higher Planning with reporting on the Bidun situation. Bidun from Kuwait continued
to seek and receive asylum abroad in countries including the United
Kingdom and New Zealand, based upon their treatment by Kuwaiti government
authorities.
WORLD REPORT 2011
552
Freedom of Expression and Media
Freedom of expression markedly deteriorated in 2010. The government continued
criminally prosecuting individuals based on nonviolent political speech, denied
academics permission to enter the country for conferences and speeches, and
cracked down on public gatherings. In April state security forces summarily
deported over 30 Egyptian legal residents of Kuwait after some of them gathered
to support Egyptian reform advocate Mohammed El Baradei.
In May prominent writer and lawyer Mohammad al-Jassim was detained for over
40 days and charged with “instigating to overthrow the regime, …slight to the personage
of the emir [the ruler of Kuwait],… [and] instigating to dismantle the foundations
of Kuwaiti society” over his blog posts criticizing the prime minister. A
judge released al-Jassim in June and adjourned the case until October.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Kuwait continues to criminalize consensual homosexual conduct, in contravention
of international best practices. Article 193 of Kuwait’s penal code punishes
consensual sexual intercourse between men over the age of 21, with up to seven
years imprisonment (10 years, if under 21 years old). Article 198 of the penal code
criminalized “imitating the appearance of a member of the opposite sex,” imposing
arbitrary restrictions upon individuals’ rights to privacy and free expression.
The police continued to arrest and detain transgendered women on the basis of
the law, many of whom have previously reported abuse while in detention.
Migrant Worker Rights
More than two million foreign nationals reside in Kuwait, constituting an estimated
80 percent of the country’s workforce. Many experience exploitative labor conditions,
including private employers who illegally confiscate their passports or do
not pay their wages. Migrant workers often pay exorbitant recruitment fees to
labor agents in their home countries and must then work off their debt in Kuwait.
For the first time since 1954 the government passed a new private sector labor
law in February, which provides workers with more protections on wages, working
553
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
hours, and safety. However, it does not establish monitoring mechanisms and
continues to exclude the country’s 660,000 domestic workers who come chiefly
from Indonesia, Sri Lanka, and the Philippines and work and live inside employers’
homes in Kuwait. No law provides them with a weekly rest day, limits their
working hours, or sets a minimum wage. Many domestic workers complain of
confinement in the house; long work hours without rest; months or years of
unpaid wages; and verbal, physical, and sexual abuse.
A major barrier to redressing labor abuses is the kafala (sponsorship) system,
which ties a migrant worker’s legal residence in Kuwait to his or her employer,
who serves as a “sponsor.” Migrant workers who have worked for their sponsor
less than three years can only transfer with their sponsor’s consent (migrant
domestic workers always require consent). If a worker leaves their sponsoring
employer, including when fleeing abuse, the employer can register the worker as
“absconding”, a criminal offense that most often leads to detention and deportation.
In September the government announced plans to abolish the sponsorship
system in February 2011, but provided no details about the system that would
replace it, or whether it would include migrant domestic workers.
Key International Actors
The United States, in the 2010 State Department Trafficking in Persons report,
classified Kuwait as Tier 3—among the most problematic countries—for the fourth
year in a row. However, the US chose not to impose sanctions for Kuwait’s failure
to combat human trafficking. President Barack Obama determined that sanctions
would affect US$2.4 billion in projected foreign military sales to Kuwait and
would restrict a US$4 million grant to the Middle East Partnership Initiative, considered
a key tool for promoting democracy and respect for human rights in the
country.
In April 2010 UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Navanethem Pillay visited
Kuwait and spotlighted the sponsorship system and statelessness as pressing
human rights concerns.
WORLD REPORT 2011
554
555
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Lebanon
Lebanese officials showed increased willingness to discuss human rights concerns
in 2010, but failed to implement many of the reforms needed to improve the
country’s record.
The authorities rejected a proposed law that would grant women the right to pass
nationality to their husbands and children, and despite promises to the contrary,
made no efforts to shed light on the fate of people who disappeared during the
1975-1990 civil war. In August parliament enacted a long-awaited amendment to
ease Palestinian refugees’ access to the labor market, but the reform fell short of
expectations.
Tension increased in the second half of the year over the United Nations tribunal
tasked with investigating the killing in 2005 of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri,
amid fears the country would again plunge into turmoil.
Torture, Ill-Treatment, and Prison Conditions
Lebanese law prohibits torture, but accountability for torture remains elusive. A
number of detainees, especially suspected spies for Israel and armed Jihadists,
told Human Rights Watch that their interrogators tortured them in a number of
detention facilities, including the Ministry of Defense and the Information Branch
of the Internal Security Forces. Lebanon has not yet established a national preventive
mechanism to visit and monitor places of detention, as required under
the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (OPCAT), which it ratified
in 2008.
Conditions in prisons remain poor, with overcrowding and lack of proper medical
care a persistent problem. According to the Internal Security Forces, pretrial
detainees represent around two-thirds of the total number of detainees.
Lebanon maintained its de facto moratorium on executions, but at least five
death sentences were passed in 2010. Many political leaders called for the death
penalty against persons convicted of spying for Israel. In July President Michel
WORLD REPORT 2011
556
Suleiman, who under Lebanese law must approve every death sentence, said that
he would approve death penalties issued by military tribunals.
Freedom of Expression
Despite Lebanon’s vibrant media, 2010 saw increased harassment of bloggers
and journalists who criticize the army and certain high-ranking officials. In March
Military Intelligence briefly detained and interrogated a blogger, Khodor Salemeh,
for posting a series of articles critical of the army and the three heads of state. In
June security forces detained Na`im Hanna, Antoine Ramia, and Shibel Kassab for
posting comments critical of the president on Facebook. An investigative judge
charged them with libel, defamation, and insulting the president, but released
them on bail on July 2. In August Military Intelligence summoned Hassan Oleik, a
journalist with al-Akhbar newspaper, for writing about an alleged conversation
between Defense Minister Elias Murr and the country’s army commander, Jean
Kahwaji, concerning a suspected Israeli spy. They released him a few hours later.
In August Military Intelligence also briefly detained Ismael Sheikh Hassan, an
urban planner, over an article he published criticizing public authorities and the
army for their handling of the reconstruction of the Nahr al-Bared refugee camp.
Refugees
The estimated 300,000 Palestinian refugees in Lebanon live in appalling social
and economic conditions. In August Lebanon’s parliament amended its labor law
to facilitate the ability of Palestinian refugees to obtain work permits by exempting
them from reciprocity requirements, eliminating work permit fees, and giving
them limited social security benefits. However, the reform did nothing to remove
restrictions that bar Palestinians from working in at least 25 professions requiring
syndicate membership, including law, medicine, and engineering. It also leaves
in place a work permit system that relies on employer cooperation, a system that
has previously relegated most Palestinians to black market labor. Palestinian
refugees are still subject to a discriminatory law introduced in 2001 preventing
them from registering property.
Palestinians from the Nahr al-Bared refugee camp—destroyed in the 2007 battle
between Lebanon’s army and the armed Fatah al-Islam group—continue to live in
557
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
dire conditions. Reconstruction efforts have been delayed, and UN Relief and
Work Agency reported the first set of rebuilt houses will not be delivered before
March 2011. The Lebanese army restricts movement to the camp by maintaining
checkpoints around it.
According to government sources, the Ministry of Interior resumed issuing temporary
identification papers to Palestinians in Lebanon who are without legal documentation
as part of a plan to improve the legal status of at least 3,000 non-ID
Palestinians who had previously lived in constant fear of arrest. The ministry had
stopped the process in early 2009, citing fraudulent applications.
As of September 30 there were 9,768 non-Palestinian refugees and asylum-seekers
registered with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
more than 80 percent of them from Iraq. Since Lebanon has not ratified the 1951
Refugee Convention, it does not give legal effect to UNHCR’s recognition of
refugees and generally treats most as illegal immigrants subject to arrest. As of
October 31, 54 recognized refugees or asylum seekers remained in detention
solely for not holding proper residency papers.
Migrant Workers’ Rights
Migrant domestic workers (MDW) face exploitation and abuse by employers,
including excessive work hours, non-payment of wages, confinement in the workplace,
and in some cases physical and sexual abuse. MDWs suing their employers
for abuse face legal obstacles and risk imprisonment and deportation due to
the restrictive visa system. In June the Ministry of Labor instituted a hotline to
receive workers’ complaints. MDWs continue to die in high numbers, with eight
deaths in August alone. Most are classified as suicides.
Male migrant workers—mostly from Syria and Egypt—working in construction and
other manual jobs face hazardous working conditions and are regular targets for
robbery and violent attack. State authorities have not made any concerted effort
to protect them or bring perpetrators to justice.
WORLD REPORT 2011
558
559
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Detention of Foreigners after their Sentence
According to the Internal Security Forces, around 13 percent of detainees in
Lebanese prisons were foreigners who had finished serving their sentence. The
group included asylum seekers and refugees who cannot safely return to their
countries. Their ongoing detention is illegal. In September 2010 Lebanon’s
Council of Ministers adopted a decree with the stated purpose of reducing the
number of foreigners detained beyond their sentence. However, the decree has
not yet been implemented and will not address concerns about the detention of
asylum seekers and refugees who do not hold proper residency papers.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
Discriminatory provisions continue to exist in personal status laws, nationality
laws, and penal laws relating to violence in the family. In May the Council of
Ministers issued a decree expanding the right of children and husbands of
Lebanese women to reside in Lebanon, but Lebanese women, unlike Lebanese
men, still cannot pass pass their nationality to foreign husbands and children.
In April the Council of Ministers submitted to parliament a new bill that aims to
criminalize domestic violence. The bill requires anyone who witnesses domestic
violence to report it and obliges perpetrators to provide the plaintiff with alternative
living arrangements, an allowance, and to pay medical expenses.
Legacy of Past Conflicts and Wars
Lebanon deposited its ratification of the Convention on Cluster Munitions with
the UN on November 5, 2010. The submunition “duds” left behind by Israel’s
2006 bombardment of southern Lebanon continue to harm civilians: according to
the official Lebanon Mine Action Center, such duds have killed at least 45 and
wounded more than 300 since 2006.
Despite a 2009 pledge to work to uncover the fate of the Lebanese and other
nationals who “disappeared” during and after the 1975-1990 Lebanese civil war
and to ratify the International Convention for the Protection of all Persons from
Enforced Disappearances, the government took no steps on these issues in 2010.
WORLD REPORT 2011
560
An official joint Syrian-Lebanese committee established in May 2005 to investigate
cases of Lebanese who “disappeared” at the hands of Syrian security forces
has not published any findings at this writing.
Hariri Tribunal
Tension over the intention of the UN’s international tribunal to try those responsible
for killing former Prime Minister Hariri in 2005 and other politically motivated
assassinations increased in anticipation of possible indictments that may implicate
members of Hezbollah. Hezbollah called for a boycott of the tribunal, accusing
it of being an “Israeli project.”
Key International Actors
Multiple international and regional actors compete for influence in Lebanon.
Regionally, Syria, Iran, and Saudi Arabia maintain a strong influence on Lebanese
politics through their local allies.
France, the United States, and the European Union provide assistance for a wide
range of programs, including armed forces training, torture prevention seminars,
and civil society activities. However these countries have not fully used their
leverage to push Lebanon to adopt concrete measures to improve its human
rights record, such as investigating specific allegations of torture or adopting laws
that respect the rights of refugees or migrant workers.
UN peacekeepers are still present in large numbers at Lebanon’s volatile southern
border with Israel.
561
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Libya
Government control and repression of civil society remain the norm in Libya, with
little progress made on promised human rights reforms. While releases of large
numbers of Islamist prisoners continued, 2010 saw stagnation on key issues such
as penal code reform, freedom of association, and accountability for the Abu
Salim prison massacre in 1996.
Libya maintains harsh restrictions on freedom of assembly and expression,
including penal code provisions that criminalize “insulting public officials” or
“opposing the ideology of the Revolution,” although there has been slightly more
media debate in recent years, particularly online.
Arbitrary Detention and Prisoner Releases
An estimated 213 prisoners who have served their sentences or been acquitted by
Libyan courts remain imprisoned under Internal Security Agency orders. The
agency, under the jurisdiction of the General People’s Committee for Public
Security, controls the Ain Zara and Abu Salim prisons, where it holds political and
“security” detainees. It has refused to carry out judicial orders to free these prisoners,
despite calls from the secretary of justice for their release.
In March Libyan authorities released 214 prisoners, including 80 of a group of 330
detained despite the fact that courts had acquitted them and ordered their
release. Some former prisoners have received compensation from the state for
years of arbitrary detention. Others are still struggling to receive compensation,
and many are banned from travelling outside Libya.
The 1996 Abu Salim Prison Massacre and Enforced
Disappearances
The authorities have not made public any account of the June 1996 Abu Salim
prison massacre in which 1,200 prisoners were killed, nor have they held anyone
responsible. On September 6, 2009, the acting secretary of defense established a
seven-judge investigation panel, headed by a former military tribunal judge, to
conduct an investigation. The panel’s final report was due in March 2010, but it
WORLD REPORT 2011
562
563
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
remains unpublished at this writing. Libyan authorities offered compensation of
200,000 dinars (US$162,000) to families who agree to relinquish all legal claims,
but most of the victims’ families in Benghazi, Libya’s second-largest city, refused
to accept compensation on those terms and continued to call for criminal
accountability. In June families reported that local authorities and security officials
were pressuring them to relinquish their compensation claims.
There are still dozens of unresolved disappearance cases in Libya, including
those of Libyan opposition members Jaballa Hamed Matar and Izzat al-Megaryef,
whom Egyptian security arrested in 1990 in Cairo. Their families later learned that
Egypt had handed them over to Libyan security officials, who detained them in
Abu Salim prison. Prominent Lebanese Shia cleric Imam Musa al-Sadr disappeared
in Libya 32 years ago; his fate remains unknown.
Freedom of Expression, Association, and Assembly
While there was a gradual opening for greater debate and discussion in the
media during the past five years, especially on the internet, 2010 saw a general
regression in freedom of expression, which remains severely curtailed. In January
the Libyan government blocked access to at least seven independent and opposition
Libyan websites based abroad, including Libya Al Youm, Al Manara, and
Libya Al Mostakbal. Journalists face harassment for expressing criticism, and lawsuits
and criminal sanctions for defamation. In February security officers briefly
arrested four journalists from the radio station Good Evening Benghazi, and
authorities banned the program from airing. In November Internal Security officers
arrested 20 journalists from the Libya Press agency for three days and suspended
the publication of Oea, both established by Saif al-Islam al-Gaddafi, the
Libyan leader’s son.
In April the Libyan State Security Court acquitted dissident Jamal al-Haji of “insulting
judicial authorities” and freed him after four months in prison. Al-Haji’s arrest
stemmed from his public complaint about the torture and inhumane conditions
that he endured during two years as a political prisoner from 2007 to 2009, and
the travel ban he has faced since his release. Article 178 of the penal code carries
penalties up to life imprisonment for disseminating information considered to
“tarnish [the country’s] reputation or undermine confidence in it abroad.”
WORLD REPORT 2011
564
Negative comments about Libyan leader Col. Mu`ammar al-Gaddafi are frequently
punished, and self-censorship is rife.
Libya has no independent NGOs and Libyan laws severely restrict freedom of
association. Law 71 bans any group activity opposing the ideology of the 1969
revolution, and the penal code imposes the death penalty on those who join such
groups. The government has refused to allow independent journalists’ and
lawyers’ organizations. The only organization able to criticize human rights violations
publicly is the Human Rights Society of the Gaddafi Foundation, which is
chaired by Saif al-Islam al-Gaddafi.
Demonstrations are also illegal, although those by families of victims of the Abu
Salim prison killings continued in Benghazi in 2010. While the government
allowed the demonstrations, some of the organizers faced harassment, intimidation,
and arrest.
Treatment of Foreigners
Libya continues to abuse and mistreat non-Libyan migrants caught trying to leave
the country by boat. Libya also refuses to recognize the presence of refugees in
the country. In April Libyan Foreign Secretary Moussa Koussa said that Libya
“does not have any refugees but only illegal migrants who break the laws.” In July
the government said that there were 3 million irregular migrants in Libya. A new
law on “Illegal Migration” criminalizes trafficking of migrants, but does not provide
protections for refugees.
On June 28 a group of detained Eritrean migrants tried to escape after Libyan officials
allowed Eritrean embassy officials to take their photos and forced them to
complete forms, raising fear of deportation. In response, Libyan authorities transported
245 detained Eritrean asylum seekers from Misrata to another detention
center in al-Biraq, north of Sabha, in an apparent attempt to deport them. At least
11 of this group were Eritreans whom Italy had interdicted at sea and forced back
to Libya without giving them an opportunity to claim asylum. After an international
outcry, Libya released this group but did not give them any support or protection.
They remain in Libya.
565
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Libya has no asylum law, has not signed the 1951 Refugee Convention, and has
no formal working agreement with the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR). Although UNHCR had partial and ad hoc access to detained
migrants for two years, in June Libya ordered UNHCR to close its office and
expelled its representative, although it later allowed the agency to continue processing
resettlement cases.
Rights of the Amazigh Minority
The Amazigh (Berbers), Libya’s main cultural and linguistic minority, face discrimination
and harassment by security officials. Libyan authorities do not allow
schools to teach, or media to use, the Amazigh language. Libyan law also bans
use of non-Arab Amazigh names on all official documentation. In January Colonel
Gaddafi criticized Amazigh New Year celebrations as un-Islamic and not recognized
by the state, saying they disrupted national unity; an Amazigh organization
reported that at least two people had been arrested in connection with trying to
organize celebrations. The Amazigh website Libya Imal was among those blocked
by authorities in January. In August Internal Security officers arrested Amazigh
activist Ali Abu al-Seoud and detained him incommunicado for eight days in connection
with his online writing on Amazigh rights. They released him without
charge.
Women’s Rights
In January the General People’s Committee adopted Law No. 24 of 2010 on the
Provisions of Libyan Nationality, which permits the passing of Libyan nationality
to children born to Libyan mothers and foreign fathers, but leaves the interpretation
of the provision to implementing regulations that the committee has not yet
issued.
The Libyan government continues to detain women and girls indefinitely without
due process in “social rehabilitation” facilities for suspected transgression of
moral codes. Many women and girls detained in these facilities have committed
no crime, or have already served a sentence. Some are there only because they
were raped, and are now ostracized for staining their family’s “honor.”
WORLD REPORT 2011
566
Key International Actors
In May member states elected Libya to a seat on the UN Human Rights Council.
Libya’s election was uncontested because the African Group of States presented
the same number of candidates as there were vacancies for this election. In
November Libya’s human rights record came under review at the Council during
Libya’s first Universal Periodic Review. The government accepted 66 general recommendations
but rejected 25 other concrete recommendations on revising
penal code articles and publishing a list of the disappeared.
In October the European Union and Libya concluded an agreement on an agenda
for migration cooperation, which made no mention of the lack of an asylum law or
protection mechanisms in Libya. Negotiations over the EU-Libya Framework agreement
resumed after Libya scrapped its ban on the entry of EU nationals.
In December 2009 Human Rights Watch released its “Truth and Justice Can’t
Wait” report at a news conference in Tripoli, the first time an independent human
rights organization had been allowed to publicly criticize Libya’s human rights
record in the capital.
567
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Morocco and Western Sahara
In 2010 human rights conditions in Morocco were mixed, and in some aspects,
decidedly poor. The government used repressive legislation and complaisant
courts to punish and imprison peaceful opponents, especially those who violated
taboos and laws against criticizing the king and the monarchy, questioning
Morocco’s claim over Western Sahara, or “denigrating” Islam.
The government particularly restricts rights in the restive Western Sahara region,
over which Morocco claims sovereignty, and which it administers as part of its
national territory. A Western Sahara independence movement based in exile, the
Popular Front for the Liberation of Saguía al-Hamra and Río de Oro (the Polisario
Front), demands a public referendum that includes the option of independence.
Over the years the Moroccan authorities have imprisoned many peaceful advocates
of this position while instead proposing autonomy under Moroccan sovereignty.
Terrorism and Counterterrorism
Hundreds of suspected Islamist extremists arrested in the aftermath of the
Casablanca bombings of May 2003 remain in prison. Many were convicted in
unfair trials after being held in secret detention and subjected to mistreatment
and sometimes torture. Some were sentenced to death, a punishment that
Morocco has not abolished even though it has not been carried out since 1993.
Since further terrorist attacks in 2007, police have arrested hundreds more suspected
militants, many of whom were convicted and imprisoned for belonging to
a “terrorist network” or preparing to join “the jihad” in Iraq or elsewhere.
Intelligence agencies continued to interrogate terrorism suspects at an unacknowledged
detention center at Temara, near Rabat, according to reports from
detainees. Many suspects alleged that police tortured them under interrogation,
while holding them in pre-charge custody for longer than the 12-day maximum the
law provides for terrorism cases. For example, several men arrested in and
around Casablanca in March and April for suspected al Qaeda links told Human
Rights Watch that plainclothes agents who showed no warrants or identification
arrested, blindfolded, and transported them to a secret location, which they
WORLD REPORT 2011
568
569
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
believe was the Temara facility, and held and interrogated them for up to 36 days
before transferring them to a regular police jail. Most said that they suffered torture.
The government formally denied these allegations to Human Rights Watch
and stated that the arrests and detentions in these cases were conducted according
to the law.
In August tapes recorded by the United States CIA were made public showing that
the US had in 2002 transported terrorism suspect Ramzi Benalshibh to Morocco
for interrogation in a secret Moroccan-run facility, before flying him to
Guantanamo. Moroccan authorities deny operating secret jails.
Confronting Past Abuses
Following the pioneering work Morocco’s Equity and Reconciliation Commission
(ERC) completed in 2005, the government acknowledged responsibility for “disappearances”
and other grave abuses in the past, and compensated some
16,000 victims or their relatives. However, no Moroccan officials or security force
members are known to have been prosecuted for rights violations committed during
the period from 1956 to 1999 that the ERC investigated, and the government
has yet to implement most of the institutional reforms the ERC recommended to
safeguard against future abuses. In September the government said it would convert
some notorious former secret prisons into memorials for the “preservation
and rehabilitation of memory.”
Police Conduct and the Criminal Justice System
Courts seldom provide fair trials in cases with political overtones. Judges routinely
ignore requests for medical examinations from defendants who claim to have
been tortured, refuse to summon exculpatory witnesses, and convict defendants
on the basis of apparently coerced confessions. On July 16 the Rabat Court of
Appeals upheld the 2009 conviction of all 35 defendants–in a trial known as the
Belliraj case–on charges that included forming a terrorist network. The court
maintained the life sentence imposed on alleged ringleader Abdelkader Belliraj
while reducing the sentences for five codefendants who were political figures to
10 years in prison. As in the first trial the appeals court based the guilty verdicts
almost entirely on the defendants’ “confessions” to the police, even though most
WORLD REPORT 2011
570
of the defendants had repudiated these statements in court. The court refused to
investigate the defendants’ allegations of torture, detention in secret jails, and
the falsification of confessions.
The authorities jailed prominent nonviolent pro-independence Sahrawi activists
Ali Salem Tamek, Brahim Dahane, and Ahmed Naciri after arresting them on
October 8, 2009. Four other Sahrawi activists arrested at the same time were later
released pending trial. The police arrested the seven upon their return from an
unprecedented public visit with the Polisario leadership in the Sahrawi refugee
camps near Tindouf, Algeria. A Casablanca judge initially referred the case against
the seven to a military court on the grounds that the alleged offenses included
harming “external state security” by “causing harm to Morocco’s territorial integrity,”
but nearly one year later the military judge sent the case back to civilian court
on the lesser charge of “harming [Morocco’s] internal security.” The trial opened
on October 15 and was immediately postponed as three of the defendants
entered their second year in provisional detention.
Sahrawi students Abdellah Daihani and Ali Toumi left prison in April after serving
six months for “insulting state institutions.” Their offense consisted of proclaiming
that they recognized neither the Moroccan police nor the state during a political
argument with other passengers on a train.
Freedoms of Association, Assembly, and Movement
Morocco boasts thousands of independent associations, but government officials
arbitrarily impede the legalization of some organizations, undermining their freedom
to operate. Groups affected include some that defend the rights of Sahrawis,
Amazighs (Berbers), sub-Saharan immigrants, and unemployed university graduates,
as well as charitable, cultural, and educational associations whose leadership
includes members of Justice and Spirituality, a nationwide movement that
advocates for an Islamic state and questions the king’s spiritual authority.
The government, which does not recognize Justice and Spirituality as a legal association,
tolerated many of its activities but prevented others. On June 28 the
police arrested seven movement members in Fez after an ex-member claimed
they had abducted and tortured him. According to the suspects, the police tor-
571
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
tured them and forced them to sign confessions without reading them first. A
medical examination conducted on one of the defendants noted that he had
injuries that seemed to coincide with his period in police custody. The seven men
are on trial for abduction and torture at this writing.
The government generally tolerates the work of the many human rights organizations
active in Rabat and Casablanca, but individual activists sometimes paid a
heavy price for whistle-blowing. Chekib el-Khayari, president of the Association
for Human Rights in the Rif, has been serving a three-year term since February
2009 for “gravely insulting state institutions” and minor currency violations. The
authorities arrested him after he accused certain Moroccan officials of complicity
in narcotics trafficking. A Casablanca appeals court on November 24, 2009 confirmed
the verdict.
Retired Col.-Maj. Kaddour Terhzaz, born in 1937, remains incarcerated after a military
court convicted him in a one-day trial in November 2008 for disclosing
“national defense secrets,” solely because of a 2005 letter he had addressed to
the king that criticized what he saw as Morocco’s shabby treatment of pilots who
had been held as prisoners of war by the Polisario.
Authorities generally do not hamper the activities of foreign human rights groups
visiting Morocco. Surveillance is tighter in Western Sahara, although authorities
in El-Ayoun eased the requirement they imposed in 2009 that foreigners notify
them before visiting Sahrawi activists at home.
Sahrawi activists enjoyed more freedom to travel abroad than in 2009, with fewer
reports of authorities confiscating or refusing to renew their passports or preventing
them from boarding flights.
Most types of outdoor gatherings require authorization from the Interior Ministry,
which can refuse permission if it deems them liable to “disturb the public order.”
Although many public protests run their course undisturbed, baton-wielding
police have brutally broken up some demonstrations. Among the most frequent
targets are the protests organized across the country by chapters of the National
Association of Unemployed University Graduates. For example, on March 31,
security forces charged and dispersed a sit-in by the association in Nador, injuring
several and briefly detaining four of the organizers.
WORLD REPORT 2011
572
In early October several thousand Sahrawi residents of El-Ayoun, Western Sahara,
erected a tent camp outside the city to dramatize a list of economic grievances.
Authorities negotiated with camp leaders but early on November 8 ordered the
protesters to leave and then dismantled their tent city by force, using mostly
water cannons and tear gas. They encountered some violent resistance and there
were casualties among the security forces and civilians. Sahrawis in the city of El
Ayoun erupted in protest the same day, with further casualties on both sides,
including scores of Sahrawi men and women whom the police beat brutally while
in custody. At this writing Human Rights Watch is investigating these events.
Media Freedom
Morocco’s independent print and online media investigate and criticize government
officials and policies but face prosecution and harassment when they cross
certain lines. The press law includes prison terms for “maliciously” spreading
“false information” likely to disturb the public order or for speech that is defamatory,
offensive to members of the royal family, or that undermines “Islam, the
institution of the monarchy, or territorial integrity,” that is, Morocco’s claim on
Western Sahara.
The independent, provocative Arabic daily Akhbar al-Youm was reborn as Akhbar
al-Youm al-Maghrebiya after a court shut the newspaper down on October 30,
2009 for publishing a cartoon that depicted a cousin of King Mohammed VI in an
allegedly disrespectful fashion. However, the narrow field of serious independent
news media lost key publications in 2010 with the closures, for financial reasons,
of Nichan and Le Journal weeklies and al-Jarida al-Oula daily. The latter two had
in recent years been the object of numerous prosecutions, some of them politically
motivated, for defamation and other offenses.
The king on June 12 pardoned the only journalist in prison during the first half of
2010, Driss Chahtane, editor of al-Mish’al weekly. Chahtane had served eight
months of a one year sentence for “maliciously” publishing “false news” about
the king’s health.
Moroccan state television provides some room for investigative reporting but little
for direct criticism of the government or for dissent on key issues. In May the
573
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Ministry of Communication announced that foreign stations, which have a large
viewership in Morocco, must obtain authorization before filming outside the capital.
The ministry refused for the second straight year to accredit two local Al
Jazeera correspondents without providing a reason and then, on October 29,
announced the suspension of the channel’s activities in Morocco on the grounds
that the channel “seriously distorted Morocco’s image and manifestly damaged
its greater interests, most notably its territorial integrity,” an apparent allusion to
Western Sahara.
Religious and Cultural Freedoms
During 2010 Morocco summarily expelled over 100 Protestant foreign nationals
among the several hundred living legally in the country. The authorities orally
informed some that they had violated laws against proselytizing, but did not
charge them before forcing them to leave. In other cases, the authorities told the
persons their departures were “an urgent necessity for state or public security,” a
legal formulation that allows immediate expulsions without charges or due
process.
The Interior Ministry issued a circular in April 2010 that made it easier for parents
to register Amazigh (Berber) first names for their newborns. But civil registrars
continued to reject Amazigh names in isolated cases, prompting calls from
Amazigh activists for the ministry to ensure that all civil registrars heed the new
circular.
Human Rights Violations by the Polisario
On September 21 the Polisario arrested Mostapha Selma Sidi Mouloud, a Sahrawi
refugee residing in the Tindouf camps in Algeria, upon his return from Moroccancontrolled
Western Sahara, where he had publicly announced his support for
Morocco’s proposal to maintain sovereignty over the region while granting it a
measure of autonomy. The Polisario said they had arrested Selma for “espionage”
and “treason,” but on October 6 announced his release. At this writing he
remains under Polisario auspices while the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees work to resettle him in a place of his choosing.
WORLD REPORT 2011
574
Key International Actors
In 2008 the European Union gave Morocco “advanced status,” placing it a notch
above other members of the EU’s “neighbourhood policy.” Morocco is the biggest
Middle Eastern beneficiary of EU aid after Palestine, with €580 million (approximately
US$808 million) earmarked for 2011-2013.
France is Morocco’s leading trade partner and source of public development aid
and private investment. France increased its Overseas Development Assistance to
€600 million for 2010-2012. France rarely publicly criticized Morocco’s human
rights practices and openly supported its autonomy plan for Western Sahara.
The US provides financial aid to Morocco, a close ally, including a five-year $697
million grant beginning in 2008 from the Millennium Challenge Corporation to
reduce poverty and stimulate economic growth. On human rights, the US continued
to publicly praise Morocco’s reform efforts and advances made by women.
The State Department’s Counterterrorism Report for 2009 sent Morocco the wrong
signal by favorably noting its convictions of alleged terrorists without mentioning
the repeated fair-trial violations in such cases. Officials from the US embassy in
Rabat told Human Rights Watch that they urged Morocco to reform its press code,
provide due process to expatriate Christians facing expulsion, and apply its law
on associations more consistently, including by recognizing Sahrawi human rights
NGOs that currently lack legal status.
The UN Security Council in April 2010 renewed the mandate of the UN Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) for one year but once again
declined to enlarge that mandate to include human rights observation and protection.
Morocco opposes giving MINURSO such a mandate, whereas the Polisario
says it supports it.
King Mohammed VI announced in 2008 that Morocco would lift its reservations to
the Convention for the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,
but that has yet to happen at this writing. Morocco has not ratified the Rome
Statute for the International Criminal Court or the Convention for the Protection of
All Persons against Enforced Disappearances, although it helped to draft the latter.
575
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Saudi Arabia
Human rights conditions remain poor in Saudi Arabia. King Abdullah has not fulfilled
several specific reform promises; reforms to date have involved largely symbolic
steps to improve the visibility of women and marginally expand freedom of
expression.
Authorities continue to systematically suppress or fail to protect the rights of nine
million Saudi women and girls, eight million foreign workers, and some two million
Shia citizens. Each year thousands of people receive unfair trials or are subject
to arbitrary detention. Curbs on freedom of association, expression, and
movement, as well as a pervasive lack of official accountability, remain serious
concerns.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
Saudi Arabia continues to treat women as legal minors, allowing male guardians
to determine whether a woman may work, study, marry, travel, or undergo certain
medical procedures. The government has not fulfilled its 2009 pledge to the
United Nations Human Rights Council to dismantle the male guardianship system.
The Ministry of Interior since October 2009 has refused to issue a 43-year-old
divorced woman cardiologist a new passport without male guardian approval. In
2010 the uncles and male guardians of a US-based adult woman with dual Saudi
and US nationality did not allow her to obtain a Saudi passport. In May Nazia
Quazi–the Indian father of 23-year-old dual Canadian and Indian national–finally
permitted his daughter to leave Saudi Arabia after luring her to the kingdom in
2007 and keeping her there, as her guardian, against her will because he disapproved
of her fiance.
A medical doctor in her forties lost a court appeal to remove her father as her
guardian after he refused to give her hand in marriage and confiscated her
income. She lives in a women’s shelter. The brothers of two unrelated women—
one in Buraida, the other in Riyadh—acting as their guardians, forced their sisters
to marry five men each, for money and against their wills. In January 2010 a court
WORLD REPORT 2011
576
577
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
in Qasim province sentenced Sawsan Salim to 300 lashes and one-and-a-half
years in prison for “appearing [in court] without a male guardian.”
The Saudi Human Rights Commission did not respond to written requests from
Human Rights Watch that it assist Nazia Quazi, Sawsan Salim, ‘A’isha Ali, or the
women in Buraida and Riyadh. The woman in Riyadh said she had contacted the
commission but that it had failed to assist her.
Women and children who are victims of domestic violence face societal and governmental
obstacles in obtaining redress. In September the appointed Shura
Council that fulfills some functions of a parliament discussed a law aimed at better
protecting children from violence. In March officials in the Family Protection
Program said they had received 200 reports of child abuse in the previous six
months.
Saudi Arabia strictly enforces gender segregation throughout the kingdom,
including in work places, impeding women’s full participation in public life.
Women make up 14.4 percent of the workforce, triple the rate in 1992, a March
2010 study by Booz & Company found. Women’s unemployment rate is four times
that of men. Panda Supermarket in August reassigned 11 designated women
cashiers after prominent cleric Yusuf al-Ahmad called for a boycott.
Women cannot work as judges or prosecutors. Promises by the Justice Ministry in
February to draft a law allowing women lawyers to practice in court remained
unmet.
The government has not yet set a minimum legal age for marriage, but in June
issued new marriage contracts noting the bride’s age. In January, a divorced
father married off his 12-year-old daughter for 80,000 riyals (ca. US$21,300)
because his ex-wife had gained custody, Al-Riyadh newspaper reported.
Migrant Worker Rights
8.3 million migrant workers legally reside in Saudi Arabia; an unknown number of
other migrant workers are undocumented. They fill manual, clerical, and service
jobs, constituting more than half the national workforce. Many suffer multiple
abuses and labor exploitation, sometimes rising to slavery-like conditions. Saudi
WORLD REPORT 2011
578
Arabia did not bring any prosecutions under a 2009 anti-trafficking law against
Saudis employing Nepali domestic workers trafficked from Kuwait.
Saudi Arabia made no progress reforming the restrictive kafala (sponsorship) system
that ties migrant workers’ residency permits to their employers; workers cannot
change employers or exit the country without written consent from their initial
employer or sponsor. The system fuels abuses such as employers confiscating
passports, withholding wages, and forcing migrants to work against their will.
On Saudi National Day, September 23, the king announced a six-month amnesty
for undocumented workers to return home without incurring immigration penalties.
In 2010, illegal strike actions by migrant workers increased, typically because of
unpaid salaries. In May, 30 Nepalese cleaners were repatriated after striking in
February over pay and lack of accommodation. They spent two months homeless
and three weeks in deportation detention. Also in May workers at the Dhahran
compound of Jadawel International–owned by Saudi Arabia’s third richest man,
Shaikh Muhammad bin Issa Al Jaber–went on strike over unpaid salaries and
expired residency permits. Jadawel made a partial payment in August, but by
September salary payments were again three months in arrears. In September
workers at the Mecca metro went on strike, as did over 200 Filipino workers at
Ansar hospital in Jeddah in June.
1.5 million migrant domestic workers remain excluded from the 2005 labor law.
Although the Shura Council in July 2009 approved an annex to the law extending
them limited labor protections, at this writing the government has not enacted it.
Asian embassies report thousands of complaints each year from domestic workers
forced to work 15-20 hours a day, seven days a week, and denied their
salaries. Domestic workers frequently endure forced confinement; food deprivation;
and severe psychological, physical, and sexual abuse. After returning home
in August, a Sri Lankan domestic worker had dozens of metal nails extracted from
her body that she claimed her Saudi employers had hammered into her as punishment
for complaining about long working hours. In September a Filipina
domestic worker was found dead with acid burns and stab wounds in her employers’
home in Khobar.
579
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Criminal Justice, Arbitrary Detention, Torture, and Ill-Treatment
Detainees, including children, are commonly the victims of systematic violations
of due process and fair trial rights, including arbitrary arrest and torture and illtreatment
in detention. Saudi judges routinely sentence defendants to thousands
of lashes.
Judges can order arrest and detention, including of children, at their discretion.
Children can be tried and sentenced as adults if physical signs of puberty exist. It
was unclear whether the law setting the age of majority at 18, passed by the
Shura Council in 2008 but not yet enacted, would apply to criminal justice matters.
Authorities rarely inform suspects of the crime with which they are charged, or of
the supporting evidence. Saudi Arabia has no penal code and prosecutors and
judges largely define criminal offenses at their discretion. In April the Council of
Senior Religious Scholars in principle approved codification of Sharia. During
interrogation detainees are not assisted by lawyers; they face excessive pretrial
delays and difficulty examining witnesses or presenting evidence at trial. The
Shura Council in January approved, but the government at this writing has not
enacted, a law to provide defendants with legal assistance free of charge.
In August a judge in Tabuk considered sentencing a man to be surgically paralyzed
after convicting him of paralyzing another man in a fight two years earlier. In
March a Medina court reaffirmed Lebanese television presenter Ali Sibat’s death
sentence for “witchcraft” based on his fortune-telling show broadcast from
Lebanon. In September a Qatif court sentenced two high school pupils to six
months in prison and 120 lashes for stealing exam questions.
Secret police detained without trial or access to lawyers, in many cases for years,
around 2,000 persons suspected of sympathies or involvement with armed
groups or for their peaceful political views. Muhammad al-’Utaibi and Khalid al-
’Umair, two human rights activists arrested in January 2009 for trying to organize
a peaceful Gaza solidarity demonstration, continued to be held in al-Ha’ir prison
without trial beyond the six-month limit allowed under Saudi law and despite a
prosecution order for their release. In Saudi Arabia, prosecutors under the
Ministry of Interior issue arrest and detention warrants and orders for release.
WORLD REPORT 2011
580
On January 20, Saudi authorities informed the family of Jordanian professor
Muhammad al-Nimarat that he had died in Abha secret police prison on
November 27, 2009. Al-Nimarat remained in detention after he finished his twoyear
sentence in early 2009 for “issuing private religious rulings.”
Prisoners and detainees in several facilities described inhumane conditions.
Women twice rioted in Makka women’s prison in 2010. Five Ethiopian detainees
in Jizan deportation center died from alleged asphyxiation due to overcrowding in
August, and Saudi websites in September published what they said were recent
photos showing overcrowded communal cells in Riyadh’s Malaz prison. In
September a number of detainees in the Jeddah deportation center rioted and
then escaped. Inmates in several prisons complained about ill-treatment and
forced confessions extracted at police stations.
Freedom of Expression and Belief
Saudi authorities continue to brook little public criticism of officials or government
policies in 2010. The Ministry of Culture and Information approves newspaper
and television editors and heavily censors print and broadcast media.
Internet critics crossing vague “red lines” face arrest.
Police in June arrested Sunni human rights activist Shaikh Mikhlif bin Dahham al-
Shammari for “annoying others” with articles he wrote criticizing prominent Sunni
clerics for their anti-Shia views. In August 2009, prosecutors charged Nasir al-
Subai’i under unspecified articles of the Law against Cybercrimes with making
allegedly libelous comments against the Saudi consul in Beijing. Al-Subai’i had
written on his website about his ordeal trying to secure funding for his brother’s
medical care abroad.
In May Jamal Khashoggi, chief editor of the liberal Al-Watan newspaper, was
sacked over articles questioning Saudi Arabia’s religious ideology. A judge in
October sentenced journalist Fahd al-Jukhaibid to prison and public lashes for a
news article describing a public protest against electricity cuts in the northern
town of Qubba. The books of Abdo Khal, a Saudi novelist and columnist, remain
banned even after he won the International Prize for Arabic Fiction in March 2010.
581
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
A Ministry of Culture and Information spokesperson made conflicting statements
regarding the requirement that blogs and news websites obtain a license under a
proposed law regulating online expression.
Saudi Arabia does not tolerate public worship by adherents of religions other
than Islam and systematically discriminates against its religious minorities, in
particular Shia in the Eastern Province and around Media, and Ismailis (a distinct
branch of Shiism) in Najran. Official discrimination against Shia encompasses
religious practices, education, and the justice system. Government officials
exclude Shia from certain public jobs and policy questions and publicly disparage
their faith.
Authorities have kept Munir Al Jassas, a Saudi Shia human rights activist, in
detention without trial since November 2009 and Muhammad Al Libad, a young
Shia from ‘Awwamiyya town, in detention since January 2010 for his alleged role
in March 2009 sectarian disturbances there. Authorities in Ahsa’ province continue
to detain six Shia students arrested in January and February for publicly displaying
religious banners during Ashura, a Shia religious holiday, in December
2009.
Key International Actors
Saudi Arabia is a key ally of the United States and the United Kingdom and both
countries continued in 2010 to laud Saudi counterterrorism cooperation. US pressure
for human rights improvements was imperceptible. In September the
Pentagon proposed for Congressional approval a US$60 billion arms sale to
Saudi Arabia, the biggest-ever US arms sale. It is unknown whether the UK made
efforts through the Two Kingdoms Dialogue to promote human rights, but if so
they had no tangible effect.
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Navenathem Pillay, in a visit to the
region in April, called on Saudi Arabia to improve women’s rights; abolish the
sponsorship system; address statelessness; and protect the rights to freedom of
expression, assembly, and association. The Gulf Cooperation Council announced
the establishment of a human rights committee in July 2010, but its mandate and
working methods remain unclear at this writing. Other Gulf countries made no
WORLD REPORT 2011
582
human rights demands of Saudi Arabia, and the kingdom joined others in supporting
a crackdown in Bahrain on peaceful political dissidents and human rights
activists ahead of elections there in October.
583
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Syria
There was no significant change in Syrian human rights policy and practice in
2010. Authorities continued to broadly violate the civil and political rights of citizens,
arresting political and human rights activists, censoring websites, detaining
bloggers, and imposing travel bans.
Emergency rule, imposed in 1963, remains in effect and Syria’s multiple security
agencies continue to detain people without arrest warrants, holding them incommunicado
for lengthy periods. The Supreme State Security Court (SSSC), an
exceptional court with almost no procedural guarantees, regularly sentences
Kurdish activists and Islamists to long prison terms.
A positive development in 2010 was the adoption in January of a new comprehensive
anti-trafficking law.
Arrest and Trial of Political Activists
Twelve leaders of the Damascus Declaration, a prominent gathering of opposition
groups, finished serving 30-month prison terms imposed in October 2008 for
“weakening national sentiment.” All were released except writer Ali al-`Abdallah,
who is facing new charges of “spreading false information” and “spoil[ing] Syria’s
relations with another country” because of articles he wrote while in prison. His
trial is still pending at this writing.
In February border police detained Ragheda Sa`id Hasan, a former political prisoner
who was a member of the Communist Action Party. Three days later unidentified
individuals confiscated a copy of a manuscript she wrote about her past
detention from her apartment, as well as other political publications. She remains
in detention.
The SSSC sentenced dozens of Kurdish political activists to prison in 2010,
including many members of the PYD political party, which is affiliated with the
Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK). In April the SSSC sentenced four members of the
Kurdish Yekiti Party—Yasha Wader, Dilghesh Mamo, Ahmad Darwish, and Nazmi
Mohammad—to five years in prison on the charge of undertaking acts “to cut off
WORLD REPORT 2011
584
585
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
part of Syrian land.” Three other prominent Yekiti members—Hassan Saleh,
Muhammad Mustapha, and Ma`ruf Mulla Ahmad—face the same charges in their
ongoing trial before the SSSC.
In June a military judge sentenced Mahmud Safo, a member of the Kurdish Left
Party, to one year in prison for “inciting sectarian strife” and membership in an
unlicensed organization.
Dr. Kamal al-Labwani, a physician and founder of the Democratic Liberal
Gathering, who is serving a 15-year sentence for advocating peaceful reform,
remains in prison.
Freedom of Expression and Civil Society Activism
Syria’s press law provides the government with sweeping control over publications.
The government has extended this control to online outlets. Internet censorship
of political websites is pervasive and includes popular websites such as
Blogger (Google’s blogging engine), Facebook, and YouTube.
In December 2009 State Security detained Tal al-Mallohi, a 19-year-old student
blogger, reportedly for a critical poem she wrote. At this writing the security services
are holding her incommunicado and have not referred her to the judiciary.
In January blogger Karim `Arbaji was released by presidential pardon. The SSSC
had sentenced him in 2009 to three years in prison for moderating a popular
online youth forum, akhawia.net, which contained criticisms of the government.
In January security forces detained a journalist, Ali Taha, and a photographer, Ali
Ahmad, who work for the satellite TV station Rotana, which mainly focuses on
social life topics. They were released in February, without charge. In February
security forces also released Ma`en `Akel, a journalist at the official newspaper
Thawra, whom they had detained in November 2009 while he was investigating
government corruption.
In March Military Intelligence in Aleppo detained `Abdel Hafez `Abdel Rahman, a
board member of the unlicensed Kurdish human rights group MAF (“Right” in
Kurdish), and along with another MAF board member, Nadera `Abdo. The security
WORLD REPORT 2011
586
services released `Abdo and referred `Abdel Rahman to trial on charges of
“undertaking acts to cut off part of Syrian land.”A military judge released him on
bail on September 1. His trial is ongoing at this writing.
In April authorities released on bail Ahmad Mustafa Ben Mohammad (known as
Pir Rostom), a Kurdish political activist and writer, whom they detained in
November 2009 for articles he wrote online.
In June a criminal court sentenced Muhannad al-Hasani, a human rights lawyer
and president of the Syrian Human Rights Organization (Swasiah), to three years
in prison for “weakening national sentiment” and “spreading false or exaggerated
information” in connection with his monitoring of the SSSC. In May al-Hasani won
the prestigious Martin Ennals Award for his work as a human rights defender.
In July a military tribunal sentenced Haytham al-Maleh, an 80-year-old prominent
human rights lawyer and former judge, to three years in prison for “weakening
national sentiment” and “spreading false information that weakens the nation’s
morale” after an opposition television station aired a phone interview with him in
which he criticized Syrian authorities.
In June border security guards detained Kamal Sheikho, a member of Committees
for the Defense of Democracy Freedoms and Human Rights in Syria (CDF). On
August 23, security forces detained another CDF member, Isma`il `Abdi, a dual
Syrian-German citizen who has lived in Germany since 1997 but was vacationing
in Syria. A judge interrogated him in October on charges of “weakening national
sentiment” and “membership in a prohibited group.”
The government continues to prevent activists from traveling abroad, including
Radeef Mustapha, head of the Kurdish Human Rights Committee.
All Syrian human rights groups remain unlicensed, as officials consistently deny
their requests for registration.
Arbitrary Detention, “Disappearances,” and Torture
Syria’s multiple security services continue to detain people without arrest warrants
and frequently refuse to disclose their whereabouts for weeks and some-
587
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
times months, in effect forcibly disappearing them. The fate of Nabil Khlioui,
detained in 2008 from the region of Deir al-Zawr because of suspected ties to
Islamists, remains unknown. The authorities have also kept silent about the fate
of at least 20 Kurds detained since 2008 on suspicion of ties to a separatist
Kurdish movement.
Human Rights Watch received numerous reports of ill-treatment and torture by
security agencies. The United Nations Committee against Torture said in May that
it was “deeply concerned about numerous, ongoing, and consistent allegations
concerning the routine use of torture by law enforcement and investigative officials.”
At least five detainees died in custody in 2010, with no serious investigations into
the deaths by the authorities. In June security services returned the body of
Muhammad Ali Rahman to his family. According to Syrian human rights activists,
his corpse showed signs of torture. Syrian law provides Syrian security services
with extensive immunity for acts of torture.
As in previous years, the government failed to acknowledge security force involvement
in the “disappearance” of an estimated 17,000 persons, mostly Muslim
Brotherhood members and other Syrian activists detained by the government in
the late 1970s and early 1980s, as well as hundreds of Lebanese and Palestinians
detained in Syria or abducted from Lebanon.
More than two years after security forces opened fire on rioting inmates in
Sednaya prison, killing at least nine, the government has not released any information
about the casualties. The authorities have not released Nizar Rastanawi, a
prominent human rights activist who completed his four-year sentence in
Sednaya on April 18, 2009, and there is no information about his well-being.
Discrimination and Repression against Kurds
Kurds, Syria’s largest non-Arab ethnic minority, remain subject to systematic discrimination,
including arbitrary denial of citizenship to an estimated 300,000
Syria-born Kurds. Authorities suppress expressions of Kurdish identity and prohibit
the teaching of Kurdish in schools.
WORLD REPORT 2011
588
In March 2010, security forces shot at Kurds celebrating the Kurdish New Year in
the northern town of Raqqa to disperse them, killing at least one. In July a military
court sentenced nine Kurds alleged to have participated in the celebrations in
Raqqa to four months for “inciting sectarian strife.”
Women and Girls’ Rights
Syria’s constitution guarantees gender equality, and many women are active in
public life, but personal status laws as well as the penal code contain provisions
that discriminate against women and girls. The nationality law of 1969 denies
Syrian women married to foreign spouses the right to pass on their citizenship to
their children or spouses.
In January the government issued a comprehensive anti-trafficking law,
Legislative Decree No. 3, which provides new grounds for prosecuting trafficking
and protecting victims, and outlines a minimum punishment of seven years.
Syria amended its penal code in 2009 to require a minimum two-year sentence
for so-called “honor” crimes; at least 10 honor crimes were documented by Syrian
women’s rights groups in 2010.
Migrant domestic workers, whose numbers have increased in Syria, reportedly
face exploitation and abuse by employers. The government enacted two decrees
regulating the work of recruiting agencies to better protect the workers, but
enforcement mechanisms are still lacking.
Situation of Refugees Fleeing Iraq
Syria hosts more Iraqi refugees than any other country, with 210,000 registered
with the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) at the beginning of 2010;
the actual numbers are likely much higher. Syria gives Iraqi refugees, registered
or not, access to public hospitals and schools, but prohibits them from working.
In February UNHCR closed the al-Tanf refugee camp—which is situated in the no
man’s land between Iraq and Syria and has hosted Palestinians from Iraq for
nearly four years—and relocated the last of the refugees to the al-Hol camp inside
589
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Syria. However, a more permanent solution is still needed for the more than 600
Palestinians in al-Hol camp.
Key International Actors
The international community’s interactions with Syria have focused almost exclusively
on its regional role. Key European Union and US officials have condemned
the arrest and trials of prominent activists, but their interventions have had no
impact on Syria’s actions. In July both US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and
the EU High Representative Catherine Ashton publicly criticized Syria’s detention
and trial of Haytham al-Maleh, Muhanad al-Hasani, and Ali al-Abdallah. In
September the European Parliament adopted a resolution condemning Syria’s
crackdown on human rights activists.
WORLD REPORT 2011
590
Tunisia
The human rights situation remained dire in Tunisia, where President Zine el-
Abidine Ben Ali and the ruling Democratic Constitutional Rally party (RCD) dominate
political life.
The government frequently uses the threat of terrorism and religious extremism
as a pretext to crack down on peaceful dissent, while state security agents use
surveillance, arbitrary detention, and physical aggression to intimidate and persecute
those whom the government deems to be a “threat.” Independent journalists,
human rights defenders, and union activists risk prosecution on trumped-up
charges.
Activists often resort to the internet as a space to disseminate and access information
when authorities deny them the physical space to do so. However, Tunisia
aggressively blocks access to websites containing critical political and human
rights information, and seems to be directly or indirectly involved in sabotaging
the email accounts of persons known to engage in human rights or opposition
political activity.
Criminalizing Contact between Tunisians and Foreign Entities
On June 15 the Chamber of Deputies, the lower house of parliament, amended
article 61bis of the penal code to impose criminal penalties on persons who
“directly or indirectly, have contacts with agents of a foreign country, foreign institution
or organization in order to encourage them to affect the vital interests of
Tunisia and its economic security.” The amendment may threaten persons who
furnish information about human rights in Tunisia to foreign governments and
multi-lateral organizations, including the European Union and United Nations.
Justice and Human Rights Minister Lazhar Bououni told parliament on June 15
that “affecting the vital interests of Tunisia” includes “inciting foreign parties not
to extend credit to Tunisia, not to invest in the country, to boycott tourism or to
sabotage the efforts of Tunisia to obtain advanced partner status with the
European Union.” Parliament approved this provision on June 15 after Tunisian
591
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
human rights defenders held a meeting with EU officials in Madrid in April in the
context of EU-Tunisia negotiations over granting Tunisia advanced partner status.
Human Rights Defenders
Authorities have refused to grant legal recognition to every truly independent
human rights organization that has applied over the past decade. After denying
recognition, the authorities use the organization’s “illegal” status to hamper its
activities.
Human rights defenders and dissidents are subject to heavy surveillance, arbitrary
travel bans, dismissal from work, interruptions in phone service, physical
assaults, harassment of relatives, suspicious acts of vandalism and theft, and
slander campaigns in the press. Members of unrecognized human rights organizations,
such as the International Association in Support of Political Prisoners
(AISPP) and the Tunisian Association to Combat Torture (ALTT), are regular targets
for harassment by security forces. Plainclothes police harass lawyers who are
members of these organizations and who take on politically sensitive cases.
Radhia Nasraoui, a lawyer and spokesperson for the ALTT, reported that police
regularly question her clients about what they have discussed with her in confidence,
which scares away potential clients.
Prison authorities prevented Samir Ben Amor, a lawyer and secretary general of
AISPP, from visiting his clients in prison between August 2009 and March 2010,
even though he had court authorization for the visits.
Media Freedom
Domestic print and broadcast media do not provide critical coverage of government
policies, apart from a few low-circulation magazines–such as the opposition
weekly al-Mawkif–which are subject to occasional confiscation. Tunisia has
licensed private radio and television stations, but none that have an independent
editorial line. The government blocks access to certain domestic and international
political or human rights websites featuring critical coverage of Tunisia.
WORLD REPORT 2011
592
On July 6, 2010, the Gafsa Appeals Court sentenced journalist Fahem Boukadous
in an unfair trial to four years in prison for “participating in a criminal association
with the intention of harming people and their property” and “spreading information
liable to disrupt public order.” The apparent motive behind his prosecution
was his coverage in 2008 for El-Hiwar el Tounsi, an Italy-based satellite television
channel, of demonstrations and social unrest in the Gafsa mining region that led
to the prosecution of about 200 persons, many of whom reported torture and illtreatment
in detention. During the July 6 hearing the presiding judge refused to
investigate Boukadous’s allegations of torture and prevented defense lawyers
from presenting their arguments in court. Police surrounded the courthouse and
denied access to many journalists and local observers. Boukadous’s wife said
that he had not received adequate care in prison for his asthma and respiratory
problems.
On April 27 authorities freed dissident journalist Taoufik Ben Brik from prison
after he served his six-month sentence for assaulting a woman. Ben Brik was sentenced
by the Court of First Instance in Tunis, the capital, following an unfair trial
in which he was convicted solely on the basis of the alleged victim’s testimony
and a confession that Ben Brik claims was forged. The trial followed a pattern of
prosecutions against journalists critical of the government on questionable criminal
charges.
Counterterrorism Measures and Human Rights
Since 1991 there has been one deadly terrorist attack in Tunisia: an April 2002
truck bomb that targeted a synagogue on the island of Djerba, for which al-Qaeda
claimed responsibility. Security forces have also clashed once with armed militants
between December 2006 and January 2007 outside Tunis.
The 2003 Law in Support of “International Efforts to Fight Terrorism and the
Repression of Money Laundering” contains a broad definition of terrorism that the
United Nations Human Rights Committee criticized on March 28, 2008 for its
“lack of precision.” Authorities have charged many hundreds of men, and some
minors, under the law. Nearly all of those convicted and imprisoned have been
accused of planning to join jihadist groups abroad or inciting others to join,
rather than of having planned or committed specific acts of violence. In July 2009
593
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Tunisia’s parliament adopted an amendment narrowing the law’s definition of a
terrorist act by restricting the extent to which “incitement to hatred” would meet
the definition.
In January 2010 then-UN special rapporteur on the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism, Martin
Scheinin, visited Tunisia and noted that “the most disturbing experience during
my mission was the existence of serious discrepancies between the law and what
was reported to me as happening in reality.” He noted that “the frequent use of
confessions as evidence in court without proper investigation into allegations of
torture or other ill-treatment,” and that there were a disproportionately low number
of prosecutions or other clear findings related to torture, compared to the frequency
of allegations.
Prosecution of Student Union Activists
Members of the General Union for Tunisian Students (UGET) have faced persecution
for their union activities. On February 3 the Court of First Instance in Mahdia
sentenced five UGET members to 20 months in prison on charges of aggression
and destroying public property, despite lack of persuasive evidence of their guilt.
The charges date to October 2007, when the students staged a two-day sit-in to
protest what they saw as their arbitrary expulsion from the university for holding a
demonstration. The students remain free pending their appeal, which has been
postponed four times and at this writing is set for early January 2011.
Key International Actors
France is Tunisia’s leading trade partner and its fourth-largest foreign investor. In
April 2009 France concluded a nuclear energy cooperation deal and an €80 million
(US$108 million) aid package for Tunisia. On July 16, 2010, French Foreign
Ministry spokesperson Bernard Valéro noted France’s commitment to freedom of
expression and the press, and said that France was “monitoring the situation of
Mr. [Fahem] Boukadous, in particular his prison conditions and his ability to
access proper medical care.” This statement was an exception to France’s overall
reluctance to publicly pressure Tunisia to improve its human rights record. On
March 22, 2009, French Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner acknowledged, “It’s
WORLD REPORT 2011
594
595
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
true that there are human rights abuses in Tunisia, journalists who are harassed,
sometimes imprisoned, and a general policy of firmness.” He then went on to
praise Tunisia’s economic and social achievements, notably regarding the status
of women and the values of secularism.
The European Union-Tunisia Association Agreement remains in force, despite the
government’s human rights record. On May 11 the 8th session of the Tunisia-
European Union Association Council took place in Brussels, Belgium. The two
sides agreed to work on a roadmap to grant Tunisia “advanced status” with the
EU.
At this writing, the United States 2011 Foreign Operations Appropriations bill
would provide $15 million in Foreign Military Financing assistance to Tunisia. For
the first time, the bill conditions $1 million of that sum on the Tunisian government
making “significant efforts to respect due process and the rights of its citizens
to peaceful expression and association and to provide access for its citizens
to the internet.”
While Tunisia allowed a visit during 2010 of the UN special rapporteur on counterterrorism
(see above), at this writing it has not agreed to a request to visit from
the special rapporteur on torture. The request, which has been pending since
1998, was renewed in November 2009.
WORLD REPORT 2011
596
United Arab Emirates
The human rights situation in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) worsened in 2010,
particularly for migrant workers, as the construction slowdown in Dubai continued.
Other pressing human rights issues include torture, restrictions on freedoms
of expression and association, and violations of women’s rights. Authorities continue
to prevent peaceful demonstrations and to harass local human rights
defenders.
Two prominent cases in 2010 highlighted ongoing concerns about the justice system:
in January a court cleared a member of the royal family on torture charges
despite video evidence against him; in March, 17 migrant workers in Sharjah were
convicted of murder despite evidence their confessions were unreliable and the
product of police torture. The latter decision remains on appeal at this writing.
Migrant Worker Rights
During six years of spectacular growth in the construction sector, mainly in Dubai,
the UAE brought in hundreds of thousands of South Asian migrant workers.
Immigration sponsorship laws grant employers extraordinary power over the lives
of such workers. Workers do not have the right to organize or bargain collectively
and face penalties for going on strike. The Labor Law of 1980 excludes from coverage
domestic workers employed in private households. Although the law calls
for a minimum wage, the Ministry of Labor has yet to adopt such a measure.
Across the country, abuses include unsafe work environments, squalid living conditions
in labor camps, and the withholding of travel documents. Workers also
complain of nonpayment of wages, despite a mandatory electronic payment system
introduced in 2009, that requires companies to pay salaries directly into
licensed banks to ensure timely payments without illegal deductions.
The financial crisis that began in late 2008 cost tens of thousands of workers
their jobs. Trapped in camps lacking basics such as food and sanitation, many
were unable to find new jobs or a way home. Other workers say that some
employers forced them to accept reduced pay and benefits or face dismissal.
597
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Hundreds of laid-off migrant workers in 2010 were stranded in labor camps without
electricity or running water for months on end after their Dubai-based employers
closed; some had to fight off rats while sleeping amidst garbage heaps.
In May hundreds of workers marched from their Sharjah labor camp to the Labor
Ministry in Dubai demanding to be sent back home. The workers said they lived
in squalor and their employer had not paid them in six months. That same week
about 200 workers staged a sit-in at the Labor Ministry demanding unpaid wages.
Police detained 95 Vietnamese workers who allegedly attempted to block the
ministry’s entry gates. In June three Asian workers suffocated to death in their
labor accommodation in Dubai after inhaling carbon dioxide from a generator. In
August a fire charred to death 11 sleeping workers. In September authorities finally
began sending home 700 stranded workers from the al-Sajaa camp in Sharjah.
In February 2010 New York University committed publicly to requiring all companies
building and operating its Abu Dhabi campus to reimburse workers for any
recruiting or other employment-related fees that they had to pay. The new terms
also bar companies from confiscating worker passports. In September the
Guggenheim art museum followed suit, though its provisions do not require contractors
to reimburse workers for fees paid. Neither institution publicly committed
to independent, third-party monitoring of labor conditions or to collective bargaining
and a minimum wage. At this writing Le Louvre Abu Dhabi has not made
any specific public commitments.
Many female domestic workers in the UAE suffer unpaid wages, food deprivation,
long working hours, forced confinement, and physical or sexual abuse. The
Indonesian embassy registered a 24 percent increase in domestic worker
exploitation incidents in Abu Dhabi in 2009 compared with 2008. In October
2010, makeshift shelters in Abu Dhabi and Dubai housed more than 300 runaway
Filipina domestic workers. The standard contract for domestic workers introduced
in April 2007 calls for “adequate breaks” but does not limit working hours or provide
for a weekly rest day, overtime pay, or workers’ compensation.
In October, two weeks after Kuwait announced plans to scrap its kafala (sponsorship)
system, UAE’s minister of labor said the UAE would not follow suit.
However, the UAE government took some steps in 2010 to protect migrant work-
WORLD REPORT 2011
598
ers. In March the Labor Ministry announced the creation of a new unit to identify
and investigate potential labor trafficking cases. In May the Labor Ministry
extended by an extra month the summer season midday break for individuals
working outside in sweltering heat.
Torture and Suspicious Deaths
On January 10 an Emirati court cleared Sheikh Issa bin Zayed al Nahyan, a member
of the UAE ruling family, of torture charges despite video footage that showed
him abusing Afghan grain dealer Mohammed Shah Poor with whips, electric cattle
prods, and wooden planks with protruding nails. The court convicted five codefendants
but accepted the sheikh’s defense that he was under the influence of
drugs, which diminished the responsibility for his actions. The public prosecutor
did not appeal the ruling.
On March 29 a Sharjah court sentenced 17 Indian men to death for the murder of
a Pakistani national during a brawl over control of the illicit alcohol trade. The 17
men alleged that police tortured them over nine days to obtain confessions.
Lawyers for Human Rights International (LFHRI), an Indian group, said police beat
the men with clubs, subjected them to electric shocks, deprived them of sleep,
and forced them to stand on one leg for prolonged periods. As of October their
appeal against their convictions continued.
In August 2010 criminal lawyer Abdul Hameed filed a public complaint with
Dubai’s public prosecutor urging an investigation into circumstances surrounding
at least 20 suspicious deaths of inmates (19 Emiratis and one Afghan) in Dubai’s
central prison over the preceding two years. As of October, he had not received
any response.
Freedom of Association and Expression
In 2010 the government subjected the Jurist Association, an NGO established in
1980 to promote the rule of law and raise professional standards, to mounting
restrictions. The government did not permit association representatives to attend
meetings abroad and cancelled symposiums that it deemed controversial at
home. Members also complained of official pressure to quit the association.
599
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Former association president Muhammad al-Mansoori, whom authorities have
harassed for years, was dismissed from his position as a legal advisor to the
government of Ras Al Khaimah in January after he gave a television interview in
which he criticized restrictions on freedom of speech in the country. Authorities
have refused to renew his passport since March 2008.
Police arrested at least four young activists after they attempted to organize a
peaceful protest march on July 15 in response to increasing oil prices.
Authorities fired one of the organizers from his government job and Dubai
police held him in detention for a week for “inciting the nation against the government,”
even though the protest was cancelled. Another was imprisoned for
more than a month and suspended from his work.
The government monitors press content and journalists routinely exercise selfcensorship.
Although Prime Minister Sheikh Muhammad stated in 2007 that journalists
should not face prison “for reasons related to their work,” a 1980 law still
in force provides jail terms for journalists and suspension of publications that
publish “materials that cause confusion among the public.”
On February 7, authorities blocked access to the online discussion forum UAE
Hewar (http://uaehewar.net/), a popular website that encourages debate on topics
ranging from freedom of expression to political rights.
Women’s Rights
Despite the existence of shelters and hotlines to help protect women, domestic
violence remains a pervasive problem. The penal code gives men the legal right
to discipline their wives and children, including through the use of physical violence.
In October the Federal Supreme Court issued a ruling that upheld a husband’s
right to “chastise” his wife and children with physical abuse.
In January a Dubai court charged 23-year-old British woman and her fiance with
having illegal sex and drinking outside permitted premises after the woman
reported to police that a hotel employee had raped her. In June the Abu Dhabi
criminal court sentenced an 18-year-old Emirati woman to a year in prison for illicit
sex after she complained that six men gang-raped her a month earlier.
WORLD REPORT 2011
600
According to a survey conducted in January 2010 of 980 UAE residents, 55 percent
of the female respondents said they would not report a sexual assault for
fear of tarnishing their family’s reputation, and 49 percent would not do so
because society would judge them harshly.
The government made progress in law enforcement efforts against the trafficking
of women and girls and successfully prosecuted several traffickers. In June the
UAE announced it would establish two new shelters, in Ras Al Khaimah and
Sharjah, for trafficked women and girls.
Key International Actors
In April United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Navanethem Pillay
toured Gulf countries. During her UAE visit she criticized the sponsorship system
“that leaves migrant workers vulnerable to exploitation in an unequal power
relationship with their employers” and urged the creation of national human
rights institutions that comply with international human rights standards.
In August the United States expressed disappointment at the UAE’s planned cutoff
of key BlackBerry services, noting that the ban would set a dangerous precedent
in limiting freedom of information. In October the UAE government said it
would not go ahead with the ban. The Telecommunications Regulatory Authority
said Canadian manufacturer Research in Motion had brought its devices into line
with strict local guidelines on security and encryption but authorities did not
release terms of the agreement.
601
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Yemen
Yemen’s human rights situation continued to deteriorate in 2010. Amid political
unrest in the south, hundreds of arbitrary arrests and the use of lethal force
against peaceful demonstrators undermined advances in the rule of law.
Skirmishes tested a truce in the conflict with Huthi rebels in the north, and government
ministries, the army, rebels, and “tribes” in various conflict affected
northern areas obstructed humanitarian assistance. Accountability for laws of war
violations remained lacking. Yemen intensified counterterrorism efforts against
suspected al Qaeda members in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP), but some attacks
killed and injured civilians.
Friends of Yemen, a group of states and intergovernmental organizations established
in January, failed to press for an end to human rights abuses as a condition
for pledging financial and technical assistance.
Terrorism and Counterterrorism
The United States increased military assistance and cooperation with Yemen’s
government following the failed AQAP attempt in December 2009 to blow up an
airliner en route to Detroit. AQAP conducted numerous deadly attacks in 2010,
particularly on state intelligence and security officials on its list of 55 Yemenis targeted
for assassination.
In June four AQAP gunmen attacked a post of the Political Security Organization
(one of Yemen’s several intelligence agencies) in Aden, killing at least 11 intelligence
officers and soldiers, and freeing several suspected militants.
In a September bus ambush in San’a AQAP killed 14 senior officers who had
recently completed a US counterterrorism intelligence course. In October militants
in San’a fired a rocket-propelled grenade at a car carrying five British Embassy
staff members, including the deputy ambassador, injuring three. In April a suicide
bomber tried unsuccessfully to kill then British Ambassador Tim Torlot.
The US government revealed it had targeted Yemeni-American preacher Anwar al-
Awlaqi for assassination based on his alleged links to AQAP plots. In November a
WORLD REPORT 2011
602
Yemeni court indicted Al-Awlaqi, who is hiding in Yemen, on terrorism-related
charges and ordered his capture, dead or alive.
The US reportedly assisted Yemen in at least four airstrikes on alleged AQAP targets.
One—a cruise missile attack on suspected AQAP members on December 17,
2009—resulted in at least 41 civilian deaths in the southern province of Abyan.
The strike reportedly involved at least one cluster munition, a weapon that due to
its indiscriminate nature poses unacceptable risk to civilians. Another US-assisted
attack in central Marib province in May killed a deputy governor rather than
the AQAP suspect, prompting the victim’s tribesmen to attack strategic oil
pipelines.
Yemen’s government arrested scores of terrorism suspects on weak evidence and
unlawfully detained many for weeks or months without charge, according to reputable
Yemeni human rights activists. Concerns persisted that President Ali
Abdullah Saleh used the counterterrorism campaign as an excuse to target members
of Yemen’s separatist Southern Movement and independent media.
For three weeks in August Yemeni security forces shelled suspected AQAP targets
in Lawdar, a town in Abyan province that is home to separatists. Media reports
said the three dozen victims included al Qaeda members and security forces, but
that the attacks also damaged hundreds of homes and displaced tens of thousands
of people. In September the government’s three-day attack on suspected al
Qaeda hideouts in Hawta, southern Shabwa province, displaced thousands more
families.
Campaign against Southern Separatists
Security forces suppressed protests of the Southern Movement, establishing
checkpoints on days of announced demonstrations and arresting suspected participants.
On September 23, security forces arrested at least 12 Yemenis in Aden
who were planning to demonstrate to draw attention to their grievances when the
Friends of Yemen group of states met in New York to discuss aid to Yemen.
Deputy Interior Minister Salih al-Zawari said there were 245 southern protests in
March, involving 200 acts of violence. A southern human rights report listed 13
dead, 31 wounded, and 61 arrested in separatists’ clashes with government
603
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
forces in May alone. In July police in Aden killed one man when they fired on a
public funeral march for Ahmad Darwish, who allegedly died from torture in late
June following his arrest after AQAP’s attack on the Aden intelligence facility.
Photographs appeared to show bruises covering Darwish’s body. From May to July
the army blockaded southern areas of al-Dhali’, Lahj, and parts of Shabwa. Some
Southern Movement activists erected road blocks and called for civil unrest, closing
government offices, schools, and shops. In June the army repeatedly shelled
al-Dhali’ city center, leading to several civilian casualties.
Conflict in the North
On February 12, Huthi rebels and government forces in the northern Sa’da governorate
agreed to a truce, ending six months of heavy fighting, which was the sixth
round of violence since June 2004. In August both sides agreed to a 22-point plan
to implement the truce, including releasing all prisoners. In June Yemeni NGOs
presented a list of 249 persons they said the government had tried, or was trying,
in connection with the Sa’da conflict, despite expectations under the truce that
they would not face punishment. A further 86 remained detained without known
charges. Despite the truce, skirmishes between Huthis and the army or armybacked
tribal militias led to scores of civilian and fighter casualties.
As of mid-August the conflict had displaced just under 330,000 people, almost
half of whom fled between August 2009 and February 2010. Only a few displaced
persons went to official camps; more than 80 percent live with host families or in
open spaces, schools, and mosques. Aid agencies reported struggling to reach
them due to insecurity and access restrictions imposed by officials, local tribes,
and rebels. By August over 16,000 displaced persons were known to have
returned home.
Between November 2009 and January 2010 Saudi forces became a party to the
armed conflict and prevented persons seeking refuge from crossing its border,
forcing thousands back to Yemen, according to media reports.
Government forces and Huthi fighters recruited children for combat. Huthi fighters
reportedly carried out summary executions and endangered civilians by firing
from populated areas. Government forces reportedly conducted indiscriminate
WORLD REPORT 2011
604
605
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
aerial bombardment in civilian-populated areas, including a crowded market in
al-Talh on September 14, and a gathering of displaced persons in al-’Adi on
September 16. Neither party took steps to investigate or address possible laws-ofwar
violations.
Freedom of Expression
On May 22—the 20th anniversary of the unification of North and South Yemen—
President Saleh declared an amnesty that freed many, but not all, detainees and
prisoners arrested for peaceful expression. Political Security continued to detain
peaceful Southern Movement dissidents. On August 16, intelligence forces arrested
Abd al-Ilah Haidar al-Shayi’, a terrorism expert and journalist for the official
Saba News Agency, accusing him of being an al Qaeda spokesperson based on
his interviews with the group’s members.
More than 16 journalists and peaceful activists received sentences ranging from
fines to 10 years in prison in 2009 and 2010, mostly for airing grievances felt by
many in the south of the country. The Specialized Criminal Court in March sentenced
a professor of economic geography, Husain al-’Aqil, to three years in
prison for publicly raising concerns about control of Yemen’s oil wealth. After al-
’Aqil’s release in the May amnesty, Aden University in September “froze” his academic
duties.
On May 24 the Press and Publication Court, established in 2009 to try journalists,
sentenced Sami Ghalib, chief editor of the weekly Al-Nida’, and four colleagues to
a suspended three-month prison term for “undermining the unity” of Yemen. The
information minister banned newspapers, including Al-Watani, because of sympathetic
coverage of southern protests. Some have managed to republish, others
have been hauled to court or shut down.
In April Minister of Justice Ghazi al-Aghbari proposed amending the penal code by
adding vague language that would criminalize “undermining established national
principles.” The proposals remained under parliamentary review at time of writing.
WORLD REPORT 2011
606
Women and Girls’ Rights
Child marriages and forced marriages remain widespread, exposing young girls to
domestic violence and maternal mortality, and truncating their education. Judges
are not obliged to ensure girls’ free consent before notarizing marriage contracts.
In March a 12 or 13-year-old girl died from severe genital bleeding three days after
her marriage. Amid opposition from Islamic conservatives, President Saleh has
not yet signed into law a measure parliament passed in February 2009 setting the
minimum age for marriage at 17.
Domestic violence and marital rape are not criminalized. A women’s shelter
opened in 2009 in San’a housing women fleeing from violence and former prisoners
who have completed their sentences but are rejected by their families.
Despite some improvements, Yemen still has a high maternal mortality rate of
370 deaths per 100,000 live births. Approximately seven to eight women die each
day from childbirth complications. More than 70 percent of women deliver at
home.
Key International Actors
In August Qatar mediated between the government and Huthi rebels. The United
Kingdom in January assembled the Friends of Yemen group, including key Gulf
countries, the G8, and intergovernmental organizations. In March and September
meetings, the group discussed financial assistance to Yemen, but failed to tie aid
to ending the human rights abuses fueling Yemen’s crises.
Donors contributed only 49 percent of the requested US$187 million under the
United Nations 2010 Yemen Humanitarian Response Plan. Saudi Arabia, Qatar,
and other Persian Gulf states provide substantial amounts of assistance to
Yemen, including to tribal leaders, religious institutions, and the government.
European Union states also gave humanitarian and development aid.
The US more than doubled its military assistance to Yemen to $150 million, as
well as giving US$110 million in humanitarian and economic aid. The US publicly
supported Yemen’s unity, but urged peaceful resolution of its crises.
607
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

609
WORLD REPORT
2011
UNITED STATES
H U M A N
R I G H T S
W A T C H
United States
US citizens enjoy a broad range of civil liberties and have recourse to a strong
system of independent federal and state courts, but continuing failures—notably
in the criminal justice and immigration systems and in counterterrorism law and
policy—mar its human rights record. Although the Obama administration has
pledged to address many of these concerns, progress has been slow; in some
areas it has been nonexistent.
There were positive developments in 2010, including a Supreme Court ruling
abolishing the sentencing of children to life in prison without parole for nonhomicide
crimes; a new law that promises to reduce racial disparities in the sentencing
of cocaine offenders; and a healthcare law promising health insurance to
an estimated 32 million uninsured Americans.
All of these topics were examined in November 2010 during the first-ever
Universal Periodic Review of the US at the United Nations Human Rights Council,
part of a larger process in which the Council examines the human rights records
of all 192 UN member states.
Extreme Criminal Punishments
The number of US states that impose the death penalty remained at 35 in 2010.
At this writing 45 people have been executed in the US thus far in 2010; 52 were
executed in 2009.
There are 2,574 youth offenders (persons under age 18 at the time they committed
their offense) serving life without parole in US prisons. There are no known
youth offenders serving the sentence anywhere else in the world. In a historic
decision in June 2010, Graham v. Florida, the US Supreme Court ruled that the
sentence cannot be imposed on youth offenders convicted of non-homicide
crimes. While the ruling was a significant step forward, most youth offenders
serving the sentence were convicted of homicide and were not affected by the ruling.
WORLD REPORT 2011
610
611
UNITED STATES
WORLD REPORT 2011
612
Prison Conditions
As of June 2009 the US continued to have both the largest incarcerated population
(2,297,400, a decrease of 0.5 percent since December 2008) and the highest
per capita incarceration rate in the world (748 inmates per 100,000 residents).
17 months after the National Prison Rape Elimination Commission delivered its
proposals to eliminate prison rape to the Justice Department, Attorney General
Eric Holder still had not promulgated final standards. Sexual violence, meanwhile,
remains commonplace in US prisons. The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) reported
in August 2010 that 88,500 prison and jail inmates had experienced some
form of sexual victimization between October 2008 and December 2009.
According to a survey mandated by the Prison Rape Elimination Act and analyzed
by the BJS, an estimated 12 percent of youth held in juvenile facilities reported
that they had been sexually abused.
There were advances in treatment of women in US prisons. In August the
Washington Department of Corrections, following a court order, began to address
staff sexual misconduct against women prisoners, including through revamping
complaint and investigation procedures, installing additional surveillance cameras,
and increasing training. The number of states restricting the shackling of
pregnant prisoners grew from six to ten with Colorado, Washington, Pennsylvania,
and West Virginia joining New York, Illinois, California, Texas, Vermont, and New
Mexico. But there were highly disturbing developments as well: in Colorado, for
example, women inmates were subjected to degrading, routine, suspicionless
searches requiring them to open their labia for inspection by guards.
In California legislation went into effect in January 2010 that is designed to reduce
the prison population by, among other measures, giving more good time credits
and diverting certain parole and probation violators from prison. Nevertheless,
California has appealed to the US Supreme Court a federal court order requiring
the state to reduce its prison population so that it can provide constitutionally
adequate medical and mental health care to inmates.
Despite the large number of prisoners in the US with histories of substance use
and addiction, evidence-based drug dependence treatment is rarely available to
them. HIV and hepatitis prevalence among prisoners is significantly higher than
613
UNITED STATES
in the non-incarcerated community, yet proven harm-reduction programs, such as
condom availability and syringe exchange, remain rare. The 2010 Human Rights
Watch and American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) report, Sentenced to Stigma,
documented the harmful impact on prisoners and their families of prison policies
that mandate HIV testing, breach confidentiality, and promote stigma and discrimination.
Harsh US prison conditions were further exposed in July when the European Court
of Human Rights temporarily halted the extradition of four terrorism suspects
from the United Kingdom to the US due to concerns that their long-term incarceration
in a US “supermax” prison would violate Article 3 of the European
Convention on Human Rights, which prohibits “torture or… inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment.”
Racial Disparities in the Criminal Justice System
The burden of incarceration falls disproportionately on members of racial and ethnic
minorities, a disparity which cannot be accounted for solely by differences in
criminal conduct: black non-Hispanic males are incarcerated at a rate more than
six times that of white non-Hispanic males and 2.6 times that of Hispanic males.
One in 10 black males aged 25-29 were in prison or jail in 2009; for Hispanic
males the figure was 1 in 25; for white males only 1 in 64.
In August 2010 President Barack Obama signed the Fair Sentencing Act, which
alters the federal government’s historically far more punitive approach to crack
versus powder cocaine offenders that has led to racial disparities in sentencing.
While symbolically important, the act does little to address the overwhelming
racial disparities in drug law enforcement: blacks constitute 33.6 percent of drug
arrests, 44 percent of persons convicted of drug felonies in state court, and 37
percent of people sent to state prison on drug charges, even though they constitute
only 13 percent of the US population and blacks and whites engage in drug
offenses at equivalent rates.
WORLD REPORT 2011
614
615
UNITED STATES
WORLD REPORT 2011
616
Rights of Non-Citizens
There are some 38 million non-citizens living in the US, of whom approximately
12 million are undocumented. In 2009 US Immigration and Customs Enforcement
(ICE) detained between 380,000 and 442,000 non-citizens in some 300 detention
facilities, at an annual cost of US$1.7 billion.
In May 2010, reports surfaced that ICE was investigating allegations that a guard
at a Texas immigration detention center had sexually assaulted several female
detainees. This was the latest in a series of alleged sexual assaults, abuses, and
episodes of harassment that have come to public attention since ICE was created
in 2003.
In a July report, Deportation by Default, Human Rights Watch documented barriers
facing persons with mental disabilities in immigration proceedings, including a
lack of legal safeguards and numerous cases of prolonged detention.
ICE made useful proposals in 2010 for better addressing sexual abuse in immigration
facilities and mistreatment of detainees with mental disabilities, but few
have been implemented at this writing.
In late 2009 Human Rights Watch reported on the problem of extensive transfers
of immigrant detainees between facilities across the US. More than 1.4 million
detainee transfers occurred between 1999 and 2008, interfering with detainees’
rights to access counsel, witnesses, and evidence. In July 2010 ICE announced the
launch of an online detainee locator system—an important reform—but Congress
has taken no steps to check ICE’s expansive transfer power and ICE has failed to
promulgate a promised policy to reduce transfers.
ICE also continues to have sweeping deportation powers. In June Assistant
Secretary John Morton wrote of his desire to prioritize the deportation of “dangerous
non-citizen criminals.” If implemented, this would be an important reform—
the largest numbers of deportations have been of non-violent and low-level
offenders—but prospects for change in ICE practices remains unclear at this writing.
617
UNITED STATES
According to figures released in 2010 by the Center for Constitutional Rights and
other groups, 79 percent of deportations under ICE’s “Secure Communities” program
were of nonviolent and low-level offenders. Human Rights Watch’s own
analysis of government data showed that three-quarters of non-citizens deported
between 1997 and 2007 were nonviolent or low-level offenders. Under draconian
laws passed in 1996, judges in many deportation cases are given no discretion to
allow immigrants convicted of such minor offenses to remain in the US, regardless
of their lawful presence in the country, status as a spouse or parent of a US
citizen, economic contributions, or service in the US military.
Congressional efforts to overhaul the immigration system continued to flatline.
No immigration reform bill moved in Congress, including the DREAM
Act–designed to help immigrant children who grow up in the US–which was originally
introduced in 2001. The current system has created a massive underground
of persons who have lived undocumented in the US for many years. According to
the Pew Hispanic Center, 5.9 million undocumented persons (53 percent of all
undocumented persons) have lived in the US for more than 10 years, and 1.4 million
have lived in the country for more than 20 years. A July 2010 Human Rights
Watch report,Tough, Fair, and Practical, describes how lawmakers’ failure to
reform US immigration law violates basic human rights principles.
Individual US states continued to propose problematic immigration laws in 2010.
An Arizona law, SB 1070, authorized police to interrogate anyone they reasonably
suspect to be undocumented. In July a federal court enjoined enforcement of the
most controversial sections of SB 1070, including “reasonable suspicion” interrogations,
on grounds that federal immigration law preempts the Arizona statute
and that lawfully-present aliens would be impermissibly burdened by the law. The
court’s decision is under appeal.
Labor Rights
US workers continue to face severe obstacles in forming and joining trade unions,
and the US government is failing to meet its international obligation to protect
their exercise of these rights. Human Rights Watch supported the Employee Free
Choice Act, a modest legislative proposal to reduce some of these obstacles, but
a Senate filibuster threat has blocked the bill for two years.
WORLD REPORT 2011
618
619
UNITED STATES
Human Rights Watch’s September 2010 report, A Strange Case, focused on violations
of US workers’ organizing and bargaining rights by European-based multinational
corporations operating in the US. European firms that claim to comply with
International Labor Organization core labor standards and other human rights
laws too often violate these norms in their US operations, where labor laws offer
substandard protections in key areas.
A May 2010 Human Rights Watch report, Fields of Peril, reported on the working
conditions faced by hundreds of thousands of children who work on US farms.
The 1938 Fair Labor Standards Act specifically exempts farmworker children from
the minimum age and maximum hour requirements that apply to all other working
children, exposing them to work at far younger ages, for far longer hours, and
under far more hazardous conditions. Federal protections that do exist are often
not enforced, and state child labor laws vary in strength and enforcement. As a
result, child farmworkers, most of whom are Latino, often work 10 or more hours a
day and risk pesticide poisoning, heat illness, injuries, and life-long disabilities.
Many drop out of school and girls are sometimes subject to sexual harassment.
Health Policy
In March 2010 President Obama signed the Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act, which will provide health insurance to some 32 million uninsured
Americans. However, the act’s restrictions on how insurance companies may provide
coverage for abortions are expected to impede abortion access.
In July 2010 the Obama administration issued the first National AIDS Strategy for
the US. HIV infections in the US continue to rise at an alarming rate, particularly
in minority communities, and many states continue to undermine both human
rights and public health with abstinence-only restrictions on sex education, inadequate
legal protections for HIV-positive persons, resistance to harm-reduction
programs such as syringe exchange, and failure to fund HIV prevention and care.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
Despite the Obama administration’s stated support for ratification of the global
women’s rights treaty, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
WORLD REPORT 2011
620
621
UNITED STATES
WORLD REPORT 2011
622
Discrimination against Women, neither the administration nor the Senate moved
toward ratification. The US now stands as one of only seven nations that have not
joined the treaty. A bill to enhance US efforts to combat violence against women
globally gained momentum in 2010, but remained pending in Congress at this
writing.
In the workplace, women continue to make 77 cents for every dollar earned by
men. The US is one of only a handful of countries that have no guarantee of paid
maternity leave and pregnancy discrimination claims have risen sharply. Women
remain significantly underrepresented at all levels of government, including in the
US Congress, where they constitute just over 17 percent of members.
Women experiencing violence in the US face barriers to safety and justice.
Thousands of requests for emergency shelter and transitional housing from
domestic violence survivors go unmet every year, with federal funding for such
services falling short of targeted levels. In July Human Rights Watch released a
report showing that up to 80 percent of rape kits (DNA evidence collected from a
victim’s body) in the state of Illinois may never have been tested. The state is
attempting to address this problem: Governor Pat Quinn signed a bill contemporaneously
with the release of the Human Rights Watch report requiring local law
enforcement officials to send rape kit evidence for testing, making Illinois the first
state in the nation to do so.
Discrimination Based on Sexual Orientation and Gender
Identity
US law offers no protection against discrimination based on sexual orientation or
gender identity. The Uniting American Families Act, which would allow same-sex
relationships between a US citizen and a foreign national to be recognized for
immigration purposes, did not advance in Congress. The Defense of Marriage Act
(DOMA), which prohibits the federal government from recognizing the relationships
formed by same-sex couples, remains in force.
There have been steps at the state level to better protect the rights of lesbian,
gay, bisexual, and transgender people. A federal district court in Massachusetts
declared unconstitutional the DOMA provision that prohibits the federal govern-
623
UNITED STATES
ment from recognizing same-sex marriages valid in other jurisdictions. Separate
district courts in California ruled that the California constitutional amendment
barring same-sex couples from marrying (Proposition 8) and the federal policy
barring lesbian, gay, and bisexual people from serving openly in the military
(Don’t Ask Don’t Tell) violate the US Constitution.
A move in Congress in May to repeal Don’t Ask Don’t Tell remains pending at this
writing. The Employment Non-Discrimination Act—a bill that would prohibit discrimination
in employment based on sexual orientation or gender identity at the
federal level—is also pending before Congress.
Counterterrorism
Despite overwhelming evidence that senior Bush administration officials
approved illegal interrogation methods involving torture and other ill-treatment,
the Obama administration has yet to pursue prosecutions of any high-level officials
or to establish a commission of inquiry. In January the Justice Department’s
Office of Professional Responsibility released a report concluding that top lawyers
in the Bush-era Office of Legal Counsel did not violate legal ethics rules when
they wrote memos authorizing so-called enhanced interrogation techniques, but
rather “exercised poor judgment.”
Although Attorney General Eric Holder appointed a federal prosecutor in 2009 to
review post-9/11 interrogation practices, the prosecutor has yet to issue a report
and, by all indications, the investigation is unlikely to examine the responsibility
of senior officials who set the policies in place and authorized the abuses. The
Obama administration’s continued invocation of an overly broad understanding
of the “state secrets” privilege was accepted by several courts, cutting off another
possible avenue for redress for victims of torture and other abuses.
In transferring counterterrorism detainees abroad, the Obama administration said
that it would continue to rely on “diplomatic assurances”: non-binding and often
unreliable promises from the receiving country that detainees would be treated
humanely. In July the Obama administration transferred a detainee from
Guantanamo to his native Algeria on the basis of such assurances, despite his
WORLD REPORT 2011
624
625
UNITED STATES
WORLD REPORT 2011
626
claims that he would face torture or ill-treatment by the Algerian government or
non-state actors.
The Obama administration missed its self-imposed deadline to shut down
Guantanamo and failed to provide any real indication of when the facility would
actually be closed. Although the administration did not seek to enact preventive
detention legislation, it continues to hold suspects without charge at
Guantanamo based on wartime detention authority. In May the administration
announced its plans to continue to hold indefinitely at least 48 detainees who
have already been in US custody for approximately eight years. Following an
attempted attack on a US jetliner in December 2009 by a Nigerian man who
allegedly trained with al Qaeda in Yemen, the administration stopped transferring
detainees to Yemen, leaving 57 Yemeni detainees whose transfers had been
approved stuck at Guantanamo indefinitely.
The political uproar that followed Attorney General Holder’s announcement in
November 2009 that Khalid Sheikh Mohammed and four other “high-value”
detainees would be tried in federal criminal court led the administration to reconsider
its decision. At this writing no decision has been made as to where and how
they would be tried.
Meanwhile the administration pursued other cases in military commissions,
including the prosecution of Ibrahim al Qosi, a Sudanese man who pled guilty but
whose sentence was kept secret. The Obama administration also pursued the
military commission prosecution of child soldier Omar Khadr, even though Khadr
was only 15 years old when he was captured, and he was charged with an offense
not considered to be a war crime. Despite some improvements to the military
commissions, they continue to lack the basic guarantees of fairness found in US
federal courts, allow certain evidence obtained coercively, discriminate against
non-citizens, and are used to prosecute people for conduct that has never before
been considered a violation of the laws of war, raising serious retroactivity concerns.
627
UNITED STATES

629
WORLD REPORT
2011
2010
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
PUBLICATIONS
H U M A N
R I G H T S
W A T C H
WORLD REPORT 2011
630
By Country
Afghanistan
The “Ten-Dollar Talib” and Women’s Rights: Afghan Women and the Risks of Reintegration
and Reconciliation, July 2010, 65pp.
Angola
Transparency and Accountability in Angola, April 2010, 31pp.
Argentina
Illusions of Care: Lack of Accountability for Reproductive Rights in Argentina, August 2010, 52pp.
Azerbaijan
Beaten, Blacklisted, and Behind Bars: The Vanishing Space for Freedom of Expression in
Azerbaijan, October 2010, 94pp.
Bahrain
Slow Reform: Protection of Migrant Domestic Workers in Asia and the Middle East, April 2010,
26pp.
Torture Redux: The Revival of Physical Coercion during Interrogations in Bahrain, February 2010,
89pp.
Bangladesh
“Trigger Happy”: Excessive Use of Force by Indian Troops at the Bangladesh Border, December
2010, 81pp.
Burma
“I Want to Help My Own People”: State Control and Civil Society in Burma after Cyclone Nargis,
April 2010, 102pp.
Burundi
Closing Doors?: The Narrowing of Democratic Space in Burundi, November 2010, 69pp.
“We’ll Tie You Up and Shoot You”: Lack of Accountability for Political Violence in Burundi,
May 2010, 47pp.
Mob Justice in Burundi: Official Complicity and Impunity, March 2010, 105pp.
631
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH PUBLICATIONS
Cambodia
Off the Streets: Arbitrary Detention and Other Abuses against Sex Workers in Cambodia,
July 2010, 76pp.
“Skin on the Cable”: The Illegal Arrest, Arbitrary Detention and Torture of People Who
Use Drugs in Cambodia, January 2010, 93pp.
Cameroon
Criminalizing Identities: Rights Abuses in Cameroon based on Sexual Orientation and Gender
Identity, November 2010, 62pp.
China
“I Saw It with My Own Eyes”: Abuses by Chinese Security Forces in Tibet, 2008-2010,
July 2010, 73pp.
“Where Darkness Knows No Limits”: Incarceration, Ill-Treatment and Forced Labor as Drug
Rehabilitation in China, January 2010, 37pp.
Colombia
Paramilitaries’ Heirs: The New Face of Violence in Colombia, February 2010, 122pp.
Cote d’Ivoire
Afraid and Forgotten: Lawlessness, Rape, and Impunity in Western Côte d’Ivoire,
October 2010, 72pp.
Croatia
“Once You Enter, You Never Leave”: Deinstitutionalization of Persons with Intellectual or
Mental Disabilities in Croatia, September 2010, 74pp.
Democratic Republic of Congo
Tackling Impunity in Congo: Meaningful Follow-up to the UN Mapping Report, October 2010,
16pp.
Always on the Run: The Vicious Cycle of Displacement in Eastern Congo, September 2010, 88pp.
Trail of Death: LRA Atrocities in Northeastern Congo, March 2010, 67pp.
“You Will Be Punished”: Attacks on Civilians in Eastern Congo, December 2009, 183pp.
Egypt
Elections in Egypt: State of Permanent Emergency Incompatible with Free and Fair Vote,
November 2010, 24pp.
Ethiopia
Development without Freedom: How Aid Underwrites Repression in Ethiopia, October 2010,
105pp.
“One Hundred Ways of Putting Pressure”: Violations of Freedom of Expression and Association
in Ethiopia, March 2010, 59pp.
France
“No Questions Asked”: Intelligence Cooperation with Countries that Torture, June 2010, 62pp.
Germany
“No Questions Asked”: Intelligence Cooperation with Countries that Torture, June 2010, 62pp.
Guinea
Bloody Monday: The September 28 Massacre and Rapes by Security Forces in Guinea,
December 2009, 108pp.
Honduras
After the Coup: Ongoing Violence, Intimidation, and Impunity in Honduras,
December 2010, 79pp.
India
Dignity on Trial: India’s Need for Sound Standards for Conducting and Interpreting Forensic
Examinations of Rape Survivors, September 2010, 54pp.
Back to the Future: India’s 2008 Counterterrorism Laws, July 2010, 20pp.
Indonesia
Policing Morality: Abuses in the Application of Sharia in Aceh, Indonesia, December 2010, 10pp.
Prosecuting Political Aspiration: Indonesia’s Political Prisoners, June 2010, 43pp.
Turning Critics into Criminals: The Human Rights Consequences of Criminal Defamation
Law in Indonesia, May 2010, 91pp.
“Unkept Promise”: Failure to End Military Business Activity in Indonesia, January 2010, 20pp.
WORLD REPORT 2011
632
Iran
Iran: Abuses against LGBT People, December 2010, 77pp.
The Islamic Republic at 31: Post-election Abuses Show Serious Human Rights Crisis,
February 2010, 19pp.
Iraq
“They Took Me and Told Me Nothing”: Female Genital Mutilation in Iraqi Kurdistan, June 2010,
80pp.
Ireland
A State of Isolation: Access to Abortion for Women in Ireland, January 2010, 57pp.
Israel and the Occupied Territories
“I Lost Everything”: Israel’s Unlawful Destruction of Property during Operation Cast Lead,
May 2010, 116pp.
Turning a Blind Eye: Impunity for Laws-of-War Violations during the Gaza War, April 2010, 62pp.
Jordan
Slow Reform: Protection of Migrant Domestic Workers in Asia and the Middle East, April 2010,
26pp.
Stateless Again: Palestinian-Origin Jordanians Deprived of their Nationality,
February 2010, 60pp.
Kazakhstan
“Hellish Work”: Exploitation of Migrant Tobacco Workers in Kazakhstan, July 2010, 115pp.
Kenya
Needless Pain: Government Failure to Provide Palliative Care for Children in Kenya, September
2010, 78pp.
“I Am Not Dead, But I Am Not Living”: Barriers to Fistula Prevention and Treatment in Kenya,
July 2010, 82pp.
“Welcome to Kenya”: Police Abuse of Somali Refugees, June 2010, 99pp.
633
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH PUBLICATIONS
Kosovo
Rights Displaced: Forced Returns of Roma, Ashkali and Egyptians from Western Europe
to Kosovo, October 2010, 77pp.
Kuwait
Walls at Every Turn: Abuse of Migrant Domestic Workers through Kuwait’s Sponsorship System,
October 2010, 97pp.
Slow Reform: Protection of Migrant Domestic Workers in Asia and the Middle East,
April 2010, 26pp.
Kyrgyistan
“Where is the Justice?”: Interethnic Violence in Southern Kyrgyzstan and its Aftermath,
August 2010, 91pp.
Lebanon
Without Protection: How the Lebanese Justice System Fails Migrant Domestic Workers,
September 2010, 54pp.
Slow Reform: Protection of Migrant Domestic Workers in Asia and the Middle East,
April 2010, 26pp.
Libya
Libya: Silencing Civil Society: Draft Association Law Fails to Protect Freedom of Association,
December 2010, 18pp.
Malaysia
Slow Reform: Protection of Migrant Domestic Workers in Asia and the Middle East,
April 2010, 26pp.
Morocco
Morocco: “Stop Looking for Your Son”: Illegal Detentions under the
Counterterrorism Law, October 2010, 56pp.
Nigeria
“Everyone’s in on the Game”: Corruption and Human Rights Abuses by the Nigeria Police Force,
August 2010, 102pp.
WORLD REPORT 2011
634
Pakistan
Their Future is at Stake: Attacks on Teachers and Schools in Pakistan’s Balochistan Province,
December 2010, 40pp.
Philippines
“They Own the People”: The Ampatuans, State-Backed Militias, November 2010, 96pp.
Rwanda
Genocide, War Crimes and Crimes Against Humanity: A Digest of the Case Law of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, January 2010, 500pp.
São Tomé e Príncipe
An Uncertain Future: Oil Contracts and Stalled Reform in São Tomé e Príncipe, August 2010,
23pp.
Saudi Arabia
Looser Rein, Uncertain Gain: A Human Rights Assessment of Five Years of King Abdullah’s
Reforms in Saudi Arabia, September 2010, 52pp.
Slow Reform: Protection of Migrant Domestic Workers in Asia and the Middle East, April 2010,
26pp.
Senegal
Fear for Life: Violence against Gay Men and Men Perceived as Gay in Senegal,
November 2010, 95pp.
“Off the Backs of the Children”: Forced Begging and Other Abuses against Talibés in Senegal,
April 2010, 114pp.
Singapore
Slow Reform: Protection of Migrant Domestic Workers in Asia and the Middle East,
April 2010, 26pp.
Somalia
Harsh War, Harsh Peace: Abuses by al-Shabaab, the Transitional Federal Government,
and AMISOM in Somalia, April 2010, 62pp.
635
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH PUBLICATIONS
Spain
Eternal Emergency: No End to Unaccompanied Migrant Children’s Institutionalization
in Canary Islands Emergency Centers, June 2010, 40pp.
Sri Lanka
Legal Limbo: The Uncertain Fate of Detained LTTE Suspects in Sri Lanka, February 2010, 30pp.
Sudan
Democracy on Hold: Rights Violations in the April 2010 Sudan Elections, June 2010, 32pp.
Syria
A Wasted Decade: Human Rights in Syria during Bashar al-Asad’s First Ten Years in Power,
July 2010, 35pp.
Thailand
“Targets of Both Sides”: Violence against Students, Teachers, and Schools in Thailand’s
Southern Border Provinces, September 2010, 111pp.
From the Tiger to the Crocodile: Abuse of Migrant Workers in Thailand, February 2010, 124pp.
Tunisia
The Price of Independence: Silencing Labor and Student Unions in Tunisia, October 2010, 62pp.
Repression of Former Political Prisoners in Tunisia: “A Larger Prison”, March 2010, 42pp.
Turkey
Protesting as a Terrorist Offense: The Arbitrary Use of Terrorism Laws to Prosecute and
Incarcerate Demonstrators in Turkey, November 2010, 74pp.
Uganda
“As if We Weren’t Human”: Discrimination and Violence against Women with Disabilities in
Northern Uganda, August 2010, 73pp.
A Media Minefield: Increased Threats to Freedom of Expression in Uganda, May 2010, 60pp.
Making Kampala Count: Advancing the Global Fight against Impunity at the ICC Review
Conference, May 2010, 102pp.
WORLD REPORT 2011
636
United Arab Emirates
Slow Reform: Protection of Migrant Domestic Workers in Asia and the Middle East,
April 2010, 26pp.
United Kingdom
Without Suspicion: Stop and Search under the Terrorism Act 2000, July 2010, 64pp.
“No Questions Asked”: Intelligence Cooperation with Countries that Torture, June 2010, 62pp.
Fast-Tracked Unfairness: Detention and Denial of Women Asylum Seekers in the UK,
February 2010, 69pp.
United States
The Price of Freedom: Bail, Pretrial Detention, and Nonfelony Defendants in New York City,
December 2010, 75pp.
A Strange Case: Violations of Workers’ Freedom of Association in the United States by
European Multinational Corporations, September 2010, 130pp.
Detained and at Risk: Sexual Abuse and Harassment in United States Immigration Detention,
August 2010, 24pp.
Deportation by Default: Mental Disability, Unfair Hearings, and Indefinite Detention in the
US Immigration System, July 2010, 98pp.
“I Used to Think the Law Would Protect Me”: Illinois’s Failure to Test Rape Kits, July 2010, 42pp.
“Tough, Fair, and Practical”: A Human Rights Framework for Immigration Reform in the
United States, July 2010, 24pp.
Costly and Unfair: Flaws in US Immigration Detention Policy, May 2010, 11pp.
Fields of Peril: Child Labor in US Agriculture, May 2010, 99pp.
My So-Called Emancipation: From Foster Care to Homelessness for California Youth,
May 2010, 70pp.
Sentenced to Stigma: Segregation of HIV-Positive Prisoners in Alabama and South Carolina,
April 2010, 45pp.
Jailing Refugees: Arbitrary Detention of Refugees in the US Who Fail to Adjust to
Permanent Resident Status, December 2009, 40pp.
Yemen
All Quiet on the Northern Front?: Uninvestigated Laws of War Violations in Yemen’s War
with Huthi Rebels, April 2010, 54pp.
637
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH PUBLICATIONS
WORLD REPORT 2011
638
Hostile Shores: Abuse and Refoulement of Asylum Seekers and Refugees in Yemen,
December 2009, 53pp.
In the Name of Unity: The Yemeni Government’s Brutal Response to Southern Movement
Protests, December 2009, 73pp.
Zambia
Unjust and Unhealthy: HIV, TB, and Abuse in Zambian Prisons, April 2010, 135pp.
Zimbabwe
Deliberate Chaos: Ongoing Human Rights Abuses in the Marange Diamond Fields of Zimbabwe,
June 2010, 16pp.
Sleight of Hand: Repression of the Media and the Illusion of Reform in Zimbabwe,
April 2010, 26pp.
639
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH PUBLICATIONS
WORLD REPORT 2011
640
641
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH PUBLICATIONS
By Theme
Arms Issues
Meeting the Challenge: Protecting Civilians through the Convention on Cluster Munitions,
November 2010, 224pp.
Business and Human Rights Issues
A Strange Case: Violations of Workers’ Freedom of Association in the United States by
European Multinational Corporations, September 2010, 130pp.
An Uncertain Future: Oil Contracts and Stalled Reform in São Tomé e Príncipe, August 2010,
23pp.
“Hellish Work”: Exploitation of Migrant Tobacco Workers in Kazakhstan, July 2010, 115pp.
Deliberate Chaos: Ongoing Human Rights Abuses in the Marange Diamond Fields of Zimbabwe,
June 2010, 16pp.
Transparency and Accountability in Angola, April 2010, 31pp.
“Unkept Promise”: Failure to End Military Business Activity in Indonesia, January 2010, 20pp.
Children’s Rights Issues
Their Future is at Stake: Attacks on Teachers and Schools in Pakistan’s Balochistan Province,
December 2010, 40pp.
Needless Pain: Government Failure to Provide Palliative Care for Children in Kenya,
September 2010, 78pp.
“Targets of Both Sides”: Violence against Students, Teachers, and Schools in Thailand’s
Southern Border Provinces, September 2010, 111pp.
“Hellish Work”: Exploitation of Migrant Tobacco Workers in Kazakhstan, July 2010, 115pp.
“Tough, Fair, and Practical”: A Human Rights Framework for Immigration Reform in the United
States, July 2010, 24pp.
Eternal Emergency: No End to Unaccompanied Migrant Children’s Institutionalization in
Canary Islands Emergency Centers, June 2010, 40pp.
Fields of Peril: Child Labor in US Agriculture, May 2010, 99pp.
“I Lost Everything”: Israel’s Unlawful Destruction of Property during Operation Cast Lead,
May 2010, 116pp.
My So-Called Emancipation: From Foster Care to Homelessness for California Youth,
May 2010, 70pp.
“Off the Backs of the Children: Forced Begging and Other Abuses against Talibés in Senegal,
April 2010, 114pp.
“Skin on the Cable”: The Illegal Arrest, Arbitrary Detention and Torture of People Who Use Drugs
in Cambodia, January 2010, 93pp.
Disability Rights Issues
“Once You Enter, You Never Leave”: Deinstitutionalization of Persons with Intellectual or Mental
Disabilities in Croatia, September 2010, 74pp.
“As if We Weren’t Human”: Discrimination and Violence against Women with Disabilities in
Northern Uganda, August 2010, 73pp.
Deportation by Default: Mental Disability, Unfair Hearings, and Indefinite Detention in the
US Immigration System, July 2010, 98pp.
Health and Human Rights Issues
Development without Freedom: How Aid Underwrites Repression in Ethiopia, October 2010,
105pp.
Needless Pain: Government Failure to Provide Palliative Care for Children in Kenya, September
2010, 78pp.
Illusions of Care: Lack of Accountability for Reproductive Rights in Argentina, August 2010, 52pp.
“I Am Not Dead, But I Am Not Living”: Barriers to Fistula Prevention and Treatment in Kenya, July
2010, 82pp.
“I Used to Think the Law Would Protect Me”: Illinois’s Failure to Test Rape Kits, July 2010, 42pp.
Unaccountable: Addressing Reproductive Health Care Gaps, May 2010, 10pp.
Sentenced to Stigma: Segregation of HIV-Positive Prisoners in Alabama and South Carolina,
April 2010, 45pp.
Unjust and Unhealthy: HIV, TB, and Abuse in Zambian Prisons, April 2010, 135pp.
“Skin on the Cable”: The Illegal Arrest, Arbitrary Detention and Torture of People Who Use Drugs
in Cambodia, January 2010, 93pp.
“Where Darkness Knows No Limits”: Incarceration, Ill-Treatment and Forced Labor as Drug
Rehabilitation in China, January 2010, 37pp.
International Justice Issues
Memorandum for the Ninth Session of the International Criminal Court Assembly of States
Parties, November 2010, 37pp.
WORLD REPORT 2011
642
643
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH PUBLICATIONS
WORLD REPORT 2011
644
Tackling Impunity in Congo: Meaningful Follow-up to the UN Mapping Report,
October 2010, 16pp.
Making Kampala Count: Advancing the Global Fight against Impunity at the ICC Review
Conference, May 2010, 102pp.
Genocide, War Crimes and Crimes Against Humanity: A Digest of the Case Law of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, January 2010, 500pp.
LGBT Rights Issues
Criminalizing Identities: Rights Abuses in Cameroon based on Sexual Orientation and Gender
Identity, November 2010, 62pp.
Fear for Life: Violence against Gay Men and Men Perceived as Gay in Senegal,
November 2010, 95pp.
“Tough, Fair, and Practical”: A Human Rights Framework for Immigration Reform in the
United States, July 2010, 24pp.
Migrant Worker Issues
Ukraine: Buffeted in the Borderland: The Treatment of Asylum Seekers and Migrants in Ukraine,
December 2010, 123pp.
Walls at Every Turn: Abuse of Migrant Domestic Workers through Kuwait’s Sponsorship System,
October 2010, 97pp.
Without Protection: How the Lebanese Justice System Fails Migrant Domestic Workers,
September 2010, 54pp.
Deportation by Default: Mental Disability, Unfair Hearings, and Indefinite Detention in the US
Immigration System, July 2010, 98pp.
“Hellish Work”: Exploitation of Migrant Tobacco Workers in Kazakhstan, July 2010, 115pp.
“Tough, Fair, and Practical”: A Human Rights Framework for Immigration Reform in the
United States, July 2010, 24pp.
Eternal Emergency: No End to Unaccompanied Migrant Children’s Institutionalization in Canary
Islands Emergency Centers, June 2010, 40pp.
Fields of Peril: Child Labor in US Agriculture, May 2010, 99pp.
“Off the Backs of the Children: Forced Begging and Other Abuses against Talibés in Senegal,
April 2010, 114pp.
Slow Reform: Protection of Migrant Domestic Workers in Asia and the Middle East,
April 2010, 26pp.
645
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH PUBLICATIONS
Unjust and Unhealthy: HIV, TB, and Abuse in Zambian Prisons, April 2010, 135pp.
From the Tiger to the Crocodile: Abuse of Migrant Workers in Thailand, February 2010, 124pp.
Refugees/Displaced Persons Issues
Rights Displaced: Forced Returns of Roma, Ashkali and Egyptians from Western Europe to
Kosovo, October 2010, 77pp.
Always on the Run: The Vicious Cycle of Displacement in Eastern Congo, September 2010, 88pp.
“Where is the Justice?”: Interethnic Violence in Southern Kyrgyzstan and its Aftermath,
August 2010, 91pp.
“Tough, Fair, and Practical”: A Human Rights Framework for Immigration Reform in the United
States, July 2010, 24pp.
“Welcome to Kenya”: Police Abuse of Somali Refugees, June 2010, 94pp.
Costly and Unfair: Flaws in US Immigration Detention Policy, May 2010, 11pp.
Fast-Tracked Unfairness: Detention and Denial of Women Asylum Seekers in the UK,
February 2010, 69pp.
Terrorism and Counterterrorism Issues
Protesting as a Terrorist Offense: The Arbitrary Use of Terrorism Laws to Prosecute and
Incarcerate Demonstrators in Turkey, November 2010, 74pp.
Morocco: “Stop Looking for Your Son”: Illegal Detentions under the Counterterrorism Law,
October 2010, 56pp.
Back to the Future: India’s 2008 Counterterrorism Laws, July 2010, 20pp.
Without Suspicion: Stop and Search under the Terrorism Act 2000, July 2010, 64pp.
“No Questions Asked”: Intelligence Cooperation with Countries that Torture, June 2010, 62pp.
Harsh War, Harsh Peace: Abuses by al-Shabaab, the Transitional Federal Government, and AMISOM
in Somalia, April 2010, 62pp.
Women’s Rights Issues
Policing Morality: Abuses in the Application of Sharia in Aceh, Indonesia, December 2010, 10pp.
Criminalizing Identities: Rights Abuses in Cameroon based on Sexual Orientation and Gender
Identity, November 2010, 62pp.
Afraid and Forgotten: Lawlessness, Rape, and Impunity in Western Côte d’Ivoire,
October 2010, 72pp.
WORLD REPORT 2011
646
647
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH PUBLICATIONS
Dignity on Trial: India’s Need for Sound Standards for Conducting and Interpreting Forensic
Examinations of Rape Survivors, September 2010, 54pp.
Detained and at Risk: Sexual Abuse and Harassment in United States Immigration Detention,
August 2010, 24pp.
Illusions of Care: Lack of Accountability for Reproductive Rights in Argentina, August 2010, 52pp.
“I Am Not Dead, But I Am Not Living”: Barriers to Fistula Prevention and Treatment in Kenya,
July 2010, 82pp.
“I Used to Think the Law Would Protect Me”: Illinois’s Failure to Test Rape Kits, July 2010, 42pp.
The “Ten-Dollar Talib” and Women’s Rights: Afghan Women and the Risks of Reintegration and
Reconciliation, July 2010, 65pp.
“Tough, Fair, and Practical”: A Human Rights Framework for Immigration Reform in the United
States, July 2010, 24pp.
“They Took Me and Told Me Nothing”: Female Genital Mutilation in Iraqi Kurdistan,
June 2010, 80pp.
“Welcome to Kenya”: Police Abuse of Somali Refugees, June 2010, 94pp.
Unaccountable: Addressing Reproductive Health Care Gaps, May 2010, 10pp.
Slow Reform: Protection of Migrant Domestic Workers in Asia and the Middle East,
April 2010, 26pp.
Fast-Tracked Unfairness: Detention and Denial of Women Asylum Seekers in the UK,
February 2010, 69pp.
A State of Isolation: Access to Abortion for Women in Ireland, January 2010, 57pp.
All reports can be accessed online and ordered at
www.hrw.org/en/publications.
WORLD REPORT 2011
648
649
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH PUBLICATIONS


HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
350 Fifth Avenue
New York, NY 10118-3299
www.hrw.org
H U M A N
R I G H T S
W A T C H
This 21st annual World Report summarizes human rights conditions in more than
90 countries and territories worldwide. It reflects extensive investigative work
undertaken in 2010 by Human Rights Watch staff, usually in close partnership with
domestic human rights activists.
With increasing frequency, governments that might exert pressure for human rights
improvement are accepting the rationalizations and subterfuges of repressive
governments, favoring private “dialogue” and “cooperation” over more hard-nosed
approaches. In principle there is nothing wrong with dialogue, but it should not be a
substitute for public pressure when the government in question lacks the political will
to respect rights. Human Rights Watch calls on governmental supporters of human
rights to ensure that the quest for cooperation does not become an excuse for inaction.
WORLD REPORT | 2011
SEVEN STORIES PRESS
140 Watts Street
New York, NY 10013
www.sevenstories.com $25.00 U.S.
Front cover: Former Burmese political prisoner
© 2010 Platon for Human Rights Watch
Back cover: Child worker in Kazakhstan
© 2009 Moises Saman/Magnum for Human Rights Watch
Cover Design by Rafael Jiménez