Private Companies and the Public Interest:
Why Corporations Should Welcome
Global Human Rights Rules
By Lisa Misol
It has been a decade since Ken Saro-Wiwa was convicted in an unfair trial
and executed with eight others in retaliation for protesting Shell Oil’s operations
in Nigeria. That same year, 1995, the international spotlight fell on
American clothier “The Gap” for deplorable working conditions in its supplier
factories in El Salvador.
Both companies paid a price: Shell soon faced a lawsuit (still pending) in a
U.S. court for alleged complicity in the executions; The Gap confronted
nationwide picketing of its stores, which ended only when the company
agreed to the demands of anti-sweatshop activists.
These were watershed moments. Many multinational corporations, worried
about the costs and consequences for their brand names if they were blamed
for the human rights impact of their business practices, woke up and took
notice. In response to their critics, some of the companies in the line of fire
adopted human rights policies. Others, seeing the writing on the wall, preemptively
did the same. Many prominent companies have now adopted voluntary
codes of business conduct that include respect for basic human rights.
Because voluntary commitments are insufficient in themselves to prevent
corporate involvement in human rights abuses, there have been increasingly
frequent calls for binding standards. Indeed, regulations already have begun
to emerge in some sectors on some issues, but coverage and enforcement is
spotty, far short of the kind of comprehensive framework many believe is
necessary. Multinational corporations have long responded to calls for any
kind of binding human rights standards with the claim that self regulation or
voluntary guidelines are enough. But there are signs that this opposition may
be beginning to change.
In private, some multinational executives have started to question whether
industry’s antagonism to regulation makes sense when it comes to human
rights. They realize that only binding standards can ensure a level playing
field and that, increasingly, the choice facing them is not between adopting
voluntary codes of conduct and doing nothing. It is a choice between continuing
to compete on an uneven, ever-shifting playing field and participating in
the creation of universally binding and enforceable rules that apply equally to
all companies.
For most corporations, having clear, consistent rules would be preferable to
being subjected to unfair competition and a confusing mix of standards that
provides little guidance to companies and little comfort for victims of human
rights abuse.
This essay argues that enforceable global standards are desirable, inevitable,
and, contrary to received wisdom, good for business.
The Drive for Corporate Social Responsibility
Pressure from campaigning organizations in the fields of environmental protection
and human rights helped spur the movement toward greater corporate
responsibility. Today, Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) is a burgeoning
field, encompassing corporate ethics, workplace issues, and environmental
as well as human rights concerns.
Growing numbers of nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) are monitoring
corporate practices against basic standards, including human rights. The
news media also increasingly scrutinize corporate conduct. Ethically-minded
investors and consumers are demanding more from the companies with
which they do business. CSR advocates now find greater numbers of sympathetic
listeners in government and corporate headquarters.
In part the ground is shifting because of the impact of globalization on businesses.
Companies now commonly operate in a wide variety of locations, not
just in their own country or in like-minded locales. Their products and brand
names reach all corners of the globe, as do the news media that follow their
activities. In some of the countries that host their operations, the clout of
multinational corporations rivals or exceeds that of the national government.
There is no sign that these trends are letting up. In the current environment,
public advocacy for CSR can only be expected to increase and to spotlight
more and more instances of corporations implicated in abuse.
There is plenty to focus on. Workers the world over still struggle to assert
their rights in the face of company indifference and government inaction.
Harmful child labor, unsafe conditions, and discrimination—not to mention
the deprivation of workers’ rights to free association and collective bargaining—
remain all too common throughout both the developed and developing
world.
In areas of violent conflict and instability, the pursuit of profits without
human rights safeguards can fuel a range of abuses, including torture, forced
labor, war crimes, and crimes against humanity. All too often, companies cozy
up to local armed groups to get access to lucrative resources, or buy smuggled
goods from killers who use the proceeds to purchase weapons.
In response to increasing public attention to the role corporations can play in
facilitating human rights abuse, recent years have seen a proliferation of voluntary
initiatives on corporate social responsibility. A number of CSR initiatives
explicitly address human rights, along with environmental and other
issues. By way of illustration, some 2,300 global companies have endorsed the
United Nations Global Compact, a modest voluntary commitment to abide
by ten ethical principles, including respect for human rights. Voluntary corporate
commitments to human rights, however, can be demonstrably inadequate,
as the following example shows.
Limitations of Voluntary Guidelines: The Congo Gold Example
We are cursed because of our gold. All we do is suffer.
There is no benefit to us.
Congolese gold miner
Companies operating globally face many challenges: managing across borders,
navigating different regulatory regimes, protecting their brands, and
dealing with shifting expectations. For companies active in zones of weak
governments, the challenges are still greater. These companies must cope
with questions about security, immense poverty, and lack of a functioning
state, to name just a few. Frequently voluntary guidelines are simply not
enough to ensure respect for human rights in these environments. A report
published by Human Rights Watch in June 2005 on the abuses taking place
in the gold fields of the Democratic Republic of Congo illustrates the limitations
of such voluntary commitments by one of the world’s largest gold producers,
AngloGold Ashanti, part of the international conglomerate Anglo
American.
Northeastern Congo is home to one of Africa’s largest unexplored goldfields.
It is also a region in a desperate state. Torn apart by years of war, the
Congolese economy is shattered, and more than three million of its citizens
are dead. The desire to control Congo’s rich mineral resources—including
gold, diamonds, and other precious minerals—has been central to the war
that started in 1998. Brutal killings continue, despite a fitful peace process
and a shaky transitional government launched in June 2003. Those unfortunate
enough to live in mineral-rich areas have suffered some of the worst
atrocities.
In this volatile environment, AngloGold Ashanti decided to explore for gold.
The company set up a project camp in Mongbwalu, a gold town ruled by the
murderous Nationalist and Integrationist Front (FNI), and developed links
with its leaders to gain access to the gold-rich area. The situation on the
ground must have been clear. FNI combatants controlled all road and airport
access into the town, flaunted their guns in the streets, forced people to
work in the gold mines, and conducted killing sprees in nearby villages.
Human Rights Watch documented in detail the links between AngloGold
Ashanti and the local warlord, showing how the FNI armed group responsible
for these atrocities gained financial and logistical support, and, most
importantly, political credibility from its ties to the company.
Significantly, AngloGold Ashanti has a corporate code of conduct that
includes human rights standards and public commitments to corporate social
responsibility. Its commitments are viewed by many other companies as cutting
edge. AngloGold Ashanti executives should have ensured that their
operations in Congo complied with those commitments and did not adversely
affect human rights. They do not appear to have done so.
In response to the Human Rights Watch report, AngloGold Ashanti said it
regretted any payments made to the armed group, that the payments were
minimal, and that such support was not part of company policy. The company
undertook a high level review of its activities in Congo to determine how,
and if, it could operate in such an environment with integrity. It also publicly
pledged to cease all payments to abusive armed groups in Congo and to pull
out of the mine site if the groups attempted to extort funds in the future. As
one company executive later put it, “we learned too late not to ‘do as in
Rome.’”
The activities of AngloGold Ashanti in Congo show the limitations of voluntary
guidelines and illustrate the need to move beyond rhetoric. If binding
standards had been in place, AngloGold Ashanti would have been induced to
devise stronger mechanisms to prevent such an ill-advised and ultimately
detrimental relationship with abusive warlords in the Congo, secure in the
knowledge that its potential corporate competitors would be held to the same
standards.
Towards Binding CSR Standards
Companies are increasingly aware that human rights problems are bad for
business. Human rights issues are having a decided impact on how companies
do business. In a survey of the world’s 500 largest companies, more than a
third of respondents reported that human rights concerns had caused them to drop a proposed investment, and nearly a fifth said they disinvested from a
country for that reason.
In a number of areas, steps have been taken to move beyond purely voluntary
CSR standards. Leading companies have worked to reflect their human
rights commitments in corporate practices. In some industries, particularly
apparel, companies have agreed to not only codes of conduct, but also independent
monitoring to increase the odds that they and their suppliers will
live up to their word. The Fair Labor Association has a monitoring process
that provides one example.
To a limited extent, enforceable regulations have also begun to emerge,
though their reach is spotty. Some stock indices, such as FTSE 4Good,
require qualifying companies to comply with basic ethical standards. Certain
international financial institutions make similar demands of their loan beneficiaries.
For instance, the International Finance Corporation, the private-sector
lending arm of the World Bank Group, has said it will require companies
to live up to the Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights, which
provide for human rights protections and some company disclosures about
payments. Companies that are complicit in serious human rights abuses risk
liability under laws such as the U.S. Alien Tort Claims Act. In extreme cases,
corporate executives could even face prosecution by the International
Criminal Court. And individual governments, sometimes prompted by trade
agreements, increasingly demand that trading partners regulate certain corporate
conduct.
Moreover, public expectations already constrain the behavior of some large
corporations. This is mostly the case for major companies based in countries
with an active civil society and vigorous news media. In such countries, political
leaders often respond to demands for corporate responsibility by endorsing
standards for business conduct. These measures, in turn, provide a yardstick
against which watchdog groups judge the behavior of the companies
based there.
In each of these cases, however, constraints on corporate behavior are limited businesses free to break the rules. The first point to be made is that global
rules would level the playing field. As things stand, more responsible companies
sometimes lose economically for doing the right thing or face competitive
disadvantages based on the standards applicable to their home country.
A company executive, speaking anonymously under Chatham House rules,
acknowledged the difficulty of trying to operate ethically in difficult environments
when there are no clear rules and other companies do not feel so constrained.
As he put it, “Any regulation is better than no regulation.”
A second point is that companies eager to get ahead of the curve may be
signed up to a dizzying number of CSR guidelines, codes of conduct, and
voluntary commitments. Complying with these initiatives in their global
operations can be time consuming and expensive, especially where monitoring
and reporting mechanisms are built in. Rather than having to navigate so
many divergent codes and make sense of emerging liabilities, it would be in
the interest of these companies to operate under simpler, enforceable rules
that eliminate ambiguity.
The current patchwork of rules hardly creates a fair competitive environment:
it is piecemeal in its coverage and unpredictable in its enforcement.
Different initiatives identify and interpret human rights standards differently,
leading to divergent expectations. From the point of view of a corporate
executive who needs to plan and manage risks, that should be an unsettling
thought.
The Problem of “Rogue” Companies
A compelling reason for prominent or far-sighted businesses to back binding
human rights standards derives from the fact that public pressure tends to
focus on highly visible companies, especially ones that have a brand or image
to protect. Relatively few companies are so prominent that their behavior is
under regular scrutiny from activists and the press. That gives an unfair
advantage to less well-known competitors who can operate under the radar
screen of public attention.
Well-known companies, worried about the harm that misconduct could cause
their reputation, must assume the costs of meeting broadly recognized standards
of corporate conduct. For example, a big company might have to
accept paying higher wages associated with employing adults rather than
children or permit trade unions to operate freely in its factories. By contrast,
a no-name company, confident that the public will not notice its misdeeds,
may not feel compelled to act as responsibly.
The gold industry again provides an illustration of this. Warlords in Congo,
working together with their local business allies, used the proceeds from the
sale of gold to gain access to money, guns, and power. Operating outside of
legal channels, they worked together with a network of gold smugglers to
funnel gold out of Congo to Uganda, destined for global gold markets in
Switzerland and elsewhere, where it was bought by multinational companies.
One such company that bought gold from this network was Metalor
Technologies, a leading Swiss gold refinery. Metalor knew, or should have
known, that gold bought through this network came from a conflict zone in
Congo where human rights were abused on a systematic basis. The company
claimed it actively checked its supply chain to verify that acceptable ethical
standards were being maintained. Yet during five years of buying gold from
the network, no serious questions were raised.
After discussions and correspondence with Human Rights Watch and just
prior to the publication of the Human Rights Watch report, Metalor
announced it would suspend its purchases of gold from Uganda. Fearing possible
repercussions for their business, other Swiss gold refineries followed
Metalor’s lead. The trade in “tainted gold” from northeastern Congo immediately
slowed; warlords and their business allies were finding it difficult to
find clients for their ore. But the halt was only temporary. In less than two
months, other gold refineries less concerned about their reputation stepped
into the void. The trade moved from Switzerland to Dubai.
Concerned about the ramifications of pressure from campaigning groups, the
gold jewelry industry wants to counter concerns over “tainted gold.”
Following in the footsteps of the diamond industry, which has sought to disassociate itself from “blood diamonds,” the jewelry industry aims to set standards
for responsible practices, including human rights standards, that will
protect its consumer market. To do so they will need to tackle those within
the industry who act irresponsibly. This will be tough, if not impossible, to
carry out on a voluntary basis. Pitching “clean” products becomes hard when
unscrupulous competitors can still play dirty. Attention to the misdeeds of
no-name companies can sully the reputation of an entire industry—damaging
even larger established brands.
Only enforceable rules, applicable to all companies regardless of prominence,
can avoid this double standard.
The Way Forward
Social responsibility is not the first issue for which corporations have begun
to recognize the advantage of enforceable standards with broad reach. A similar
dynamic emerged after the U.S. government’s adoption in 1977 of the
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, which made it illegal for companies operating
in the United States to bribe foreign officials. The U.S. law was adopted in
the wake of a domestic corporate scandal but, once in place, put U.S. companies
at a competitive disadvantage because their foreign competitors
remained free to continue securing business through bribery. In response,
U.S. firms pressed for—and got—a multilateral treaty to even out the competitive
environment.
After years of complaints, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) in 1997 adopted a treaty requiring all its member
states to criminalize such bribery. The OECD’s thirty members account for
some two-thirds of the world’s goods and services and 90 percent of global
private capital flows. China remains outside the treaty, but as its companies
increasingly operate overseas its exclusion will become legally less tenable.
The OECD already has set out corporate social responsibility standards. Its
Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises have been endorsed by a total of
thirty-nine countries, including nine non-OECD members. The adhering
countries are home to ninety-seven of the world’s top one hundred multinational companies. The OECD Guidelines are voluntary but do have an
implementation process run by governments, and are widely used to judge
corporate conduct. For example, a U.N. expert panel publicly chastised a
number of Western companies operating in Congo for failing to comply with
the OECD Guidelines. In addition, NGOs have lodged formal complaints
against some of these companies under OECD procedures.
OECD member countries, following on the anti-bribery effort, should move
to make their CSR standards binding. They should adopt a treaty under
which they agree to enact laws similar to the OECD Guidelines that would
be enforceable under national criminal or civil codes, carrying penalties such
as fines or, in extreme cases, imprisonment. Like anti-bribery laws, this
national legislation would bind any company operating in that nation’s jurisdiction.
In addition, the United Nations, which has already drafted non-binding
norms on corporate conduct, might provide a forum to negotiate a universally
applicable treaty. U.N. discussions on business and human rights have
tended to be highly polarized, but a new approach may emerge. In 2005 the
United Nations’ human rights body launched a two-year process to examine
these issues. The Commission on Human Rights created a mandate for a
high-level expert, appointed in July 2005 by the U.N. Secretary-General, to
raise awareness of the human rights responsibilities of companies, look at the
tough issues that have blocked progress to date, and map a way forward. An
advantage of this U.N.-led process is that it is explicitly focused on human
rights and brings together governments, companies, and concerned civil society
groups from around the world.
The U.N. mandate—if focused appropriately—has the potential to move
beyond a purely voluntary approach toward effective human rights protection
that combines elements of voluntarism with enforcement potential on core
rights issues. It carries risks as well. Unless human rights are taken as the
point of departure, the process could degenerate into a consensus around
weak “standards” that are lower than those derived from human rights law
and principles.
Though any such agreements or treaties will take time, it is crucial to begin
to move down that road. The next few years offer a valuable opportunity to
break the current impasse on the corporate accountability debate. Already,
many corporations are engaged with other stakeholders in various processes
to debate and refine CSR standards. These companies are working on several
fronts to develop CSR standards and widen their application within and
across different industries.
Given the momentum behind the CSR movement, the continuing proliferation
of different standards, and the problem of an unequal playing field, it is
clear that business has a vital interest in helping to define human rights
norms. By doing so, it can help ensure that the resulting requirements are
clear, practicable, and fair. Industry also has a direct stake in seeing that these
requirements are applied to all companies, regardless of where they are
based, and that they are effectively implemented and enforced. Ultimately,
that means making the rules universal and mandatory.
Sometimes it pays to take the initiative. For hard-headed businesspeople, the
smart move is to face up to global human rights standards early and make
them work by making them stick.
Lisa Misol is a researcher with the Business and Human Rights Program at
Human Rights Watch.
Some of the arguments and language used in this essay first appeared in a
Financial Times opinion article (“Rules on Corporate Ethics Could Help, Not
Hinder, Multinationals,” June 21, 2005) by Human Rights Watch Executive
Director Kenneth Roth. Anneke Van Woudenberg, senior researcher in Human
Rights Watch’s Africa Division, contributed material for the Congo case study.
Preventing the Further Spread of HIV/AIDS:
The Essential Role of Human Rights
By Joseph Amon
AIDS is no longer [just] a disease. It is a human rights issue.
Nelson Mandela
After twenty-five years, the global AIDS pandemic is still expanding. More
than forty million people are living with HIV/AIDS. In 2005, five million
people were newly infected, and three million died of AIDS. Between 2003
and 2005, the number of people living with HIV in East Asia rose by more
than 25 percent, and the number of people living with HIV in Eastern
Europe and Central Asia rose by more than one-third. However, sub-Saharan
Africa remains by far the worst-affected region.1 Countries such as Lesotho
and Swaziland, with nearly one in three adults infected, are openly presented
as possibly being the first countries to “die” of AIDS.
Why has the epidemic spread so inexorably across the globe? Why have
countries failed to act—or acted so ineffectually—to stop the epidemic from
progressing? It has been acknowledged for almost as long as HIV has been
recognized that HIV/AIDS is fundamentally tied to human rights abuses.2
But such acknowledgment has had surprisingly little impact on the global
response to the epidemic, and this failure explains, to a large extent, why we
have made so little progress.
Worldwide, vulnerability to HIV/AIDS is linked to populations marginalized
by society because of their gender, race/ethnicity, sexual orientation, or social
or economic class. Human rights are central both to our understanding of
the dynamics of the disease and to how we must combat it.
HIV/AIDS is commonly thought to be related to “economic, social, and cultural
rights” (such as the right to health care), as opposed to “civil and political
rights,” such as freedom of expression and association and due process of
law. However, many of the human rights abuses that most increase HIV
risk—violence and discrimination against women and marginalized populations as well as people living with HIV/AIDS, harassment and imprisonment
without due process of outreach workers and at-risk populations seeking
HIV/AIDS information or services, and censorship of health information—
are abuses of civil and political rights. The fact that these abuses have a concrete
impact on the health of individuals underscores what has been called
the “indivisibility” of human rights norms—the notion that civil and political
rights and economic, social, and cultural rights are mutually reinforcing and
derive from a single principle: the fundamental dignity of each human being.
While there is widespread, though by no means universal, recognition that
social stigma can fuel the epidemic, and that the characteristics of HIV infection
do not warrant intrusive restrictions on liberty, all too often these basic
understandings are not reflected in law or in concrete policy terms. Equally
important, there is uneven (at best) appreciation of the broader human rights
issues that contribute to the continuing spread of the disease. Most perversely,
some of the critical lessons about stopping HIV/AIDS, learned painfully
and acted on with positive results in the 1980s and 1990s, are now being disregarded.
Even while treatment options are expanding, responses to
HIV/AIDS in many places are getting further from the kind of sciencebased,
human-rights informed response that has been proven to stop the
spread of the disease. Left unaddressed, human rights abuses will undermine
both HIV/AIDS prevention and treatment.
Mobilizing Communities, Increasing Awareness (1981-1999)
Although the first AIDS case was diagnosed in 1981, little global recognition
of the disease or response to the epidemic was seen before 1986 when, at the
World Health Assembly, Uganda’s health minister declared that his country
had an enormous problem with AIDS and needed help. The Minister and the
Assembly called on the World Health Organization (WHO) to act. In
September 1986, a WHO program for prevention and control of AIDS was
formed, which, in February of 1987, became the Global Programme on
AIDS (GPA).
By January 1990, the GPA was working in 123 countries to develop national
AIDS prevention plans. The national programs that emerged from these tions as well as people living with HIV/AIDS, harassment and imprisonment
without due process of outreach workers and at-risk populations seeking
HIV/AIDS information or services, and censorship of health information—
are abuses of civil and political rights. The fact that these abuses have a concrete
impact on the health of individuals underscores what has been called
the “indivisibility” of human rights norms—the notion that civil and political
rights and economic, social, and cultural rights are mutually reinforcing and
derive from a single principle: the fundamental dignity of each human being.
While there is widespread, though by no means universal, recognition that
social stigma can fuel the epidemic, and that the characteristics of HIV infection
do not warrant intrusive restrictions on liberty, all too often these basic
understandings are not reflected in law or in concrete policy terms. Equally
important, there is uneven (at best) appreciation of the broader human rights
issues that contribute to the continuing spread of the disease. Most perversely,
some of the critical lessons about stopping HIV/AIDS, learned painfully
and acted on with positive results in the 1980s and 1990s, are now being disregarded.
Even while treatment options are expanding, responses to
HIV/AIDS in many places are getting further from the kind of sciencebased,
human-rights informed response that has been proven to stop the
spread of the disease. Left unaddressed, human rights abuses will undermine
both HIV/AIDS prevention and treatment.
Mobilizing Communities, Increasing Awareness (1981-1999)
Although the first AIDS case was diagnosed in 1981, little global recognition
of the disease or response to the epidemic was seen before 1986 when, at the
World Health Assembly, Uganda’s health minister declared that his country
had an enormous problem with AIDS and needed help. The Minister and the
Assembly called on the World Health Organization (WHO) to act. In
September 1986, a WHO program for prevention and control of AIDS was
formed, which, in February of 1987, became the Global Programme on
AIDS (GPA).
By January 1990, the GPA was working in 123 countries to develop national
AIDS prevention plans. The national programs that emerged from these MSM with HIV information and instructions on how to use condoms and
negotiate condom use with partners. Broader messages to the general population
were conveyed through the mass media to “humanize” the disease and
fight stigma and discrimination.
Although taking different approaches, these programs were all initiated by
individuals from the most affected communities, supported by local or
national governments (often through financing as well as new legislation),
and based on the dignity and autonomy of each individual. The programs
quickly saw results. In New York, HIV prevalence among white MSM at
STD clinics decreased from 47 percent to 17 percent between 1988 and
1993. In Uganda, adults reported increased condom use and decreased numbers
of sexual partners, while youth reported delayed onset of sexual behaviors.
Uganda saw the start of a downward trend in HIV prevalence, peaking
in the early 1990s at over 15 percent and decreasing to 6-7 percent by 2003.
In Thailand, decreases were seen in the number of men reporting commercial
sex, while increases were reported in condom use. HIV prevalence
declined to 1.5 percent in 2003. In Brazil, the percentage of young people
who reported using condoms the first time they had sex increased from less
than 10 percent in 1986 to more than 60 percent in 2003, and national HIV
prevalence among pregnant women remained below 1 percent.
Despite these visible successes, in communities where outreach efforts were
less focused—for example among drug users in Thailand, Hispanic MSM in
New York City, or poor slum dwellers in Brazil—considerably less success
was noted.
Nonetheless, these comprehensive programs, remarkable for their mobilization
of resources, political will, engagement with the community, and respect
for human rights, were seen as models for expanding the HIV/AIDS
response worldwide.
Through the mid-1990s emphasis was also put on understanding the epidemic
as a multi-dimensional problem, requiring a multi-sectoral response. This
strategy emerged in part because HIV/AIDS was expanding unchecked with
massive social and economic consequences and in part because of difficulties generating the resources required to fight the epidemic properly. Concerned
officials and donors sought to leverage resources simultaneously from multiple
sources including ministries of education, agriculture and industry.
Then, from the mid to the late-1990s, international efforts to fight
HIV/AIDS foundered and splintered. The earlier focus and success in places
like Thailand and Uganda were not replicated elsewhere, and the global leadership
at WHO waned. Fast-growing epidemics were recognized virtually
everywhere. Bilateral programs expanded, as did the prominence (and budget)
of the World Bank, but these developments were unable to keep pace with
the increasing demands of the pandemic. Increased attention was placed on
the biomedical aspects of HIV/AIDS, including vaccine development and the
use of anti-retroviral drugs to treat people living with HIV/AIDS and reduce
the risk of mother-to-child HIV transmission.3
Expanding Resources, Narrowing Approaches: Moralizing the
Epidemic (2000-2005)
In June 2001, a historic U.N. General Assembly Special Session (UNGASS)
on HIV/AIDS for the first time generated global acknowledgement of the
pandemic as not only a public health crisis but also a threat to societies and
international security. The special session put virtually all of the world’s leaders
on record as endorsing a set of specific global targets in combating
HIV/AIDS, while its formal declaration explicitly underscored the links
between poverty, underdevelopment, and illiteracy to the spread and impact
of HIV/AIDS. It also recognized that stigma, silence, discrimination, and
lack of confidentiality undermined prevention and care efforts, and that gender
equality and the empowerment of women and girls were fundamental to
reducing vulnerability. The Declaration affirmed that access to medication in
the context of pandemics such as HIV/AIDS was fundamental to the realization
of the right to health.
Specifically, governments pledged: “by 2003, to enact, strengthen or enforce
as appropriate, legislation, regulations and other measures to eliminate all
forms of discrimination against, and to ensure the full enjoyment of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms by people living with HIV/AIDS and members of vulnerable groups, in particular to ensure their access to,
inter alia, education, inheritance, employment, health care, social and health
services, prevention, support and treatment, information and legal protection,
while respecting their privacy and confidentiality; and develop strategies
to combat stigma and social exclusion connected with the epidemic.”4
While this effort arguably increased the political will to address HIV/AIDS,
the most important change in this era was perhaps the increased allocation of
resources committed to fighting the epidemic. In 2001, the Global Fund to
fight HIV/AIDS, TB and Malaria was created. Three years later, the United
States Leadership against AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria Act of 2003 (the
U.S. Global AIDS Act) and the U.S. President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS
Relief (commonly known as PEPFAR) were enacted. The same year, a revitalized
WHO announced an ambitious plan to get three million people on
anti-retroviral treatment by the end of 2005.
But these declarations and commitments of new resources, while seeming to
recognize the central importance of combating the human rights violations
underlying the epidemic, have addressed them in only limited ways. The
integration of prevention and treatment programs has splintered. Sciencebased
prevention programs increasingly are being replaced by conservative,
moralistic sexual abstinence campaigns that stigmatize those living with
AIDS and deny people information about condoms. Treatment programs
have made some headway but still do not reach many affected populations
and still do not recognize critical obstacles that rights-based approaches
would help overcome. In 2003, one-half of all governments in sub-Saharan
Africa had yet to adopt legislation specifically outlawing discrimination
against people living with HIV/AIDS and only one-third of countries worldwide
had adopted legal measures specifically outlawing discrimination against
populations especially vulnerable to HIV/AIDS.
Throughout the 1990s the dominant approach to HIV prevention among
young people was comprehensive sex education, which teaches abstinence as
a healthy choice for young people but also provides information about condoms
and safer sex. As a part of the PEPFAR program, comprehensive sex
education programs are being replaced by programs that emphasize “abstinence only” until marriage, which censor or distort information about condoms
and safer sex. The U.S. Global AIDS Act requires that 33 percent of
HIV prevention spending go to “abstinence-until-marriage” programs.5
Abstinence-only proponents commonly rely on fear-based messages, making
unsubstantiated claims about the psychological effects of pre-marital sex and
exaggerating the failure rate of condoms. These programs often suggest that
condoms are appropriate only for those who “fail” at abstinence or marital
fidelity and “choose to engage in high-risk sex”—contributing to an environment
of shame and stigma which discourages the use of condoms even for
sexually active youth and among adults with multiple, concurrent partners.6
Another example of HIV/AIDS policies turning their back on proven, evidence-
based approaches that respect human rights is the restriction in the
U.S. Global AIDS Act requiring that organizations receiving U.S. anti-AIDS
funding have a policy “explicitly opposing prostitution” and barring the use
of funds to “promote or advocate the legalization or practice of
prostitution.”7 This approach recalls the efforts by Senator Jesse Helms in
1987 to block federal HIV/AIDS education funding to groups that “promote”
homosexuality.
The U.S. requirements not only coerce organizations into adopting a particular
ideology as a condition of receiving HIV/AIDS funding, but also negate
the ability of outreach organizations to approach sex workers with the nonjudgmental
and non-moralistic attitude that has been shown to be effective
with these communities. Empowering women marginalized in prostitution to
participate in public life and to challenge the rights abuses that impede their
struggle against HIV/AIDS has been a documented success in the efforts
against AIDS. Far from addressing the harms associated with sex work, the
U.S. requirements are likely to alienate sex workers and to fuel public opprobrium
against them, further driving sex workers underground and away from
life-saving services. In addition, the lack of guidance from the U.S. government
regarding just what it means to “oppose prostitution” casts a shadow of
uncertainty over HIV prevention programs and places a chilling effect on
organizations wishing to conduct outreach and HIV prevention with sex
workers in a respectful, non-judgmental manner.8
U.S. restrictions on needle exchange and other “harm reduction” programs
and U.S. law enforcement interference with grassroots HIV prevention work
are additional examples of the disastrous effect of replacing science-based
approaches with narrowly defined moralistic ones.9 The sharing of hypodermic
syringes accounts for the majority of new HIV infections in much of
Eastern Europe, Central and Southeast Asia, and Latin America: needle
exchange programs are a matter of life and death. Needle exchange programs,
moreover, are perhaps the best studied HIV prevention intervention
in the world. Rigorous evaluations consistently show that providing sterile
syringes and information about sterile drug injection to people who use drugs
reduces HIV risk without increasing rates of drug use.10 Although the effectiveness
of sterile syringe programs has been endorsed by the World Health
Organization, the Joint United Nations Program on HIV/AIDS, the U.S.
National Institutes of Health, the U.S. Institute of Medicine, and other leading
public health bodies,11 the United States remains the only country in the
world to ban the use of federal funds for needle exchange. Recently, it has
begun to aggressively export this standard internationally.
The U.S. has blocked resolutions at the United Nations that would recognize
the human rights of injection drug users;12 sought to obstruct the work of
UNAIDS and the U.N. Office on Drugs and Crime in promoting harm
reduction and needle exchange in countries hard-hit by HIV/AIDS;13 and
encouraged national governments to adopt criminal law approaches to drug
use rather than recognizing that epidemics of drug addiction and HIV/AIDS
are public health threats requiring humane, rights-based responses.14
With the expanded resources now available for HIV/AIDS, it is finally possible
to imagine HIV treatment programs joining HIV prevention efforts in an
integrated, rights-respecting continuum of services. Unfortunately, moralistic
approaches to HIV prevention which place new obstacles in the way of
reaching populations that most need information and services hinder such a
comprehensive approach. Restrictive and moralistic U.S. policies also endanger
one of the most ardently promoted and potentially life-saving approaches
to HIV prevention and treatment: expanded HIV testing.
Expanding access to HIV testing is a critically important step in improving
responses to the epidemic. When accompanied by effective counseling and
accessible post-test services—including comprehensive prevention (information
and condoms) and treatment and care—expanded HIV testing can
encourage more people to protect themselves and their partners, and to seek
care which can prolong their lives.
Expanded HIV testing can take many forms, however. It is all too common
for HIV testing to be mandatory for certain populations—prisoners and military
recruits, for example. In many countries, moreover, even HIV testing
outside such institutional settings is sometimes conducted without consent
and test results sometimes are not given to the person who was tested.
In medical settings, two different approaches have recently been promoted:
“routine offer” HIV testing—with an “opt-in” emphasis—proposes that every
individual in the health care setting be offered an HIV test. By contrast,
“opt-out” HIV testing attempts to increase the number of individuals consenting
to an HIV test by requiring that individuals be tested unless they
specifically decline the test. In some settings, protocols require individuals to
decline the test three times before their refusal is accepted, and before they
are entitled to receive medical care.
The newest approach to expanded HIV testing, however, goes beyond these
approaches by seeking to bring HIV tests out of the medical setting and into
communities. On December 1, 2005, the Ministry of Health of Lesotho and
the WHO announced an unprecedented effort in the fight against
HIV/AIDS: a village-to-village campaign to test every Mosotho (resident of
Lesotho) aged twelve and older for HIV by the end of 2007.15 This program
was launched in Lesotho because it has one of the highest HIV prevalence
rates in the world, with approximately one in three adults infected. With
Lesotho facing a projected massive population loss from migration as well as
mortality and a decrease in life expectancy from fifty-two to thirty-four years
between 2000 and 2005, observers fear that Lesotho will collapse and fail—
the first country to “die” of AIDS.
Village-to-village HIV testing recalls the great public health campaigns of
thirty years ago, such as the worldwide eradication of smallpox through case
detection, isolation, and mass vaccination. Because of the inextricable link
between HIV/AIDS and human rights abuse, however, this method of HIV
testing also carries the potential for spreading stigma and, with it, discrimination
and other human rights violations. HIV/AIDS, a disease with a long and
silent incubation period, with transmission caused by intensely personal
behaviors (sex, childbirth, drug use), and with disproportionate prevalence
among the most marginalized populations in society, is strikingly different
from smallpox, and must be treated as such.
Historically, the largest concerns around HIV testing were ensuring that testing
was voluntary, that it was confidential, and that adequate counseling was
provided. These concerns were of primary importance in a context where few
resources existed for people who tested positive, and where people believed
to be living with HIV/AIDS faced serious and often life-threatening violence
and abuse (women facing domestic violence as well as MSM and marginalized
populations generally). It was hoped that if individuals learned their
HIV serostatus, they would adopt behaviors that would either reduce their
risk of infection if they were HIV-negative, or reduce the risk that they
would transmit the virus to others if they were HIV-positive. In some cases,
where counseling was adequate, and decisions were truly voluntary, these
programs were shown to work.16
In the past few years, as significant resources have been committed to
expanding access to anti-retroviral drugs throughout the world, treatment
that can alleviate suffering and postpone death has become a real possibility
for hundreds of thousands of people living with AIDS. In this context, HIV
testing has become increasingly critical to expanding access to treatment,
and, in turn, is helping to transform HIV/AIDS from a death sentence to a
manageable chronic disease. These changes have led to a justified re-evaluation
of HIV testing principles, and have led many people in the public health
community to push for a different approach.17 Specifically, they emphasize
the “right” to know one’s HIV serostatus and have called for dramatic
increases in the numbers of people tested.
But much of the call for this type of expanded approach rests upon two
assumptions: 1) that mass HIV testing will lead to positive changes as people
change their behaviors and seek treatment; and 2) that few human rights
abuses will result from this approach. There is little evidence to support
these assumptions.
Studies in sub-Saharan Africa have found between 3.5 percent and 14.6 percent
of women report abuse following the disclosure of their HIV test result.
The highest rates of negative outcomes have been reported by women tested
in antenatal clinics, and the lowest rates by women tested at voluntary counseling
and testing sites. Women who are tested at antenatal clinic sites do not
have a chance to think about testing or prepare themselves or their partners
for testing. Therefore they are both less likely to disclose results to their
partners and also are more likely to be victims of violence when they do.
The Lesotho operational plan for universal access to HIV testing states that
“every household will be offered an HIV test” and that “communities will
choose how HIV testing and counseling will be carried out for [their] members.”
Independent oversight “to guarantee the rights of community members”
will be provided by a three-person committee in each health center
catchment area, with each center providing “at least a biannual written
report.” The government is also creating a national telephone hotline.18
Public health officials argue that it is unfair to criticize the lack of evidence in
support of village-to-village testing in light of the public health crisis facing
Lesotho. That argument would be justified if this were the only approach
available. But it is not. The other available alternative—concerted, large-scale
promotion of voluntary HIV counseling and testing—has not been tried.
The Lesotho plan will only be as successful as the government’s ability to get
people to participate, as well as its ability to provide comprehensive HIV prevention
information and necessary medicines. However, without better protections
for human rights and without concerted efforts to reduce the stigma
of HIV/AIDS within Lesotho, there is little hope for widespread, truly voluntary
participation. Even if large numbers of people are tested, the Lesotho plan allocates only 3,000 Maloti (U.S.$465) out of a total of 75,593,250
Maloti (U.S.$11.7 million) to support post-test referrals and services.19
The Lesotho plan, like many calls for expanded HIV testing, focuses almost
exclusively on individual behavior change and does not adequately take into
account the structural barriers—violence, abuse, and interference with lifesaving
information and services—that prevent individuals most vulnerable to
infection from taking measures to reduce their HIV risk.
Efforts to expand HIV testing should not put public health experts on one
side and human rights proponents on the other. Both recognize that people
have a right of access to HIV testing as part of the broader right to health
care enshrined in the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and
Cultural Rights. Informed consent and confidentiality requirements, protections
against violence and discrimination, and measures to combat stigma
need not be barriers to expanded HIV testing.
The 1984 Siracusa Principles on the Limitation and Derogation of Principles
in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, moreover, illustrate
that, where there is a perceived conflict between critical public health
needs and human rights imperatives, governments should proceed rationally
and deliberately. Public health policies can infringe rights if they are sanctioned
by law, serve a legitimate public health goal, are necessary to achieve
that goal, are no more intrusive or restrictive than necessary, and are non-discriminatory
in application. The International Guidelines on HIV/AIDS and
Human Rights, issued as non-binding policy guidance to governments by the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) in 1996, affirm
that HIV testing of individuals “should only be performed with the specific
informed consent of that individual” except where specific judicial authorization
is granted to perform a mandatory test.
Too often, expanded HIV testing programs forget their goal is not simply to
get a large number of people tested once. “Knowing your HIV status” is a
dynamic issue with repeat testing required, as adolescents become adults, as
an individual’s behavior (and risk) changes, or (as is especially true for women and girls in many parts of the world) as their own behavior stays the same but
their partner’s behavior changes. Mass HIV testing programs may be able to
test large numbers of people once, but only programs that protect individual
rights will encourage people to seek follow-up treatment services and help
people reduce their risk behaviors and their vulnerability to HIV infection
over time.
A Different Approach: Protecting Human Rights
Over the course of the HIV/AIDS epidemic, too little has been done to
change laws and practices that violate human rights, putting individuals at
risk of infection and disease and impeding access to HIV information and
services for those who need it most. Changing these laws is not only a moral
imperative, but is also key to the sustained success of prevention, testing, and
treatment programs.
In sub-Saharan Africa, for example, nearly 60 percent of individuals living
with HIV infection are women. This disproportionate burden is due less to a
specific biologic susceptibility to infection, and more to their lack of basic
human rights. Women and girls are put at risk by economic vulnerability
resulting from discrimination and lack of legal protections; sexual violence,
including in institutions such as schools, prisons, and workplaces; domestic
violence, including marital rape; violations of property and inheritance rights;
and, in some countries, harmful traditional practices such as exorbitant bride
price, widow inheritance, and even ritual sexual “cleansing.” Governments,
which have an obligation to stop such violations and abusive practices, too
often tolerate them.
Responding to the HIV/AIDS epidemic requires addressing such vulnerabilities
directly, not indirectly through general education campaigns or HIV testing.
In Zimbabwe, an estimated 700,000 people lost their homes, livelihood,
or both when, in May 2005, the government unleashed Operation
Murambatsvina (Cleanse the Filth), a campaign of forcible evictions and
demolitions in urban areas throughout the country. Six months into the crisis,
hundreds of thousands of people remained displaced throughout the
country. Among other things, the massive displacement disrupted access to life-saving therapies for individuals with HIV and TB, encouraging the
emergence of multi-drug resistant strains, and it created the conditions—displacement,
destitution, lack of legal protections—which are known to spur
the epidemic. This was recognized by UNAIDS representatives when, in
November 2005, they cautioned that recent declines in HIV prevalence in
Zimbabwe “could start rising again if underlying vulnerabilities, which contribute
to unsafe sexual behaviour and fuel the epidemic, are not sufficiently
addressed. Such vulnerabilities include gender inequality, poverty and population
mobility.”20
Stigmatizing attitudes and discrimination by health care providers continue
to hinder access to HIV testing and treatment in many places. In other
places, violence, or the fear of violence, prevents many people from obtaining
HIV/AIDS testing and treatment. In Uganda, despite long-standing and well
run programs, service providers have reported that women come to them
secretly, fearing that their husbands will beat them if they seek HIV testing
or medical attention. Jane Nabulya, a Ugandan woman, said that she secretly
tested for HIV in 1999 when she found out her husband had AIDS. She
explained: “I was scared to tell him that I had tested HIV-positive. He used
to say [of] the woman who gives him AIDS, ‘I will chop off her feet.’ I have
never told him.”21
Conclusion
The response to the HIV/AIDS epidemic by governments and multilateral
agencies must recognize and respect human rights. In parts of the world
today, the lack of an adequate response to the epidemic—whether due to
denial of the existence or extent of the epidemic, misappropriation of
resources, or hostility to those individuals infected or those populations most
at-risk of infection—represents a basic violation of the right to health. In
other countries, HIV education, prevention, and treatment programs are
inaccurate or inequitable.
All individuals, including those most marginalized, must enjoy access to accurate
information about HIV/AIDS and have equal access to HIV/AIDS programs.
HIV testing in particular—as the entry point for access to anti-retroviral drugs and important services—must be accessible to all. But efforts to
expand HIV testing, and to put in place “routine” testing, must not become
coercive, must recognize the rights of the individuals being tested, and must
provide linkages to both prevention and care.
Across the globe, people who test positive for HIV have been denied
employment, fired from their jobs, kicked out of hospitals, denied both HIV
specific and general medical treatment, harassed and assaulted by community
members who find out their status, and sometimes even killed. Because
human rights abuses fuel the HIV epidemic, HIV/AIDS programs must
explicitly address, and find ways to mitigate, these abuses.
Combating the rights abuses that put vulnerable populations at risk of HIV is
essential to turning around the AIDS crisis. Concrete policy measures are
urgently needed and can have immediate and long-term impact. New laws
can be put in place, or enforced if they already exist, to protect women’s
equal rights in the areas of inheritance, sexual violence, domestic violence
and spousal rape, marriage, division of property upon divorce, land use and
ownership, and access to housing and social services.
Programmatic reforms, designed to address human rights violations, should
ensure that national HIV/AIDS programs include measures to combat discrimination
and violence against people living with HIV/AIDS, with particular
attention to marginalized populations. Efforts should also be made to provide
human rights training for judges, police, and other officials; improve
data collection relating to police abuse and domestic violence, women’s property
rights, and sexual abuse of girls; ensure that anti-retroviral drug distribution
systems recognize the challenges marginalized populations face in
accessing treatment; and ensure that HIV test results and other patient information
is kept confidential. Public education campaigns on the human rights
of people living with HIV/AIDS in local languages and using appropriate
media should be intensified.
It is sometimes suggested that paying attention to human rights is somehow
so costly and time consuming that it should really be considered optional
during a public health crisis. However, there is no reason that public health and human rights be considered in opposition to one another. In responding
to the global HIV/AIDS epidemic, only programs that start with a basic
respect for individuals, and their rights, will be successful. Those programs
which adopt strategies in the name of efficiency or ideology and which fail to
respect human rights will ultimately fail.
Joseph Amon directs the HIV/AIDS Program at Human Rights Watch.
1 U.N. Joint Progamme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), AIDS Epidemic Update: December
2005 (Geneva: United Nations, 2005),
http://www.unaids.org/epi2005/doc/EPIupdate2005_html_en/epi05_00_en.htm#TopOf
Page (retrieved November 21, 2005).
2 Jonathan Mann, who headed the first Global Programme on HIV/AIDS at the World
Health Organization (WHO), recognized early in the epidemic the importance of linking
HIV/AIDS and human rights, especially to ensure that those at risk would not be
stigmatized in using services. See Jonathan M. Mann, “Human rights and AIDS: The
future of the pandemic,” in Jonathan M. Mann, Sofia Gruskin, Michael A. Grodin, and
George J. Annas, eds., Health and Human Rights: A Reader (New York and London:
Routledge, 1999).
3 HIV can be transmitted from an HIV-infected mother to her child during pregnancy,
labor, and delivery, or through breastfeeding. The administration of antiretroviral drugs
to HIV-infected pregnant women and to her infant shortly after birth greatly reduces
the risk of mother-to-child HIV transmission.
4 United Nations General Assembly, “Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS,”
June 27, 2001.
5 U.S Global AIDS Act, 22 U.S.C. §§ 7672(b)(3), 7673(a); see also Office of the United
States Global AIDS Coordinator, “The President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief.
U.S. Five Year Global HIV/AIDS Strategy,” February 2004.
6 For further information about U.S.-funded abstinence-only-until-marriage programs,
see Human Rights Watch, “The Less they Know, the Better: Abstinence-only
HIV/AIDS Programs in Uganda,” vol. 17, no. 4(A), March 2005; Human Rights
Watch, “Ignorance Only: HIV/AIDS, Human Rights and Federally Funded Abstinence-
Only Programs in the United States: Texas: A Case Study,” vol. 14, no. 5(G), September
2002.
7 U.S. Global AIDS Act, 22 U.S.C. § 7631(e, f) (2003); see also Letter from Human
Rights Watch, et al., to President Bush opposing mandatory “anti-prostitution pledge,”
May 18, 2005, http://hrw.org/campaigns/hivaids/hiv-aids-letter/; Rebecca Schleifer,
“United States: Funding Restrictions Threaten Sex Workers’ Rights,” HIV/AIDS Policy
and Law Review, vol. 10, no. 2, August 2005.
8 Two separate lawsuits have been filed in U.S. courts challenging the “anti-prostitution
pledge” requirements as violating fundamental rights to health and to free expression.
See Rebecca Schleifer, “Challenges filed to U.S. Anti-AIDS Law Anti-prostitution
Pledge Requirement,” HIV/AIDS Policy and Law Review (forthcoming) (describing
cases); “Prostitution Loyalty Oath,” http://www.genderhealth.org/loyaltyoathsuit.php
(website links to court pleadings filed in cases).
9 See Human Rights Watch, “Injecting Reason: Human Rights And HIV Prevention
For Injection Drug Users; California: A Case Study,” vol. 15, no. 2(G), September
2003.
10 See studies cited in “Injecting Reason,” pp. 10-17.
11 See, e.g., World Health Organization, Joint United Nations Program on HIV/AIDS,
and United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, “Policy Brief: Provision of Sterile
Injecting Equipment to Reduce HIV Transmission” (2004); Joint United Nations
Program on HIV/AIDS, “Intensifying HIV prevention: UNAIDS policy position
paper,” August 2005, p. 23; U.S. National Institutes of Health, Interventions to Prevent
HIV Risk Behaviors: Consensus Development Statement, February 11-13, 1997; Institute
of Medicine of National Academy of Sciences, No Time to Lose: Getting More from HIV
Prevention (2001).
12 Transnational Institute, “The United Nations and Harm Reduction – Revisited: An
unauthorized report on the outcomes of the 48th CND session,” Drug Policy Briefing
No. 13, April 2005.
13 Ibid.; see also, Letter from Antonio Maria Costa, Executive Director, United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, to Robert B. Charles, Assistant Secretary,
International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs, U.S. Department of State,
November 11, 2004.
14 See, e.g., Jole Baglole, “Vancouver Drug Facilities Draw Ire of U.S. Officials,” Wall
Street Journal, April 1, 2003.
15 “Lesotho launches groundbreaking HIV campaign on World AIDS Day,” WHO
website: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2005/pr64/en/index.html
(retrieved December 1, 2005).
16 See: The Voluntary HIV-1 Counseling and Testing Efficacy Study Group, “Efficacy
of VCT in individuals and couples in Kenya, Tanzania, and Trinidad: A Randomised
Trial,” The Lancet, vol. 356, July 8, 2000, pp 103-112; M.H. Merson, J.M. Dayton, K.
O’Reilly, “Effectiveness of HIV prevention interventions in developing countries,”
AIDS, September 2000, vol. 14, supp. 2, pp. S68-84; and C.A. Liechty, “The evolving
role of HIV counseling and testing in resource-limited settings: HIV prevention and
linkage to expanding HIV care access,” Current HIV/AIDS Report, December 2004,
vol. 1(4), pp. 181-5.
17 See, e.g., Kevin De Cock et al., “A serostatus-based approach to HIV/AIDS prevention
and care in Africa,” The Lancet, vol., 367 (2003), pp. 1847–49; Kevin De Cock, et
al., “Shadow on the continent: public health and HIV/AIDS in Africa in the 21st century,”
The Lancet, vol. 360 (2002), pp. 67-72.
18 Lesotho Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (STI, HIV & AIDS Directorate and
Partners), “‘Know Your Status’ Campaign Operational Plan 2006-7; Gateway to comprehensive
HIV prevention, treatment, care and support; Universal Access to HIV
Testing and Counseling,” December 1, 2005.
19 This figure refers to the total budget for Strategic objective 7: “Strengthen post-test
services for both HIV positive and HIV negative people” as specified in Lesotho
Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (STI, HIV & AIDS Directorate and Partners),
“‘Know Your Status’ Campaign Operational Plan 2006-7; Gateway to comprehensive
HIV prevention, treatment, care and support; Universal Access to HIV Testing and
Counseling,” December 1, 2005.
20 UNAIDS, “HIV rates decline in Zimbabwe,” November 21, 2005,
http://www.unaids.org.zw/default.htm (retrieved November 21, 2005).
21 Human Rights Watch, “Just Die Quietly: Domestic Violence And Women’s
Vulnerability to HIV In Uganda,” August 2003, vol. 15, no.15(A), p. 29
Angola
The slow pace of post-war reconstruction and reconciliation in the wake of
Angola’s twenty-seven year civil war, which ended in 2002, continued in
2005. While important electoral legislation was approved by the national
assembly, much remains to be done to create an environment in which free
and fair elections can take place and to extend civil and political rights to all
Angolans. The government continues to violate Angolans rights to freedom
of expression, association, and assembly. Persistent delays remain in rebuilding
roads, schools, and other infrastructure in the rural provinces. The consistent
lack of full transparency in the government’s use of ever-increasing oil
revenues remains a further impediment to enjoyment of human rights and
reconstruction in Angola. Abuses against civilians by the Angolan military
and political tension in the province of Cabinda remain causes for concern.
Preparations for 2006 Elections
In early 2005, the Angolan government and opposition political parties negotiated
a “package” of electoral laws that would form the legal basis for parliamentary
and presidential elections in 2006. Despite some opposition, the
National Assembly, dominated by the Movement for the Popular Liberation
of Angola (Movimento Popular de Libertação de Angola, MPLA) voted in
favor of the legislative package on April 26, 2005. The original legislation
barred President Jose Eduardo Dos Santos from seeking reelection, but the
Supreme Court later overruled this provision. The National Union for the
Total Independence of Angola (União Nacional para a Independência Total de
Angola, UNITA) and other opposition groups called for legislative and presidential
elections to take place simultaneously in 2006, but these dates have
still not been set. Statements by the ruling party in late 2005 that “Angola is
not ready” and that “elections must not be rushed” have raised the level of
uncertainty as to the likelihood of elections being called for 2006.
Disagreement over the composition of the National Electoral Commission,
in which the governing MPLA named seven of the eleven members, has
delayed preparations for elections.
Opposition parties raised other problems with the electoral process, notably
issues pertaining to electoral registration, electoral education, and political
party financing. Media reports in 2005 that the MPLA might use surplus
money arising from oil sales to finance its political campaign received widespread
attention. Voter registration reportedly began in some areas loyal to
the ruling party before the establishment of the national, provincial, and local
electoral commissions, and was tightly controlled and monitored by the
MPLA and its members. Official voter registration was delayed due to lack of
infrastructure and capacity outside the capital, complications related to the
identification of Angolan citizens, many of whom are returning refugees
without national identity cards, and political disagreements over the electoral
commissions. The national registration process is now slated to begin in
January 2006.
Rede Eleitoral (Electoral Network), a coalition of civil society organizations
working for free and fair elections, advocated for disarmament and reintegration
of former combatants and civic education of the police in response to
reports that much of the rural population still fear that the elections may
turn violent. The lack of access to information and limits on freedom of
expression, especially in rural areas, are also significant obstacles to free and
fair elections.
The lack of resources, conflict over land rights, and rising frustration among
ex-combatants due to the slow pace of reintegration have contributed to
increased political tension throughout Angola. The paucity of development
and reconstruction funding flowing to rural areas, especially areas that heavily
support the opposition, increased the perception that the central government
is corrupt and uninterested in reconciliation. In one incident, UNITA
accused the MPLA of involvement in the destruction of its local headquarters
in Moxico province and of attacking party supporters on April 5, 2005. The
incidents were apparently in response to the discovery of a land mine on the
runway of the Lumbala N’guimbo airport, which was blamed on UNITA.
Freedom of Expression, Association and Assembly
Press freedom remains a concern in Angola, both for journalists in private
and government-owned news outlets. While a much-debated national media
law was stuck in parliament for the greater part of 2005, the government
continued to maintain control of the airwaves in rural areas. Radio Ecclesia, a
privately-owned Catholic radio station, continued to seek permission to
broadcast outside Luanda. While this permission was not forthcoming, Radio
Ecclesia’s popular news program began playing on Vatican Radio in
November, allowing the station to be heard outside Luanda. Several incidents
demonstrated the tendency of the government to limit free speech.
Angolan National Radio suspended a popular radio talk show after its host
criticized the government in an interview on Radio Ecclesia. In April, the
Deputy Minister for Information warned journalists at the state-owned daily
newspaper “Jornal de Angola” not to criticize the government or give too
much print space to the opposition.
Restrictions on the right of people to assemble peacefully were imposed on
several occasions in 2005. On August 25, Carlos Almeida, a senior member
of the opposition Party to Support Democracy, was jailed for 45 days for
staging an unauthorized protest outside parliament. He was protesting his
party’s exclusion from the National Electoral Commission. In mid-July, the
government of the province of Cabinda refused, without explanation, the
request of a number of NGOs to hold a rally in favor of a peaceful solution
to the conflict.
Tensions in Cabinda
While the government repeatedly stated that the armed conflict against the
Front for the Liberation of the Cabinda Enclave (FLEC) in the oil-rich
province of Cabinda had ended, it continued to maintain a massive military
presence in the enclave. Fears of military escalation increased in July as local
authorities reported that a new Angolan army offensive against FLEC in
Cabinda was underway to crush the armed insurgency. The army has denied
that it stepped up the military campaign, but abuses committed by armed
forces personnel do not seem to have subsided. Violations connected to the military continued to be reported in 2005, including the brutal murder on
April 14 of a three-year old girl and allegations that the army kidnapped and
tortured members and sympathizers of Mpalabanda, a local human rights
NGO, in July. The commander of the armed forces in Cabinda claimed that
justice in these cases has been served. Asked to comment on the acts of indiscipline
committed by soldiers under his command, General Marques Banza
admitted that “there might have been isolated cases of indiscipline here and
there, and in those instances we have known how to mete out punishment.”
Reports that the Angolan government is in discussion with oil companies to
grant exploration rights for drilling on-shore, as opposed to off-shore where
most of the oil is currently produced, could exacerbate tensions in Cabinda,
and lead to a continued military presence to ensure unfettered access to these
resources.
Since March 22, 2005, there has been significant popular opposition to and
protest over the Catholic Church’s naming of an “Angolan” bishop to preside
over Cabinda. When the Archbishop of Angola traveled to Cabinda on July
18, he was met at the airport by protests which turned violent. The violence
continued as he tried to hold mass and he was forced to leave. Relations
between the Vatican and the local population and Catholic priests have
remained tense, with both Cabindans and the local Catholic clergy accusing
the Vatican of not favoring the interests of the enclave. One priest was briefly
detained by the military, and the Angolan Catholic Church suspended two
popular Cabindan priests in August and shut down the Immaculate
Conception Church in Cabinda. The governor of Cabinda accused
Mpalabanda of being involved in orchestrating the protests.
Return and Resettlement
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees said that 2005 would
be the last year that the agency would facilitate repatriation of refugees from
neighboring countries; starting in 2006, it will focus solely on reintegrating
those already repatriated. This will leave approximately 130,000 Angolan
refugees still living in neighboring countries. It is unclear whether these
refugees will independently return to Angola or remain in the countries where they are presently located. However, the repatriation of refugees from
Zambia, which began in May, and the Democratic Republic of Congo
(DRC), was delayed due to poor infrastructure and a lack of social services
such as education and health in the rural areas of the Angolan interior.
Rumors circulating in refugee camps in Zambia that a shortage of food and
medicine exists in Angola kept many from returning home. The United
Nations Children’s Fund reported in late August that rural areas in Angola
do not have access to sufficient drinking water and U.S.$440 million needs to
be invested to change the situation. The population has yet to receive any
benefit from increasing oil revenues that have come with skyrocketing oil
prices. Some refugees also reportedly fear that they will be forcefully incorporated
into the army. Returns from the DRC were also delayed due to the
outbreak of the Marburg virus epidemic in Uige province in Angola.
Key International Actors
International pressure on Angola to improve its record on transparency and
human rights has not been very effective. A U.S.$2 billion credit line granted
to the government of Angola by the Chinese Export-Import bank has
allowed the ruling party to reject calls for greater transparency. The Angolan
government also rejected several reports critical of the human rights situation
in Angola, including the report by Hina Jilani, the U.N. special rapporteur
for human rights defenders.
Donor countries have indefinitely postponed the holding of a donors conference
to help fund reconstruction efforts in Angola, largely due to the failure
of the Angolan government to come to an agreement with the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) on setting up a Staff Monitored Program, the main
precondition to holding a donors conference. Despite many in-country visits
by IMF staff and directors, an agreement does not look likely in 2005. Huge
gains in oil revenues resulting from soaring international oil prices have not
been accounted for by the government. The international donor community
is reluctant to provide development aid because the Angolan government has
largely failed to improve financial accountability and transparency, especially
in the oil sector.
While the influence of international actors such as the IMF has waned, the
role of regional actors, such as member states of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC), will increase in the run-up to elections.
The government has not made encouraging statements with respect to allowing
international observers to monitor the elections in 2006. SADC member
states and other regional actors will need to take a firmer stance in ensuring
that free and fair elections are conducted in a climate of improved enjoyment
of human rights. However, SADC’s endorsement of blatantly unfair elections
in Zimbabwe in 2005 is cause for concern.
Burundi
In 2005 Burundians went to the polls for the first time in twelve years,
choosing a president, Pierre Nkurunziza, who declared his commitment to
establishing the rule of law in a country marked by years of widespread
human rights abuses. His government took office under a new constitution
that guarantees power-sharing between the Hutu and Tutsi ethnic groups
and among political parties. The constitution, adopted by over 90 percent of
voters at a February 28, 2005 referendum, also requires that 30 percent of
parliamentary seats be reserved for women, the first time they have held this
much power in the legislature.
The new government seeks to end an ongoing war with the Forces of
National Liberation (FNL), a guerilla group that controls territory around
Bujumbura, the capital. Some FNL combatants split from the rest of the
group in October 2005, claiming to want peace, but they appear to number
only about one hundred. According to some in this group, other FNL under
Agathon Rwasa killed seven of those seeking peace.
During 2005, soldiers and rebel combatants killed, raped, abducted, and
robbed civilians in hundreds of incidents, although none on the scale of massacres
in previous years. Some of these abuses were committed by FNL combatants
and by soldiers of Nkurunziza’s movement, the National Council for
the Defense of Democracy-Force for the Defense of Democracy (CNDDFDD),
as they struggled to control territory near Bujumbura.
As skirmishes between FNL and government soldiers increased in September
and October, soldiers summarily executed five civilians and detained and tortured
others in Kanyosha commune, all suspected of ties with the FNL.
Intelligence agents also detained dozens of persons from the Kinama neighborhood
of Bujumbura and beat some of them in the weeks just after Kinama
voters had preferred candidates from the Burundian Front for Democracy
(FRODEBU) to those of the CNDD-FDD.
Hundreds of soldiers, former rebel combatants, and members of a government-
sponsored militia, Guardians of the Peace, ended military activities.
Without any prospect of employment, some turned to crime. The many
cases of armed robbery, sometimes resulting in death of the victims, and rape
drew attention to the incapacity of the police and judicial systems.
Nkurunziza promised that no one would be above the law, but as of late 2005
his government had yet to propose ways to deal with current crime or with
the widespread crimes committed during the war, including those committed
by combatants from his own force.
Peaceful Installation of the New Government
Burundians last voted in 1993 when they chose Melchior Ndadaye as president,
the first Hutu elected to this position. Military officers from the Tutsidominated
army assassinated Ndadaye soon after, touching off a twelve-year
war where hostilities between Hutu (85 percent of the population) and Tutsi
(14 percent of the population) colored partisan and regional struggles for
power.
In addition to winning the presidency in 2005, the CNDD-FDD easily carried
both the legislative and communal elections, significantly reducing the
power of the parties that had controlled the previous government. Except for
one limited effort by the FNL to disrupt voting, the polling was generally
peaceful. In a welcome innovation, Burundian radio stations cooperated to
cover polling throughout the country—their reports of calm encouraged voters
to go vote. Although relatively few incidents marred voting, there were
numerous reports of harm or threats by CNDD-FDD loyalists against supposed
opponents during the pre-electoral period.
In contrast to neighboring Rwanda which dealt with Hutu-Tutsi hostility by
eliminating ethnic categories, Burundi acknowledges ethnic groups and,
under its new constitution, guarantees 40 percent of governmental and
administrative posts and 50 percent of places in the armed forces to Tutsi.
The new system also reserves three parliamentary seats for Twa, a minority
who comprise less than 1 percent of the population. The CNDD-FDD has
also tried to counter ethnic hostilities by recruiting Tutsi into its ranks, previously
largely Hutu.
A Disappointing Beginning
After applauding a new government and the presidential promises for protecting
human rights, Burundians have been disappointed to see officials continuing
old abuses. Under the guise of searching out FNL supporters, soldiers
beat and then executed four civilians in Kanyosha on October 1 and
another on October 5. Intelligence agents detained dozens of persons associated
with FRODEBU and beat some of them, particularly after the
September local elections. Among the victims were three recently elected
officials and the husband of another.
Demobilization and Disarmament
Early in 2005, the forces of the CNDD-FDD and the former Burundian
Armed Forces were integrated into the new National Defense Force (FDN).
There was no vetting to eliminate officers or soldiers implicated in past violations
of human rights or international humanitarian law, some of whom continued
in positions of responsibility. More than 16,000 former combatants
have been demobilized but many of them rejoined the new army. Groups
comprising several thousand Guardians of the Peace and other militia have
been disbanded and their members demobilized. Dissatisfied with delays in
disbursing the payments of U.S. $100 that they are supposed to receive, former
militia took to the streets several times, most recently in October 2005.
Only a few hundred militia members have turned in firearms to the authorities;
many weapons and grenades, in some cases distributed by the authorities
themselves during the war, remain in civilian hands, posing a risk of future
violence.
Justice
The national judicial system, reformed in 2003, functions poorly, in part
because of lack of resources and in part because of incapacity and corruption
of personnel. Popular disillusionment with the failure to arrest and try criminals
has led to an increase in lynchings of suspects. One man said to have
thrown a grenade in a house in Kamenge, Bujumbura, in July 2005, was beaten
to death by a crowd, as was a man accused of sorcery in Nyabiraba commune, Gitega, in January. But in an exceptional break with past patterns of
impunity, the Court of Appeals found senior security and prison officials
guilty of the November 2001 murder of Dr. Kassy Malan, then head of the
World Health Organization in Burundi. In a May 2005 decision, the court
sentenced four of them to death and nine others to jail terms.
Throughout 2005, Burundians debated how to ensure accountability for the
many violations of international humanitarian law committed during the war
and previous periods of large-scale ethnically-based killing,, such as those
which occurred in 1972 and 1988. The United Nations Security Council,
charged by the Arusha Accords with assisting in this matter, recommended a
reconciliation commission and a special trial chamber in the Burundian judicial
system (resolution 1606, June 2005), both to be staffed by Burundian and
international personnel. Late in 2005 the Burundian government, apparently
reluctant to confront the complexities of delivering justice, had yet to negotiate
details of these arrangements with the U.N.
Land and the Return of Refugees
Over fifty thousand Hutu refugees returned to Burundi from Tanzania in
2005, bringing to over 230,000 the number of returnees since 2002. Many
had fled during the violence in 1993 and most of these returnees have
reclaimed their former holdings. Local commissions, operating under a
national office, are intended to resolve any conflicting claims. Although the
commissions are not fully operational, land disputes remained scattered and
local throughout 2005. Land disputes may increase with the return of
200,000 refugees still outside Burundi, some of whom fled in 1972 and have
lost title to their land by an absence of longer than thirty years.
In April 2005 thousands of Rwandans fled to Burundi saying they feared false
accusations and unfair trials in the Rwandan people’s courts. Some also said
they fled rumors of massacres planned by officials. Burundian authorities initially
welcomed them but later cooperated with Rwandan authorities in forcing
the refugees to return involuntarily to Rwanda, in violation of international
conventions. In October Burundian and Rwandan officials agreed to
repatriate another 3,000 Rwandans, against their will if necessary.
Key International Actors
The United Nations Operation in Burundi (ONUB) along with key regional
leaders—particularly South Africa, Uganda, and Tanzania—played major
roles in moving the various political parties through the transition period and
to the installation of the new government. Tanzania continues attempts to
broker a peace agreement with the FNL. Although ONUB troops have only
occasionally been able to protect Burundians from violence, the ONUB
human rights division has efficiently documented and publicized many
human rights abuses, exerting significant pressure towards improvements in
the police and judicial systems. The U.N. Security Council delayed responding
to Burundian calls for help in establishing justice for crimes committed
during past periods of ethnic violence, but it now appears ready to partner
with Burundi in this important effort.
In September, the U.N. secretary general called for an international mechanism,
including regional and African Union representatives, to support further
reforms and disarmament. Many international donors offered financial
assistance, including Belgium, which provided an emergency grant of some 2
million euros to pay salaries of administrative staff in September 2005.
Côte d’Ivoire
During 2005, the political impasse between the Ivorian government and
northern-based New Forces rebels resulted in a steady increase in human
rights abuses by Ivorian security forces, the rebels, and militias associated
with both sides. Throughout the year there were persistent reports of extrajudicial
executions, torture, arbitrary detentions, extortion and looting, and of
recruitment and use of child soldiers by all sides. Two deadly outbreaks of
ethnically motivated violence resulted in some one hundred deaths. 2005 saw
no meaningful efforts by the Ivorian government, rebels or the international
community to combat the pervasive culture of impunity in the country.
Efforts to end the political-military crisis saw the failure of a third internationally
negotiated peace accord, the African Union-brokered Pretoria
Agreement, signed in April 2005. To avoid a constitutional crisis following
the end of incumbent Gbagbo’s five-year term, the African Union (A.U.) in
October proposed a plan calling for Gbagbo to remain in office for up to one
year. The new plan —which was not signed by the warring factions—also
calls for the appointment of a new prime minister acceptable to all parties
who would help ensure the implementation of crucial reforms including laws
relating to nationality and naturalization and the powers and composition of
the Independent Electoral Commission. However, while the plan was later
endorsed by the United Nations Security Council, it was rejected by the
rebels and opposition political parties.
At year’s end, the apparent disenfranchisement of the rebels from the political
process—as well as internal divisions along ethnic lines within the Ivorian
security forces—led to serious concerns about either a renewal of armed conflict
or a coup d’etat. The prospect of a renewed military offensive by either
side raises serious human rights concerns given the government’s prominent
use of ill-disciplined militias and hate media to incite violence against perceived
opponents. The extent to which the rebel leadership maintains effective
command and control over its forces and the extent to which U.N.
peacekeepers could protect vulnerable groups of civilians are also of concern.
As the political crisis deepens, the institutions that once provided benefits to
ordinary Ivorians— the public education system, healthcare services, and the
judicial system— continued to deteriorate, resulting in serious hardship particularly
in the rebel-held north. Some four thousand French troops monitor
a buffer zone or “Confidence Zone.” between the government-controlled
south and the rebel-controlled north of the country. A six thousand-strong
United Nations peacekeeping mission, the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI), established in April 2004, is deployed country-wide.
The issues at the heart of the Ivorian conflict—the exploitation of ethnicity
for political gain, competition over land and natural resources, and corruption—
remain unresolved.
Abuses by State Security Forces
During 2005, scores of summary executions were carried out by the police,
army, and the Central Command Security Operation Force (CCOS) —a new
security force of about 1700 men created by Presidential decree in July to
ensure security in Abidjan. The majority of these executions appeared to target
northerners, West African immigrants and other perceived rebel sympathizers,
though the government maintained that the executions took place in
the course of combating common crime. The police, army, CCOS and, to a
lesser extent, armed militias engaged in systematic and widespread extortion,
racketeering and intimidation of businessmen, street traders, and motorists
among others. Perceived rebel sympathizers were believed to be particularly
targeted. Army officers regularly engaged in the cross border recruitment of
Liberians, including former child combatants, to fight with Ivorian pro-government
militias. In July 2005, a group of armed soldiers from the Ivorian
Republican Guard stormed the Abidjan offices of state broadcaster RTI and
instructed directors not to broadcast footage of opposition members.
Abuses by Pro-government Militias and Groups
In 2005, pro-government militias and groups, sometimes working together
with state security forces, intimidated and at times attacked opposition party
members, journalists and human rights activists aligned with pro-opposition newspapers and United Nations peacekeepers. A violent pro-government student
group, the Students’ Federation of Cote d’Ivoire (FESCI), committed
serious abuses, including torture and rape, against students perceived to be
supporting the opposition. In July 2005, the pro-government Young Patriot
militia burned opposition newspapers, threatened to kill newspaper vendors,
surrounded and threatened the offices of opposition newspapers, and forced
their way into a public TV station. U.N. peacekeepers and civilian staff were,
on several occasions, intimidated, surrounded, and prevented from patrolling
and conducting investigations in government-controlled areas.
Abuses by the Forces Nouvelles
New Forces rebels systematically extort money and pillage goods, including
livestock and foodstuffs, from civilians in villages both under their control
and within the buffer zone. Suspected government collaborators and spies
were on several occasions tortured and summarily executed by rebel leaders.
In the north, rebel commanders arbitrarily dispense justice, in turn leading to
severe violations of human rights: numerous individuals accused of common
crimes are arbitrarily detained within prisons, informal detention centers and
military camps for often extended periods of time. The Dozos, a traditional
tribally based civil defense group now working in coordination with the New
Forces, has also committed serious violations including extortion, arbitrary
detention, torture and rape.
Intercommunal Conflict over Land
During 2005 there were at least two violent episodes of inter-communal conflict
between indigenous groups and immigrant farm workers in the cocoa
and coffee plantation areas of the west. The causes of the violence are multifaceted
and involve a complex interplay of economic factors, disputes over
land rights, the proliferation of armed militias, and the political manipulation
of ethnicity. In February 2005, sixteen people were killed and thousands displaced
in clashes sparked by an attack by pro-government militia on the
rebel-held village of Logouale. In May and June 2005, at least seventy people were killed and thousands more displaced in a spate of revenge killings in and
around the town of Duékoué.
Accountability
Throughout 2005, neither the government nor the rebel leadership took
concrete steps to discipline, investigate or hold accountable those responsible
for ongoing crimes, much less past atrocities which took place during the
2000 election violence, 2002-2003 civil war, and violent crackdown on an
opposition demonstration in March 2004.
For their part, the United Nations Security Council and African Union resisted
the adoption of concrete efforts to either hold perpetrators accountable
through prosecutions or to restrain the actions of alleged human rights violators
through the imposition of travel and economic sanctions. The U.N.
Security Council has yet to make public or discuss the findings of the
Commission of Inquiry report into serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law since September 2002, which was handed to
the UN Secretary General in November 2004. The report contained a secret
annex listing people accused of human rights abuses who could eventually
face trial. Similarly, the Council refused to implement travel and economic
sanctions authorized under resolution 1572, which was passed in November
2004. This resolution authorized the use of sanctions against Ivorians who
violated human rights, broke the arms embargo, indulged in hate speech, or
blocked the peace process.
While the prosecutor for the International Criminal Court announced in
January 2005 that he would send a team to Cote d’Ivoire to lay the groundwork
for a possible investigation into war crimes, he had at year’s end yet to
do so. The prosecutor was acting on an ad hoc request to the ICC by the
Ivorian government made in September 2003.
Key International Actors
No one country, international body or individual appeared willing or able to
exert sufficient influence to move the two sides towards a peaceful resolution to the political and military crisis. Throughout the year key international
players were exasperated with the lack of progress in the implementation of
yet another peace accord. However, the African Union, which during 2005
took the lead in peace negotiations, was loath to use and maintained effective
veto power over the only leverage tool available — United Nations economic
and travel sanctions. Key international players were equally unprepared to
take measures to combat impunity although the United Nations on numerous
occasions expressed concern about ongoing violations. This reluctance—
in the name of undermining future prospects for peace—appeared to
embolden the perpetrators and fed into the intransigence of the Ivorian government
and New Forces.
Following the failure of the parties to fully implement the Pretoria
Agreement, there was no consensus as to which would be the most suitable
body to play the role of negotiator during the coming year: The A.U.-
appointed envoy, South African President Thabo Mbeki, was deeply mistrusted
by the rebels who accused him of being too close to the government.
Key members of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)—
Burkina Faso and Mali—were blamed by the government for supporting
the rebels. France, who has been accused of favoritism by both sides, and
the United Nations deferred to the African bodies. In response, the African
Union created the International Working Group (IWG)—to be chaired by
Nigeria’s Foreign Minister and composed of senior officials from Benin,
Ghana, Nigeria, Niger, South Africa, France, United States, Britain, the
International Monetary Fund, World Bank, European Union, African Union
and regional body ECOWAS—to monitor the implementation of future
commitments.
While the United Nations Security Council appeared frustrated with both
parties to the conflict, it was reluctant to take a leadership role in pushing for
accountability or sanctions. However, in June 2005, it authorized an increase
of some 850 more troops.

Democratic Republic of Congo
Crippled by continuing conflict among its four main component parties, the
transitional government of the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) ended
two years in power with much of the eastern region still not under its control.
Faced with overwhelming logistical problems, the transitional government
postponed elections scheduled for June 30, 2005 and will likely hold
them in the first half of 2006. Security services committed election-related
abuses throughout 2005, including the January shooting in Kinshasa of
dozens of demonstrators protesting elections delays and the later detention of
political activists for months without charge elsewhere in the country.
Focused on assuring elections, few Congolese or outsiders worked effectively
to curb ongoing violence against civilians or to address crucial post-conflict
challenges, such as delivering justice for the many grave violations of international
humanitarian law committed in Congo in the last decade.
Unconvinced that elections will bring results they favor, some belligerents to
the war that officially ended in 2002 have kept their troops from being integrated
into the new national army, as stipulated in the final peace accords. In
late 2004 and in 2005 troops from the former Congolese Rally for
Democracy-Goma (RCD-Goma) refused integration and fought the national
army in several clashes in the eastern DRC. Armed groups which remained
outside the peace process also fought each other, the national army and the
U.N. peacekeeping force known as MONUC. Representatives of one such
group, opponents of the Rwandan government known as the Democratic
Force for the Liberation of Rwanda (FDLR), announced that they would disarm
and return to Rwanda, but only a few hundred did so in 2005.
In 2005, combatants from armed groups as well as government soldiers deliberately
killed, raped, and abducted civilians and destroyed or looted their
property in repeated attacks, particularly in eastern Congo. A feeble justice
system failed to prosecute these recent crimes and did nothing to end
impunity for war crimes and crimes against humanity committed during the
previous two wars. The September 2005 discovery of mass graves from 1996 in the eastern region of Rutshuru served as a reminder of the unpunished
mass slaughter of civilians in Congo in the last decade.
Government Soldiers and Armed Groups Target Civilians
The government failure to integrate troops of former belligerent groups into
the national army and to properly train and pay its soldiers underlay some
military abuses. Military abuses such as those that occurred in December
2004 in North Kivu where government soldiers and combatants refusing
integration fought and killed at least one hundred civilians, many of them
targeted on an ethnic basis, were repeated elsewhere in 2005. In Walungu,
South Kivu, government soldiers raped civilians and looted property during
operations against the FDLR in late 2004 and early 2005. In Equateur, poorly
paid and undisciplined troops went on a rampage in July 2005, killing, raping,
and stealing from civilians.
As government soldiers tried to take control of Ituri and parts of North and
South Kivu, Maniema and Katanga in late 2004 and 2005, both they and the
combatants fighting them committed grave violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. In Ituri, which experienced widespread
violence against civilians in previous years, more than fifteen thousand members
of armed groups agreed to lay down their weapons, but others who
refused to disarm increased attacks on MONUC peacekeepers and government
soldiers. In February 2005 nine peacekeepers were killed in an ambush
north of Bunia, the main town. Combatants refusing disarmament took control
of areas near the towns of Boga and Kilo in August and September 2005,
forcing thousands of civilians to flee their homes.
In North Kivu, where authorities illegally distributed hundreds of firearms to
civilians in late 2004, there was little progress in 2005 in recuperating the
weapons, some of which were used by civilians to harm, rob, or intimidate
others.
Foreign Armed Groups
The continuing presence of Ugandan and Rwandan rebel combatants in eastern
Congo threatens regional stability by providing a pretext for intervention
by the Rwandan or Ugandan governments. In mid-2005 the Ugandan government
facilitated a meeting of Ituri combatants who forged a new alliance
to fight the Congolese government and MONUC. Under pressure from the
international community, the Ugandan government later expelled these ‘warlords’
from Uganda, but took no action to arrest them. In September 2005
Uganda threatened to invade Congo after some rebel Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA) troops, opposed to the Ugandan government, briefly crossed into the
Congo.
In March 2005, under pressure from their former backers in the Congolese
transitional government, FDLR rebels said they would give up military
struggle and return to Rwanda. Most FDLR combatants stayed in Congo but
split into several factions. One such group, calling itself the “Rastas,” killed,
kidnapped for ransom, and raped civilians around Walungu, South Kivu. The
African Union proposed sending a force to disarm the FDLR but by late
2005 had not put any troops in the area.
Civil and Political Rights
In January and June 2005, security forces killed dozens of men, women, and
children protesting electoral delays in Kinshasa, Mbuyi Mayi, Goma and
other towns. In May 2005, the national security service arrested over one
hundred people, primarily from southern Katanga, supposedly suspected of
planning a Katangan secession attempt. They detained some for months
without charge. In hundreds of cases throughout the country, police and
other agents of security services arbitrarily detained and tortured citizens
with the intent of extorting payment from them. Authorities arrested and
closed the operations of journalists who criticized those in power, such as a
television station of Vice President Jean-Pierre Bemba, who is likely a chief
challenger of President Kabila in the up-coming elections. In another case
the Information Ministry in January 2005 ordered certain broadcasters to
discontinue political programming and live phone-in programs. In July, authorities arrested a Kinshasa editor after his newspaper reported that a
government minister had misappropriated U.S. $300,000.
Illegal Exploitation of Resources
As in the past armed groups profited from the illegal exploitation of
resources and fought to control rich mining areas and lucrative border posts.
In gold-rich Ituri, for example, armed groups fought over mines at Kilo and
Bambu in September 2005. Local organizations as well as international
observers report growing corruption and fraud by officials linked to the
exploitation of resources. Multinational companies sought to sign new mining
deals or revitalize old ones, further complicating efforts to ensure effective
national control over resources. A Congolese parliamentary commission
investigating contracts signed during the war years for the exploitation of
minerals and other resources reported many irregularities and recommended
ending or renegotiating the contracts, a measure awaiting action by parliament.
Threats to Human Rights Groups
Congolese human rights activists face significant intimidation and violence,
abuses that are rarely punished. After Pascal Kabungulu, a prominent activist,
was assassinated in Bukavu in July 2005, two soldiers were arrested in connection
with the killing, but their commander forced authorities to release
them. In June 2005, the national security service arrested a well-known
activist in Lubumbashi, saying he was linked to the May secession attempt in
Katanga. When other activists protested his arrest, six of them were arrested
and mistreated while in detention. Activists and members of civil society in
North Kivu received anonymous threats and visits by armed men to their
homes in January 2005, after they denounced war crimes committed by local
troops and the distribution of weapons to civilians by provincial authorities.
Four felt so threatened that they fled the country.
Delivering Justice
Despite national and international proclamations about the importance of
accountability for past crimes, numerous persons suspected of violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law continue to occupy posts of
national or local responsibility, including in the newly integrated army. In
exceptional cases, authorities responded to international pressure by arresting
several armed group leaders from Ituri in early 2005 and by issuing arrest
warrants for other military figures who resist government control. The prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) is investigating war crimes
and crimes against humanity in Congo, an effort that may eventually bring
some major perpetrators to justice.
Key International Actors
MONUC peacekeepers were posted outside of urban areas in early 2005,
helping to deter human rights violations in some places. But MONUC
troops are still too few to protect civilians throughout the country. In
September 2005, the Security Council authorized deployment of an additional
841 MONUC police during elections and provided a further three hundred
peacekeepers.
The United States, the United Kingdom, and South Africa are working to
keep the peace process from collapse, helping resolve disagreements among
partners in the national government and seeking a solution to disarming the
FDLR. Focused on making elections happen, donors have not yet addressed
how to assure political space or deliver justice after elections.
Eritrea
The Eritrean government’s tyranny became more ruthless in 2005. Rule by
force and caprice remains the norm, as the government aggressively moves to
intimidate the population and to isolate it from the outside world.
The border dispute with Ethiopia continues to fester and is used by the government
to justify repressive policies. The government of Eritrea seriously
interfered with the United Nations’ ability to monitor troop movements
along the border in 2005 and threatened to resume war unless Ethiopia
accepts an independent Boundary Commission decision which it considers
favorable.
Arrests, Imprisonment and Torture
Suppression of Political Dissent and Opinion, Arbitrary Arrest, and Illegal
Detention
No political party other than the People’s Front for Democracy and Justice
(PFDJ) is allowed to exist in Eritrea and no national elections have been held
since the country won its independence from Ethiopia in 1993. Using the
excuse that Eritrea remains at war, the government has refused to implement
the 1997 constitution, drafted by a constitutional assembly and ratified by
referendum, that respects civil and political rights.
The government has arrested thousands of citizens for expressing dissenting
views, practicing an “unregistered” religion, avoiding endless military conscription,
attempting to flee the country, or on suspicion of not fully supporting
government policies. Mass arrests began in September 2001 with the
detention of eleven leaders of the PDFJ who questioned President Isayas
Afewerki’s erratic and autocratic leadership. The government arrested publishers,
editors and reporters and closed all independent newspapers and
magazines. The arrests continued in 2005 and included three leaders of government-
affiliated labor unions, the only unions allowed to operate in the
country.
Most of those arrested are held indefinitely in incommunicado detention.
None are formally charged, given access to lawyers or brought to trial. Some
prisoners are released but are warned not to talk about their imprisonment or
treatment. Some manage to escape and flee the country. As of September
2005, the World Food Program reported that ten thousand fleeing Eritreans
are in refugee camps in Ethiopia, two hundred of whom fled since January,
with two hundred to three hundred more arriving monthly.
Prison Conditions and Torture
Prisoners are often held in secret prisons, including underground cells.
Because of the large number of arrests, less prominent prisoners are packed
into cargo containers or in other overcrowded prisons. In addition to psychological
abuse, solitary confinement and abysmal conditions, escapees report
the use of physical torture. Prisoners are suspended from trees with their
arms tied behind their backs, a technique known as almaz (diamond).
Prisoners are also placed face down, hands tied to feet, a method of torture
known as the “helicopter.”
Military Conscription Roundups and Arrests
Eritreans between the ages of eighteen and forty-five must perform two years
of compulsory national service. In practice, however, the time for service is
repeatedly prolonged. There are frequent giffas (sweeps) to round up
“evaders”—some of whom have already fulfilled their lawful obligations. The
government often uses national service as retribution for perceived criticism
of government policies. Those accused of evading service are frequently tortured.
Conscripts are often used for public works projects, such as road
building. There have been persistent reports that they are also used as laborers
on party, military, and officers’ personal farms.
In September 2005, the Italian newspaper Corriere della Sera published photographs
taken by a diplomat in Asmara who witnessed a killing by security
forces of a young man wounded during a giffa. According to the diplomat, a
security agent shot the man at close range, execution-style, while the victim
lay in the road. The government denied the diplomat’s account and photographs, quoting several persons who lived in the area who asserted that the
only body in the street was that of a drunk.
In mid-2005, the government for the first time made hundreds of arrests of
family members of children who had not reported to the military training
camp at Sawa for their final year of high school or who otherwise did not
report for national service. Although the government issued denials, foreign
diplomats confirmed the arrests.
Three separate immigration decisions in 2005, by an appellate court in the
United States (Nuru v. Gonzales, 404 F.3d 1207 (9th Cir.), the European
Court of Human Rights (Said v. the Netherlands, Application no. 2345/02),
and the United Kingdom Immigration Appeal Tribunal (Appeal No: Eritrea
CG [2005]UKIAT 00106), granted asylum to Eritreans fleeing conscription
on the grounds that national service is used as a measure of political repression
and that anyone forcibly returned to Eritrea is likely to be tortured.
Religious Persecution
The government closed all religious institutions in May 2002 except for
those affiliated with the Eritrean Orthodox, Roman Catholic, Eritrean
Evangelical (Lutheran) churches and Sunni Muslim mosques. Members of
Pentecostal Christian churches are arrested for possession of Bibles or for
attending communal worship. In 2005, the government intensified its persecution
of adherents of unregistered religions by raiding wedding parties at
private homes. Some clergy of a modernizing wing of the Eritrean Orthodox
church were also arrested in 2005. Many of those arrested are beaten or tortured
during their arrest or while in captivity.
Jehovah’s Witnesses have been especially mistreated. Some have been
detained for a decade for refusing to participate in national military service
even though the official penalty is incarceration for no more than three years.
The Eritrean government defends its practices on the ground that the unrecognized
churches have failed to register, but some religious groups applied
for registration in 2002 and have not been registered. The government announced in April 2005 that it soon would register the Seventh Day
Adventist denomination, but as of November 2005, it had not done so.
In September 2005, the United States imposed sanctions after having earlier
designated Eritrea as a “country of particular concern” for its religious persecution.
Suppression of Human Rights Groups
Neither domestic nor international human rights organizations are allowed
to operate in Eritrea. Indeed, almost no domestic civil organizations are
allowed to function except as an appendage to the government or to the
PDFJ. In June 2005, the government imposed new restrictions on nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) providing assistance to the country. The
restrictions require annual registration and prohibit any NGO with less than
U.S.$2 million in capital (if foreign) or U.S.$1 million (if domestic) from
being registered.
No non-governmental sources of information exist except word-of-mouth.
Foreign broadcasts are periodically jammed.
Relations with Ethiopia
The 1998-2000 war with Ethiopia ended with an armistice agreement by
which Eritrea and Ethiopia agreed to binding arbitration of their border. An
international peace-keeping force, U.N. Mission in Eritrea-Ethiopia
(UNMEE), maintains troops and observers along the twenty-five-kilometerwide
armistice buffer line between the two countries. The force and the zone
are based on the armistice agreement that suspended the conflict.
In 2003, Ethiopia announced its rejection the decision of the independent
Boundary Commission, largely because it awarded the village of Badme, the
flashpoint for the war, to Eritrea. The Eritrean government uses the possibility
of renewed conflict as a justification for postponing elections, prolonging
national service, and for its repressive policies. Eritrea has lashed out against
the international community for not compelling Ethiopia to implement the border commission decision. Eritrea insists that the border be demarcated
without conditions and Ethiopia insists that, while it accepts the Boundary
Commission’s decision in principle, demarcation can proceed only after bilateral
discussions. No serious international pressure has been applied to
Ethiopia to honor its commitments.
In 2005, President Issayas threatened to resume the war if the impasse is not
resolved. In October 2005, the government declared that UNMEE helicopters
and night patrols could no longer be used to monitor the border. By
November, both Eritrea and Ethiopia had substantially increased troop levels
and armament near the border.
Key International Actors
In January 2005, the African Union adopted a 2003 African Commission on
Human and Peoples’ Rights report finding Eritrea’s arrest of the eleven government
officials in 2001 and their continued incarceration in violation of the
African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights. In April, the Inter-
Parliamentary Union unanimously concluded that continued detention was a
gross violation of fundamental rights under Eritrean and international law,
and inferred from the conflicting justifications given by the government that
the accusations against the eleven were groundless.
The international community’s assistance consists of food and other humanitarian
assistance. The European Union announced in 2003 that it would provide
Eritrea an unstated sum under the European Initiative for Democracy
and Human Rights, in addition to a ? 96 million five-year aid package (until
2007) for social and economic development. The European Union said that
its assistance would depend on the government’s willingness to improve civil
liberties but has taken no action to withdraw assistance in the face of government
intransigence.
With minor exceptions, the United States withholds non-humanitarian assistance
to Eritrea because it has refused to release two American embassy local
employees arrested in 2001. (After four years, no charges have been filed
against them.) In August 2005, Eritrea arrested two more local embassy staff, allegedly for human trafficking. In early summer, the government demanded
that the U.S. Agency for International Development cease operations in the
country without offering a reason, other than that the government was
uncomfortable with HIV/AIDS programs and wanted assistance to be provided
directly to the government. In September, the United States imposed a
partial denial of arms-export licenses on Eritrea for its religious persecution.
This sanction is more symbolic than real because the United States exports
few arms to Eritrea. The Eritrean ministry of defense issued a statement calling
the sanction part of a U.S. Central Intelligence Agency plot to “instill
chaos” in Eritrea and to rescue the Ethiopian government. Despite the official
U.S. position of keeping its distance, high-level U.S. Defense department
officials frequently visit and praise the Eritrean government for fighting terrorism.
Ethiopia
The aftermath of Ethiopia’s landmark May 2005 parliamentary elections has
laid bare the deeply entrenched patterns of political repression, human rights
abuse and impunity that characterize the day-to-day reality of governance in
much of the country. This dispiriting reality has come as a shock to many
international observers who had viewed the electoral process with a great
deal of optimism. The run-up to the May elections witnessed displays of
openness and genuine political competition unprecedented in Ethiopia’s long
history. But many Ethiopians experienced these limited openings in a context
still dominated by heavy-handed government efforts to suppress and punish
any form of political dissent. Worse, the aftermath of the May elections has
been marred by seemingly intractable controversy and displays of government
brutality that threaten to reverse the gains yielded by the electoral
process.
Post-election Uncertainty and Violence
Official tallies in the weeks following the May 15 voting indicated that opposition
parties had made enormous gains in parliament but had fallen well
short of obtaining a majority. The largest opposition coalition, the Coalition
for Unity and Democracy (CUD), refused to accept those results, alleging
that it had been robbed of outright victory by widespread government fraud.
The government, in turn, has accused the CUD of conspiring to overthrow
the government by force. At the time of writing, a full five months after the
elections, it is still unclear whether the CUD will take its seats in parliament.
These tensions exploded in early June, when protests broke out in Addis
Ababa in defiance of a government ban on public assemblies. Police and military
forces responded with excessive force, killing at least thirty-six unarmed
civilians and wounding more than 100. Security forces then arrested several
thousand opposition supporters throughout the country. In November negotiations
between the government and leading opposition parties broke
down, sparking a fresh wave of protests. Ethiopian security forces again
reacted with brutality, killing at least 46 people and arresting more than 4000 in Addis Ababa and other towns. The government then ordered the
arrest of several dozen opposition politicians, journalists, editors and civil
society activists. Ethiopian authorities have indicated that several among
them are likely to face charges of treason, which carries a potential sentence
of death under Ethiopian law.
Political Repression
Government officials and security forces in much of Ethiopia make routine
use of various forms of human rights abuse to deter and punish dissent. For
more than a decade, authorities in the country’s vast Oromia region have
used exaggerated concerns about armed insurgency and “terrorism” to justify
the torture, imprisonment and sustained harassment of their critics and even
ordinary citizens. Student protests in 2004 at Addis Ababa University and in
secondary schools throughout Oromia led to the arrest of hundreds of students,
many of whom were mistreated while in custody. Ever since the
protests and throughout 2005, regional officials in Oromia have gone to
oppressive lengths to monitor and control the speech and conduct of students
and teachers alike.
In rural areas in Oromia, local officials often threaten to withhold vital agricultural
inputs such as fertilizer from impoverished farmers if they speak out
against them or their policies. In other cases, local officials selectively enforce
harsh penalties for the non- repayment of debts to justify the imprisonment
of their critics or the seizure of their property. In the months prior to the
May 2005 elections, regional officials in Oromia created new quasi-governmental
structures used to subject the rural population to intense levels of surveillance
and to impose restrictions on farmers’ freedoms of movement, association
and speech.
Abuses Committed by the Ethiopian Armed Forces
The Ethiopian government has taken no meaningful action to address widespread
atrocities committed by Ethiopian military forces in the remote
southwestern region of Gambella. Federal authorities have refused even to
investigate human rights abuses so severe that they may rise to the level of crimes against humanity and continue to allow the authors of those crimes
the enjoyment of near-total impunity.
In December 2003, military personnel joined civilian mobs in a rampage
through indigenous Anuak neighborhoods in Gambella town, murdering as
many as 424 Anuak civilians. In the months that followed, Ethiopian military
forces subjected Anuak communities throughout the region to widespread
and systematic acts of murder, rape, torture, arbitrary imprisonment and the
destruction of entire villages. The immediate trigger for these abuses was a
series of attacks in 2004 by Anuak civilians against civilians on other ethnic
groups in the area.
A government-sponsored Commission of Inquiry set up to investigate the
December 2003 violence in Gambella town resulted in a whitewash, and
since then the government has refused even to investigate any of the abuses
that have taken place throughout the region since early 2004. Reports of
ongoing abuses continued to emerge from Gambella in 2005, albeit on a
smaller scale than the violence in late 2003 and 2004.
Security forces frequently arrest civilians in other parts of Ethiopia, claiming
they are members of the Oromo Liberation Front in Oromia state or the
Ogaden National Liberation Front and Al-Itihad Al-Islamiya in Somali state.
Few of those arrested are brought to trial. Some are released; others are kept
in arbitrary detention for prolonged periods, often without a hearing or cause
shown, sometimes incommunicado. Frequent reports of extrajudicial executions
and torture emerge from Somali region, but access to the region has
been restricted by the military to such a degree that these reports are impossible
to confirm.
Restrictions on the Press
Many independent journalists, editors and publishers continue to endure
harassment and intimidation, and criminal penalties for a range of speechrelated
penalties remain on the books. In June 2005, the Ministry of
Information revoked the licenses of five Ethiopian journalists working for the Voice of America and Radio Deutsche-Welle because it disapproved of their
coverage of the elections and the post-election controversy.
Judicial Delay
The courts in Ethiopia often step in to order the release of government critics
jailed on trumped-up charges of treason or armed insurrection. However,
judicial action often occurs only after unreasonably long delays, both because
of the courts’ enormous workload and because of excessive judicial deference
to bad faith police requests for additional time to produce evidence. In addition,
courts have shown themselves far less likely to contest prolonged pretrial
detention in high-profile cases that have the attention of high-level federal
officials.
Fourteen years after the overthrow of the former military government (the
Derg), several thousand of its former officials remain jailed awaiting trial,
charged with genocide, crimes against humanity, and major felonies. Former
dictator Mengistu Haile Mariam, on trial in absentia, remains a guest of the
Mugabe government in Zimbabwe, with little chance of being held accountable
for his abuses so long as he remains there.
Local Human Rights Defenders
Ethiopia has only one large, nationwide human rights organization, the
Ethiopian Human Rights Council (EHRCO). Government officials routinely
accuse the organization of working to advance an anti-government political
agenda and its staff and ordinary members are often subjected to harassment
and intimidation by local officials and members of the security forces. In June
2005, three EHRCO investigators were arrested and taken to military detention
camps because of their efforts to document the human toll of the government’s
post-election crackdown. All three were subsequently released but
were threatened with future criminal proceedings.
Another human rights organization, the Human Rights League, reopened its
offices in March 2005 after winning a protracted court battle against government efforts to ban its operations. It remains to be seen whether the organization
will be allowed to operate free of government interference.
Key International Actors
Ethiopia is considered an essential partner of the United States in its “war on
terrorism,” and Washington has generally been unwilling to apply meaningful
pressure on the Ethiopian government over its human rights record. The
U.S. suspects Islamic extremist groups are hiding in bordering areas of
Somalia, and sometimes inside Ethiopia itself. The U.S. military, operating
primarily out of a base in Djibouti, cooperates closely with the Ethiopian
armed forces in counterterrorism efforts and capacity building work. The
United States is also the largest donor of bilateral aid in Ethiopia.
Other Western donors have also been reluctant to criticize Ethiopia’s human
rights record and have in many respects actually embraced the Ethiopian
government as something of a model for Africa. UK Prime Minister Tony
Blair invited Ethiopian Prime Minister Meles Zenawi to play a leading role
on Blair’s Commission for Africa, which was charged with finding solutions
to some of the continent’s most intractable problems. There is no indication
that donors’ unusually robust criticism following the post-election crackdown
in Addis Ababa will translate into a sustained willingness to be more vocal in
demanding that the federal government respect human rights.
The United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) maintains
approximately 3300 troops and military observers along the twenty-five kilometer-
wide armistice buffer line between the two countries. In September
2005 the Security Council voted to extend UNMEE’s mandate through March
2006, as tensions remain high between the two countries (see Eritrea chapter).
Liberia
The completion in October and November 2005 of presidential and parliamentary
elections marked a major step towards the consolidation of Liberia’s
transition from a near-failed state rife with human rights abuses to a democratic
state governed by the rule of law. The elections followed a 2003 peace
agreement which ended three years of internal armed conflict and the
deployment in 2003 of some fifteen thousand United Nations peacekeepers.
At year’s end there were solid grounds for optimism including the disarmament
of more than 101,000 combatants; the return home of tens of thousands
of civilians who had fled during the war; the recognition by both
Liberia and the international community of the role corruption played in
fomenting armed conflict; and the ability of journalists and civil society to
function after years of being silenced, persecuted and targeted. A Truth and
Reconciliation Commission empowered to recommend prosecutions for the
worst offenders was also established. However, the human rights situation
remained precarious as a result of frequent criminal acts in the face of inadequate
police and civil authorities; striking deficiencies within the judicial system;
financial shortfalls for programs to train demobilized combatants; and
continued regional instability, most notably in neighboring Côte d’Ivoire.
Moreover, there was little progress on ensuring accountability for past atrocities.
Ongoing Insecurity and Related Abuses
During 2005, United Nations peacekeepers and civilian police consolidated
their control throughout all major Liberian towns leading to significant
improvements in protection for civilians. However, serious institutional deficiencies
within the national police force and judicial system remain. The illegal
occupation of rubber plantations by former rebel leaders who refused to
recognize the legitimacy of the Liberian Transitional Government of Liberia
(NTGL), rioting by ex-combatants mostly in response to delays in reintegration
programs, as well as the emergence of vigilante groups formed to combat
rising crime in the face of an incompetent police force were worrying developments in 2005. There are ongoing risks associated with the election
or appointment into public office of individuals known to have committed
human rights abuses in the past. A former faction leader, several individuals
subject to United Nations sanctions for their engagement in activities aimed
at undermining security in Liberia and the sub-region, and a few former
high-level military commanders against whom there are credible allegations
of responsibility for serious human rights abuses were elected into office in
the 2005 elections. The abusive records of these persons raises concerns that
they may in the future resort to force and other extra-legal measures to
undermine the rule of law in Liberia. As well, unidentified individuals made
verbal and, in some cases, physical threats against human rights defenders
believed to be providing information to the Special Court for Sierra Leone.
Throughout 2005, there were consistent reports of former president Charles
Taylor interfering in Liberian political affairs and fomenting instability in the
region.
Disarmament of Former Combatants and Re-recruitment into
Regional Conflicts
From 2003-2005, more than 101,000 individuals were disarmed and demobilized.
The disarmament exercise was criticized for not having strict admittance
criteria and for letting in numerous individuals who were not real combatants,
a factor which contributed to the shortfall of funds from international
donors to support education or skills training programs. At years end, this
shortfall left some 43,000 ex-combatants outside of the reintegration program.
During 2005, the dearth of training and education programs, particularly
along the border with neighboring Cote d’Ivoire, contributed to rerecruitment
by the Ivorian government and rebel forces, of hundreds of excombatants,
including children. According to interviews with Liberian fighters,
the majority went to fight alongside militias associated with the Ivorian
government. In 2005, two periods of intense recruitment occurred: at the
beginning of March and September 2005, in anticipation of future attacks on
Ivorian rebel-held positions.
Rule of law
Liberia’s history of armed conflict and human rights abuses reflect profound
and deep-rooted weaknesses in institutions which should guarantee the rule
of law. In 2003, the U.N. Security Council mandated the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) to assist in the restructuring and training of the
police, army and judiciary. 2005 saw some progress in the rehabilitation of
these institutions. However, serious problems in reform of the Liberian
police force, delays in demobilizing the former army, and lack of donor support
to rebuild the decimated judicial infrastructure stalled progress in establishing
the rule of law.
Liberian National Police
One feature of the restructuring of the Liberian police was a vetting procedure
to screen out applicants alleged to have committed serious violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law. The civilian component of
UNMIL administered the vetting that took place in 2004 and 2005. The vetting
process appears to have been disorganized, inefficient, and most likely
ineffective in screening out human rights abusers. Problems with the process
included the lack of clear criteria for the elimination of potential human
rights abusers, the failure to allocate adequate human resources to conduct
thorough and systematic background checks on applicants, and inadequate
involvement of Liberian human rights groups and the general population in
the process. Meanwhile, countrywide, the newly trained and vetted Liberian
police continue to engage in unprofessional and at times criminal behavior
including extortion.
The Liberian Army
The United States has the lead in recruiting and training a new Liberian
army of some two thousand soldiers. In early 2005, the US contracted the
project to a privately owned security company, DynCorp. The restructuring
exercise is running months behind schedule and is set to begin in late 2005.
Although DynCorp has a detailed plan to screen recruits for past human rights abuses, it remains to be seen whether this plan will be successfully
implemented.
Judiciary
In 2003, UNMIL proposed an ambitious strategy to rebuild the justice system.
In 2005, however, reforms progressed at an alarmingly slow pace. The
judiciary remains severely dysfunctional: only half of 145 magistrate positions
are staffed, and of these none holds a law degree. Only five of Liberia’s fifteen
circuit courts are operational. Of grave concern is that only 3% of all
inmates in Liberia’s prisons and holding cells are convicted felons. The 97%
remaining are being held in pre-trial detention, often for extended periods of
time.
Even when judicial authorities have been assigned to a courtroom, the dearth
of prosecutors and public defenders undermines the quality of justice dispensed.
Judges and other staff often fail to fulfill their duties, sometimes by
neglecting to attend proceedings. Magistrate and local tribal courts often try,
sentence, fine and imprison people for criminal and civil matters that are outside
their jurisdiction. Frequent reports exist of judicial authorities releasing
suspects charged with criminal offenses after having received a bribe, or
soliciting money from them to stop the case from proceeding to a higher
court. Prisons and detention centers continue to operate far below international
standards with overcrowded cells and lack of food and water for
detainees.
Truth and Reconciliation Commission
On June 10, 2005, an act establishing the Liberian Truth and Reconciliation
Commission (TRC) was signed into law. The TRC is mandated to investigate
gross human rights violations and economic crimes that occurred
between January 1979 and October 14, 2003. It is empowered to recommend
amnesty in cases not involving serious violations of international humanitarian
law and to recommend prosecution for the most serious cases. The TRC
was set to begin work in early 2006.
Accountability for Past Abuses
Neither the Liberian government nor the international community have
developed a concrete strategy to bring perpetrators of serious war crimes and
crimes against humanity committed during Liberia’s armed conflicts to justice.
However, throughout 2005 there was public debate on whether to prosecute
these individuals: civil society leaders stressed the importance of perpetrators
of gross violations facing justice for their crimes while Liberian transitional
government officials and the international community maintained that
prosecutions could undermine efforts to consolidate the peace. While the
TRC is empowered to recommend prosecution for the most serious cases,
there was no indication as to whether or not TRC commissioners would act
on this power and, if they did, whether the Liberian judicial system would be
able and willing to try these crimes.
Corruption
Corruption in the public and private sectors of Liberian society has long
been endemic, and is widely recognized as having contributed to the country’s
political instability and ensuing armed conflicts. Throughout 2005, there
were numerous scandals and allegations made against members of the
NTGL including the manipulation of contract bidding, the looting of state
coffers, and the misappropriation of development aid. The international
community financed audits of the Central Bank and other state-owned enterprises
and proposed a hard-hitting three-year anti-corruption plan—the
Governance and Economic Management Assistance Programme (GEMAP)—
which was approved by the NTGL in September 2005. The plan provides
for foreign financial experts to be placed in and empowered to co-sign all
financial and operational matters within the National Bank of Liberia, the
Finance Ministry, and several other revenue generating agencies. It also calls
for the establishment of an independent anti-corruption commission.
However, the original proposal for using foreign judges to adjudicate cases
was dropped.
Key International Actors
International actors, notably the United Nations and Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) were committed to full implementation
of the 2003 Accra Peace Accords, which included the completion of elections
in October 2005. ECOWAS took the lead inn resolving internal disputes
within the NTGL. Throughout 2005, the international community’s top priorities
were ensuring that the election exercise was a success and putting in
place mechanisms to fight corruption. However, other key rule of law issues,
including the imperative to rebuild Liberia’s fractured judicial system and the
merits of pursuing justice for the past atrocities, received little attention.
Despite mounting international pressure, the Nigerian government, which
offered former president Charles Taylor a safe haven in 2003, refused to hand
him over to the Special Court for Sierra Leone, which indicted him for war
crimes connected with his support for rebels in Sierra Leone. The United
States continued to be the largest donor to both reconstruction efforts and
the United Nations peacekeeping mission in Liberia. In June 2005, the U.N.
Security Council voted to reapply the largely successful arms embargo and
travel ban against individuals involved in previous attempts to destabilize the
region, and to continue sanctions on the sale of diamonds and timber.
Nigeria
Nigeria’s most serious human rights problems remain unresolved. The government
has largely failed to tackle the impunity that often attaches to serious
human rights abuses, particularly abuses committed by the security forces
and government officials. No one has yet been brought to justice for the
massacre of hundreds of people by the military in Odi, Bayelsa state, in 1999,
and in Benue state, in 2001, and members of the Nigerian police force are
very rarely held accountable for widespread abuses including torture and
murder. While the federal government has made some efforts to tackle corruption,
it remains a pervasive problem even as the vast majority of Nigerians
continue to live in extreme poverty. Widespread corruption leads directly to
violations of social and economic rights and exacerbates other causes of violence
and intercommunal tension.
In recent years, Nigeria has repeatedly been shaken by devastating outbreaks
of intercommunal violence that are often fueled by government mismanagement
and political manipulation. Many unresolved tensions are likely to be
made even more explosive by intense political competition surrounding landmark
presidential primaries in 2006 and general elections in 2007. Concerns
exist that many politicians may resort to the same violent tactics in the
upcoming elections that undermined the legitimacy of the last nationwide
polls in 2003.
Intercommunal Violence
Intercommunal violence along ethnic, religious and other lines has claimed
thousands of lives since the end of military rule in 1999. While 2005 saw no
large-scale outbreaks of communal violence comparable to the worst incidents
of recent years, smaller local-level clashes, for example in Kwara, Delta
and Edo states, during which scores of people were believed to have died,
occurred throughout 2005. Human Rights Watch estimates that between two
thousand and three thousand people have been killed in outbreaks of intercommunal
violence in Plateau State alone since 2001, including seven hundred
people in 2004.
The continuing tensions underlying Nigeria’s endemic intercommunal clashes—
including conflicts over citizenship rights, environmental and population
pressures, basic state failure to provide needed services, religious extremism,
economic decline, corruption and cynical political manipulation of intercommunal
divisions— are as complex as they are volatile. But Federal and State
government officials in Nigeria have generally failed to heed warning signs
that might allow them to prevent episodes of violence and have failed to
respond effectively to violence when it occurs. Security forces are often
notably absent when violence erupts, and widespread impunity for human
rights violations contributes to the cycle of violence and emboldens perpetrators.
For example, since the 2004 violence in Plateau and Kano, those
responsible for instigating and planning the attacks appear to have escaped
justice.
Conflict in the Niger Delta
The oil-rich Niger Delta in the south of the country remains the scene of
recurring violence between members of different ethnic groups competing
for political and economic power, and between militia and security forces
sent to restore order in the area. Violence between ethnic militias often
occurs within the context of clashes over control of the theft of crude oil.
The violence is aggravated by the widespread availability of small arms, a
problem which exists throughout Nigeria but is particularly acute in the
Delta. Despite a robust military and police presence in the region, local communities
remain vulnerable to attack by militias, criminal gangs, and the
security forces themselves. Oil companies rarely speak out publicly about
such abuses; indeed, some of their own practices have contributed to ongoing
conflict in the region.
Federal policy towards conflict in the Delta has vacillated between heavyhanded
attempts at imposing order and attempts to bring reconciliation. In
September 2005 federal authorities arrested Niger Delta People’s Volunteer
Force (NDPVF) leader Asari on charges of treason; that same month, U.K.
police arrested Bayelsa state Governor Diepreye Alamieyeseigha in London
on charges of money laundering. This contrasted sharply with the government’s response to violence in 2004, during which rival militias waged running
battles that devastated villages around Port Harcourt in Rivers State.
Alhaji Dokubo Asari’s NDPVF staged a brazen attack on neighborhoods controlled
by a rival militia in Port Harcourt itself. At the time, Nigerian
President Olusegun Obasanjo responded by calling those two rival militia
leaders to Abuja in September 2004, where he brokered a ceasefire.
The two arrests in 2005 led to a sharp rise in tensions throughout the Niger
Delta, largely because both men claim to be standard-bearers for the cause of
self-determination and resource control for the Delta’s ethnic Ijaw population.
Ijaw militants briefly seized control of a Chevron flow station in
response to Asari’s arrest and threatened future violence unless Asari is
released. That reaction underscored how little the government has done to
address the underlying causes of violence in the region. Most glaringly, the
end of military rule in 1999 has not led to effective efforts to deliver material
benefits or basic security to impoverished Delta communities living atop the
country’s vast oil reserves.
Abuses by Police
During 2005, as in years before, torture, ill-treatment, extra-judicial killings,
arbitrary arrest and detention and extortion by the police, often perpetrated
by or with the knowledge of senior police, remained widespread and routine.
Impunity from prosecution remains the biggest single obstacle to combating
this problem. In June 2005 six people were killed at a police checkpoint in
Abuja. In response to a nationwide outcry over the killings, federal authorities
took the highly unusual step of bringing five police officers to trial on
charges of homicide. According to statistics provided by the Nigerian police,
several thousand “armed robbery” suspects have been killed by the Nigerian
police in recent years. The police have also killed scores of people in custody
or in the course of routine duties such as traffic control. There is no independent
mechanism to ensure that abuses by the police are addressed or even
properly investigated. Since the end of military rule there have been no successful
prosecutions against Nigerian police officers alleged to have committed
torture.
In August 2005, President Obasanjo publicly acknowledged that Nigerian
police officers have committed murder and torture. It remains to be seen
whether this statement will be followed up with a serious push for badly
needed reforms.
Human Rights Concerns in the Context of Shari’a
Since 2000, Shari’a (Islamic law) has been extended to give Shari’a courts
jurisdiction over criminal cases in twelve of Nigeria’s thirty-six states. In
Katsina state two men were put on trial in Shari’a court on charges of
sodomy in 2005; if convicted they could be sentenced to death by stoning.
Shari’a has provisions for sentences that amount to cruel, inhuman and
degrading treatment, including death sentences, amputations and floggings.
No executions or amputations have taken place since early 2002 and capital
sentences have generally been thrown out on appeal, but Shari’a courts continue
to hand down death sentences.
Many trials in Shari’a courts fail to conform to international standards and
do not respect due process even as defined by Shari’a legislation; defendants
rarely have access to a lawyer, are not informed about their rights, and judges
are often poorly trained. The manner in which Shari’a is applied discriminates
against women, particularly in adultery cases where standards of evidence
differ based on the sex of the accused.
Freedom of Expression and Attacks on Civil Society
Despite significant gains in civil liberties since the end of military rule, several
restrictions on freedom of expression remain. Throughout 2005 Federal
Police and State Security Service (SSS) forces continued to harass and occasionally
detain publishers, editors and journalists in 2005. In at least two such
cases in 2005, security forces raided newspaper offices in response to articles
that accused politically prominent individuals, including the wife of President
Olusegun Obasanjo, of corruption.
There have also been numerous cases of arrests, detention, ill-treatment,
intimidation and harassment of critics and opponents of the government.
Security forces have harassed and intimidated civil society activists from the
Niger Delta and members of the Movement for the Actualization of the
Sovereign State of Biafra (MASSOB), an Igbo self-determination group, in
several different incidents throughout 2005.
Indicted War Criminal Charles Taylor and his Exile in Nigeria
In another example of Nigeria’s failure to tackle impunity, former Liberian
President Charles Taylor, indicted by the Special Court for Sierra Leone for
war crimes, crimes against humanity and other serious violations of international
humanitarian law, was granted asylum in Nigeria in 2003 and continues
to live in exile in Calabar, Nigeria. Despite mounting international pressure
from African countries, the United Nations, the European Union and
the United Sates, and a wide array of international African civil society
groups, Nigeria continues to refuse to surrender him to the court.
Key International Actors
Under President Obasanjo, Nigeria continues to enjoy a generally positive
image in the eyes of foreign governments. The country has enhanced its
regional and international significance through the leading role played by
Obasanjo in the African Union, his efforts to broker peace in the Darfur
region of Sudan and his role in calming tension during the February 2005
political crisis in Togo. This, combined with Nigeria’s economic significance
as a major oil producer, creates an unwillingness on the part of key governments,
notably the United Kingdom and the United States, and intergovernmental
organizations such as the African Union and the Commonwealth, to
publicly criticize Nigeria’s human rights record, despite abundant evidence of
serious human rights problems and little action on the part of the government
to address them.
Rwanda
In 2005 Rwanda expanded its system of people’s courts (gacaca jurisdictions)
from one tenth of the territory to the whole country. Established to try
crimes from the period of the 1994 genocide, the jurisdictions were supposed
to draw their legitimacy from popular participation, but many Rwandans did
not trust them and boycotted the sessions. Some judges ignored gacaca rules
by jailing hundreds of persons in preventive detention or for false or incomplete
testimony. Since few appellate gacaca courts exist yet, most of those
jailed have no recourse. As the jurisdictions started pre-trial inquiries
throughout Rwanda, some 10,000 Rwandans fled to surrounding countries,
many saying they feared false accusations and unfair trials.
Throughout 2005, authorities pursued the elusive goal of national unity, continuing
earlier campaigns against “divisionism” and “genocidal ideology.” On
occasion they equated “genocidal ideology” with dissent from government
policies or with opposition to the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF), the dominant
party in the government.
In September 2005 the government published a law on land tenure, the
result of several years of debate. Although guaranteeing Rwandans (and foreign
investors) the right to own land, the law also grants government farreaching
powers over land use, potentially subjecting owners to loss of land
without compensation.
Gacaca Jurisdictions
Meant to combine customary practices of conflict resolution with punitive
justice, gacaca jurisdictions began on a pilot basis in 2002. Many jurisdictions
failed to win public trust for various reasons: hundreds of judges were themselves
accused of crimes; some witnesses refused to speak or to speak truthfully;
and the jurisdictions were prohibited from examining crimes by RPF
soldiers, leading to perceptions that they delivered one-sided justice.
Authorities reformed the jurisdictions in 2004, simplifying the structure and
reducing the number of judges on each panel, but these changes had barely
been implemented when officials announced plans for further reforms in September 2005. Pilot jurisdictions have tried fewer than three thousand
cases. Trials have yet to begin in most of the country and will be further
delayed by the proposed reforms. In 2005 authorities said that an estimated
761,000 persons (just under one half of the adult Hutu male population at
the time of the genocide) would be accused of crimes. Officials aim to complete
trials by 2007, an unrealizable goal at the current rate of proceedings.
The reforms put the system under closer administrative control; e.g., instead
of the popular assembly drawing up lists of accused persons, administrative
agents now do so. Local officials are permitted to fine and otherwise sanction
citizens who do not attend required sessions.
In September 2005, the national prosecutor’s office arrested Guy Theunis, a
priest, journalist, and human rights activist, and submitted the case it had
prepared against him to a gacaca jurisdiction. As in many gacaca cases
throughout the country, evidence was insubstantial, yet judges decided
Theunis, a Belgian citizen, should be tried for inciting genocide and sent him
back to prison. Belgium asked that the case be transferred to Belgian hands.
He was returned to Belgium in late November 2005 for possible prosecution.
In July authorities provisionally released nearly twenty thousand detainees
who had confessed to genocide or who were elderly, ill, or who had been
minors in 1994. This brought to nearly forty-five thousand the number
released since 2003, all of whom will supposedly stand trial. Genocide survivors,
who feared new attacks or attempts to impede justice by those
released, protested the decision.
In September some 750 persons convicted of genocide began performing
community service labor as part of the sentence to be served for their crimes.
For administrative convenience, all were brought to work in one place, contravening
the original intent—to compensate for damage done in locations
where the crimes had been committed—of the labor service program.
Most of the 10,000 Rwandans who fled in 2005 crossed into Burundi, where
they were initially welcomed. But later, Burundian authorities cooperated
with Rwandan officials to return them to Rwanda against their will. Widely
criticized by international partners for violating international refugee conventions, Burundian authorities nonetheless decided in October to send back
three thousand other Rwandans still in Burundi.
Other Judicial Issues
In a landmark decision in May 2005, the High Court issued a writ of habeas
corpus for the first time. When authorities failed to produce the person
named in the order, the court held a minister, the national prosecutor, and
national police commissioner in contempt, but vitiated the decision by concluding
that the court had no authority to impose penalties on the officials.
Authorities continued to detain persons without charge in violation of
Rwandan law, including Col. Patrick Karegeya, an officer once close to
President Paul Kagame, who was held for five months. In March an appeals
court affirmed the conviction of newspaper editor Charles Kabonero for
defaming an official and increased his penalty to a one-year suspended jail
term and a hefty fine. It failed to affirm a promising lower court ruling limiting
“divisionism” to certain forms of public action, thus missing the opportunity
to restrict future use of this vague charge against others. In May the
High Court found opposition politician Leonard Kavutse guilty of inciting
“divisionism” and sentenced him to two years in jail. It ignored Kavutse’s
claim that he had confessed after being tortured, and excused authorities who
had detained him illegally. In late October the Supreme Court began hearing
an appeal in the cases of former President Pasteur Bizimungu and seven others,
convicted of inciting violence and other charges in trials marked by
insubstantial evidence and many due process violations.
Divisionism and “Genocidal Ideology”
Following 2003 and 2004 parliamentary reports attacking political opponents
of the RPF and several nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) for “divisionism”
and “genocidal ideology,” the Senate in 2005 commissioned a study,
as yet unpublished, to identify such ideas among international NGOs and
scholars. Officials interrogated and intimidated two former presidential candidates
after radio broadcasts in which they voiced doubts about gacaca. As
high-level officials focused on “genocidal ideology” in speeches and ceremonies, Rwandan and international NGOs tailored their activities to avoid
confrontation with authorities. Human rights organizations, particularly hard
hit by 2004 attacks, avoided taking stands likely to draw official ire.
Authorities refused official recognition to the Community of Indigenous
Peoples in Rwanda (CAURWA), which defends the rights of the Batwa
minority (some 30,000 people), saying its ethnic focus violated the constitution.
Officials interrogated and detained journalists who criticized the government
and seized one issue of a newspaper, refusing to allow its distribution.
New Land Law
The long-awaited land law issued in 2005 is meant to transform a jumble of
small, fragmented, and minimally productive plots into a more prosperous
system of larger holdings producing for global, as well as for local, markets.
National authorities are to determine how land holdings will be regrouped,
which crops will be grown, and which animals will be raised. Farmers who
fail to follow the national plan may see their land “requisitioned,” with no
compensation, and their land would be given to others. Such centralized control
of land use, characteristic of some colonial and post-colonial regimes,
marks a radical departure for Rwanda.
The law legitimates “land sharing” which requires land owners to give a part
of their land without compensation to others designated by authorities. Some
farmers who resisted the policy when it was begun in the 1990s were punished
by fines or jail sentences; the policy remains the source of many disputes.
The law also affirms the policy of obligatory grouped residence under
which persons living in dispersed homesteads must move to governmentestablished
“villages” (imidugudu). When implemented on a large-scale in
the late 1990s, authorities in some cases used force, fines, and prison terms to
make Rwandans relocate. At least two imidugudu were created in northwestern
Rwanda in 2005, leading to land loss for local farmers. The law claims to
accept the validity of customary rights to land, but rejects the customary use
of marshlands by the poor and abolishes important rights of prosperous landlords
(abakonde) in the northwest, the home region of the previous regime.
Key International Actors
In late 2004 the United Kingdom and Sweden suspended aid to discourage
Rwandan interference in the Democratic Republic of Congo but took no
similarly strong stands on human rights issues. Although the United States
criticized shrinking political space at the end of 2004, other donors rarely
voiced public agreement with this assessment. In 2005, some donors funded
civil society programs meant to promote human rights but failed to provide
corresponding political support.
Generally applauded for its economic growth (with little recognition of the
dramatically widening gap between rich and poor), Rwanda reached the completion
point for Heavily Indebted Poor Countries, as designated by the
World Bank and International Monetary Fund, and was rewarded with $1.4
billion dollars in multilateral debt relief, followed shortly after by forgiveness
of some $90 million owed to the Paris Club nations.
Rwanda, one of the first countries to undergo assessment by the peer review
mechanism of the New Partnership for African Development (NEPAD),
received a generally favorable report but was criticized for refusing recognition
to CAURWA, mentioned above. In response, Rwanda agreed to discussions
with CAURWA, but with no result by late in the year. Increasingly
important in Africa-wide politics, Rwanda provided troops for the African
Union peacekeeping force in the Sudan.
Sierra Leone
While the end of Sierra Leone’s brutal armed conflict in 2002 brought an
end to the gross violations of human rights that characterized the eleven-year
armed conflict, there is growing recognition by the international community
and Sierra Leonean civil society that the government has done little to
address the issues that gave rise to the conflict—endemic corruption, weak
rule of law, and the inequitable distribution of the country’s vast natural
resources. The government’s refusal to do more to address crushing poverty
in the face of high unemployment among young adults and continuing insecurity
within the sub-region renders Sierra Leone vulnerable to future instability.
2005 also saw a rise in attacks against the Sierra Leonean press.
Persistent inadequacies in the police and judiciary continue to undermine
improvements in implementing the rule of law in Sierra Leone. However,
through the efforts of the United Nations-mandated Special Court for Sierra
Leone, significant progress continues to be made in achieving accountability
for war crimes committed during the war. Meanwhile, the government was
resistant to implementing key recommendations made by Sierra Leone’s
Truth and Reconciliation Commission and has yet to appoint commissioners
to the National Human Rights Commission, established by parliament in
2004.
In anticipation of the complete withdrawal of U.N. peacekeepers set for
December 2005, and in recognition of Sierra Leone’s continued institutional
weaknesses within the security, judicial and governance sectors, the U.N.
Security Council in August 2005 approved the establishment of a peacebuilding
mission to be called the U.N. Integrated Office for Sierra Leone
(UNIOSL). The mission’s mandate will begin in January 2006 following the
complete withdrawal of the once-17,000-strong peacekeeping mission. The
priorities of UNIOSL will focus on fighting corruption, improving transparency,
establishing the rule of law and assisting in preparations for the 2007
general elections.
Accountability for Past Abuses
Throughout 2005, the Special Court for Sierra Leone (SCSL), established in
2002 to bring justice for victims of atrocities committed during the war, continued
to make progress. The appointment of judges in January 2005 to the
second trial chamber enhanced the court’s overall efficiency, and at year’s
end, three trials of nine accused from all three warring factions were proceeding
simultaneously The court also uses innovative practices to promote
fair trial rights to protect witnesses who testify and to make the court accessible
to Sierra Leoneans. Some concerns remain about the court’s performance,
including instances of disclosure of identifying information about protected
witnesses, delays in rendering decisions on motions, and few initiatives
designed to have impact with the national judicial system.
Despite mounting international pressure from African countries, the United
Nations, the European Union and the United States, Nigeria continues to
resist surrendering Charles Taylor to the Special Court, which in 2003
indicted him on seventeen counts of war crimes. Initially dependent on voluntary
financial contributions, the Special Court has also struggled to operate
effectively in an uncertain funding environment. Despite voluntary contributions
by government and a subvention grant provided by the UN General
Assembly, the Special Court does not have adequate funds to complete its
work nor carry out critical activities such as ensuring longer-term protection
for witnesses. The court is currently seeking $25 million to cover operations
for 2006. International donors have so far pledged only approximately $10
million.
The Truth and Reconciliation Commission
In mid-2005, the report of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC)
was finally released to the public. The report contains several significant
findings and recommendations. It notes that decades of corrupt rule by Sierra
Leone’s political elite largely created the conditions which led to the civil
war. The recommendations include judicial reforms, measures to increase the
transparency of the mining industry, steps to improve good governance and
accountability, and the abolition of the death penalty.
In June 2005, months after promising to respond to the TRC report, the
government of Sierra Leone published its proposals for the implementation
of the report’s recommendations. However, the Government’s “white paper”
was widely criticized by civil society groups as being vague and noncommittal.
Concretely, they said it failed to establish a timeline for implementing
measures like reparations for war victims, was largely devoid of concrete
steps to improve governance or address corruption, and in some cases rejected
recommendations, such as the abolition of the death penalty.
Attacks against Journalists and Members of Civil Society
In 2005, several attacks were reported against Sierra Leonean journalists. In
May 2005 Harry Yansaneh, acting editor of the independent daily For Di
People, was severely beaten by individuals allegedly acting on the orders of
ruling party parliamentarian Fatmata Hassan Komeh. Yansaneh died two
months later as a result of his injuries. After widespread condemnation by
Sierra Leonean civil society and the international community, an inquest was
launched and several people, including Komeh and two others were arrested
and charged with manslaughter. In May 2005, two journalists from the private
weekly The Trumpet were detained and charged with “seditious libel,”
and, in September 2005, the Deputy Editor of the Awareness Times was
attacked by members of an opposition political party.
Corruption
Corruption within both the public and private sectors in Sierra Leone
remains widespread and continues to rob the public of funds needed to provide
vital services such as education, water, and healthcare. As in previous
years, 2005 saw few convictions for corruption-related offenses. In 2000,
largely under pressure from international donors, the Anti-Corruption
Commission (ACC) was established to investigate charges of corruption.
However, since the power to refer cases for prosecution rests with the attorney
general who is appointed by the president, the ACC has been subject to
political manipulation: in practice, only cases involving lower level officials
are referred for prosecution. Efforts to correct this weakness were boosted in 2005 when the power to recommend prosecution was expanded to include
two foreign prosecutors. It is hoped that this, together with the three judges
from Commonwealth countries who have since 2003 been attached to the
Sierra Leone High Court to hear corruption related cases, will contribute to
the independence of the ACC.
Efforts to Establish the Rule of Law
Despite considerable international donor aid intended to improve the judiciary,
striking deficiencies remained evident throughout 2005. These included
extortion and bribe taking by court officials; insufficient numbers of judges,
magistrates and prosecuting attorneys; inadequate remuneration for judiciary
personnel; and extended periods of pre-trial detention and sub-standard conditions
within detention centers. The system of local courts presided over by
traditional leaders or their officials and applying customary law, which is
often discriminatory particularly against women, is the only form of legal system
accessible to an estimated 70 percent of the population. Local court officials
frequently abuse their powers by illegally detaining persons and charging
high fines for minor offenses, as well as by adjudicating criminal cases
beyond their jurisdiction. At years end, there were ten men on death row following
a December 2004 conviction for treason in connection with a 2003
coup attempt; however, no executions were carried out.
Sierra Leone Army and Police
The Sierra Leone Army and police have over the years been the source of
considerable instability, corruption, and human rights violations and have
enjoyed near-complete immunity from prosecution. During 2005, the police
continued to exhibit unprofessional and at times illegal behaviour. This
included widespread extortion from civilians, including the mounting of
checkpoints to obtain money from passing vehicles and the arbitrary arrest
and detention of suspects. The police were widely criticized for initially failing
to take action in response to the beating of the journalist Yansaneh. The
Commonwealth Police Development Task Force (CPDTF) has, since 1998,
been responsible for restructuring and retraining the police and maintains
that low salaries and inadequate resources remain key challenges.
Efforts by the British-led International Military Advisory and Training Team
(IMATT), which since 1999 has worked to reform, restructure, and rehabilitate
the Republic of Sierra Leone Armed Forces (RSLAF), have led to considerable
improvements in the professionalism and accountability within the
force. However, shortages of equipment, fuel, and communications equipment
continue to undermine their operations. In 2005, there were a few
reports of abuses, extortion, and indiscipline by the army, and the RSLAF
leadership demonstrated some commitment to discipline and sanction soldiers
for offenses committed.
Trafficking in Persons
The trafficking of persons, particularly women and children, was a growing
problem in 2005. In response, the Parliament passed legislation criminalizing
the practice, and the government conducted some investigations into and
closure of suspected venues employing trafficked individuals. Numerous children
are trafficked from the provinces to work in diamond mines, as commercial
sex workers, and in street labor, in both Sierra Leone and neighboring
countries.
Key International Actors
In spite of providing billions of dollars in assistance to Sierra Leone since the
end of the armed conflict in 2002, international donors have been largely
reluctant to criticize the ongoing problems of corruption and bad governance,
which both undermine Sierra Leone’s recovery and make it vulnerable
to future instability. They have also been unwilling to leverage Sierra Leone’s
dependency on aid to pressure the government to address corruption and
governance issues.
The United Kingdom has for the last several years spent some U.S. $60 million
per year on rebuilding and restructuring the army, police, and judiciary.
The United States in 2005 spent some U.S.$9 million on reconstruction,
military education, training and other types of development aid, including on
improving the control and management of the diamond sector.
South Africa
As South Africa enters its eleventh year of democracy, its challenge lies in
implementing policies in line with the country’s far-reaching and progressive
constitution. Areas of particular concern relate to the rights of detained and
accused persons, excessive use of force by police, the rights of refugees and
asylum seekers, and access to education on commercial farms.
Police
The decrease in 2005 in the number of deaths in police custody and as a
result of police action is welcome. Reforms in policing particularly in the
conduct of arrests and detention had a positive effect. By April 2005, 652
deaths involving law enforcement had been reported—down from 714 by
March 2004. Of these 652 cases, 286 occurred in police custody and included
deaths by suicide, natural causes, and injuries sustained prior to detention.
The remaining 366 deaths were the result of law enforcement action, including
fatalities incurred in the course of arrests, beatings in detention, and
shooting of innocent bystanders.
Of concern is a gradual increase in the number of cases of inappropriate use
of force by the police—a matter that has been raised and investigated by the
Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD), an independent oversight body.
Increasingly, police have been involved in violent confrontations with communities
protesting against a lack of services. In May, police used rubber bullets
to control residents of an informal settlement of Happy Valley,
Kommetjie who were protesting against tardy delivery of housing and basic
services. On September 21, in a protest against the local municipalities’ slow
response to a typhoid outbreak in Botleng, Delmas, the police used rubber
bullets against protestors, injuring at least six people. On July 12, police used
teargas and rubber bullets to disperse a peaceful demonstration to protest
against the lack of progress in the dispensing of antiretroviral medication for
the treatment of HIV/AIDS in Queenstown, Eastern Cape.
In June, the ICD completed its investigation into the death of a seventeenyear-
old boy following the firing of rubber bullets on peaceful protestors of eNtabazwe—a township previously designated for Africans—outside
Harrismith on August 30, 2004. It recommended that the state should prosecute
the police officers who fired at the protesters. These officers are due to
stand trial on February 6, 2006. The ICD urged that police officers should
not use lethal ammunition such as birdshot and buckshot to manage protestors.
The United Nations Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms
by Law Enforcement Officials provides that police shall, as far as possible,
use nonviolent means before resorting to the use of force and firearms.
Whenever the lawful use of force and firearms is unavoidable, police must
exercise restraint in such use and act in proportion to the seriousness of the
offense and the legitimate objective to be achieved, and also minimize damage
and injury.
Prisons
The entry into force of sections addressing the treatment of prisoners in the
Correctional Services Act 111 of 1998 on July 31, 2004 provides a framework
to safeguard the human rights of prisoners. Overcrowding in South Africa’s
prisons remains high. As of September 30, 2005, 155,770 prisoners were
being held in facilities that should accommodate 113,825. The number of
sentenced prisoners decreased from 133, 764 in March 31, 2004 to 110, 971
in September. The number of pre-trial prisoners dropped from 52, 326 as of
January 31, to 44, 799 in September 31, 2005. This marginal drop from the
previous year is due, in part, to the early release of 31, 865 qualifying prisoners
between May and August. Despite these steps, overcrowding continues to
threaten the health and living conditions of prisoners and impedes rehabilitation
efforts. Sexual assaults and gang violence are a further threat to the safety
of prisoners. The Inspecting Judge of Prisons—an independent oversight
body—has raised concerns at the high prison population, and has recommended
the early release of prisoners who are too poor to afford bail in order
to reduce the number of inmates. As of March 31, 2005, 13,880 detained
prisoners—about a third of the pre-trial population—could not afford bail.
Following, in part, a constitutional court order requiring the substitution of
the death sentence in May 2005, sixty-three inmates were no longer imprisoned under the death sentence. As of September 30, forty three prisoners
were awaiting the substitution of their sentences.
Children in Detention
Juveniles continue to be incarcerated while awaiting trial despite international
legal requirements that child offenders not be detained except as a last
resort. Notably, however, the number of children awaiting trial in detention
has dropped significantly from between two to three thousand in March 2004
to 1227 as of September 30, 2005. The total number of children in detention
is 2314. International standards stipulate that juveniles should be held in separate
quarters from adults; however, this is not always the case in South
Africa. Children in detention are reportedly victims of sexual abuse, violence,
and gang related activities. The Child Justice Bill, deliberated in the South
African Parliament 2005, proposes a restorative justice approach in an
attempt to move children out of the criminal justice system. The bill establishes
one-stop child justice centers.
Rights of Refugees and Asylum Seekers
Since the inception of the 1998 Refugees Act, which formally protects the
rights of asylum seekers and refugees in line with international law, South
Africa has witnessed a steady increase in the number of asylum seekers. In
2003 the asylum seeker and refugee population was 110, 643. By the end of
2004, this number had increased to 142,907. 32, 600 new asylum applications
were lodged with the Department of Home Affairs in 2004. The implementation
of the Refugees Act remains problematic. Delays in the refugee status
determination process, inconsistency in application of a court decision allowing
for the right to work and study for asylum seekers;, corrupt practices and
inadequate procedures for unaccompanied minors seeking asylum render
protections for asylum seekers inadequate. The number of applications for
asylum pending at the end of 2004 was 115,220, while only 27,683 applications
had been granted refugee status. These administrative difficulties can
present a risk of unlawful arrest and possible deportation for asylum seekers.
South Africa deported a total of 167,137 foreign nationals in 2004. Between January and September 30, South Africa deported 156, 893. The majority of
the deportees are from Southern Africa.
Violence against Women and Children
Violence against women and children is widely recognized as a serious concern
in South Africa: 55,114 rapes and attempted rapes were reported to the
South African police between April 2004 and March 2005 (though the real
number is almost certainly significantly higher.) This is an increase from the
previous year over a similar period. The South African Parliament considered
the Sexual Offenses Bill to remove anomalies from the existing law by broadening
the definition of rape and focusing on the victim rather than the perpetrator
with respect to violence against women in 2005. Police and the court
officials continue to receive training in handling cases of violence against
women and children. The government established fifty-two sexual offenses
courts to adjudicate and focus specifically on cases related to gender violence
by end 2004.
Social and Economic Rights
South Africa has a number of good policies intended to safeguard social and
economic rights. However, the government continues to face challenges in a
number of areas including land reform, provision of services such as health
care and education in rural areas, and broadly finding a solution to poverty
(between 40 and 50 percent of the population can be considered poor). 2005
saw several demonstrations against poor delivery of services in impoverished
communities in the Western Cape, Free State, Eastern Cape and Gauteng
provinces.
People living in rural areas continue to face difficulties in accessing
their rights to health care and social services. For example, although
access to public schooling for children is widely available and enrollment
continues to increase, conditions of schools in poor areas remain
inadequate. Insecure buildings, lack of water, and unhygienic sanitation
facilities are some of the conditions pupils face. Physical access to education in rural areas remains difficult for a number of rural learners.
Walking distances can reach thirty kilometers each day to and from
school, exposing learners to dangers such as sexual violence and contributing
to high dropout rates. With respect to public schools on
farms, there has been marginal progress in concluding contractual
agreements between government and farm owners. These contracts
delineate the roles and responsibilities of each party in providing education.
Since 1997, when legislation was enacted providing for these contracts,
only approximately half these schools have such contractual
agreements. The lack of contracts hinders children’s abilities to receive
a quality education. A government ministerial committee on rural education
released a report in May that makes a number of key recommendations
to improve schooling in rural areas. The national Department
of Education indicated that it was preparing a policy document on the
recommendations. The South African Human Rights Commission—an
independent statutory body—conducted public hearings on the right to
a basic education in October 2005.
Key International Actors
In the promotion of human rights, democracy and peace, South Africa continues
to play a key role in Africa under the auspices of the African Union.
South Africa has provided troops in peace support operations, supported
post-conflict reconstruction and led mediation efforts in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, Burundi, Darfur, western Sudan and Côte d’Ivoire
respectively.
The South African government began a national consultative process of the
African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM)—a self-monitoring, voluntary
mechanism—as agreed to by the African Union and Government
Implementation Committee of the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development to review the country’s practice of democracy, governance and
social and economic development in September. The APRM country review
team will consider this report when it visits South Africa in 2006.
Sudan
The January 9, 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement ending the twentyone-
year civil war between the Sudanese government and southern rebels has
brought little significant improvement to Sudan in the area of human rights.
Implementation of the agreement was delayed by several factors, including
the sudden death of southern rebel leader Dr. John Garang. As part of the
agreement, the Sudanese government lifted the state of emergency thoughout
Sudan (with the exception of Darfur and the east) but attacks on villages
in Darfur continued, and killings, rape, torture, looting of civilian livestock
and other property took place on a regular basis. Arbitrary arrests and detentions,
executions without fair trials, and harassment of human rights defenders
and other activists remained a feature of Sudanese policy in both Darfur
and other areas of Sudan. For the first time, however, the U.N. Security
Council made use of its power to refer the situation of Darfur to the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in March 2005. .
The Crisis in Darfur
In 2005, indiscriminate and targeted killings, rape, forced displacement, and
looting of civilians of the same ethnicity as the rebel groups in Darfur continued
to occur at the hands of government-backed militias or “Janjaweed”
although on a lesser scale than in 2003-2004. An upsurge of attacks occurred
in September and October 2005, including targeted attacks on international
aid workers and members of the African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS),
tasked to monitor the April 2004 ceasefire agreement and protect civilians
under imminent threat. Government-supported militias also attacked civilian
villages and an internally displaced persons camp in Aro Sharow, West
Darfur.
This violence contributed to the inability of the two million internally displaced
people, living precariously in camps, to return home. Subject to attack
when leaving the camps, displaced person remained confined in them,
dependent on international humanitarian aid. Women and girls particularly were victims of sexual attacks in any remote area when going for water, firewood
or fodder, or to take their wares to market.
Sudanese government policy towards the displaced communities continued to
be marked by suspicion and abusive policies such as frequent arbitrary
arrests, detentions of displaced leaders on an ethnic basis and increasing
harassment and intimidation of humanitarian aid agencies assisting the displaced
persons. In some areas, women who complained about rape to the
police were humiliated and threatened; some unmarried women and girls
were accused of adultery solely on the basis of their unwanted pregnancy and
unwed status.
The Sudanese government took no concrete steps to implement a 2004
Security Council resolution demand to disarm and disband its allies, the
Janjaweed. Government militia allies, to whose abuses civil servants turned a
blind eye, and army troops committed abuses with impunity, encouraging
further lawlessness. In June 2005, the Sudanese government set up a tribunal,
the “Special Criminial Court on Events in Darfur,” purportedly to try individuals
guilty of abuses. However, as of October 2005, of six cases tried by
the new tribunal, none concerned major crimes associated with the conflict.
No medium or high-level government officials or militia leaders were suspended
from duty, investigated, or prosecuted for serious crimes in Darfur.
The two main rebel movements—the Sudan Liberation Army (SLA) and the
Justice and Equality Movement—were responsible for numerous abuses,
including attacks on civilians, commercial vehicles and aid workers, abductions
of civilians, looting of livestock and the use of child soldiers. A splinter
faction of the JEM captured more than thirty ceasefire monitors from the
African Union Mission in Sudan in October then released them after a few
days.
As the year wore on, the rebel movements were increasingly plagued by
internal splits, partly on an ethnic basis, and with increasing fragmentation.
Reports of abuses by certain rebel factions grew, particularly by those factions
controlling the Jebel Marra region.
Southern Sudan
A long-awaited peace agreement, the result of almost three years of negotiations,
was signed between the Sudanese government and the southern-based
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM) on January 9, 2005, allowing
autonomy for the southern region for six and a half years, followed by a referendum
on self-determination for the south. The agreement also provided
for elections at national, regional, state and local levels after four years. It
also provided that half the government revenues of oil produced in southern
Sudan be allocated to the southern regional government.
The north-south peace agreement, however, had major human rights defects,
including the absence of any mechanism to ensure accountability for abuses
committed during the twenty-one year war waged mostly in southern Sudan.
John Garang´s death in a helicopter accident on July 30 provoked a massive
response among southerners in Khartoum, Malakal, and Juba. Khartoum saw
the worst of the communal violence that followed: three days of ethnicallymotivated
attacks by southerners and northerners resulted in more than 130
deaths and more than 800 wounded. The Sudanese government reportedly
arrested more than 1,500 people, most of whom were almost immediately
released.
While it is too early to judge his potential for bringing democratic changes
to the southern Sudan, Garang’s successor and long-time deputy, Gen. Salva
Kiir, had been a low-profile leader within the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army (SPLA) for reforms to promote accountability within the movement.
One early indication is favorable: Gen. Salva Kiir instructed that the selection
process for legislators to both the regional and national assemblies be
opened up to public participation, as there was no time to organize elections.
Southerners rushed to take part. While many obstacles exist to the creation
of a southern government that is transparent and accountable and enforces
human rights, this early willingness to let people choose their representatives
is a good sign. They already enjoy more human rights than do their northern
fellow citizens, in that the presence of security forces in the southern garrison
towns is lessened and there has been more free speech, free press and free assembly in the south than for decades. The national army, however, has
not withdrawn from the south but under the peace agreement it has about
two years to complete this process.
Attacks on Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders and other activists remained under serious threat of
arbitrary arrest and detention in 2005. A prominent human rights defender
based in Khartoum, Dr. Mudawi Ibrahim Adam, the chairperson of the
Sudan Social Development Organization (SUDO), was arrested twice—in
January and May 2005—and charged with “crimes against the state.” Articles
51, 52, 53, and 58 of the Sudanese Criminal Code, which include “crimes
against the state” and espionage, were often used used to intimidate individuals
speaking out about abuses, including international humanitarian aid workers
working in Darfur. More than twenty international or national aid workers
were arbitrarily arrested, detained, or threatened by Sudanese police and
security forces in Darfur in the first six months of the year alone.
Key International Actors
Throughout 2005, international policy towards Sudan vacillated between
condemnation and appeasement. This reflected the varying interests at stake,
such as the implementation of the north-southern peace agreement, ending
the atrocities in Darfur, and even regional counterterrorism efforts. The U.S.
government was a prime example of this policy schizophrenia. U.S. officials
vociferously condemn the continuing attacks, but the U.S. Central
Intelligence Agency invited Sudanese security chief Salah Ghosh, a likely
indictee before the ICC for war crimes committed in Darfur, to Washington
in April 2005 to discuss Sudanese-U.S. counterterrorism interests.
Divided interests regarding Sudan were prevalent not just bilaterally among
western governments, but also within the United Nations Security Council.
The single most important achievement of the Security Council was the historic
referral of Darfur to the ICC on March 31, 2005. In June the ICC
announced that it would investigate the crimes in Darfur. In a second March
2005 resolution, the Security Council established a sanctions committee to identify individuals who violated an arms embargo on Darfur and who committed
abuses; the sanctions would not apply retroactively. Despite the continuing
abuses in Darfur throughout 2005, however, the Security Council
was prevented from enacting stiffer sanctions due to resistance from China
and Russia, two of its five permanent members. In November Sudanese
authorities roughed up two visiting members of the sanctions committees’
panel of experts.
The African Union played an increasingly prominent role in Darfur. In April
2005 the AU requested, and the Sudanese government agreed, to a further
deployment to total 7,700 military and police for AMIS’ expanded mission.
Donors pledged U.S. $291 million for the project, including logistical assistance
for this deployment from NATO, the E.U., the U.N., the U.K., the
U.S., Canada, France and others. AMIS’ peace support efforts in Darfur had
mixed results. Although AMIS troops contributed to some measure of
improved security and civilian protection in those areas where they were
deployed, the mission was plagued by continuing logistical and financial
problems. The AU’s efforts at mediating peace talks on Darfur were not as
successful; sharp leadership clashes within the SLA, which had the most
forces in the field of all the rebel groups, left the group unable to make decisions
at the negotiating table.
Uganda
Uganda failed to make progress on human rights and its international reputation
suffered in 2005. The conflict in northern Uganda claimed victims daily
and more than 1.5 million people continued to languish in displaced persons
camps, vulnerable to abuses by the brutal Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) and
an undisciplined government army, the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces
(UPDF). The Ugandan government arrested on treason and rape charges the
front-running challenger to twenty-year incumbent President Yoweri
Museveni, only three weeks after he returned from exile. Dr. Kizza Besigye,
the candidate for the opposition Forum for Democratic Change, was charged
with twenty-two others; when fourteen of those were granted bail, government
Joint Anti-Terrorism Task Force agents in black suits entered the court
building and prevented all present from leaving. The chief justice denounced
the “rape” of the courthouse. Other political opponents and journalists were
threatened and put in jail for criticizing the government, and some, accused
of rebel collaboration or treason, were tortured in illegal detention centers.
The War in Northern Uganda
The nearly twenty year long conflict in northern Uganda continues to victimize
the population in the three districts of the Acholi, more than 90 percent
of whom are in displaced persons camps and are not free to return
home. The rebel LRA committed killings of civilians, torture, mutilations
and sexual abuse, including rape and forced “marriages” of girls to rebel
commanders, and abducted thousands of children and brutalized them, forcing
them to serve as child soldiers. Despite repeated assurances by the government
that it has won the war against the rebels, the LRA continues to
launch brutal attacks, often in response to such government assurances.
Three separate attacks on aid workers in northern Uganda probably by the
LRA resulted in the death of two individuals on October 26 and the injury of
four others. In November the LRA, appeared to threaten to target foreigners,
causing most international nongovernmental relief organizations to temporarily
withdraw their staff.
Peace talks between the Ugandan government and the LRA, mediated by
Betty Bigombe, a former government minister from the north, broke down
in early 2005 and fighting was renewed. The violence escalated after the
main LRA negotiator, Brigadier Sam Kolo, defected to the government side
in mid-February 2005.
The LRA continued to launch attacks against civilians in northern Uganda
from its bases in southern Sudan, and increasingly attacked Sudanese in
Sudan. In September 2005, some four hundred LRA rebels crossed to the
West Bank of the Nile in southern Sudan and, attacking Sudanese villages
along the way, crossed into northeastern Democratic Republic of Congo
(DRC) where they were interviewed by the UN Mission in DRC
(MONUC). The Ugandan government renewed threats to enter the DRC to
deal with the LRA but did not act following widespread condemnation of any
action that would further destabilize northeastern DRC. The LRA appeared
to withdraw from DRC back into southern Sudan within the month, however,
and resumed attacks on civilians, killing two demining workers and one
relief worker south of Juba.
Soldiers and officers of the Ugandan army, which is deployed in or near
every displaced persons camp in northern Uganda, engaged in abuses in
2005, beating, raping and even killing civilians with near total impunity.
After more than a year’s investigation, the International Criminal Court
(ICC) issued sealed arrest warrants for five LRA leaders in October, asking
the Ugandan, Sudanese and DRC governments to enforce them. The five
include Joseph Kony, leader of the LRA, and Vincent Otti, the second-incommand.
Joseph Kony is to be tried on twelve counts of crimes against
humanity and twenty-one counts of war crimes, including murder, inducing
rape, intentionally directing an attack against a civilian population and forced
enlisting of children. The ICC was criticized by some civic and religious
leaders in northern Uganda for scuttling the peace process.
Political Freedoms
Bowing to growing international pressure to democratize Uganda and wean
the country off the Movement system of “no-party” politics, the government
organized a referendum on July 28 asking voters whether they wanted to
open up political space for parties to compete for power in elections scheduled
for March 2006. The main opposition coalition boycotted the referendum,
complaining that the decision by President Yoweri Museveni—who has
been president since 1986— to push through a constitutional amendment in
June that removed presidential term limits, allowing him to run for a third
term, undermined any efforts at democratic reform. A majority of voters cast
their ballots in favor of multi-party politics, but the turnout was low.
Opposition politicians critical of the government faced increased threats to
their safety and freedom with the stakes rising higher as the March 2006
presidential election date approached. On April 20, 2005, two opposition
members of Parliament, Ronald Reagan Okumu and Michael Nyeko Ocula,
were arrested by the Criminal Investigations Division of the police and
charged with the 2002 murder of a councilman. Both MPs are from Gulu
district in northern Uganda, are vocal defenders of human rights and critics
of the government’s conduct in the war against the LRA and are prominent
opponents of Museveni’s third term.
Okumu and Okulu were released on bail on May 17, but a number of other
members of the political opposition have been arrested on politically motivated
capital charges such as treason, including the chairman of the opposition
group Forum for Democratic Change in Rukungiri district in southwestern
Uganda.
In late October, Kizza Besigye, the failed candidate against Museveni in the
2001 presidential election, returned to Uganda from his four-year exile in
South Africa, despite hints that he might be jailed as a member of the “armed
opposition.” He won the nomination by the FDC as their presidential candidate
and began to draw large crowds while campaigning in the north and in
the southwest—his as well as President Museveni’s home area.
He was arrested three weeks after his return, on November 14, for a 1997
rape and for involvement in the LRA and another armed movement, the
People’s Redemption Army (PRA), based in DRC; unlike the LRA, the PRA
has not launched any attacks inside Uganda. The arrest prompted demonstrations
by his supporters that were met with tear gas; one person was killed.
During the entire bail hearing for fourteen of his co-defendants in court in
Kampala, on November 16, the court was surrounded and controlled by thirty
military commandos and two senior police commanders and several agents
in civilian clothes. The judiciary denounced this as “utterly despicable” and a
“day of infamy.” The presence of commandos in court during the hearing of
a petition was “simply unprecedented in the annals of this or any other High
Court. They unleashed an incredible chilling effect on the administration of
justice in this country,” the Principal Judge of Uganda’s High Court said.
Freedom of Expression
Uganda enjoys a relatively vibrant free press, especially in Kampala.
However, journalists who criticized the government on politically sensitive
topics still faced intimidation and arrest. Following the July 30 death of
Sudanese First Vice-President John Garang, many Ugandans speculated that
the Ugandan government was to blame for Garang’s death, although the two
had been close allies. Garang died when traveling in President Museveni’s
presidential helicopter; the helicopter crashed at night in the rain in southern
Sudan as he was on his way back from a meeting with Museveni. President
Museveni said that such speculation was a threat to national security and
would not be tolerated. When popular radio talk show host Andrew Mwenda
suggested that Garang’s death was the result of the Ugandan government’s
incompetence, Mwenda was charged with sedition and jailed on August 12.
KFM radio, which broadcasts Mwenda’s call-in show, was shut down for a
week and the independent newspapers the Daily Monitor and the Weekly
Observer, which ran a column by Mwenda, also faced closure. Mwenda was
released on bail after three days and returned to his radio show, but the arrest
casts a shadow on less prominent journalists in Uganda, especially in the
politically charged run-up to elections.
Torture
The use of torture as a tool of interrogation has featured prominently in
human rights violations by Ugandan security and military forces. Official and
ad hoc military, security and intelligence agencies of the Ugandan government
have illegally detained and tortured suspects, often in unofficial and
illegal “safe houses,” seeking to force confessions of links to rebel groups.
Torture and prolonged incommunicado detention, sometimes as long as two
years, in military barracks has been used against common criminals as well.
Despite a number of high profile cases and the work of the Ugandan Human
Rights Commission, a government body, verifying the use of torture, no one
was punished for it. In May, the UN Committee against Torture published a
report which found that these practices were still prevalent in Uganda in
2005. It called on the government of Uganda to end impunity for violators of
human rights and urged it to abolish “safe houses.”
HIV/AIDS
The Ugandan government was lauded internationally for implementing successful
HIV prevention programs in the 1990s. But the country adopted
U.S.-funded “abstinence-only” programs that jeopardize Uganda’s successful
fight against HIV/AIDS, with the support of conservative religious groups
inside Uganda and the First Lady. These programs included the removal of
critical HIV/AIDS information from primary school curricula, including
information about condoms, safer sex, and the risks of HIV in marriage—in
violation of the public’s right to accurate health information. Over the past
year, access to condoms in Uganda has been reduced dramatically due to
government recalls and new taxes and quality-testing requirements on
imported condoms, causing a shortage of condoms previously made freely
available in government health clinics. Stephen Lewis, U.N. special envoy for
HIV/AIDS in Africa, in August said the Bush administration’s policy of promoting
abstinence prevention programs and cuts in federal funding for condoms
have contributed to a condom shortage in Uganda and undermined the
country’s HIV/AIDS fight.
Key International Actors
The international donor community has been slow to respond to the nineteen-
year human rights crisis in northern Uganda, and for many years funding
for the humanitarian crisis was far from what was necessary. In 2005,
agencies such as UNICEF and the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs moved to expand protection and
human rights monitoring in the north and the U.N. Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights’ announced plans to deploy human rights
monitors to the same region.
Donor governments were more critical of the backward movement on political
reform in Uganda. Those that once praised Museveni withheld aid in
2005 in response to the lack of progress on democratic reform, symbolized
by the third term constitutional amendment and plans for President
Museveni to run again. Fears were that this would cause the entrenchment of
a one-party state. Uganda is dependent on foreign aid to finance 40 percent
of its budget.
In May Britain withheld U.S. $9.5 million in aid, accusing the Ugandan government
of poorly handling the political transition. Ireland also withheld
U.S. $3.5 million. In July Norway also withheld U.S.$4 million for what
Norwegian Ambassador Tore Gjos stated was his government’s displeasure at
“mishandling of the democratic process.” The Ugandan government blamed
the aid cuts on a negative campaign by the opposition who urged donors to
freeze aid to the Uganda. These measures, while symbolic (aid was only
“withheld”, not cancelled), pressured the government to hold a referendum
on a multiparty system, but the National Resistance Movement still controlled
all government institutions.
Several prominent critics of Uganda, including former U.S. ambassador
Johnny Carson, urged Museveni not to run again. A leaked unpublished
World Bank consultancy report described widespread corruption, nepotism,
and cronyism that permeate Uganda’s institutions, and urged the Bank to cut
its aid to Uganda. The Global Fund to fight AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria
temporarily suspended its programs to Uganda due to “serious mismanagement”
of funds on August 24, then restored the funding later in the year.
Zimbabwe
The continuing erosion of human rights in Zimbabwe was highlighted in
2005 by Operation Murambatsvina, the government’s program of mass evictions
and demolitions which began in May, and, which, according to the
United Nations, deprived 700,000 men, women and children of their homes,
their livelihoods, or both throughout the country. The evictions and demolitions
occurred against a background of general dissatisfaction in many of
Zimbabwe’s urban areas over the political and economic situation in the
country. The country is currently spiraling into a huge economic and political
crisis.
The government continues to introduce repressive laws that suppress criticism
of its political and economic policies. In August, parliament passed the
Constitutional Amendment Act, which gives the government the right to
expropriate land and property without the possibility of judicial appeal, and
to withdraw passports from those it deems a threat to national security.
Mass Forced Evictions and Demolitions
The government’s policy of forced evictions and demolition of homes and
informal business structures carried out in Zimbabwe’s urban areas with little
or no warning violated the rights of hundreds of thousands of Zimbabweans.
Police used excessive force to destroy houses and structures and in some
cases police armed with guns and truncheons, threatened and assaulted people.
The evictions and demolitions led to widespread homelessness, lack of
freedom of movement, loss of livelihood and minimal access to food, water,
health care, education, and justice for hundreds of thousands of
Zimbabweans. Tens of thousands of homes, and hundreds of informal business
properties as well as legal housing and business structures were
destroyed without regard for the rights or welfare of those who were evicted.
The scale of destruction was unprecedented, and the victims were mainly the
poor and vulnerable in Zimbabwe’s cities and towns including widows, children,
elderly and chronically ill persons. The evictions led to the disruption of anti-retroviral therapies and treatment of opportunistic infection for those
living with HIV/AIDS.
Thousands of people remain homeless and displaced by the evictions with no
shelter and little or no access to food, water and medical assistance. To date
noone has received any housing under the Zimbabwe government’s
Operation Garikai program, ostensibly initiated to provide accommodation
to all persons made homeless by the evictions. The Zimbabwean government
has not investigated reports of excessive use of force by the police or brought
the perpetrators to justice.
Blocking of Humanitarian Assistance
The government’s refusal to cooperate with a United Nations emergency
appeal for the hundreds of thousands affected by the evictions worsened their
plight. On August 29, the U.N. Under-Secretary General for Humanitarian
Affairs Jan Egeland condemned the lack of cooperation from the government
with regard to mitigating the effects of the evictions, and accused it of hampering
efforts to aid those affected. The government continues to obstruct
the provision of humanitarian assistance by local and international humanitarian
agencies to internally displaced and evicted populations. On October
31, 2005, the U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan made a heartfelt appeal
calling on the government to allow U.N. agencies and other humanitarian
agencies access to help those made homeless by Operation Murambatsvina.
In addition, an estimated 2.9 million people across Zimbabwe were in need
of food aid by the end of September. However, despite the serious food
shortages, the government of Zimbabwe refused to make a formal appeal for
food aid from the World Food Program.
The humanitarian situation has also been exacerbated by Zimbabwe’s failing
economy. In September 2005, inflation reached 359.8 percent and unemployment
was at 80 percent. Although some reports suggest that the rate of HIV
infections has recently decreased, the issue of HIV/AIDS is still of critical
concern with almost 1.8 million people infected with HIV/AIDS (more than
20 percent of all adults) and nearly one million children orphaned. The government was saved from expulsion from the International Monetary Fund in
September when it managed to repay a total of U.S. $135 million in debts.
Elections
There has been no thaw in relations between the opposition and the ruling
party. Tensions between the two main parties were heightened by the result
of parliamentary elections which took place in March 2005. The ruling
Zimbabwe African National Union-Patriotic Front won the elections but the
opposition Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) declared that the elections
were not free and fair. In the run up to the elections, Human Rights
Watch documented a series of human rights violations, including political
intimidation of opponents by ruling party supporters, electoral irregularities,
and the use of repressive legislation by the government. Local civil society
organizations, international organizations, including Amnesty International
and International Crisis Group, and the international community including
the European Union (E.U.), and the governments of the United Kingdom
and the United States widely criticized the elections. The African Union
(A.U.), the Southern African Development Community and South African
observer teams, however, endorsed the election results. Senate elections were
scheduled to take place on November 26, and triggered serious divisions
within the MDC over whether or not to participate in the elections. The disagreements
subsequently led to the expulsion of 26 members from the party,
who decided to contest the elections against the wishes of other party members
and leader Morgan Tsvangirai.
Repressive Legislation and Human Rights Defenders
The situation of human rights defenders and journalists in Zimbabwe
remains precarious. The Constitutional Amendment Act has been added to a
raft of laws that restrict the human rights of those who criticize the government
and try to protect human rights in Zimbabwe. Apart from allowing the
government to expropriate land and property without recourse to the courts,
the act also allows the government to withdraw passports from those it deems to be a threat to security, thus restricting the rights to freedom of movement
of any government critics or human rights defenders.
Human rights groups continue to work in a highly restrictive environment.
The government uses repressive laws such as the Public Order and Security
Act to restrict the right to freedom of assembly, association, and expression of
civil society activists and the opposition. Although President Robert Mugabe
did not sign the restrictive Non-Governmental Organization Act into law, its
existence has had a detrimental effect on the ability of human rights groups
to operate freely, as they fear that the Act may be revived and lead to their
shutting down.
Key International Actors
In response to the mass forced evictions, in May 2005 U.N. Secretary
General Kofi Annan appointed a special envoy, Anna Tibaijuka, to investigate.
Her strongly-worded report, released on July 22, concluded that the
evictions were carried out in an “indiscriminate and unjustified manner” and
recommended that those found responsible for the evictions be brought to
justice. The government of Zimbabwe strongly refuted the U.N.’s findings
and claimed that the evictions were lawful and that the U.N. had exaggerated
both the scale of the evictions and the numbers of persons affected.
Western governments, in particular the governments of the United States,
United Kingdom, and other European Union governments, also condemned
the mass evictions. Many African governments once again refused to publicly
condemn human rights violations in Zimbabwe and chose to remain silent on
the issue of the evictions. The South African government indicated that it
would await the U.N. report on the crisis before responding but did not do
so. Although the South African government has expressed some concern with
the human rights conditions in Zimbabwe, it continues to exercise a policy of
‘quiet diplomacy’ in its dealings with the government, an approach which has
to date yielded few tangible results.
Attempts by African governments and the African Union to address
Zimbabwe’s human rights crisis have so far yielded little. In August, the government of Zimbabwe refused to accept the A.U. appointment of former
president Joachim Chissano as an envoy to broker talks between the ruling
party and the opposition MDC, claiming that such talks would not be taking
place. The commendable effort by African Union Commission Chair Alpha
Oumar Konare to appoint a special envoy to investigate the evictions was
blocked by the Zimbabwe government, which refused to grant the envoy permission
to investigate, until he was forced to leave the country on July 7,
2005. The Zimbabwe government claimed that the African Union had failed
to follow protocol in sending the envoy to investigate the evictions. The
Southern African Development Community also failed to discuss Zimbabwe
at its annual summit in August. In general, there has been a lack of sustained
attention from African governments to the crisis in Zimbabwe.
The United Kingdom and other E.U. governments have provided some
humanitarian aid to address the crisis caused by the evictions. However,
donors have become increasingly frustrated by the government’s obduracy in
dealing comprehensively with the humanitarian crisis caused by the evictions.
The government’s refusal to sign a U.N. emergency appeal to help those
affected by the evictions and to make a formal appeal for food aid added to
already existing tensions with western governments.
Western governments, in particular the United Kingdom and the United
States, have failed to convince other influential governments (especially those
in the South) to take a stronger stand on Zimbabwe at forums such as the
U.N. Security Council. China, Russia and other African countries state that
Zimbabwe does not warrant discussions at the Security Council because they
claim it is not a threat to international peace or security.
Argentina
Violence in Argentina’s overcrowded prisons worsened in 2005. Guard brutality,
which has been especially well documented in Buenos Aires province,
is widespread and shows no signs of diminishing.
Prosecutors continue to investigate the systematic violations of human rights
committed under military rule (1976-1983). In June 2005, in an historic decision,
the Supreme Court declared the “Full Stop” and “Due Obedience” laws
to be unconstitutional, removing the remaining legal obstacles to these trials.
Prison Conditions
According to the Provincial Commission of Memory, a governmental body,
three prisoners were killed every week in Buenos Aires province through
March 2005, triple the level of violence in 2004. Prisoners in other provinces
also suffer from overcrowding, deplorable conditions, and inmate violence.
Eight people were killed, including five prisoners, two guards, and a police
officer, in a prison riot in February 2005 in a prison in Córdoba province.
Built to hold fewer than one thousand inmates, the prison was holding over
1,700 at the time. Two months later, thirteen inmates died in an inter-prisoner
clash in the Instituto Correccional Modelo in the city of Coronda, Santa Fe
province. According to official reports, eleven died of gunshot wounds, and
two were burned alive.
A third deadly riot claimed thirty-two lives in October after a fire broke out
in the Magdalena prison in Buenos Aires province. While the fire was started
by clashing prisoners, some reports allege that fire extinguishers in the prison
did not function and firefighters never entered the prison to battle the blaze.
The vast majority of inmates in Argentine prisons have not yet been tried. As
of February 2005, only 11 percent of inmates in the province of Buenos Aires
had been sentenced. Pretrial detention facilities are grossly inadequate.
According to the Center for Legal and Social Studies (CELS), a respected
human rights organization, 5,951 detainees in Buenos Aires province were being held in crowded police lockups in April 2005 for lack of regular prison
accommodation.
In May 2005, the Supreme Court of Justice declared that all prisons in the
country must abide by the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the
Treatment of Prisoners. The court was ruling on a collective habeas corpus
petition lodged by CELS in 2001 on behalf people held in prisons and police
lockups in Buenos Aires province. In August 2004 Human Rights Watch, the
International Commission of Jurists, and the World Organization against
Torture presented an amicus curiae brief in support of the petition. In
December 2004 the Supreme Court held a public hearing on the issue, the
first ever in a human rights case, in which CELS, Human Rights Watch, and
the provincial government of Buenos Aires participated. In addition to
declaring the U.N. rules to be national minimum standards, the court
required that police lockups be barred from detaining children under age
eighteen or sick people.
Torture
Torture and other forms of brutality are widespread in the prison system of
the province of Buenos Aires. In May 2005, prison guards in La Plata beat
inmate Cristián López Toledo and shocked him with electric current in
reprisal for denouncing earlier beatings to the Committee against Torture of
the Provincial Commission of Memory. A forensic doctor confirmed the use
of electricity from a skin sample. No effective measures have been taken to
implement the committee’s recommendations since the publication of its
October 2004 report on abuses in the prison system.
Accountability for Past Abuses
Argentina continues to make progress in prosecuting perpetrators of grave
human rights violations during the country’s so-called dirty war, in which at
least 14,000 people “disappeared.” In June 2005, the Supreme Court declared
the “Full Stop” and “Due Obedience” laws to be unconstitutional by a 7-1
majority, with one abstention. The two amnesty laws, passed in the late
1980s, granted immunity to perpetrators of torture, killings, and disappearances during military rule. Although Congress annulled the laws in 2003 and
cases had been reopened, progress had been slow as investigators waited for
the court to rule definitively on the constitutionality of the two laws.
Three hundred and thirty former military and police personnel are now facing
human rights-related charges and about 180 are detained in prisons or
military installations, or are under house arrest. Public attention has focused
on two “mega-cases” involving illegal arrest and torture by the First Army
Corps, and by the navy at the Navy Mechanics School (Escuela de Mecánica
de la Armada, ESMA), a torture center in the capital where an estimated
5,000 people are believed to have been held in secret detention before being
killed.
Forty-three alleged perpetrators have been detained in the First Army Corps
case, and an additional seven are fugitives from justice. Eighteen former
ESMA officers are currently under arrest. They include former naval Cap.
Alfredo Astíz, now in detention in a navy installation and awaiting trial for
the “disappearance” of two French nuns, Alice Domon and Léonie Duquet,
among other crimes. Duquet’s remains, which had been buried for twentyeight
years in an unmarked grave, were finally identified using DNA samples
in August 2005. In 1990, after a trial in absentia, a French court sentenced
Astíz to life imprisonment for this crime. Thirteen other former ESMA officers,
including Jorge Acosta, alias “The Tiger,” have been charged with stealing
property from detainees who “disappeared.”
The pace of prosecutions has been slow, mainly due to numerous appeals
presented by the defendants. Despite these delays, human rights groups
expect some of the cases to be tried in open court in 2006.
In March 2005, the Federal Appeals Court declared pardons issued by former
President Menem in 1989 and 1990 on behalf of six former army generals to
be unconstitutional. Three of the six who are still living—Carlos Suárez
Mason, Juan Bautista Sasaiñ, and Jorge Olivera Rovere—are accused of
human rights violations as former officers of the First Army Corps. The
appellate court reached the same conclusion in another case in July. It
declared unconstitutional the pardons of two vice-admirals, Antonio Vañek and Julio Torti, both charged with human rights violations at ESMA. All five
are expected to stand trial in the coming months.
Reproductive Rights
Women in Argentina continue to face arbitrary and discriminatory restrictions
on their reproductive decisions and access to contraceptives and abortion.
Access to one of the most effective forms of contraception—female sterilization—
continues to be subject to discriminatory limitations. Women are
often told that they need to obtain spousal authorization, that they must have
at least three children, and that they must be at least thirty-five years old to
be eligible.
Many women must choose between an unwanted or dangerous pregnancy or
an illegal and unsafe abortion. Approximately half a million illegal abortions
occur every year in Argentina, according to the health ministry, representing
40 percent of all pregnancies.
In 2005, in an important step toward guaranteeing women’s right to access to
health care services, the Argentine government published national guidelines
on humane post-abortion care.
Freedom of Expression
Draft legislation to extend rights of free expression and access to information
made no progress in 2005. A bill approved in the lower house in May 2003,
that would give Argentine citizens the right to information held by public
bodies, was weakened in the Senate and is now back in the lower house. An
earlier bill to make defamation of public officials punishable only by civil
damages, as opposed to criminal sanctions, has also not advanced. The need
for such legislation is still apparent. In June 2005 the government’s media
minister, Enrique Albistur, brought a criminal defamation suit against journalists
and directors of the magazine Noticias and the publishing house Perfíl
for a January article criticizing his policies on the distribution of government
advertising. The minister, who had asked for the maximum three-year sentence,
later withdrew the lawsuit.
Key International Actors
In December 2004, the U.N. Committee against Torture reported on
Argentina’s implementation of the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. Among the committee’s
concerns were the high number of reports of torture and ill-treatment,
the small number of convictions, the detention of children below the
age of criminal responsibility, and overcrowding and poor conditions in prisons.
In April 2005, a Spanish court sentenced Argentine ex-naval officer Adolfo
Scilingo to 640 years in prison for crimes against humanity. Scilingo went to
Spain in 1997 to voluntarily confess his role in throwing detainees into the
sea from airplanes, but subsequently retracted his admissions. Judge Baltasar
Garzón is also investigating the case of Ricardo Miguel Cavallo, another
ESMA agent, who was extradited from Mexico in 2003 on charges of genocide
and terrorism.
In July, in proceedings before the Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights, the Argentine government formally accepted partial responsibility for
failing to prevent the 1994 bombing of the Jewish Argentine Mutual
Association (AMIA), and for subsequently failing to properly investigate the
crime. Not a single person has been sentenced for the attack, while five have
been acquitted for lack of evidence.
Brazil
Significant human rights abuses continue in Brazil. Human rights defenders
suffer threats and attacks; police are often abusive and corrupt; prison conditions
are abysmal, and rural violence and land conflicts are ongoing. And
while the Brazilian government has made efforts to redress human rights
abuses, it has rarely held to account those responsible for the violations.
Police Violence
Brazil’s intractable problems of police violence and death squads reached a
grisly zenith in the early morning hours of March 31, 2005, when armed men
executed twenty-nine people —including women and children—outside Rio
de Janeiro. Only one person escaped. The Baixada Fluminense area, where
the killings occurred, is notorious for its high murder rate and for death
squads connected to the military police. In the wake of mass demonstrations
by Brazilian rights groups, and a public outcry from around the world,
unprecedented cooperation between state and federal authorities led to the
arrest of eleven police, who are being held in police custody pending trial.
Authorities believe that the Baixada massacre was committed in retaliation
for the previous detention of nine police officers accused of killing two people
and leaving their bodies behind a police station in Duque de Caxias, in
the Baixada region. The police, whose actions were caught on film, decapitated
one of the bodies and threw the head into the station. In September 2005,
rights groups requested that the Rio de Janeiro State government adopt a
permanent program to reduce civilian deaths in police operations. Many
deaths continue to be registered under the much-criticized category of
“resisting arrest,” which is often used to cover up extrajudicial executions.
Police violence is one of Brazil’s most systemic, widespread, and longstanding
human rights concerns, disproportionately affecting the country’s poorest and
most vulnerable populations. Cases of police abuse all too often end in
impunity.
Death Squads
The Public Security Secretary of Ceará was ousted in June 2005 after military
police under his command were found to be involved in death squads
acting as illicit private security guards. Twelve people were accused of participating
in this criminal group, and six were placed in pretrial detention in
August.
Conditions of Detention
The inhumane conditions, violence, corruption, and overcrowding that have
historically characterized Brazilian prisons remain one of the country’s main
human rights problems. National and international governmental and nongovernmental
sources all agree that prisons and other places of detention
hold inmates in scandalously abusive conditions.
Children and adolescents confined in Brazil’s youth detention facilities face
similar conditions. Severe overcrowding is endemic to these facilities. In
some cases, such as the Padre Severino youth detention unit in Rio de
Janeiro, facilities are operating at more than twice their design capacity. Staff
shortages also create real threats to the security of inmates and staff. In
March 2005, clothing and food shortages, as well as a lack of opportunities
for recreation and rehabilitation, led to a series of riots and escapes from
youth detention facilities in São Paulo.
Rural Violence and Land Conflict
Indigenous people and landless peasants face discrimination, threats, violent
attacks, and killings as a result of land disputes in rural areas. According to a
report by the Pastoral Land Commission, twenty-eight people were killed in
rural conflicts from January to August 2005. By not intervening to guarantee
the safety of people in these contexts, and by not punishing those who have
carried out attacks, authorities encourage continued violence.
On February 16, 2005, in Goiás state, two people were killed and dozens of
others were wounded in a police operation to evict some 3,000 families from a 130-hectare property near a luxury apartment block. Although precautions
were taken to avoid violence, state authorities later acknowledged that the
police demonstrated a “lack of proper restraint” in the operation.
Impunity
Impunity is the rule in Brazil, with few human rights crimes being effectively
investigated or prosecuted. In December 2004, in an effort to remedy this
glaring problem, the Brazilian government passed a constitutional amendment
to make human rights crimes federal offenses, a change that international
organizations such as Human Rights Watch had recommended for
many years. The change allows certain human rights violations to be transferred
to the federal—as opposed to the state—justice system for investigation
and trial. Authority to order such transfers rests with the Attorney
General or the Council for the Defense of Human Rights.
In another positive step, the federal government has made efforts to open
files from the military archives and has opened a reference center on political
repression during Brazil’s military government, which will contain documents,
films, and victims’ statements from the period.
In August 2005, the Supreme Court granted pretrial release to Norberto
Mânica, who is accused of ordering the execution of three agents investigating
slave labor, and their driver, in the city of Unaí in Minas Gerais in
January 2004. None of the four men accused of the crime have been punished
to date. In another controversial ruling, in September, the Supreme
Court ordered that Lt. Col. Mário Pantoja be released on bail. Pantoja had
been sentenced to 228 years in prison as one of those responsible for the
1996 murder of nineteen rural workers in the Eldorado de Carajás case, but
he was granted a retrial, which is pending.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders face threats, intimidation, and physical attack. While
the government launched the National Protection Program for Human Rights Defenders in October 2004, the program has not been effective in
shielding those brave enough to stand up for victims of human rights abuses.
A seventy-four-year-old U.S. missionary and activist, Sister Dorothy Stang,
was shot dead as she walked to a meeting on February 12, 2005, in the western
city of Anapu, Pará state. Sister Dorothy had worked in the region for
over twenty years. She had met with federal and state officials, including
members of the federal Human Rights Secretariat, to discuss death threats
against rural workers just a week before she was killed.
In another prominent case, Father Paulo Henrique Machado, who had
played a key role in mobilizing family members of the victims of the Baixada
massacre, was shot to death on July 25, 2005, in Nova Iguaçu, just outside
Rio de Janeiro. Although the Federal Program for Protection of Victims and
Witnesses (Provita) was put in place in the Baixada area after the massacre,
Father Machado’s murder was understood as part of an effort to discourage
human rights work in its aftermath.
Adamor Guedes, president of the Amazonian Association of Gays, Lesbians,
and Transvestites, was stabbed to death in his home on August 28. Guedes
was a recognized defender of the human rights of gay people.
Key International Actors
The European Union pledged 6.5 million Euros to Brazil’s Support Program
for Police Ombudsmen and Community Policing. The objective of the program
is to ensure that Brazil’s police forces respect human rights and find less
violent methods to combat crime.
Brazil decided to turn down $40 million in U.S. global AIDS money in May
2005 because of a requirement that funding recipients condemn prostitution.
Supported by public health and human rights groups, Brazilian officials
insisted that anti-prostitution policies undermine efforts to stem the spread
of HIV.
In March 2005, in an official report, the U.N. Special Rapporteur on the
Independence of Judges and Lawyers blasted Brazil for lack of access to justice, nepotism, and discrimination based on gender and ethnicity, among
other problems. Hina Jilani, the U.N. Special Representative on Human
Rights Defenders, was scheduled to visit Brazil in December.
By early 2005, the first two cases against Brazil had been sent to the Inter-
American Court of Human Rights. The first involved Damião Ximenes
Lopes, a young psychiatric patient who was tortured to death in state custody
in 1999, and the second involved Gilson Nogueira de Carvalho, a human
rights lawyer in Rio Grande do Norte who was killed by a death squad in
1996.
Chile
Chile continues to prosecute hundreds of former military personnel accused
of committing grave human rights violations during the dictatorship of Gen.
Augusto Pinochet. After President Ricardo Lagos pardoned a low-ranking
official convicted of homicide, a debate on clemency measures, long advocated
by the army commander-in-chief and the opposition parties, was restarted
in Congress.
The Lagos government failed to tackle reform of the over-extended system
of military justice, which still allows civilians to be prosecuted by military
courts for assaults on police and even speech offenses.
After years of debate, extensive constitutional reforms have become law.
They have eliminated most of the authoritarian elements of the Constitution
introduced by Pinochet in 1980.
Prosecutions for Human Rights Violations under Military Rule
Progress toward holding accountable those responsible for Pinochet-era
human rights violations continues, but not without challenges. On January
25, 2005, the Chilean Supreme Court ordered all judges investigating human
rights violations under military rule to halt their inquiries within six months.
Unless trials were begun within this time, or the parties appealed successfully
for cases to be kept open, all investigations into human rights violations committed
during the dictatorship were to terminate on July 25, 2005. In early
May, after sustained attention by both local and international human rights
groups, the court rescinded the measure.
Former dictator Augusto Pinochet still faces a series of court cases. Before
criminal proceedings can begin courts have to decide, on the merits of each
case, whether to strip him of immunity from prosecution as a former president.
Some immunity cases in 2005 were decided in his favor, others against
him. The evident inconsistencies in the different Supreme Court decisions
reflected variations in the composition of the panels hearing the cases, as well
as the fact that panels are not bound by past precedent.
In March 2005, the Supreme Court upheld Pinochet’s immunity against
charges relating to the 1974 assassination in Buenos Aires of former army
commander Gen. Carlos Prats and his wife. In September and October, in
contrast, the Supreme Court lifted Pinochet’s immunity in the so-called
Colombo Operation and Riggs Bank cases. The former involves an elaborate
scheme in 1975 to cover up the abduction and murder of 119 Chilean leftists.
The latter involves possible charges of tax evasion and forgery, among others.
The judicial probe into these issues followed the U.S. Senate’s discovery in
2004 that Pinochet had salted away millions of dollars in secret accounts at
Riggs Bank in Washington. It has been alleged that the main source of
Pinochet’s fortune (estimated at $27 million) were rake-offs from arms trafficking.
Pinochet’s lawyers continued to use his alleged mental incapacity to block
prosecutions. In June, an appeals court decided that Pinochet was not fit to
stand trial for nine deaths and a kidnapping associated with a scheme known
as Operation Condor by which political dissidents in neighboring countries
were forcibly “disappeared.” In September the Supreme Court upheld the
ruling. However, in November a medical team from the state Medical Legal
Service concluded that Pinochet had exaggerated his symptoms and was fit
enough to stand trial in the Colombo case.
In a surprise decision in August, President Lagos pardoned an army sergeant
convicted of the 1982 murder of a trade unionist. Manuel Contreras Donaire
(no relation to Manuel Contreras Sepúlveda, Pinochet’s director of intelligence)
was serving an eight-year sentence for his part in the abduction and
murder of Tucapel Jiménez, the president of the public employees’ union.
President Lagos commuted the remainder of Contreras’s sentence to be
served at home. The measure, reflecting Lagos’s view that low-ranking soldiers
obeying orders should be treated leniently, aroused passionate debate.
Opposition senators presented several bills aimed at shortening sentences for
human rights violators and allowing other military prisoners to benefit automatically
from pardons.
In March 2005, Paul Schaefer, founder and leader of the Colonia Dignidad, a
mysterious German colony in southern Chile, was captured in Buenos Aires and swiftly deported to Chile to face child sex abuse and human rights-related
charges. Schaefer and his associates enjoyed close relations with the military
government, which used the colony as a detention center after the 1973
military coup. Scores of political prisoners are thought to have been held
there and tortured and many “disappeared.” In March and May police found
three cars buried on the property similar to those owned by political prisoners
who disappeared in the 1970s. In June, a huge arsenal of military weapons
was discovered, as well as files containing intelligence documents about political
figures and prisoners believed to have been held there.
Torture Commission
The government has continued to confront the military-era legacy of torture,
even though it has not supported prosecutions for this systematic abuse. In
June 2005, the National Commission on Political Imprisonment and Torture,
which issued a major report in November 2004, published an addendum on
1,204 new victims. It included a chapter about the situation of eighty-six victims
who were detained with their parents when they were younger than
twelve years old, who were born in prison, or were in gestation when their
mothers were detained. The commission classified those detained with their
parents or born in detention as torture victims. Some had been used as
hostages or to pressure their parents while they were being tortured.
The government’s insistence that the testimonies collected by the commission
must be kept secret for fifty years—even from the courts—has hindered
prosecutions.
Terrorism Prosecutions of Mapuche
A court in the southern city of Temuco frustrated prosecutorial efforts to
reinstate terrorism charges against five Mapuche defendants and a sympathizer
whom a trial court had unanimously acquitted in November 2004. Most of
the defendants’ alleged crimes were against property and none posed a direct
threat to life. The Supreme Court had annulled the November verdict on
grounds that prosecution evidence had not been properly considered, ordering
a retrial. The second trial court found in July 2005 that there was insufficient evidence to sustain charges of illicit terrorist association. An appellate
court later upheld the ruling, as did the Supreme Court in November.
Restrictions on Free Expression
Chilean legal restrictions on free expression have been eased. In August 2005,
Congress finally approved a bill amending the Criminal Code to eliminate
provisions that penalized strongly worded criticism of the president, military
officers, members of Congress, and higher court judges, a type of law known
as desacato. Unfortunately, the text approved after a three-year debate in
Congress was a watered-down version of the bill originally presented by the
government. It retained desacato offenses in the code of military justice, such
as the offense of sedition, and preserved the jurisdiction of military courts in
such cases, even over civilians. Moreover, legislators insisted on criminalizing
“threats” made against them for their views expressed in Congress or made
against judges for their decisions, a prohibition that could be used in the
future to penalize criticism.
Progress in the area of freedom of expression was also made in July, when the
Senate rejected a proposal by the lower house to strengthen the constitutional
protection of “public life,” an anachronistic notion dating from the military
government that shielded public officials and politicians from scrutiny.
Constitutional reforms approved in August went a step further, removing
from the Constitution references to public life and the crime of defamation.
The reforms also established the principle that the decisions of government
bodies are public.
Discrimination on the Basis of HIV Status
In August a Chilean court ordered Carabineros, the uniformed police, to pay
compensation of 100 m. pesos (approx. $1,800) to a former police corporal
who was fired because he was living with HIV. In the first decision of its
kind, the 13th Civil Court of Santiago cited Law No. 19,779 of 2001, which
states that an HIV test result may not be grounds for dismissal from employment.
Constitutional Reform
In August 2005 a package of constitutional reforms that had been under
debate since the early 1990s finally became law. It abolished the position of
“appointed senator,” and restored the president’s power to fire the commanders-
in-chief of the armed forces and the uniformed police.
International Criminal Court Ratification
Despite strong advocacy by Foreign Minister Ignacio Walker, the Senate has
still not approved a constitutional reform allowing Chile to ratify the Rome
Statute for the International Criminal Court. Approval of the Statute has
been stalled since April 2002 when the Constitutional Court, ruling on a
petition by a group of opposition senators, declared the ratification bill
unconstitutional.
Criminal Procedure Reform
The introduction of a new code of criminal procedure in all parts of the
country has improved due process guarantees for defendants facing criminal
prosecution. Legislation was passed in November 2005 toughening some of
its provisions, making pretrial release more difficult to obtain.
Key International Actors
The Chilean Congress has still to implement legislation compensating the
family of United Nations diplomat Carmelo Soria, who was abducted and
killed by government agents in 1976. In a friendly settlement brokered by the
Inter American Commission on Human Rights in March 2003 the Chilean
Government agreed to pay $1,500,000 to Soria’s relatives. However, after
months of delay, in November 2005 the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee rejected the compensation payment.
Colombia
Colombia presents the most serious human rights and humanitarian situation
in the region. Battered by an internal armed conflict involving government
forces, guerrilla groups, and paramilitaries, the country has one of the largest
populations of internally displaced persons in the world.
Colombia’s irregular armed groups, both guerrillas and paramilitaries, are
responsible for the bulk of the human rights violations, which in 2005 included
massacres, killings, forced disappearances, kidnappings, torture, and extortion.
Despite ongoing negotiations with the government, paramilitary groups
repeatedly committed abuses in breach of their cease-fire declaration.
Members of the armed forces have at times been implicated in abuses, independently
or in collaboration with paramilitaries. Impunity for such crimes,
particularly when they involve high-ranking military officers, remains a serious
problem. Ties between military units and paramilitary groups persist, and
the government has yet to take credible action to break them.
Demobilization of Paramilitary Groups
2005 was marked by the passage of Law 975, a controversial package for the
demobilization of armed groups that the government called the “Justice and
Peace Law.” The law offers reduced sentences to members of these groups
responsible for serious crimes, if they participate in a demobilization process.
Drafted in the context of extended negotiations with paramilitaries, the law
fails to include effective mechanisms to dismantle the country’s mafia-like
armed groups, which are largely financed through drug trafficking. It also
utterly fails to satisfy international standards on truth, justice, and reparation
for victims.
Although Colombian President Alvaro Uribe signed the demobilization law
in July 2005, the government has not begun applying it. The law faced several
constitutional challenges, which were still pending at this writing in late
November 2005.
Even before the demobilization law was passed, the government sponsored
large-scale demobilization ceremonies in which thousands of paramilitaries
handed over weapons. The government portrayed these demobilizations as
important steps towards peace, but there were widespread reports of continuing
abuses and illegal activity by paramilitaries around the country, including
the recruitment of new troops.
Little effort has been made to investigate the past crimes of demobilized
paramilitaries or to collect intelligence that could be used to dismantle the
groups’ structures or identify their supporters and assets. Cross-checking of
individuals’ names against prosecutors’ records resulted in only a few dozen
paramilitaries being linked to ongoing investigations, given that in most
investigations, the perpetrator is not identified by name but rather by alias or
other factors.
Many top paramilitary commanders remain in the specially designated area
of Santa Fe de Ralito, safe from arrest or prosecution. In June 2005, prosecutors
ordered the arrest of top paramilitary commander, Diego Murillo
Bejarano (also known as “Don Berna” or “Adolfo Paz”), for allegedly ordering
the assassination of a local congressman and two other people two
months before. Nonetheless, the government announced that Murillo would
be allowed to demobilize and eventually receive the benefits of Law 975. The
government also suspended extradition orders for Murillo and commander
Salvatore Mancuso, both of whom are wanted in the United States for drug
trafficking.
Impunity and Military-Paramilitary Ties
The overwhelming majority of investigations involving human rights abuses
are never resolved. The problem of impunity affects crimes committed by all
armed groups, as well as the military.
Units of the Colombian military continue to tolerate, support, and commit
abuses in collaboration with members of paramilitary groups. In 2005, there
continued to be reports of abuses by members of the Army’s 17th Brigade as
well as by members of the armed forces operating in the region of Chocó.
In February 2005, eight residents of the Peace Community of San Jose de
Apartadó, including four minors, were brutally killed. The government’s
immediate reaction to the massacre, prior to any investigation, was to blame
it on guerrillas and deny any military presence in the area. Yet members of
the community have alleged that military and possibly paramilitary groups
were involved, and there is evidence pointing to military movements near the
location of the massacre. The investigation has proceeded slowly, in part due
to the unwillingness of witnesses to come forward, apparently out of fear and
distrust of authorities.
During the tenure of Attorney General Luis Camilo Osorio, starting in 2001,
major investigations into abuses by high-ranking officers were seriously
undermined. This troubling trend continued in 2005, as the Attorney
General’s office closed its criminal investigation into Rear Admiral Rodrigo
Quiñonez’s alleged involvement in the Chengue massacre, in which paramilitaries
killed over 20 people.
In May 2005, the Attorney General’s office also closed the investigation of
General Eduardo Avila Beltran for his alleged complicity in the 1997 paramilitary
massacre of 49 civilians in the town of Mapiripán. Two separate
courts—military and civilian—had previously ordered the Attorney General’s
office to investigate Avila’s role in the massacre.
Osorio’s term ended in mid-2005. The new Attorney General, Mario
Iguarán, has expressed an interest in working more closely with human rights
groups.
Human Rights Monitors and Other Vulnerable Groups
Human rights monitors, as well as labor leaders, journalists, and other vulnerable
groups are frequently threatened and attacked for their work in
Colombia. Investigations into such threats and attacks generally move slowly
and are rarely resolved. The problem has at times been exacerbated by highlevel
government officials, who in 2005 once again made public statements
suggesting that legitimate human rights advocacy was aimed at promoting
the interests of armed groups.
In May 2005, three prominent journalists received anonymous funeral
wreaths, accompanied by notes of condolence, at their homes or offices. As
reported by the OAS special rapporteur for freedom of expression in 2005,
such threats and prevailing impunity for killings of journalists have a chilling
effect on the media.
Monica Roa, the lead attorney in a constitutional challenge to Colombia’s
almost complete ban on abortion, received numerous death threats in 2005.
Confidential case files and two computers were stolen from her office during
a break-in.
Human rights defenders from the Colectivo de Abogados Jose Alvear Restrepo
and other organizations were also threatened in 2005. Meanwhile, there was
no obvious progress in the investigation into Operación Dragon, a large
scheme allegedly involving retired members of military intelligence, to conduct
surveillance of human rights defenders, trade unionists, and politicians
in Cali..
Violations by Guerrilla Groups
After a prolonged slowdown in their armed activity, guerrillas from the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) once again increased their
level of violent activity in 2005. FARC attacks on government forces were
accompanied by numerous and serious abuses, including massacres of civilians
and targeted killings.
In April, the FARC used gas cylinder bombs in the region of Cauca, launching
them in an indiscriminate manner in the direction of residential areas.
The attacks primarily affected members of indigenous communities, resulting
in numerous deaths and the displacement of much of the population. Other
FARC attacks targeted media, including radio stations.
Both the National Liberation Army (ELN) and the FARC continue to kidnap
civilians, holding them for ransom or political gain.
Child Recruitment
At least one of every four irregular combatants in Colombia is under eighteen
years of age. Of these, several thousand are under the age of fifteen, the
minimum recruitment age permitted under the Geneva Conventions. Eighty
percent of the children under arms belong to one of two guerrilla groups, the
FARC or the ELN. The remainder fights for paramilitaries.
Internal Displacement
Colombia has the world’s largest internal displacement crisis after Sudan. In
the last three years alone, more than three million people, as much as 5 percent
of Colombia’s population, have been forcibly displaced because of the
country’s armed conflict. More than half of all displaced persons are children
under the age of eighteen. While Colombia is among a handful of countries
that have enacted legislation to protect the internally displaced, displaced
families are often denied access to education, emergency healthcare, and
humanitarian aid.
In 2004, Colombia’s Constitutional Court held that the government’s system
for assisting displaced persons was unconstitutional. In September 2005, the
Court found that the steps taken by the government to comply with its ruling
were insufficient in terms of both resources and institutional will.
Key International Actors
The United States remains the most influential foreign actor in Colombia. In
2005 it provided close to U.S. $800 million to the Colombian government,
mostly in military aid. Twenty-five percent of U.S. security assistance is formally
subject to human rights conditions, but the conditions have not been
consistently enforced. Certification of 12.5 percent of the assistance was
delayed in the first half of 2005 due to serious setbacks and lack of progress
in key investigations of military abuses, among other factors. Nonetheless,
the certification was ultimately granted, with the U.S. State Department citing
late progress in some specific cases.
In February 2005, the member countries of the G-24 group of international
donors to Colombia met in Cartagena to discuss continuing cooperation with
Colombia. Members of Colombia’s human rights community expressed disappointment
over the resulting Cartagena Declaration, which, while reaffirming
the terms of the preceding London Declaration, was viewed as weaker
than the earlier document on various human rights issues.
While some European and U.S. assistance to the demobilization process
seems likely, its extent and nature remained an open question as of this writing
in late November 2005. The U.S. Congress approved U.S. $20 million in
assistance for the demobilization process, but the aid is conditioned on full
Colombian cooperation with U.S. extradition requests and on specific measures
to ensure accountability and the dismantlement of paramilitary structures.
The E.U. Council of Ministers stated that Law 975 could, if effectively
implemented, contribute to peace. It expressed concern, however, over the
law’s failure to adequately take into account international standards on truth,
justice, and reparation.
The OAS Mission to Support the Peace Process in Colombia, which is
charged with verifying the demobilization process, was widely criticized by
victims and human rights groups. Not only has it failed to adequately monitor
paramilitaries’ cease-fire declaration, it has also failed to follow up on
complaints of abuses, and it shows little or no independence from the government.
As of November 2005, the OAS Secretary General reportedly was
considering possible reforms to the Mission’s structure and activities.
The Office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights is active in
Colombia, with a presence in Bogotá, Medellín, and Cali. Its relations with
the government are difficult due to Colombia’s repeated failure to implement
the office’s human rights recommendations.
Guatemala
Nearly two decades after the return of civilian rule, Guatemala has made little
progress toward securing the protection of human rights and the rule of
law, essential features of a functioning democracy. Impunity remains the rule
when it comes to human rights abuses. Ongoing acts of political violence and
intimidation threaten to reverse the little progress that has been made toward
promoting accountability in recent years.
Impunity
Guatemala continues to suffer the effects of an internal armed conflict that
ended in 1996. A U.N.-sponsored truth commission estimated that as many
as 200,000 people were killed during the thirty-six-year war and attributed
the vast majority of the killings to government forces.
As Human Rights Watch has noted in the past, Guatemalans seeking
accountability for these abuses face daunting obstacles. The prosecutors and
investigators who handle these cases receive grossly inadequate training and
resources. The courts routinely fail to resolve judicial appeals and motions in
an expeditious manner, allowing defense attorneys to engage in dilatory legal
maneuvering. The army and other state institutions fail to cooperate fully
with investigations into abuses committed by current or former members.
The police do not provide adequate protection to judges, prosecutors, and
witnesses involved in politically sensitive cases.
Of the 626 massacres documented by the truth commission, only one case
has been successfully prosecuted in the Guatemalan courts. In 2004, a lieutenant
and thirteen soldiers were found guilty of the 1995 Xamán massacre
in which eleven civilians were killed; they were each sentenced to forty years
in prison. By contrast, the prosecution of former military officers allegedly
responsible for the 1982 Dos Erres massacre, in which 162 people died, has
been held up for years by dilatory defense motions.
The few other convictions obtained in human rights cases have come at considerable
cost. In the case of Myrna Mack, an anthropologist who was assassinated in 1990, it took over a decade to obtain the conviction of an army
colonel, Valencia Osorio, for his role in orchestrating the killing. During that
time, a police investigator who gathered incriminating evidence was murdered,
and two other investigators—as well as three witnesses—received
threats and fled the country. Osorio, meanwhile, escaped police custody and
has not served his sentence.
Attacks and Threats by “Clandestine Groups”
Over the past four years, there have been an alarming number of attacks and
threats against Guatemalans seeking justice for past abuses. The targets have
included human rights advocates, justice officials, forensic experts, and plaintiffs
and witnesses involved in human rights cases. They have also included
journalists, labor activists, and others who have denounced abuses of authority.
In January 2005, Guatemala’s Human Rights Ombudsman reported a plot to
assassinate Bishop Álvaro Ramazzini, who has been an outspoken voice on
social and economic issues. In March, radio journalist Marielos Monzón, who
had broadcast special programs on recent clashes between police and indigenous
protestors, reported that an anonymous caller had told her to “[s]top
defending those stinking Indians, you bitch, or we will kill you.” In August,
members of the Guatemalan Foundation for Forensic Anthropology received
repeated death threats, apparently due to their work exhuming bodies buried
in clandestine cemeteries throughout the country.
There is a widespread consensus among local and international observers that
the people responsible for these acts of intimidation are affiliated with private,
secretive, and illegally armed networks or organizations, commonly
referred to in Guatemala as “clandestine groups.” These groups appear to
have links to both state agents and organized crime—which give them access
to considerable political and economic resources. The Guatemalan justice
system, which has little ability even to contain common crime, has so far
proven no match for this powerful and dangerous threat to the rule of law.
nated in 1990, it took over a decade to obtain the conviction of an army
colonel, Valencia Osorio, for his role in orchestrating the killing. During that
time, a police investigator who gathered incriminating evidence was murdered,
and two other investigators—as well as three witnesses—received
threats and fled the country. Osorio, meanwhile, escaped police custody and
has not served his sentence.
Attacks and Threats by “Clandestine Groups”
Over the past four years, there have been an alarming number of attacks and
threats against Guatemalans seeking justice for past abuses. The targets have
included human rights advocates, justice officials, forensic experts, and plaintiffs
and witnesses involved in human rights cases. They have also included
journalists, labor activists, and others who have denounced abuses of authority.
In January 2005, Guatemala’s Human Rights Ombudsman reported a plot to
assassinate Bishop Álvaro Ramazzini, who has been an outspoken voice on
social and economic issues. In March, radio journalist Marielos Monzón, who
had broadcast special programs on recent clashes between police and indigenous
protestors, reported that an anonymous caller had told her to “[s]top
defending those stinking Indians, you bitch, or we will kill you.” In August,
members of the Guatemalan Foundation for Forensic Anthropology received
repeated death threats, apparently due to their work exhuming bodies buried
in clandestine cemeteries throughout the country.
There is a widespread consensus among local and international observers that
the people responsible for these acts of intimidation are affiliated with private,
secretive, and illegally armed networks or organizations, commonly
referred to in Guatemala as “clandestine groups.” These groups appear to
have links to both state agents and organized crime—which give them access
to considerable political and economic resources. The Guatemalan justice
system, which has little ability even to contain common crime, has so far
proven no match for this powerful and dangerous threat to the rule of law.
Despite pressure from civil society, in 2005 the Guatemalan Congress failed
to pass legislation that would have regulated work conditions for domestic
workers by setting minimum salary standards, limiting permissible work
hours, and protecting against sexual harassment.
Key International Actors
The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights opened an
office in Guatemala in 2005 to provide observation and technical assistance
on human rights practices (a role that the United Nations Verification
Mission in Guatemala (MINUGUA) had played for nearly a decade, until it
closed its operations in December 2004).
No progress has been made toward implementing the 2004 agreement
between Guatemala and the United Nations to establish a special commission
to investigate and promote the prosecution of “clandestine groups.” The
Commission for the Investigation of Illegal Groups and Clandestine Security
Organizations (CICIACS) grew out of a proposal developed by the
Guatemalan government and local human rights groups, in consultation with
members of the international community. The Guatemalan Congress has
never ratified the agreement, and the country’s Constitutional Court has held
that several of its provisions are unconstitutional. The current government
has said it would propose modifications to the initiative that would make it
consistent with the court’s restrictive interpretation of the Guatemalan
Constitution.
The inter-American human rights system continues to provide an important
venue for human rights advocates seeking to press the state to accept responsibility
for abuses. In July 2005, for example, Guatemala held a public ceremony
in the town of Plan de Sánchez, presided by Vice President Eduardo
Stein and attended by the vice president of the Inter-American Commission
on Human Rights, to accept state responsibility for the massacre of 268 villagers
in 1982. The Inter-American Court of Human Rights had ordered this
act of public acceptance in a 2004 judgment.
In a landmark ruling, Spain’s Constitutional Court held in October 2005 that
cases of alleged genocide committed during Guatemala’s internal armed conflict
could be prosecuted in the Spanish courts, even if no Spanish citizens
were involved. Finding that “principle of universal jurisdiction takes precedence
over the existence or not of national interests,” the Constitutional
Court granted the appeal by Guatemalan Nobel laureate, Rigoberta Menchú,
whose efforts to press charges in Spain for abuses committed in Guatemala
had been blocked by a lower court.
Haiti
Haiti’s already bad human rights conditions worsened in 2005, its second
year under an unelected interim government. Citing summary executions,
mob violence, torture and arbitrary arrests, the head of the human rights section
of the United Nations mission in Haiti told reporters in October that
the country’s human rights situation was “catastrophic.” It was far from clear,
as elections approached, whether free and fair polling would be possible.
Election Conditions
Presidential, legislative and local elections were supposed to take place before
the end of the year, but as of November 2005 the dates remained tentative.
They will be Haiti’s first elections since the February 2004 ouster of
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide. Delays in election preparations over the
course of 2005 led to multiple postponements in the electoral schedule, but
unelected Prime Minister Gerard Latortue continues to insist that the transfer
of power will take place as scheduled on February 7, 2006.
Irregularities in electoral preparations, including problems in the distribution
of voting materials, cast doubt on the reliability of the vote. There were also
suggestions that political bias had tainted the electoral process.
Violence, Lawlessness and Instability
With waves of violence engulfing the country, especially the capital, Port-au-
Prince, Haiti remains unstable and dangerous. In Port-au-Prince clashes
between rival criminal gangs, including some associated with former president
Aristide, result daily in civilian deaths. Armed groups of Aristide supporters
have sought to spread chaos and fear in hopes that the failure of the
interim government to stem the violence will lead to Aristide’s return. In the
provinces irregular armed groups, many made up of former members of the
Haitian military, exercise de facto governmental authority. Former soldiers
have set up barracks in police stations and abandoned buildings. They man
check points, conduct searches, seize weapons from civilians (and, at times, from police), make arbitrary arrests, and run their own makeshift prisons.
Because Haiti’s government institutions are largely dysfunctional and its
security forces are woefully inadequate, abuses go unpunished and violent
crime rates have soared.
The U.N. multinational peacekeeping force, mandated by the U.N. Security
Council to assist local authorities in maintaining order, has not succeeded in
stopping violent crime. But after an almost uncontrolled spike in violence in
May-June 2005, U.N. troops began taking more aggressive measures in Portau-
Prince that, to a limited extent, have helped alleviate the atmosphere of
insecurity. The strengthened U.N. presence has, for example, sharply
reduced kidnappings, which had reached epidemic levels. Allegations were
made, however, that U.N. forces used indiscriminate force, particularly in
sweeps of slum areas of Port-au-Prince.
Police Abuses
Police lawlessness is a major contributor to overall insecurity. Not only are
the Haitian National Police (HNP) largely incompetent in preventing and
investigating crime, they are responsible for frequent arbitrary arrests, torture,
beatings, and the excessive and indiscriminate use of force against
demonstrators. They also face credible allegations of extrajudicial executions
and of involvement in drug trafficking and other criminal activity. Untrained
and unprofessional, the police suffer from severe shortages of personnel and
equipment.
Police perpetrate abuses with almost total impunity. Human Rights Watch
knows of no members of the HNP who have faced criminal prosecution for
their abusive conduct. But in a welcome move, the head of the Haitian
National Police announced in early November 2005 that fourteen police officers
would be charged for their alleged responsibility in the August killings of
at least eleven people at a soccer game.
Justice and Accountability
Haiti’s justice system is hardly functional, suffering from corruption, politicization
and a lack of personnel, training and resources. In the provinces
judges complain there are no police to execute warrants and no prisons in
which to keep detainees; few crimes are even investigated. Where prisons
exist, their conditions are dire, with prisoners held in dirty and crowded
accommodation often lacking sanitary facilities.
Accountability for past abuses remains out of reach. Indeed, significant
regress occurred in 2005, as exemplified most dramatically by the case of
Louis Jodel Chamblain, formerly second in command of the paramilitary
Revolutionary Front for the Progress and Advancement of Haiti (Front
Révolutionnaire pour l’Avancement et le Progrès d’Haïti, FRAPH), responsible
for countless abuses during the de facto military government. He had
been convicted in absentia of the 1993 murder of a prominent Haitian businessman
and of the 1994 Raboteau massacre, but he surrendered to judicial
authorities in 2004 to exercise his right to a retrial. The convictions were
reversed, and although the Haitian authorities continued to detain him for a
few months on other allegations, they released him in August 2005. In a
related development in early May 2005, Haiti’s Supreme Court (Cour de
Cassation) quashed the sentences of fifteen other former soldiers and paramilitaries
who had been held responsible for the Raboteau massacre in a historic
2000 trial. The grounds for the Supreme Court ruling were extremely
flimsy.
The long-term imprisonment of former Prime Minister Yvon Neptune continues
to raise serious concerns. Although formal charges were finally
brought against Neptune in September 2005, the apparent political grounds
for Neptune’s detention undermines confidence in the validity of the charges
and in the fairness of any future trial.
Human Rights Defenders and Journalists
Human rights defenders, working in a dangerous, highly-politicized environment,
face threats and intimidation. Haiti is a dangerous country for journalists as well, who face threats and violence for their reporting. In June 2005,
after having received several kidnapping threats, prominent radio journalist
Nancy Roc left the country to go into exile. A few weeks later, in mid-July,
newspaper and television reporter Jacques Roche was abducted and brutally
murdered by unknown assailants. Roche’s body was found in a slum neighborhood
of Port-au-Prince; he had been tortured and shot several times.
U.N. envoy to Haiti Juan Gabriel Valdes reportedly said that Roche’s death
“has all the elements of a political murder.”
Key International Actors
The U.N. Security Council voted unanimously in late June 2005 to extend
the mandate of the U.N. Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) until
February 15, 2006, “with the intention to renew for further periods.” The
U.N. resolution also authorized the addition of more than one thousand soldiers
and civilian police to bulk up the thinly-staffed peacekeeping force. The
numbers mandated raised military troops to 7,500 and police to 1,897. But
MINUSTAH’s slow deployment of personnel and general lack of preparation
for urban warfare have plagued the mission’s efforts to restore security to
Haiti.
In November 2005, a group of human rights attorneys filed a complaint with
the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights alleging that U.N. peacekeeping
forces were involved in massacres in Haiti in July and August.
The United States is Haiti’s largest donor, having budgeted U.S.$407 million
for Haiti in 2004-05. Canada and the European Union are also major donors.
In mid-October, the E.U. unblocked ?72 million (U.S. $87 million) in aid to
support Haiti’s electoral process. The funds had been frozen several years
previously in protest over irregularities in the 2000 legislative elections.
Haitians continue to risk their lives attempting to sail overcrowded, often
leaky boats across the rough seas that separate Haiti from the United States.
Many boats are intercepted by U.S. Coast Guard cutters, but some number
of them are lost at sea. Haitians who reach the United States are subject to
mandatory detention and expedited removal procedures.
Mexico
Among Mexico’s most serious human rights problems are those affecting its
criminal justice system. Persons under arrest or imprisonment face torture
and other ill-treatment, and law enforcement officials often neglect to investigate
and prosecute those responsible for human rights violations.
President Vicente Fox has repeatedly promised to address these problems
and has taken important steps toward doing so—establishing a special prosecutor’s
office to investigate past abuses and proposing justice reforms
designed to prevent future ones. Unfortunately, neither initiative has lived up
to its potential.
Torture, Ill-treatment, Police Brutality, and Pretrial Detention
Torture remains a widespread problem within the Mexican criminal justice
system. A factor perpetuating the practice is the acceptance by some judges
of evidence obtained through violations of detainees’ human rights. Prison
inmates are subject to abuses, including extortion by guards and the imposition
of solitary confinement for indefinite periods of time. Children in some
juvenile detention facilities are forced to live in squalid conditions and are
reportedly subject to beatings and sexual abuse. Foreign migrants are especially
vulnerable to abusive practices, including extortion, by government
agents.
Over 40 percent of prisoners in Mexico have never been convicted of a
crime. Rather, they are held in pretrial detention, often waiting years for
trial.
In 2004, President Fox proposed reforms designed to fix features of Mexican
criminal procedure that perpetuate and even encourage the use of torture by
law enforcement officials. The new legislation would bar all evidence
obtained illegally and allow confessions to be entered as evidence at trial only
when they were made in the presence of a judge and defense counsel.
The reform package also contained measures to address the problem of preventive
detention. Specifically, it would amend the Constitution to establish
that criminal suspects are presumed innocent until proven guilty. The reform
would allow judges to decide in each case, based on objective criteria,
whether preventive detention is necessary.
Although the Senate approved several positive pieces of the reform package
in July 2005, Congress has yet to vote on measures addressing the critical
problems of torture and preventive detention.
Impunity
The criminal justice system routinely fails to provide justice to victims of violent
crime and human rights abuses. The causes of this failure are varied and
include corruption, inadequate training and resources, and a lack of political
will. One prominent example is the unsolved murders of hundreds of young
women and girls over the last decade in Ciudad Juárez, a city on the U.S.
border in Chihuahua state. Several individuals facing charges for some of the
Júarez killings have recanted confessions that they claim were coerced
through torture.
A major shortcoming of the Mexican justice system is that it leaves the task
of investigating and prosecuting army abuses to military authorities. As
Human Rights Watch documented in a 2001 report, the military justice system
is ill-equipped for such tasks. It lacks the independence necessary to
carry out reliable investigations and its operations suffer from a general
absence of transparency. The ability of military prosecutors to investigate
army abuses is further undermined by fear of the army, which is widespread
in many rural communities and which inhibits civilian victims and witnesses
from providing information to military authorities. The Mexican Supreme
Court had an opportunity to address the problem of military jurisdiction in a
2005 case, but in September it upheld the military’s authority over cases
involving army members even when the alleged crimes were committed
while off-duty.
The Special Prosecutor’s Office
The special prosecutor’s office that President Fox established in 2001 to
address past abuses has produced limited results. In November 2003, the special
prosecutor won a landmark decision from the Mexican Supreme Court
holding that statutes of limitations do not apply to old “disappearance” cases
as long as the victims’ bodies have not been found. He then obtained arrest
warrants for several high-level officials, and secured custody of three of them.
But these advances have been counterbalanced by significant failures. The
majority of the suspects pursued by the special prosecutor have managed to
escape arrest. The special prosecutor has also made only limited progress in
uncovering the fate of hundreds of people who were “disappeared” in the
1970s.
The special prosecutor’s most ambitious move—the indictment of former
president Luis Echeverría for genocide—was thrown out by a trial judge on
grounds that the statute of limitations had expired. The special prosecutor
won an appeal before the Supreme Court, which ruled in June 2005 that the
statute of limitations had not expired in Echeverría’s case because he had
been shielded by immunity during his presidency. But the case was thrown
out again by a lower court in July 2005, on the grounds that the 1971 massacre
did not constitute genocide.
The special prosecutor subsequently sought to indict Echeverría again on
genocide charges for a 1968 massacre of student protesters, but in September
2005 a lower court once again rejected his argument.
Labor Rights
Legitimate labor-organizing activity continues to be obstructed by collective
bargaining agreements negotiated between management and pro-management
unions. These agreements often fail to provide worker benefits beyond
the minimums mandated by Mexican legislation, and workers sometimes only
learn of the agreements when they grow discontented and attempt to organize
independent unions. Workers who seek to form independent unions risk losing their jobs, as the government generally fails to protect them from
retaliatory dismissals.
Freedom of Expression
Journalists have occasionally faced harassment and attacks, particularly those
who have investigated drug trafficking or have been critical of state governments.
In April 2005, a journalist in Tamaulipas and one in Veracruz were
killed. During that same month, another journalist in Sonora disappeared,
and at this writing is still missing. In June 2005, thirty-one journalists of the
Oaxaca-based Noticias newspaper were forced to stay inside the newspaper
facilities for more than a month because members of a pro-government trade
union had initiated a strike outside the building. Newspaper staff maintain
that the strikers did not actually work at the newspaper and aimed merely to
stop the paper’s publication.
Mexican defamation laws continue to be excessively restrictive and tend to
undermine freedom of expression. Besides monetary penalties, journalists can
be subject to criminal prosecution for alleged defamation of public officials.
Right to Education
A chronic concern in Mexico is the government’s failure to ensure that tens
of thousands of rural children receive primary education during the months
that their families migrate across state lines to work in agricultural camps. A
large number of parents choose to have their children work in the fields
rather than attend school during these months. The government’s failure to
enforce child labor laws facilitates this choice. Although there is a federal
program to provide primary schooling in the agricultural camps, the classes
are generally offered in the evening when children are too exhausted from
their work to study.
Electoral Rights
According to electoral laws in Mexico, presidential candidates must be nominated
by political parties. Jorge Castañeda, a former foreign relations minister, challenged these laws, arguing that he should be allowed to run as an
independent candidate. In August 2005, the Supreme Court refused to hear
his appeal on the grounds that only political parties have standing to challenge
the electoral laws.
Key International Actors
As part of a Technical Cooperation Agreement signed by President Fox, the
U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights maintains an in-country office
that, in December 2003, produced a comprehensive report documenting
ongoing human rights problems and providing detailed recommendations for
addressing them. The Fox administration’s justice reform proposal incorporates
some of those recommendations while ignoring others, such as the recommendation
to end military jurisdiction over cases involving human rights
violations. In December 2004, the administration presented a national human
rights program that outlined a wide range of policy objectives based on the
report’s recommendations. In 2005, the administration established a committee,
with representatives from the government and civil society, to monitor
the implementation of the program.
Along with the United States and Canada, Mexico is a party to the North
American Free Trade Agreement and its labor side accord. The side accord
commits the three countries to enforcing their laws protecting workers’
rights and grants them authority to hold one other accountable for failing to
meet these obligations. Under the accord, when a government of one country
receives a complaint of violations committed in one of the other two, it
can investigate the charges. However, because the complaint process is convoluted
and enforcement mechanisms are weak, the accord has had little
impact on labor rights violations in Mexico.
Mexico has maintained its leading role at the international level in pressing
for human rights promotion to be considered an integral part of counter-terrorism
efforts. It sponsored resolutions to that end at both the U.N. General
Assembly and the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, and successfully
pressed the Commission to name an independent expert on the protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms while combating terrorism.
In an important move, Mexico, after a long process, ratified the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court in October 2005, becoming the
100th state party of the court.
Peru
Efforts to prosecute those responsible for gross human rights violations dating
from Peru’s armed conflict (1980-2000) have begun to show results, but
they still face formidable obstacles. These include a chronic shortage of funds
and resources, a lack of trained investigators, and a lack of cooperation by the
armed forces.
Military courts continue to investigate human rights violations committed by
military personnel during this period, even though the Constitutional Court
and the Supreme Court have ruled that they lack competence to do so.
Torture is an ongoing problem. Journalists face violence and harassment, particularly
in provincial cities. Human rights defenders are vulnerable to threats
and intimidation.
Confronting the Past
At the end of November 2005, former president Alberto Fujimori was in
detention in Santiago, Chile, awaiting possible extradition to Peru on charges
of corruption and human rights abuse. Arriving unexpectedly in the Chilean
capital by private jet from Japan on November 6, Fujimori cleared immigration
without difficulty despite an Interpol alert for his arrest. Chilean police
detained him early the following morning acting on a warrant issued by the
Peruvian Supreme Court. Apart from numerous accusations of corruption,
Fujimori faces charges for killings and “disappearances” in the early 1990s.
Before leaving Japan, where he had been in self-exile since 2000, Fujimori
had announced his intention to stand as a candidate in Peru’s April 2006
presidential elections.
The number of military and police personnel facing trial for human rights
abuses committed during Peru’s counterinsurgency campaign rose significantly
in 2005. As of October 2005, 383 former and still serving officers had
been charged in twenty-two cases, most of them having been forwarded to
the attorney general by the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in August
2003.
In August 2005, the trial began in open court of more than fifty members of
the “Colina Group,” a clandestine army death squad active during the government
of Alberto Fujimori (1990-2000). They are accused of numerous
killings and forced disappearances, including shooting dead fifteen unarmed
civilians at a fundraising barbecue in the Barrios Altos district of Lima on
November 3, 1991, and kidnapping and murdering nine students and a
teacher from the La Cantuta university on July 18, 1992.
Testimony showing that the squad acted under government orders is expected
from three former members who confessed in court to the charges. Two
of them were sentenced at the beginning of the trial.
There has also been progress in cases dating from the presidencies of
Fernando Belaúnde (1980-1985) and Alan García (1985-1990). The special
human rights prosecutor in Ayacucho, Cristina Olazábal, has filed charges in
at least twelve cases. In July 2005, Judge Miluska Cano of the Fourth Supra-
Provincial Criminal Court in Lima indicted 118 soldiers for first-degree
murder, extrajudicial execution, and forced disappearance in connection with
a massacre at Cayara in May 1988, in which thirty-nine civilians were killed.
These criminal investigations face serious obstacles, however. The attorney
general mandated two special prosecutors to devote themselves full-time to
human rights cases, but the government has provided no funds to train them,
adequately equip their offices, or cover their expenses. The armed forces
deny having information to identify those who served at counter-insurgency
bases implicated in abuses; military prosecutors continue to carry out parallel
investigations of their own apparently aimed at blocking civilian trials, and
the army and police consistently fail to carry out arrest orders. According to
the human rights ombudsman, courts have issued 252 warrants for the arrest
of military and police personnel for human rights violations (naming 277 soldiers,
sixty-four police officers, and fifteen marines). Yet only forty-three
arrest warrants have been put into effect.
The government has also failed to provide effective protection for witnesses
who testify in these cases. On two occasions in 2005 unidentified gunmen
shot at Luis Ramírez Hinostroso, a key witness in a torture trial which began in October in Huancayo. In a similar 2004 attack, Ramírez was hit in the
stomach by a bullet and had to undergo surgery.
Torture
Torture by police continues to be a problem, and judicial investigations in
such cases are slow and frequently superficial. Those responsible, if convicted
at all, usually receive light sentences and have to pay very small amounts in
compensation. The Human Rights Commission (Comisión de Derechos
Humanos, COMISEDH) a respected nongovernmental human rights group,
documented sixteen cases of torture from January through September 2005.
In four cases the victims died.
On a positive note, in January 2005 an Ayacucho court sentenced three soldiers
to six years in jail for the torture in July 2002 of a nineteen-year-old
military recruit. The recruit had been drugged and subjected to brutal sexual
abuse in the Domingo Ayarza army base in Ayacucho. The three perpetrators
were each ordered to pay the victim compensation of 6,000 soles (about U.S.
$1,800). A military judge, Maj. José Etel Espinoza, received a three-year suspended
sentence for covering up the crime. On appeal by the prosecutor, in
November the Supreme Court increased the sentences to ten years and eight
years, and boosted the compensation to 30,000 soles (about U.S. $9,000).
This was believed to be the stiffest sentence ever imposed for torture in Peru.
Attacks on Journalists
Journalists and radio commentators in Peru’s provinces are vulnerable to
physical attack, intimidation, and harassment for criticizing local authorities.
This pattern of abuse has been constant for many years and shows the precariousness
of respect for press freedom in Peru. The Inter-American Press
Association reported in March 2005 that violent attacks on journalists are on
the increase in Peru.
Pucallpa, a city in the coca-growing area of the Upper Huallaga valley, is a
dangerous place for radio journalists. On two occasions in February 2005,
armed men broke into the Radio Frecuencia Oriental radio station in Pucallpa, threatening journalist Paul Garay Ramírez with a gun on the first occasion,
and severely beating him on the second. Garay said that he had been reporting
on corruption in local government and in labor organizations. In
October, police arrested Luis Valdez Villacorta, the mayor of the province of
Coronel Portillo, after an alleged hit-man confessed that Valdez hired him to
murder journalist Alberto Rivera Fernández. A persistent critic of the provincial
government and close colleague of Garay, Rivera was shot dead in April
2004.
Human Rights Defenders
Peru has a diverse and vibrant range of nongovernmental human rights
groups that operate without governmental or legal restrictions. For years,
however, some have suffered anonymous attacks, threats, and harassment.
In September 2005, Salomón Lerner, former president of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, received death threats. While he was out of the
country, his secretary received a telephone call from an individual who told
her that Lerner should “consider himself dead.” Previously, Lerner had
received a series of insulting and anti-Semitic emails. Other commission
members received insulting messages accusing them of attacking the armed
forces. The threats coincided with efforts to discredit the commission following
the second anniversary of publication of its report on human rights violations
and abuses committed by both sides during Peru’s armed conflict
(1980-2000). Several critical articles appeared in the press signed by retired
soldiers implicated in abuses. The commissioners faced nine lawsuits from
senior retired officers who claimed that they had distorted the facts.
Also in September, COMISEDH, whose lawyers represent torture victims
and relatives of the “disappeared,” suffered two anonymous attacks. On
September 6, someone tied a dirty lock of human hair to the door of its
office in Ayacucho. A week later, unidentified armed individuals staged a nocturnal
raid on COMISEDH’s office in Lima, tampered with the alarm, and
disabled the phone and cable connections. Before they left the building they
fired shots to scare off a night-watchman. Nothing was stolen.
Prosecutors and forensic experts working on human rights cases have also
received threats. Cristina Olazábal, the special human rights prosecutor in
Ayacucho, received intimidating calls from anonymous callers on several
occasions while she was investigating extrajudicial executions at Accomarca
and the Los Cabitos military base in Ayacucho. In February and August
2005, three experts from the Medical Legal Institute (the forensic branch of
the public ministry) who were participating in the Los Cabitos investigation
received threatening text messages on their cell phones. Altogether, there
were forty-five incidents involving attacks, threats, and intimidation against
witnesses and relatives, judges, prosecutors, forensic staff, and human rights
activists from January through October 2005, according to the human rights
umbrella group National Human Rights Coordinating Group.
Peru’s minister of justice acknowledged that the government had failed to
provide adequate protection for participants in human rights trials. He promised
to coordinate with the minister of the interior to investigate the attacks
and increase the level of protection.
Key International Actors
The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and the Inter-American
Court of Human Rights continue to consider Peruvian cases. In March 2005,
the Court ordered Peru to bring to justice those responsible for the extrajudicial
execution of labor leader Pedro Huilca Tecse, who was assassinated by
members of the Colina death squad in December 1992. Finally admitting
responsibility for his murder, the Peruvian government agreed to pay
U.S.$250,000 in compensation to his surviving relatives as well as undertake
various measures of symbolic reparation.
The United States and several European countries provided funds in past
years to support the work of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission.
Money for the prosecutorial effort that has followed the commission’s
report—for office equipment, computers, transportation, and the capital cost
of forensic equipment and laboratories—has come almost entirely from international
donors. In 2005, the European Union pledged 483,447 Euros
(U.S.$586,373) to assist prosecutors and forensic investigations.
By contrast, the United States decided to axe its program of support for judicial
reform initiatives. Overall aid to Peru was cut as a result of the Bush
administration’s policy of partially withholding assistance to countries that
refuse to sign a Bilateral Immunity Agreement to shield Americans from
prosecution by the International Criminal Court.
Venezuela
Since winning a national referendum on his presidency in 2004, Hugo
Chávez and his majority coalition in Congress have taken steps to undermine
the independence of the country’s judiciary by packing the Supreme Court
with their allies. They have also enacted legislation that seriously threatens
press freedoms and freedom of expression. Several high profile members of
civil society have faced prosecution on highly dubious charges, and human
rights defenders have been repeatedly accused by government officials of
conspiring against the nation. Police violence, torture, and abusive prison
conditions are also among the country’s most serious human rights problems.
Independence of the Judiciary
The Venezuelan Congress dealt a severe blow to judicial independence in
December 2004 by packing the country’s Supreme Court with twelve new
justices. A majority of the ruling coalition, dominated by President Chávez’s
party, named the justices to fill seats created by a law passed in May 2004 that
expanded the court from twenty to thirty-two members. In addition to the
justices named to the twelve new seats, five justices were named to fill vacancies
that had opened in recent months, and thirty-two more were named as
reserve justices.
The political takeover of the Supreme Court compounded the damage
already done to judicial independence by policies pursued by the court itself.
The court, which has administrative control over the judiciary, has failed to
provide security of tenure to 80 percent of the country’s judges.
Freedom of Expression
Laws passed since late 2004 have introduced onerous new restrictions on the
media. The Law of Social Responsibility in Radio and Television, approved
by the National Assembly in December 2004, establishes detailed regulations
for the content of television and radio programs. For example, stations
deemed to “condone or incite” public disturbances or publish messages “contrary to the security of the nation” are subject to heavy fines and can be
ordered to suspend broadcasting for seventy-two hours; on a second offense
they may forfeit their broadcasting license for up to five years. Key terms
such as those quoted above are left ill-defined, inviting politically motivated
application. The National Commission of Telecommunications (CONATEL)
may issue “precautionary measures” prohibiting the transmission of outlawed
content.
In March 2005, amendments to the Criminal Code came into force which
extended the scope of Venezuela’s desacato (disrespect) laws, and increased
penalties for desacato, criminal defamation, and libel. By broadening its
desacato provisions, Venezuela ignored the recommendations of the Inter-
American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) and bucked a continentwide
trend toward the repeal of this type of law.
In July, Attorney General Isaías Rodríguez ordered an investigation into
whether the newspaper El Universal had illegally subjected his office and the
country’s judiciary to public contempt by publishing an editorial entitled
“Justice on its Knees” (Justicia Arodillada). In October, in a welcome ruling,
the Supreme Court found that the editorial in question did not in fact constitute
an “institutional insult” prohibited by law. The Court noted, however,
that the constitution proscribes “the use of freedom of information and opinion
to destabilize democratic institutions.”
Police Killings
The killing of three innocent students in the Kennedy district of Caracas on
June 27, 2005, highlighted the violence and lawlessness of Venezuela’s police
forces. Leonardo González, Erick Montenegro, and Edgar Quintero died
after police from the Directorate of Military Intelligence (DIM) and the
Criminal Investigations Police (Cicpc) opened fire on their car when they
were returning from the university. The police reportedly confused the students’
car with a vehicle they were pursuing, and opened fire when it failed
to heed an order to stop. González’s body was found in the street near their
car, with a bullet wound in the eye. According to an eyewitness, men in civilian
clothes wearing hoods captured Montenegro and Quintero in an alley, made them lie on the ground, and shot them in cold blood. The police
reportedly planted weapons on the scene to make it appear that they had
been fired on first.
Hundreds of police executions have been reported over the past several years,
although the problem long predates the current administration. While the
Attorney General’s Office and the human rights ombudsman have denounced
these abuses, little progress has been made in prosecuting the police responsible
or introducing the reforms necessary to combat the practice. In August
2005, the Attorney General’s Office announced that it was investigating
5,520 presumed extrajudicial executions—involving 6,127 victims—committed
between 2000 and July 31, 2005. Of 5,997 police and military personnel
allegedly implicated, prosecutors have filed charges against 517, and at this
writing only eighty-eight had been convicted (1.47 percent).
Prison Conditions
Conditions in Venezuela’s prisons are notoriously abusive. Overcrowding is
chronic and armed gangs maintain effective control within the prison walls.
Prison riots and inmate violence claim hundreds of lives every year. In
October 2005, Venezuelan Prison Watch (Observatorio Venezolano de
Prisiones), a Caracas-based group, claimed that 314 prisoners were killed and
517 were wounded in violent incidents over the course of the year.
Border Security and the Right to Refugee Status
The Venezuelan and Colombian authorities continue to implement joint
plans to assist hundreds of refugees who cross into Venezuela to escape violence
by irregular armed groups in Colombia. Due to insecurity in the border
regions, many Colombians fleeing the armed conflict head for an uncertain
but safer future in Venezuela’s cities. In June, a group of sixty-two people,
many of them children, took refuge in a settlement of the indigenous
Barí people in Zulia state. After negotiations with Barí community leaders
who wanted them to leave, in September the National Commission for
Refugees transported the refugees by helicopter to a safer and better
equipped location.
Human Rights Defenders and Civil Society
Public officials and government media have continued pursuing efforts to
discredit Venezuela’s nongovernmental human rights organizations.
Government officials and pro- government legislators publicly accused
Humberto Prado, coordinator of Venezuelan Prison Watch and a prominent
critic of prison policy, of starting a prison protest. In January, Prado reportedly
received anonymous threats on his mobile phone. In March, COFAVIC,
a respected human rights organization, reported that official media had insinuated
that the organization had taken a share of money paid by the State in
reparation to the victims of police killings during the Caracazo riots of 1989,
a claim the organization vigorously denied.
In August 2005, the Supreme Court rejected a petition by another human
rights organization, PROVEA, to order President Chávez to retract public
statements he had previously made suggesting that both groups were participating
in a U.S.-backed conspiracy against the government.
During 2005 the Attorney General’s Office opened a criminal investigation
of one of Venezuela’s most respected human rights lawyers, Carlos Ayala
Corao (a former president of the IACHR and current president of the nongovernmental
Andean Commission of Jurists), for an alleged role in the
unsuccessful 2002 coup against Chávez. The investigating prosecutor refused
to inform Ayala about the details and grounds of the accusation, and a judge
backed the prosecutor when Ayala challenged the prosecutor’s actions. After a
concerted campaign by local and international human rights advocates, the
prosecutor eventually dropped the case in October.
In July, a Caracas court ordered the prosecution of four civil society leaders
on charges of treason. The court ordered that María Corina Machado,
Alejandro Plaz, and two colleagues be tried on treason charges brought by a
public prosecutor because their nongovernmental organization, Súmate,
accepted foreign funds for a program that encouraged citizen participation in
a 2004 referendum on President Chavez’s presidency. They were charged
under article 132 of the Venezuelan Penal Code with “conspiracy to destroy
the nation’s republican form of government” because Súmate received financial support from the National Endowment for Democracy (NED).
According to the NED, an organization that is itself financed by the U.S.
Congress, Súmate received U.S.$31,150, which was used for workshops to
educate citizens regarding Venezuela’s constitutional referendum process. If
convicted, Machado and Plaz face up to sixteen years in prison.
Key International Actors
United States-Venezuelan relations continue to be marked by hostility and
mutual distrust. The Bush administration is preoccupied by Venezuela’s close
trading relationship with Cuba and Chávez’s friendship with Castro, as well
as his perceived influence in politically unstable countries like Bolivia.
Secretary of State Condoleeza Rice referred to Venezuela as a “negative force
in the region” in her Senate confirmation hearing in January 2005.
Chavez’s criticism of the Bush administration has always been outspoken. In a
television broadcast in February, he confided that he was sure that
Washington was planning to assassinate him, and threatened to respond to
aggression by cutting off oil exports to the United States.
In response to the IACHR, the Venezuelan government maintained that the
IACHR’s analysis and recommendations regarding Venezuela in its 2003
report infringed upon the country’s national sovereignty. The commission
had criticized Venezuela’s weak separation of powers, the concentration of
power in the executive branch, and the growing participation of the armed
forces in government. In its 2004 annual report, published in early 2005, the
commission noted that the government’s position was “incompatible with
international law and with the American Convention itself.”
Afghanistan
Four years after U.S. forces ousted the Taliban from Kabul, Afghanistan faces
an increasingly violent insurgency in southern and southeastern areas, while
in the rest of the country regional military commanders—warlords—further
entrench themselves by subverting the political process and controlling the
country’s drug trade.
Insecurity hampers development in much of Afghanistan, one of the least
developed countries in the world. Economic growth remains mostly limited
to urban areas, and in particular, Kabul. Human rights abuses, poverty, and
insecurity increase markedly with distance away from city centers.
Women and girls continue to suffer from discrimination and restrictions.
Only 35 percent of school-age girls are in school. According to 2005 U.N.
and Afghan government figures, most marriages continue to involve girls
below the age of sixteen, many of them forced.
The election of a parliament completed the process initiated by the Bonn
Agreement in 2001. Election day was free of serious violence or technical
problems, but during the campaign period Human Rights Watch documented
pervasive intimidation of voters and candidates, in particular women. Over
half the members of the new parliament are linked to armed groups or have
records of past human rights abuses.
In early May 2005, sixteen protesters were killed by police and army troops
during violent demonstrations in several cities in response to reports of U.S.
interrogators desecrating a copy of the Koran during interrogations at
Guantanamo Bay.
Afghanistan again produced nearly 80 percent of the world’s heroin, and narcotics
production and trafficking brought in an estimated U.S. $3 billion to
the Afghan economy, far and away the largest single source of income for the
country and a significant source of criminality and resistance to the rule of
law.
Insurgency
In 2005, Taliban and other anti-government forces, some allied with
Gulbuddin Hekmaytar, significantly expanded their insurgency in the predominantly
Pashtun areas in southern Afghanistan. It was also the deadliest
year for U.S. forces and their coalition allies in Afghanistan: more than
eighty-five U.S. troops were killed, more than fifty of them as a result of hostile
fire. Over 1,500 Afghan civilians died because of this political violence.
On May 7, a suicide bomber set off a bomb in a Kabul internet café, killing
several Afghan civilians and a Burmese engineer working for the United
Nations. Several other suicide attacks, previously rare in Afghanistan, took
place, mostly in southern Afghanistan. Another alarming development was
the Taliban’s assassination of at least eight clergymen supportive of the central
government.
The sharp increase in violence indicates that the Taliban has succeeded in
regrouping, with significant assistance from across the Pakistani border. It
also reflects growing resentment by local Afghans against a central government
that fails to deliver on promises of development and the heavy-handed
tactics employed by U.S. and coalition forces.
Insecurity
Despite the insurgency’s growing strength, the majority of Afghans cited the
numerous regional warlords as the greatest source of insecurity. In some
remote areas, there are still no real governmental structures or activity, only
abuse and criminal enterprises by warlords, many of whom were brought to
power with the assistance of the United States after the Taliban’s defeat.
Armed clashes between rival factions decreased in 2005, but in many areas
warlords and their troops continue to engage in arbitrary arrests, illegal
detentions, kidnapping, extortion, torture, murder, extrajudicial killings of
criminal suspects, forced displacement, and rape of women, girls, and boys.
Women and Girls
Women and girls continue to face severe discrimination and suffer the worst
effects of Afghanistan’s insecurity. Conditions are better than under the
Taliban, but four years later progress has been inadequate and too slow.
Women who are active in public life as political candidates, journalists, teachers,
or NGO workers, or who criticize local rulers, still face disproportionate
threats and violence.
Women and girls are subject to both formal and informal (customary) justice
mechanisms that fail to protect their rights. Violence against women and girls
remains rampant, including domestic violence, sexual violence, and forced
marriage. Authorities often fail to investigate or prosecute these cases.
Dozens of women are imprisoned around the country for “running away”
from abusive or forced marriages, or for transgressing social norms by eloping.
Some are placed in custody to prevent violent retaliation from family
members. Women and girls continue to confront tight restrictions on their
mobility, and many are not free to travel without a male relative and a burqa.
In mid-April 2005, a twenty-nine-year-old woman was beaten to death by
her own family for adultery in Badakhshan province. And on May 4, three
women were found murdered in Baghlan province with notes attached to the
bodies warning women not to work for nongovernmental organizations or
Western aid agencies.
The most recently available figures show that in Afghanistan, one woman
died every thirty minutes due to complications in pregnancy and childbirth.
Maternal mortality claims 1,600 women per every 100,000 births in the
country. According to the most recently available figures, only 35 percent of
girls of school age attend classes, with only 10 percent of girls attending secondary
school. In five Afghan provinces in the south, at least 90 percent of
school-age girls do not attend school.
On October 11, Ali Mohaqiq Nasab, editor of the monthly Haqooq-i-Zan
(Woman’s Rights), was sentenced to two years in prison on blasphemy
charges for allegedly offending Islam by suggesting the need for reinterpreting
Islamic law to protect women’s rights. His sentence was the first such conviction in post-Taliban Afghanistan. Despite significant public outcry
from inside and outside Afghanistan, he remains behind bars as of the time of
writing.
Parliamentary Elections and the End of the Bonn Process
On October 18, Afghanistan held elections for a lower house of parliament
(the Wolesi Jirga) as well as for provincial councils. The elections marked the
end of the process begun by the 2001 Bonn Agreement, which brought
President Hamid Karzai to power as the president of Afghanistan and produced
a new constitution for the country.
On election day, Afghans again demonstrated their eagerness for embracing a
political process instead of violence; there was little systematic violence and
election authorities managed to distribute ballot boxes in most of the country.
Women comprised almost half the votes in several provinces, but the
overall turnout was significantly lower than expected. Afghan election
authorities declared the participation of 53 percent of registered voters, as
compared with over 75 percent of voters in the presidential elections last
year. In the south and southeast, anti-government forces opposed to the elections
managed to drive down participation to nearly a third of registered voters.
Although there were no security problems in Kabul, only 36 percent of the
registered voters showed up at the polls. Human Rights Watch found that
voters were put off by the complexity of the ballots, disenchantment with the
performance of the government and international community, and the presence
of too many candidates with records of serious human rights abuses.
Human Rights Watch documented attempts by warlords to subvert the parliamentary
elections. Election regulations barring candidates associated with
armed factions from running for office were poorly enforced, and armed factions
supported their own candidates by threatening independent candidates
and intimidating voters. Women candidates, who were guaranteed at least a
quarter of the parliamentary seats, faced particular challenges in reaching out
to voters and campaigning; nevertheless, sixty-eight women—a slightly higher number than the 25 percent quota set aside for them—were elected to
parliament.
Among the more infamous successful candidates were Abdul Rabb al-Rasul
Sayyaf, Burhanuddin Rabbani, Mullah Taj Mohammad, Younis Qanooni,
Haji Almas, and Mullah Ezatullah—candidates from in and around Kabul—
who were all implicated in war crimes and crimes against humanity that
occurred during hostilities in Kabul in the early 1990s. Even Mullah Abdul
Salim “Rocketi,” a notorious Taliban commander, ran and won in Zabul
province.
Transitional Justice
In January 2005, the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission published
the results of its consultation with the Afghan people, which found
that more than 90 percent of those polled supported efforts to obtain justice
for the victims of the crimes of the past twenty-five years. In June, representatives
of the Afghan government and the international community met in
The Hague and agreed to pursue a plan for creating a transitional justice
process, beginning with commemoration of the victims of abuses and documentation
of their ordeals and then moving toward a system of accountability.
Parts of the plan were approved by President Karzai’s cabinet in October, but
the crucial decision on commencing an accountability process was delayed
until the convening of the newly formed parliament, which is dominated by
warlords.
Several cases under the doctrine of universal jurisdiction have proceeded outside
the country against Afghan human rights abusers living abroad. In July, a
U.K. court convicted Faryadi Zardad, a notorious warlord, of torturing
Afghan civilians between 1991 and 1996 and sentenced him to twenty years
in prison. Similarly, on October 14, a Dutch court convicted Hesamuddin
Hesam and Habibullah Jalalzoy, both high level members of KHAD,
Afghanistan’s infamous communist-era intelligence service, of engaging in torture and sentenced them to twelve years and nine years in prison, respectively.
Key International Actors
U.S. and coalition forces active in Afghanistan under Operation Enduring
Freedom since November 2001, continue to arbitrarily detain civilians and
use excessive force during arrests of non-combatants. Ordinary civilians
arrested in military operations are unable to challenge the legal basis for their
detention or obtain hearings before an adjudicative body. They have no
access to legal counsel. Generally, the United States does not comply with
legal standards applicable to its operations in Afghanistan, including the
Geneva Conventions and other applicable standards of international human
rights law. At least six detainees in U.S. custody in Afghanistan have been
killed since 2002. U.S. Department of Defense documents show that five of
the six deaths were homicides.
In late 2003 NATO took over the U.N.-mandated International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF). In 2005, some ten thousand NATO forces expanded
ISAF’s reach to western and central parts of the country. Areas where ISAF
operates show improved security. ISAF has promised to increase its presence
in the south and southeast but has not resolved how it will engage in counterinsurgency
activity not previously experienced by ISAF in the relatively
more peaceful parts of the country.
Bangladesh
Political and security conditions deteriorated in Bangladesh in 2005. The
country saw nearly daily bombings throughout the year. On August 17, more
than 400 bombs went off simultaneously in sixty-three of the country’s sixtyfour
districts, all of them targeted at government institutions. The country’s
human rights record, already of pressing concern, worsened, as Bangladesh’s
security forces continue to commit numerous abuses, including extra-judicial
killings, excessive use of force, and custodial torture. Human rights defenders
and journalists who report on the abuses continue to be harassed and intimidated.
A culture of impunity, reinforced by 2003 legislation largely shielding
the security forces from legal challenge, and by government praise for the
Rapid Action Batallion (RAB), a specialized “anti-crime” unit responsible for
many of the unlawful killings, means that abuses go largely uninvestigated
and unpunished.
Authorities also continue to do little to protect the rights of religious minority
communities, including Hindus and members of the Ahmadiyya community
(a heterodox religious group that considers itself part of the larger Muslim
world), even as Muslim extremist groups continue to target such groups.
Tensions between the two main political parties, the Bangladesh National
Party (BNP) and the Awami League (AL), continued, with frequent clashes
between the two sides, as well as with police.
Corruption remained a serious obstacle for reform. For the fifth year in a
row, Bangladesh headed Transparency International’s list as the most corrupt
country in the world.
Extrajudicial Killings and Custodial Torture
The BNP came into power in 2001 with an anti-crime mandate. In 2003, the
government established the RAB, an elite “anti-crime” unit comprised of
armed personnel from various security branches. Since the establishment of
RAB, there have been consistent allegations of a surge in extrajudicial killings
and custodial torture. Between January and October 2005, an estimated 300
persons were killed at the hands of the security forces, largely in so-called “encounter” killings. Of these killings, 223 were committed by the police and
other law enforcement agencies, and seventy-eight by RAB. RAB often operates
together with other armed units, such as the Bangladeshi Rifles, or paramilitary
units such as Cheeta and Cobra.
Human rights groups and journalists have documented many of these killings
and have demanded an inquiry into each death, but the government has
refused. The government defends the actions of RAB by stating that, since its
establishment, serious crime in Bangladesh has dropped by half. When the
European Parliament issued a strong resolution in April 2005 condemning
RAB, the government responded dismissively, arguing that “encounter
killings” happen in all parts of the world.
RAB and other security agencies have also been accused of engaging in torture
during custody and interrogation. For example, on July 15, 2005, members
of RAB at Jasimuddin road, Uttara sector-7, Dhaka, and of the RAB–1
Office at Uttara in Dhaka severely tortured a young man. This man had been
arrested for protesting the assault on an elderly man by plain-clothes RAB
agents on the street. On July 27, 2005, the Boalia police in Rajsahi District
tortured Azizur Rahman Shohel and his younger brother Atiquer Rahman
Jewel. The brothers were beaten with batons and given electric shocks. Both
were hospitalized. The police also reportedly asked for money from the boys’
family.
The government’s history of tolerating abuses is not new. Operation Clean
Heart, a nationwide anti-crime operation that ran from October 2002 to
January 2003, was marked by a severe disregard for the right to life and due
process of law. Some sixty people were killed in eighty-eight days, three
thousand were maimed or injured, and upwards of forty-five thousand were
arrested. On the day the government announced the end of Operation Clean
Heart, it passed an ordinance precluding lawsuits or prosecutions for human
rights violations committed during this period, shielding the armed forces
and police from any liability for their actions under the operation.
Persecution of Minority Communities
Bangladesh is a party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, which ensures the rights to freedom of religion and expression, but
has tolerated violent assaults by extremists on religious minority communities.
In January 2004, the government placed a ban on all Ahmadiyya publications,
in response to an ultimatum to the government by the Islami Okiya Jote
(IOJ) and the Khatme Nabuwat Movement (KNM) to declare that
Ahmadiyyas are not Muslims. The IOJ is a small coalition partners with the
BNP, while the KNM, is an extreme Islamist vigilante and pressure group.
The BNP government chose to save its coalition rather than defend the
rights of the Ahmadiyya. A court later suspended the ban, but Islamist parties
and organizations are threatening further legal challenge.
Attacks on Ahmadiyya homes and places of worship continued in 2005.
Although human rights groups and journalists documented these attacks, the
government to date has not prosecuted any of the responsible individuals and
has not disciplined police who failed to protect victims.
Members of other religious minorities have also come under attack.
Throughout 2005, there were persistent reports of abductions and forced
conversions of minorities, and destruction and desecration of religious sites.
There were also many reports of forced evictions of Hindus from their properties.
In some cases of reported rape of Hindu girls, the police refused to
pursue investigations.
Over the last few years, as religious intolerance across Bangladesh has
increased, several hundred thousand Hindus, Buddhists, and Christians have
fled the country.
Human Rights Defenders, Journalists, and Opposition Voices
The climate of intimidation has extended to other groups who document or
speak against the government’s actions. Opposition voices are increasingly at
risk.
On January 27, 2005, senior AL member and former Finance Minister Shah
Abu Mohamed Shamsul Kibria was assassinated. Attacks on opposition AL
members are not new: Sheikh Hasina, the leader of the AL, survived a 2004
grenade and bomb blast during which twenty of AL’s party members were
killed. Other senior and junior AL members have been harassed and threatened.
On August 8, 2005, two human rights activists were attacked in public by
persons who identified themselves as BNP members. The victims, Rabindra
Ghosh and Ashok Taru Saha, were returning from conducting an investigation
into a case of torture against a member of the Ahmadiyya community.
Journalists face tremendous risks in Bangladesh. For the third year running,
Reporters Sans Frontieres reported that Bangladesh was the country with the
largest number of journalists physically attacked or threatened with death.
The government showed little interest in protecting journalists, while
Islamist groups stepped up their intimidation of the independent news media.
HIV/AIDS
This is a critical moment in the fight against HIV/AIDS in Bangladesh. The
number of reported cases is growing, India and neighboring countries in
Southeast Asia face major outbreaks, and there is a good deal of migration
across national borders. Rather than insisting on rights-based measures
shown effective in combating the further spread of HIV/AIDS, the government
both commits and condones rights violations likely to do just the opposite.
Sex workers and men who have sex with men—politically vulnerable groups
at heightened risk of HIV infection—are regularly abducted, raped, gangraped,
beaten, and subjected to extortion by the police and by powerful criminals.
Such abuses facilitate spread of the disease. The police have dealt a further
blow to Bangladesh’s anti-AIDS efforts by beating and arresting members
of such groups who work on HIV/AIDS outreach and education among
their peers. Official complaints filed by victims are largely ignored and sometimes
ridiculed.
Key International Actors
Key members of the international community, such as the United States and
the European Union, have expressed growing concern over the violence in
the country. In particular, the international community has been pointing to
the government’s failure to take action against militant groups. Only after the
August bombings did the government appear to take the threat seriously. It
initiated a massive crackdown, which resulted in an estimated eight hundred
arrests. The most significant arrestee, Mufti Abdul Hannan, reportedly has
admitted to ties with violent fundamentalist international Islamic groups.
The E.U. parliament issued a strong resolution in April 2005, pointedly stating
that the RAB was responsible for extra-judicial killings while engaged in
anti-crime operations. The United States has recently taken the lead on
expressing concern at the situation in Bangladesh. In October 2005, sixteen
U.S. lawmakers raised the issue of increasing political violence and recommended
sending a U.N. team to investigate the allegations. India expressed
its concerns as well and, in February 2005, refused to attend the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation summit which was to be hosted in
Dhaka, citing, inter alia, concerns over the security situation there.
Burma
Despite promises of political reform and national reconciliation, Burma’s
authoritarian military government, the State Peace and Development
Council (SPDC), continues to operate a strict police state and drastically
restricts basic rights and freedoms. It has suppressed the democratic movement
represented by Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, under detention since May 30,
2003, and has used internationally outlawed tactics in ongoing conflicts with
ethnic minority groups.
Hundreds of thousands of people, most of them from ethnic minority
groups, continue to live precariously as internally displaced people. More
than two million have fled to neighboring countries, in particular Thailand,
where they face difficult circumstances as asylum seekers or illegal immigrants.
The removal of Prime Minister General Khin Nyunt in October
2004 has reinforced hard-line elements within the SPDC and resulted in
increasing hostility directed at democracy movements, ethnic minority
groups, and international agencies.
Lack of Progress on Democracy or Human Rights
The junta’s pledges of democratic reform and respect for human rights continue
to be empty rhetoric. The 2003 “road map” for a transition to democracy
in Burma has made no progress. The National Convention to discuss
and promulgate principles for a new constitution has continued to flounder.
The convention met again from February to March 2005, but did not include
representatives from the National League for Democracy (NLD) and several
other ethnic nationality political parties which won seats in the 1990 elections.
At this writing, delegates handpicked by the SPDC were due to resume
their convention on December 5, 2005, in Nyaunghnapin camp in Hnawby
township outside Rangoon.
The SPDC continues to ban virtually all opposition political activity and to
persecute democracy and human rights activists. Almost all offices of prodemocracy
and ethnic nationality political parties remain closed, except for the NLD headquarters in Rangoon which has been put under heavy surveillance.
Freedom of expression, assembly, and association are still not respected.
Despite the release of 249 political prisoners in July 2005, the detention and
arrest of people who express their political opinions continues, including five
opposition Members of Parliament elected in the 1990 elections. More than
1,100 people are currently imprisoned for their political beliefs. Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi continues to be held in virtually solitary confinement without
access to newspapers, telephones, or any correspondence.
Three bombs detonated in central Rangoon on May 7, 2005. Official figures
put the death toll at eleven, with 162 wounded. The junta used this incident
to denounce and put pressure on the exiled All Burma Students Democratic
Front (ABSDF), the National Coalition Government of the Union of Burma
(NCGUB) and other Thai-based anti-government groups, though no evidence
was provided implicating these groups in the blasts.
Failed Reconciliation Efforts with and Continued Violence
against Ethnic Groups
While seventeen ceasefire agreements have brought an end to the fighting in
some areas of Burma, they have not resulted in political settlements or significant
improvements in the daily lives of villagers. In 2005 there was an
increase in government military presence in certain ceasefire areas, and the
political concerns of ethnic communities appear to have been left unaddressed
in the deliberations of the National Convention.
Some ethnic groups are now reconsidering ceasefire agreements, while some
ceasefires have already broken down. The arrests of several Shan leaders,
including the President of the Shan State Peace Council (SSPC) and the
Chairman of the Shan Nationalities League for Democracy (SNLD) in early
2005, led to the withdrawal of the Shan State National Army (SSNA) from
its ceasefire agreement with the government. Peace talks between the government
and the Karen National Union (KNU) also stalled in 2005 as Burmese forces continued to attack and destroy villages populated by Karen
civilians or to uproot them from their homes to gain control over their land.
Brutal and protracted fighting between the military government and various
ethnic groups seeking autonomy and freedom has been consistent and ongoing.
The SPDC’s campaigns of forcibly relocating minority ethnic groups has
destroyed nearly three thousand villages, particularly in areas of active ethnic
insurgency and areas targeted for infrastructure development. Forced relocation
of entire villages continues.
The Burmese government has refused international access to areas of ongoing
conflict, cutting off humanitarian assistance to internally displaced persons
(IDPs) in violation of international humanitarian law. Hundreds of
thousands of villagers have been forced to work as porters or laborers for little
or no pay. Those who refuse to provide mandatory labor are often threatened
with prosecution, or exhorted to pay a fee in lieu of their duties. Those
who do not properly carry out their tasks are often shot or beaten to death.
Anyone found to have made what the government deems “false complaints”
to the International Labor Organization (ILO) can face prosecution.
Government armed forces continue to engage in summary executions, torture,
and the rape of women and girls. Children continue to be forcibly
recruited by government armed forces.
Key International Actors
International efforts to assist the people of Burma have continued to meet
serious obstacles and hostility from the SPDC.
The U.N. special envoy has not been allowed to visit Burma since March
2004, while the special rapporteur on human rights has not been able to visit
the country since November 2003.
Amidst government-organized anti-ILO rallies, the ILO representative in
Rangoon received death threats. In October 2005, the Burmese Labor
Minister told the special adviser to the ILO’s Director General that the government had decided to leave the ILO. The future of the ILO presence in
Burma is now in doubt.
U.N. programs tasked to provide humanitarian assistance for the people of
Burma continued to face challenges from bureaucratic hurdles, corruption,
and extensive restrictions on both travel to project sites and the import of
supplies and equipment. In 2005 the Global Fund to Fight AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Malaria withdrew its U.S.$98 million program on the
ground that “its grants to the country cannot be managed in a way that
ensures effective program implementation.”
Efforts to place the situation in Burma on the agenda of the U.N. Security
Council gained momentum in late 2005 with the publication of “Threat to
the Peace: A Call for the U.N. Security Council to Act in Burma,” which was
jointly commissioned by former president of the Czech Republic Vaclav
Havel and South African Nobel Peace Prize Laureate Bishop Desmond Tutu.
It called for an urgent, new, and multilateral diplomatic initiative at the
United Nations Security Council to bring about change in Burma.
The United States and European Union maintained sanctions on Burma. In
July 2005 the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), embarrassed
by the junta in Rangoon and under pressure from the U.S. and E.U., successfully
pressured the Burmese government to skip its turn as ASEAN’s rotating
chairman in 2006. ASEAN still faces difficulties in convincing the SPDC to
fulfill promises made to other members on the commencement of genuine
political reforms, national reconciliation, and the release of political prisoners
including Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. China, India, and Thailand continued to
offer economic and political support to the SPDC. Within ASEAN,
Thailand continues to be the SPDC’s closest ally, undercutting other international
efforts to pressure Burma to reform.
To improve relations with the SPDC, in 2005 the Thai government adopted
an increasingly hard-line stance towards Burmese refugees, asylum-seekers,
and migrants. While continuing to put pressure on exiled pro-democracy
activists and human rights advocates, the Thai government struck another
major blow in March 2005 against Burmese opposition groups with a new policy requiring all Burmese refugees registered with U.N. High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to move to camps along the Burmese
border, where they are cut off from the outside world. Thailand also continues
to expel thousands of illegal immigrants to Burma every month. The
Thai army has stated that Shan asylum seekers will not be allowed to cross
the border.
Cambodia
2005 saw a sharp reversal in progress Cambodia had made in observing
human rights and developing political pluralism since the signing of the 1991
Paris Peace Accords. The political opposition was effectively dismantled with
the arrest or threat of arrest of opposition parliamentarians. Activists and
journalists speaking out about fraudulent confiscation of farmers’ land, illegal
logging, or a controversial border treaty with Vietnam were arrested, physically
attacked, threatened with death, or prosecuted and imprisoned on spurious
charges of defamation. Continuing the trend from 2003, authorities dispersed
public demonstrations, at times using excessive force. Impunity for
perpetrators of human rights abuses continued. Political trials demonstrated
the government’s ongoing control, interference, and intimidation in the work
of the courts. Despite an agreement between the United Nations and
Cambodia to bring senior Khmer Rouge leaders to justice, it became increasingly
doubtful that a tribunal established within the Cambodian court system
could ensure fair and impartial trials.
Political Intimidation
The government of Prime Minister Hun Sen moved to silence dissent in
2005, targeting not only the opposition Sam Rainsy Party (SRP), but independent
media, and civil society. Rights activists, union leaders, and opposition
party members fled the country or went into hiding. In October Hun
Sen threatened to abolish the monarchy.
The assault on the SRP began in February when the National Assembly lifted
the immunity of three opposition parliamentarians. SRP president Sam
Rainsy and Chea Poch fled the country and remained in self-imposed exile
during the year in the face of criminal defamation suits. Cheam Channy was
arrested, initially on allegations of forming an illegal rebel army, and on
August 8 he was sentenced by the National Military Court to seven years’
imprisonment for organized crime and fraud. The judge blatantly prevented
Channy’s lawyers from presenting a proper defense.
Legal action, notably prosecution for defamation or incitement, is increasingly
used to obstruct the work of human rights defenders and other civil society
figures. At least six critics of the controversial new border treaty with
Vietnam faced criminal defamation suits initiated by Hun Sen, including
Rong Chhun, president of the Cambodian Independent Teachers
Association, and Chea Mony, who replaced his murdered brother, Chea
Vichea, as head of the Free Trade Union Workers of the Kingdom of
Kampuchea.
The Judiciary
The courts—widely viewed as corrupt, incompetent, and biased—continue to
be used to advance political agendas, silence critics, and strip people of their
land. In May 2005, the prime minister strengthened his control over the judiciary
by placing the Supreme Council of the Magistracy (SCM)—a disciplinary
body for the judiciary that is meant to be independent—under the
Ministry of Justice.
In addition to the Cheam Channy case, above, a second high-profile political
trial concluded at the beginning of August 2005, when two men were sentenced
to twenty years’ imprisonment on charges of murdering union leader
Chea Vichea. The decision was based not on eyewitness testimony or forensic
evidence, but on a confession—later withdrawn—extracted after one of
the defendants was tortured by police.
The Cambodian Bar Association (CBA) remains subject to political manipulation
and continuing controversy over its 2004 elections. In July 2005, the
Appeals Court reinstated incumbent Ky Tech, supported by the ruling
Cambodian Peoples Party, as CBA president following intimidation and legal
wrangling aimed at ousting elected president Suon Visal.
Freedom of Association and Assembly
Threats to human rights defenders have intensified, with grass roots activists
and human rights workers being subjected to harassment, intimidation,
restrictions of movement, legal action, and physical violence. Authorities continue to impose restrictions on public demonstrations instituted after
anti-Thai riots in 2003.
Conflicts over land rights in 2005 went hand-in-hand with attacks against
activists defending those rights. The potential for unrest has intensified as
villagers are increasingly dispossessed of their land, often through violence or
threats by officially backed forces. In March, police and military police in
Banteay Meanchey fired into a crowd of villagers protesting forced eviction
from their land, killing at least five. Charges were later dropped against the
police officers who allegedly fired on the villagers. Police used excessive force
in dispersing other protests in 2005, including demonstrations in June by
ethnic Pnong in Mondolkiri protesting land confiscation for the Wuzhishan
concession, and a sit-down strike by Montagnard asylum seekers protesting
deportation in July (see below).
In an ominous development for international advocates working in
Cambodia, in July immigration officials refused entry to foreign staff of
Global Witness, an international nongovernmental organization (NGO) that
has exposed abuses in Cambodia’s forestry sector. Cambodian staff members
were threatened, and the group closed its Phnom Penh office.
Freedom of Expression
Opposition media was effectively silenced in 2005. Under threat of litigation,
arrest, or physical attack, journalists increasingly engage in self-censorship.
Only one opposition newspaper and radio station, and one independent radio
station, continue to operate. In September a Radio Free Asia reporter was hit
and dragged by a vehicle with government license plates while reporting on
illegal logging in Ratanakiri. In October, authorities arrested Mom Sonando,
director of the independent Beehive radio station, after he aired an interview
with a critic of Hun Sen’s policy towards Vietnam.
Prisons and Torture
Torture continues to be used by police officers, particularly those attempting
to extract confessions from suspects in detention. In March 2005, police opened fire on convicts during a prison escape from CC3 prison in Kompong
Cham. Nineteen prisoners and one warden were killed and many wounded.
Rights groups later reported torture of prisoners believed responsible for the
break.
Trafficking
Government officials, police, and military continue to operate and profit
from trafficking of women and children. The Cambodian government has
failed to prosecute perpetrators of a December 2004 attack on a safe house
operated by the NGO Afesip, in which more than eighty trafficking victims
were abducted. In a report issued in February 2005, the government stated
the girls had left the shelter voluntarily.
Refugee Rights
Vietnam’s repressive policies against indigenous minority Montagnards continue
to generate a flow of refugees into Cambodia. A January tripartite
agreement between the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), Cambodia and Vietnam was heavily criticized by international
and Cambodian rights groups for authorizing forced repatriation of recognized
refugees who refused resettlement abroad, and providing inadequate
monitoring of returnees in Vietnam. Access by UNHCR and NGOs to asylum
seekers in border areas remains difficult. Provincial authorities continue
to forcibly return Montagnard asylum seekers to Vietnam, including four
from a UNHCR shelter in Phnom Penh in January 2005 and ninety-four
from a shelter in July. In 2005, officials harassed and threatened to arrest
Cambodian villagers suspected of providing food or assistance to asylum
seekers who were not yet under the protection of UNHCR.
Key International Actors
In 2005 Hun Sen warned donors not to interfere in rights issues, stating that
“international pressure only keeps detainees behind bars longer.” The international
community appears to have heeded the warnings, offering little tangible influence on human rights issues. At the annual Consultative Group
meeting in June 2005, donors pledged U.S.$504 million in aid.
In April 2005, Peter Leuprecht, then the U.N. secretary-general’s special
representative for Cambodia, delivered a blistering attack before the U.N.
Commission on Human Rights on Cambodia’s dismal human rights record.
In July he condemned the use of electric batons by Cambodian police on
Montagnard asylum seekers, and called for cancellation of the Wuzhishan
land concession. In November, Kenyan constitutional lawyer Yash Ghai was
appointed by the secretary-general to replace Leuprecht, upon the latter’s
resignation. During a visit in August 2005, the U.N. special rapporteur on
the right to adequate housing criticized officials and military for land-grabbing.
The International Labour Organization criticized the government’s
anti-union activity, notably its concealment of information regarding the
assassination of union leaders. The World Bank exposed evidence of government
corruption, and threatened in January 2005 to freeze U.S.$297 million
in loans, but nonetheless continued to provide new loans.
As foreign governments pledged their required share of the U.S.$56 million
budget of a Cambodia-based, internationally-assisted tribunal under
Cambodian law to bring Khmer Rouge leaders to justice (as agreed in 2004),
Cambodia in 2005 reneged on most of its own financial commitment of
U.S.$13 million, stating it could only pay U.S.$1.5 million. Japan continued
as Cambodia’s lead donor and pledged a major share of funding for the
Khmer Rouge Tribunal. Support for the Khmer Rouge Tribunal was also
pledged by France, the United Kingdom, Australia, Canada, Norway,
Germany, Netherlands, Denmark, Austria, Sweden, South Korea,
Luxembourg and India.
In 2005, the European Parliament condemned the crackdown on the SRP,
human trafficking, violations of freedom of expression, and Cheam Channy’s
imprisonment. China, one of Cambodia’s most important donors and
investors, refrained from commenting on domestic politics or rights abuses.
In May, Cambodia’s National Assembly approved a bilateral immunity agreement
with the United States that exempts U.S. citizens from the authority of the International Criminal Court, whose treaty Cambodia ratified in 2003. In
response, in August, the United States lifted its ban on military aid to
Cambodia. However, the United States. announced sanctions against
Cambodia for lack of progress on trafficking issues.
China
While many governments have praised recent developments in China, the
country remains a one-party state that does not hold national elections, has
no independent judiciary, leads the world in executions, aggressively censors
the Internet, bans independent trade unions, and represses minorities such as
Tibetans, Uighurs, and Mongolians.
The Chinese Communist Party (CCP) still has not come to terms with the
1989 Tiananmen massacre, refusing to publish information about the number
of persons killed, injured, “disappeared,” or arrested or to admit that the
attack on peaceful protestors was a mistake.
In spite of its socialist roots, China faces serious challenges stemming from
growing disparities between rich and poor, and urban and rural populations.
Along with official corruption, such disparities in 2005 fueled a rise in
protests and demonstrations from workers, farmers, people forcibly evicted
from their homes, victims of police abuse, and HIV/AIDS activists, among
others. According to official figures, there were seventy-four thousand
protests in China in 2004 involving 3.5 million people, up from fifty-eight
thousand protests in 2003. China’s leaders’ preoccupation with social stability
has increased accordingly.
Government and CCP leaders have responded to the increasing social mobilization
with a multi-faceted crackdown on demonstrators and their allies and
with repression of means for disseminating information and organizing
protests, particularly the Internet. Apprehension that so-called hostile foreign
forces are bent on destabilizing China has led authorities to censor incoming
and outgoing news and personal communications across borders and to
impose long prison sentences on academics, intellectuals, and journalists for
expressing political opinions challenging official views. Plans by some officials
to ease regulations and give more room to civil society, including grassroots
groups, appear to have been shelved.
There has been some progress. In March 2004, China amended its constitution
to read “The State respects and protects human rights.” Although the constitution is not directly enforceable, the amendment does offer some hope
that human rights will be legally protected. The term human rights has now
made its way into common discourse in China.
China’s Legal System
New laws and regulations in 2005 detailing the parameters of permitted religious
activities and limiting the formation of news organizations are the latest
manifestations of China’s ongoing attempt to position itself as a society ruled
by law. Although improvements in some areas, particularly in commercial
law, are noticeable, judicial processes are still compromised by political interference,
reliance on coerced confessions, legal procedures weighted in favor
of the state, closed trials, and administrative sentencing.
Convictions on charges of “subversion” and of “leaking state secrets” continue
to result from vaguely-worded state security and state secrets laws. Shi
Tao, an established journalist, was sentenced to a ten-year prison term in
April 2005 for “leaking state secrets abroad.” The secret was a directive banning
journalists from reporting on the presence of overseas dissidents seeking
to commemorate the fifteenth anniversary of the Tiananmen massacre. In
September, Zheng Yichun was sentenced to a seven-year prison term for
“incitement to subversion.” Evidence included articles he had written for foreign
publications and websites and for his association with the Epoch Times, a
publication allied with Falungong, a spiritual group banned in China as a
cult.
Plans to revise China’s Criminal Procedure Law proceeded slowly in 2005.
Long-discussed proposals to add a judicial component to reeducation
through labor regulations appear to have stalled.
Restrictions on Freedom of Expression
Critics have labeled China’s ever more sophisticated system of controls on
the Internet the “Great Firewall of China.” More than sixty individuals were
imprisoned at this writing for peaceful expression over the Internet.
In early January 2005, the head of the Publicity Department of the Chinese
Communist Party Central Committee signaled that controls over publishing,
the Internet, and short messaging systems (SMS) would be significantly
tightened to ensure social stability. In September, the Ministry of
Information Industry and the State Council introduced new regulations on
Internet news which prevent distribution of any uncensored version of a news
event or commentary. Internet portals, e-mail systems, and SMS were all
affected.
More than 103 million Internet users face sophisticated filters, registration of
all personal domestic websites, and personal responsibility for all content.
The government closes websites without warning. In October, two
Mongolian sites and Yannan, which tracked a rural protest, were shut down.
Internet café users, after presenting identification, are issued user numbers
which make it easy to track their web use. In February, education officials cut
off hundreds of thousands of users by decreeing that only enrolled, on-site
college students, using their real names, could access university Internet message
boards.
In an increasing number of instances, global Internet companies have been
complicit in the repression, insisting they must abide by the rules and regulations
of the countries in which they operate. Google does not list links to
sites banned in China; certain words may not be used as titles for Microsoft
blogs; and Yahoo!, which three years ago signed a Public Pledge on Self-discipline
for the Chinese Internet Industry, provided information that helped
Chinese authorities arrest Shi Tao (see above).
New restrictions have affected traditional media. A 2005 regulation now
obliges Chinese reporters not affiliated with official media outlets to secure a
license, obtainable only after attending classes, passing a written examination,
and submitting an essay reflecting the ideological training they received.
Certain topics are taboo. In 2005, mainland journalists could not file their
own stories about the death of Zhao Ziyang, former premier of China, the
anti-Japanese protests, the election of a new Pope, or the incidence of bird
flu in China.
Chinese assistants and activists who work for or assist foreign journalists run
severe risks. In October 2005, local thugs savagely beat Lu Banglie, who
worked with residents of Taishi village, Guangdong province, to unseat a village
chief they accused of corruption. Lu was helping a journalist from The
Guardian, a British newspaper.
In July 2005, the State Administration of Radio, Film, and Television banned
regional broadcasters from cooperating with overseas media organizations. In
August, the Culture Ministry announced that new applications for licenses to
import print and electronic publications would not be accepted. To ensure
censorship worked, the police announced a regional system of hotlines for
reporting illegal publications.
Labor Rights
Workers in China may not form autonomous unions. Officials insist that the
Party-run All-China Federation of Trade Unions (ACFTU) sufficiently
ensures their rights, in spite of unsafe and unhealthy working
conditions––according to official figures, sixteen million enterprises are
“toxic” and over two hundred million workers suffer from 115 occupational
diseases––unpaid wages, pensions lost when state-owned enterprises go bankrupt
or are privatized, and forced and uncompensated overtime.
During 2005, workers repeatedly took to the streets. Some went to prison. Li
Xintao, formerly a worker at the Huamei Garment Company in Shandong
province, was sentenced to a five-year term in May 2005 for “disturbing public
order [and] government institutions.” He had tried to collect wages owed
by a bankrupt state-owned enterprise. In October, police detained eight
workers leading a protest against the closure of a steel plant in Chongqing.
Miners and a “floating population” of rural laborers have suffered disastrous
accident rates. In spite of new policies, official figures report that 4,228 people
lost their lives in 2,337 coal mining accidents from January through
September 2005.
Religious Belief and Expression
The Regulations on Religious Affairs that went into effect in March 2005
codified religious policy in effect since 1982. All congregations, mosques,
temples, churches, and monasteries must be registered to be legal. However,
registration brings vetting and ongoing monitoring of religious personnel,
seminary applicants, and publications; scrutiny of financial records and membership
rolls; and veto power over group activities. Failure to register renders
a group illegal and subject to closure, fines, and criminal sanctions.
Particularly troublesome are limits on large-scale religious gatherings and on
the number of religious sites in a given area; acceptance of “guidance, supervision
and inspection” by “relevant departments of the local people’s government;”
and a requirement that religious bodies “safeguard unification of the
country, unity of all nationalities, and stability of society.” This last requirement
is vague enough to give the state control of any and all religious teachings
and is rigorously enforced in the Tibet Autonomous Region, in the
Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region, and in other areas with large concentrations
of non-Han populations.
Equally troubling is increased vetting of relationships between Chinese religious
bodies and their foreign counterparts. Officials continue to express
fears that international religious ties are a façade for Western infiltration.
The new policies have been reflected in round-ups of non-registered
Christians attending training sessions. Most are released quickly, some after
paying fines. Despite statements suggesting accommodation between China
and the Vatican, at this writing some forty Catholic clergy were being
detained, imprisoned, or otherwise restricted from freely moving about.
Petitioners––The Xinfang System
Under China’s unique petitioning system, citizens dissatisfied with decisions
by local officials or courts may write letters of complaint or appear in person
at petition bureaus, and they may appeal to petition offices in regional capitals and even in Beijing. Repression of petitioners has increased as the number
of petitions has grown.
Aggrieved parties have learned that public pressure forces officials to pay
attention to issues such as corruption, forced evictions, and police abuse, and
millions have taken to filing petitions. Local and regional officials whose
careers and income could be jeopardized by popular expressions of discontent
have, in turn, relied on ever harsher measures to disperse petitioners, frequently
employing “retrievers,” who use force to break up protests and
forcibly return home petitioners congregating in Beijing or in provincial capitals.
Although petitions are rarely effective, the growth in number and increased
presence of petitioners in major urban areas has forced central authorities to
confront systemic problems. New amendments to petitioning regulations, in
effect since May 1, 2005, mandate punishment for those who retaliate against
petitioners and for officials who fail to carry out their duties. The same regulations,
however, restrict petitioner activism.
Xinjiang and the “War on Terror”
Chinese authorities appear determined to eradicate an independent cultural
identity, and the religious beliefs closely intertwined with that identity, for
Uighurs, a Turkic-speaking Muslim population in China’s Xinjiang Uighur
Autonomous Region. The campaign, which extends to personal behavior and
appearance, includes vetting of literature, destruction of mosques, and discharge
of Uighur cadres unwilling to forcibly implement religious directives.
Authorities also have fostered extensive Chinese migration into the region
leading to economic disparities favoring the newcomers.
Under current policies, children under eighteen may not receive religious
instruction and college students fear reprisals, including expulsion, for overt
religious expression. “Strike Hard” campaigns subject Uighurs who express
“separatist” tendencies to quick, secret, and summary trials, sometimes
accompanied by mass sentencing rallies. Imposition of the death penalty is
common.
After September 11, 2001, China used the “war on terrorism” to justify its
policies, making no distinction between the handful of separatists who condone
violence and those who desire genuine autonomy or a separate state. In
fact, the authorities treat cultural expressions of identity as equivalent to violent
agitation. In February 2005, Uighur writer Nurmemet Yasin was sentenced
to a ten-year prison term for publishing “The Wild Pigeon,” an
alleged separatist tract. Korash Huseyin, editor of the journal that published
the story, is serving a three-year term.
Tibet
Chinese authorities view the Dalai Lama, in exile in India since 1959, as the
linchpin of the effort to separate Tibet from China and view Tibetan
Buddhist belief as supportive of his efforts. Thus, the government limits the
number of monasteries and monks, vets all applicants for the monkhood,
interferes with the selection of monastic leaders, prohibits performance of
traditional rites, and conducts ongoing reeducation campaigns centered on
opposition to the Dalai Lama. In July 2005, the chairman of the Tibetan
Autonomous Region announced that China would choose the next Dalai
Lama.
Suspected separatists are routinely imprisoned; at this writing such individuals
included two monks from Sichuan who received eleven-year prison sentences,
probably in early 2005, for hoisting the banned Tibetan flag. Chinese
authorities have long refused to allow access to the boy the Dalai Lama identified
in 1995 as the new Panchen Lama (the second most important personage
in Tibetan Buddhism), instead keeping him under virtual house arrest
most likely in Beijing. In his place, Chinese authorities recognized another
boy as the Panchen Lama and in June 2005 in Sichuan they ordered monks
to come out in force to greet him. Authorities held several suspected “troublemakers”
in preventive detention in advance of the visit.
In January 2005, Nepal abruptly closed the Tibetan Refugee Welfare Office
in Kathmandu, jeopardizing a long-standing agreement under which
Tibetans hoping to reach India could wait in Nepal until the office of the
U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) cleared them. Although Tibetans in Nepal have met the government’s conditions for replacing the
office, Nepali authorities have stonewalled. Pressure from China is assumed
to have been behind the closing and the refusal to accept another Tibetan
organization as a replacement.
Schools in Tibet limit use of the Tibetan language and neglect to teach students
Tibetan history and culture. Officials do not tolerate privately-run
Tibetan schools.
HIV/AIDS
Although Chinese authorities have announced new steps to address the country’s
burgeoning HIV/AIDS crisis, they continue to obstruct the efforts of
activists and grassroots organizations to contribute to prevention and education
among vulnerable groups and to organize care-giving for those infected.
Regulations have thwarted activists’ attempts to register their organizations
and to raise funds, while Internet censorship has restricted the kind of information
available to individuals at high-risk. Activists who attempt to bring
problems related to the crisis to media attention have been particularly vulnerable
to harassment.
Forced Evictions
With courts offering little protection, urban and rural residents have banded
together to protest collusion between developers and local officials who
forcibly evict them from their urban homes or, without offering adequate
compensation, sell off the land they have been farming. Residents rarely win,
in part because land is not individually owned and in part because local
judges owe their jobs to local government and Party leaders. A 2003 constitutional
amendment that protects “lawful private property” has not brought
redress.
Protest organizers, such as Song Shitai in Shanghai, face intimidation and
violence. The city forcibly relocated fifty-five thousand families in 2004.
With building for the 2010 World Expo already underway, the 2005 tally is
expected to be even higher. In March 2005, Chinese officials announced plans to move five hundred thousand families to the outskirts of Beijing in
order to protect the environment. In September, they announced that twelve
“shabby” villages near 2008 Olympic sites would be demolished.
Hong Kong
When Hong Kong became a Special Autonomous Region within the People’s
Republic of China in 1997 under the principle of “one country, two systems,”
it was promised a “high degree of autonomy.” The Hong Kong government’s
October 2005 proposal for constitutional reform, ostensibly an incremental
step toward “universal suffrage,” failed to mention how and when Hong
Kong’s citizens would achieve that goal.
There is no indication that Beijing, which reserves to itself the right to veto
any proposed electoral change and to interpret the Basic Law, Hong’s Kong’s
mini-constitution, will support any initiative to further “one-person, onevote”
democracy in Hong Kong. At the first meeting of its kind between
Hong Kong’s pro-democracy legislators and Guangdong provincial officials,
sharp disagreement erupted over the issue.
Human Rights Defenders
China has never tolerated independent monitoring and reporting of human
rights abuses. Lawyers and activists who use Chinese law to assist rights victims
are particularly at risk. Since August 2005, officials in Shandong
province have confined Chen Guangcheng, a blind local farmer, to his home
and tolerated his repeated beatings by local thugs. Chen had been working
with Beijing-based lawyers to prepare a suit against local officials who committed
human rights abuses during enforcement of China’s family planning
policy.
Later in August, China closed down the Empowerment and Rights Institute
and, for a time, restricted the freedom of Hou Wenzhou, its founder. The
organization had been advising farmers and petitioners about their rights.
Yang Maodong (more commonly known as Guo Feixiong), a lawyer who
assisted Taishi villagers (see above), was formally arrested on October 4,
2005. He was first detained in September on suspicion of gathering crowds
to disrupt social order.
In November 2005, using a thinly veiled administrative pretext, authorities
ordered Gao Zhisheng to close his law firm for one year or risk restriction on
his personal freedom. Gao’s firm had taken on sensitive cases involving labor
issues, cyberdissidents, Falungong and religious practitioners, and the case of
Yang Maodong.
HIV/AIDS activists, as mentioned above, have been routinely harassed,
detained, and roughed up, but to date, officials have permitted some of their
organizations to stay open so long as they operated within governmentenforced
strictures.
Key International Actors
China has taken an increasingly active role in international affairs in recent
years, in a number of cases blocking independent U.N. investigations into
country situations, asserting that the issues under discussion are “the internal
affairs” of that country.
At the U.N. Security Council, China was one of several countries initially
unwilling to refer the situation in the Darfur region of Sudan to the
International Criminal Court in 2005. In the end, rather than veto the measure,
China abstained and the referral was made. China reportedly also has
used its position on the council’s Sanctions Committee for Darfur to impede
identification of individuals responsible for arms trade into and offensive military
flights over Darfur.
China also has played an important role in blocking the Security Council
from addressing systematic human rights abuses by Burma’s military government.
China is Burma’s largest investor and supplier of economic and military
aid.
In May 2005, two weeks after the Uzbek army killed hundreds of civilians in
Andijan, Uzbekistan, the Chinese government greeted Uzbek’s president in
Beijing with a twenty-one-gun salute and failed to endorse calls for an independent
international investigation into the Andijan violence. The Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, composed of Russia, China, and four Central
Asian states, characterized the Andijan incident as a terrorist plot.
The Chinese government refuses to cooperate with the U.N. special rapporteur
on North Korea and refuses to allow the office of the U.N. High
Commissioner for Refugees access to border areas where most North
Koreans reside.
In 2005, the presidents of China and the United States met briefly in New
York in August and in Beijing in mid-November. President Hu also met with
Premier Paul Martin in Canada and with Prime Minister Tony Blair, representing
the E.U., in Beijing and later in London. Although President Bush,
in a speech in Kyoto, Japan on November 17, prodded China to extend political
and religious freedoms and to embrace democracy, his Beijing agenda
was long on economic and security concerns and short on human rights.
Other Western governments’ preoccupations were similar. Exchanges with
China over human rights have been largely relegated to ineffective bilateral
dialogues.
The United States did not table a resolution on China’s human rights practices
at the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in 2005, apparently
in exchange for China’s willingness to cooperate with U.N. human
rights mechanisms, among other steps. China extended an invitation to the
U.N. special rapporteur on torture in 2005 but at this writing still had not
extended one to the special rapporteur on religious freedom.
Following his visit to China in October 2005, World Bank President Paul
Wolfowitz singled out two non-economic factors, rule of law and participation
of civil society, as important for economic development. Both are issues
with important human rights aspects. The Bank expects to lend China
between U.S.$1 billion to U.S. $1.5 billion a year for the next five years.
East Timor
Entering its fourth year of independence after a brutal twenty-five-year occupation
by Indonesia, East Timor continued generally to make progress in
human rights in 2005, although the pursuit of justice for past violations was
challenged. Most notably, East Timor established a Provedor’s office, similar
to an ombudsman institution in other countries. In May the United Nationsestablished
tribunal in East Timor, mandated to investigate and prosecute
serious crimes by Indonesian military and militia, shut down due to a lack of
international political and donor support. Two months earlier Indonesia and
East Timor had announced the formation of a Commission of Truth and
Friendship to address reconciliation between the two countries, with provisions
for amnesty even for perpetrators of the worst crimes.
The destruction inflicted by the occupation and by Indonesian troops withdrawing
following the U.N.-supervised independence referendum in 1999
continue to limit East Timor’s ability to consolidate its gains. But negotiations
with Australia over oil and gas revenue—although fraught with legal
difficulties—may yet yield a significant revenue flow for the impoverished
country.
Justice and Reconciliation
In May 2005, the U.N. tribunal in Dili (comprising the Serious Crimes
Investigation Unit and Special Panels for Serious Crimes) established to
investigate and prosecute serious crimes cases from 1999 (including the
killings of 1,400 East Timorese), shut down. As Human Rights Watch has
previously noted, important obstacles to justice remain for victims of the violence
that accompanied Indonesia’s rule and eventual withdrawal from East
Timor. In addition to the failure to prosecute the 1999 cases, there has been
no judicial accounting for previous atrocities committed during Indonesia’s
occupation.
During its six years in operation, the U.N. tribunal had convicted some East
Timorese militia and prepared indictments against more senior militia leaders
and high-level Indonesian officers. However, due to limitations on the tribunal’s powers to extradite indictees from Indonesia, no senior Indonesian
perpetrators had faced trial in Dili. Trials in Jakarta of senior Indonesian military
officers ended in acquittals for all. Only one East Timorese militia commander
was convicted, and he remains free pending appeal.
In February 2005, U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan announced the establishment
of a U.N. commission of experts to review the prosecution of serious
human rights violations committed in 1999 and make recommendations
to him with regard to possible future actions. The commission’s report to the
Secretary-General, published in July, found that the trials in Jakarta for
crimes committed in East Timor in 1999 were “manifestly inadequate,” and
showed “scant respect for or conformity to relevant international standards.”
The report cited the prosecution’s failure to make substantial use of available
evidence and of witnesses’ statements already gathered by Indonesia’s
Commission on Human Rights and the U.N. tribunal investigators. The
U.N. commission of experts recommended that Indonesia accept international
support to strengthen its prosecutorial capacity, and advised issuing a clear
six-month timetable to show progress on the commission’s recommendations.
The report also recommended that the U.N. Security Council extend and
strengthen the parallel justice process in East Timor, given that East Timor
had succeeded in prosecuting low-level militia members and preparing
indictments against others. As of November 2005 neither the Security
Council nor the Secretary-General had acted on any of the commission’s recommendations.
In March East Timor and Indonesia established their own joint body to look
into crimes committed in East Timor in 1999. The Commission of Truth
and Friendship (CTF) was set up to establish agreed-upon facts regarding the
events prior to and immediately after the 1999 referendum, with a view to
further promote reconciliation and friendship between Indonesia and East
Timor. The body was widely criticized by victims’ groups and civil society in
both countries for being unrepresentative of victims’ wishes for justice and
accountability, and for effectively promoting impunity. The U.N. commission
also expressed reservations about the CTF, noting that the truth commission’s
terms of reference, which include amnesty provisions even for perpetrators
of the worst crimes, “contradict[ed] international standards on denial of impunity for serious crimes.” Five Indonesian and five East
Timorese commissioners started their work in August.
The Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation in East Timor
(Comissao de Acolhimento, Verdade e Reconciliao de Timor Leste, CAVR)
is a national, independent, statutory authority mandated by law to undertake
truth-seeking, facilitate community reconciliation, report on its work and
findings, and make recommendations for further action. Complementing the
work of the (now-defunct) Serious Crimes Investigation Unit, the CAVR has
been largely successful in its initial efforts to promote national reconciliation
through national hearings on a wide range of issues, truth seeking, and public
community-based reconciliation processes—an ambitious task after twentyfive
years of violence in East Timor. The CAVR submitted its final report to
the president in October.
As Human Rights Watch has previously noted, East Timor’s judicial and
criminal institutions remain weak, under-resourced, and overburdened.
Consequently, many serious crimes, including rape and domestic violence,
are habitually referred to traditional customary law mechanisms, which lack
basic due process protections and regularly fail to provide justice for victims,
especially victims of sexual violence.
Police
Although the National Police Service of East Timor (Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste, PNTL) has had full responsibility for the country’s thirteen
districts since January 2004, it has not had adequate training or resources to
maintain law and order in a manner consistent with international human
rights standards. Reports continue of excessive use of force by police when
arresting suspects, and abuse and ill-treatment of detainees in police detention.
Internal police disciplinary mechanisms remain weak at addressing such
issues.
New Restrictions on Assembly
In late 2004 parliament passed a broadly worded Law on Freedom, Assembly
and Demonstration which violates international law and the East Timorese
constitution by restricting peoples’ right to demonstrate and voice peaceful
opposition to the head of state. The law introduces a prior notification
requirement for demonstrations, despite a provision in the constitution that
allows an unfettered right to hold assemblies “without a need for prior
authorization.”
Human Rights Defenders
East Timor’s parliament elected the country’s first Provedor in March 2005.
The Office of the Provedor has far-reaching powers to investigate and report
on complaints against government officials and institutions, including the
police. However, the Office does not have the power to make enforceable
decisions: It can only make recommendations to the relevant bodies such as
the police, offer to act as a mediator between the complainant(s) and representatives
of the public body involved, or refer a grievance to a competent
jurisdiction or other recourse mechanism. Although it can undertake investigations
without waiting for a citizen’s complaint, and does have the power to
order a person to appear for questioning, any recommendations can be disputed
or ignored. The Provedor was officially inaugurated and started work
in June 2005.
East Timor’s nongovernmental human rights defenders operated freely and
played an active role in lobbying the U.N. and government. There were no
attacks on human rights defenders in 2005.
Key International Actors
The U.N. peacekeeping mission finished its mandate in May 2005, and was
replaced by a smaller one-year political mission called the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL). Its core function is to continue to provide
capacity building support and advice to key government institutions,
with particular regard to the police service and Border Patrol Units. The U.N.’s Human Rights Unit provided training programs and technical support
for East Timorese nongovernmental organizations.
In April 2005, Indonesia’s President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono made his
first state visit to East Timor. A third meeting of the Indonesia-East Timor
joint ministerial commission followed in July. Unresolved issues between the
two countries continue to be negotiated through a series of bilateral talks,
including the official border demarcation, and how to resolve the ongoing
problems of East Timorese refugees and missing and separated children in
Indonesia. Thousands of East Timorese students continue to attend schools
and universities in Indonesia.
The World Bank has assisted East Timor since 1999 in rebuilding infrastructure,
stabilizing the economy, and supporting government institutions. The
Bank is supporting a multi-donor strategy to implement a National
Development Plan in coordination with the government. However, as
Human Rights Watch has previously noted, East Timor remains in desperate
need of long-term international financial assistance. It receives its largest
financial contributions from Japan, Portugal, the United Kingdom, the
European Union, the United States, and Australia.
India
The Congress Party-led coalition government elected in 2004 took some
important positive steps with respect to human rights in 2005. It established
a committee to review the Armed Forces Special Powers Act and has received
a report for review. For the first time, a prime minister from the Congress
Party has apologized for the 1984 anti-Sikh riots. During talks with rebel
groups in September, the government promised to ensure an end to human
rights abuses by troops deployed in Indian-administered Kashmir. For the
first time, the Indian army in Kashmir apologized in July for its actions after
troops killed three boys, mistaking them for militants. New legislation may
strengthen the right to information, rights over land, and minimum employment
guarantees.
Some problems persisted, however, and new problematic issues emerged.
Attacks on civilians by militant groups and Indian security forces continued
unabated. Not only were such killings reported from Kashmir and the northeast,
but a leftist extremist movement known as Naxalites spread through
central India, leading to a number of deaths, both in attacks by Naxalite
armed groups and retaliatory measures by security forces. The government
continued to use legislation that shields security forces from accountability—
Indian military, paramilitary, and police forces have engaged in serious
human rights abuses in conflict zones and yet there have been no attempts at
transparent investigations or prosecutions of those responsible. Police reform
was discussed, but torture during interrogation remained the norm. The
Gujarat government again failed to investigate and prosecute those responsible
for attacks on Muslims during the Gujarat riots of 2002. Despite legislative
measures to protect marginalized groups, discrimination based on caste,
social, or religious status continues widely in practice, with the failure to
implement anti-discrimination policies being especially apparent after the
December 2004 tsunami.
Rights of Dalits, Religious Minorities, and Indigenous Tribal
Groups
Although caste-based abuses are forbidden under Indian law, and the government
has embarked upon consultations to protect the rights of Dalits, other
marginalized castes, and vulnerable communities, the government has failed
to eradicate prejudice, particularly in rural areas. In a May 2005 report, After
the Deluge, Human Rights Watch documented numerous instances in which
higher-caste communities refused to share post-tsunami emergency relief
with Dalits. Ongoing abuses against Dalits include harassment, excessive
force by security forces in routine matters, mutilations, and killings by members
of other castes for attempting to cross caste barriers. For example, in
September 2005, more than fifty Dalit homes were burned down by the
upper-caste Jat community in Haryana state.
Increasingly, caste panchayats, or caste-based village councils, extrajudicially
punish inter-caste marriages with public lynching of couples or their relatives,
murder of the bride or the groom, rape, public beatings, and other
sanctions. This is particularly common if either bride or bridegroom is a
Dalit.
Indigenous peoples, known as Scheduled Tribes or Adivasis, suffer from high
rates of displacement. They make up 8 percent of the total population but
constitute 55 percent of displaced people. This has had a serious effect on the
overall development of these communities, particularly tribal children. The
government continues to use the 1894 Land Acquisition Act to displace
indigenous peoples from their lands without sufficient compensation. In
2005, the government proposed the Scheduled Tribes (Recognition of Forest
Rights) Bill, which is designed to protect the rights of those who had been
occupying forest land prior to October 1980. Activists worried that the new
law could aggravate tensions between those who will and will not benefit. In
addition, the draft fails to clarify access rights to common property resources
such as pastures and forests, and it appears to be in conflict with earlier forest
and wildlife protection laws.
Tribal groups who have converted to Christianity have been targeted for
attack by extremist Hindu organizations. In June 2005, an independent people’s
tribunal investigating the rise of violent sectarianism in Orissa state was
threatened by members of the right-wing Hindu extremist groups Rashtriya
Swayamsevak Sangh and the Bajrang Dal.
Legacy of Communal Violence
The Indian government has failed to contain violent religious extremism and
to prosecute those who instigate or participate in religious violence. Such
failures only reinforce communal resentments.
After they were committed for retrial in another state on Supreme Court
orders, hearings in two cases related to the 2002 attacks upon Muslims in the
western state of Gujarat are nearing completion. Otherwise, there has still
been little accountability for the deaths of more than 2,000 Muslims in
Gujarat during the communal violence that erupted after a train carrying
Hindu pilgrims caught fire, killing fifty-nine passengers. Human rights
activists and lawyers had petitioned for fresh investigations and trials in a
number of cases where it was felt that the local courts, prosecutors, and
police were hostile to Muslim complainants. There continue to be delays in
the investigation and prosecution of these cases. Victims insist that the perpetrators
remain at large and threaten witnesses; the police claim that the perpetrators
cannot be located.
In October 2005, five people were killed in the town of Mau in Uttar
Pradesh in Hindu-Muslim riots. The majority Muslims in the town had
objected to the celebration of a Hindu festival.
In February, a commission headed by Justice G.T. Nanavati to probe the
1984 anti-Sikh riots submitted its report to the government, and the report
was placed before parliament in August. After initially refusing to take action
against Congress leaders named in the report—a decision that led to widespread
protests—Prime Minister Manmohan Singh apologized for the 1984
riots. Senior Congress leaders accused of involvement in organizing the anti-
Sikh pogrom resigned from their posts. Separately, in respect of counterterrorism measures adopted by the police in Punjab to contain a separatist
movement, the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) in November
2004 found the state of Punjab “accountable and vicariously responsible” for
its failure to protect lives, and ordered compensation of 250,000 rupees (U.S.
$5800) for each of the more than 100 victims of summary execution.
Thousands of other cases still remain to be investigated. Many of the families
said they did not want the compensation unless those responsible were prosecuted—
a step the Punjabi government appears unwilling to take, particularly
with respect to assigning individual criminal responsibility.
Impunity of Security Forces
As Human Rights Watch noted in 2004, Indian security forces, including the
military, paramilitary forces, and the police, routinely violate human rights
with impunity. The Indian federal government rarely prosecutes army and
paramilitary troops in a credible and transparent manner. The result has been
an increase in serious abuses by security forces throughout the country.
Laws such as the Disturbed Areas Act and the Armed Forces Special Powers
Act have spawned abuses in various parts of the country, including many
deaths in custody, “disappearances,” and widespread allegations of torture.
Section 197 of the Criminal Code of Procedure gives security forces virtual
immunity for crimes committed in the course of duty.
Kashmir Conflict
The Kashmir insurgency, which began in 1989, has displaced tens of thousands
of people and seen thousands more “disappeared” at the hands of militant
and government forces.
In 2005, India and Pakistan continued talks to resolve the Kashmir issue, and
both sides also met with some Kashmiri rebel leaders. In April the governments
launched a bus service between Indian- and Pakistani-held Kashmir to
allow separated families to meet. After a devastating earthquake in October
2005, which killed tens of thousands in Pakistan-administered Kashmir, India
sent relief materials and offered other assistance. Five points have been opened up at the Line of Control, the de facto border between India and
Pakistan in Kashmir, to send relief materials and allow Kashmiris to meet and
assist their relatives affected by the earthquake.
According to the Indian government, there was a marked decline in violence
in 2005 because of the peace efforts. India withdrew some troops from
Indian-administered Kashmir and promised to continue demilitarization of
the valley if the violence is contained. The government released several
detainees in 2005 as part of a goodwill effort and as a means of addressing
human rights concerns.
Yet some human rights abuses continued and accountability remains a serious
problem. Militants killed and injured civilians in indiscriminate bomb attacks
and murdered a number of political activists, particularly those who participated
in the 2005 municipal elections. Attacks and threats against moderate
Kashmiri leaders, apparently by separatist militants, have hindered the peace
process, and if such moderates continue to be murdered for their views, a
lasting solution is unlikely to be found.
Troops continue to be responsible for arbitrary detention, torture, and custodial
killings. There has been a disturbing rise in extrajudicial executions.
Security forces regularly report gun battles where “foreign militants” are
killed. But there have been persistent allegations that such incidents are faked
and that alleged militants, taken into custody, are routinely executed.
Rights of Children
Despite a scheme launched in 2004 to provide universal education, millions
of children in India still have no access to education and work long hours in
the worst forms of child labor. Vulnerable communities such as Dalits and
tribal groups also have higher illiteracy and drop-out rates, and face significant
discrimination in education. Many continue to be forced into becoming
soldiers in areas where there are armed conflicts. Others languish in substandard
orphanages or detention centers where they endure inhumane conditions
and assaults on their dignity. Recent investigations show that hundreds
of children, most of them living in remote tribal areas, died in the last few years from causes linked to malnutrition. Children continue to be trafficked
for marriage, sex work, or employment. Tens of thousands of children, many
of them girls, live on the streets where they are at risk of physical abuse by
police, heightened vulnerability to HIV transmission, trafficking, and recruitment
into child labor.
Rights of Those Living with HIV/AIDS
The government estimates that in 2004, 5.134 million people in India were
living with HIV/AIDS, though many experts suggest that the number is
much higher. People living with AIDS, as well as those traditionally at highest
risk—sex workers, injection drug users, and men who have sex with
men—continue to face widespread stigmatization and discrimination. People
with AIDS are denied employment and access to education and healthcare.
Hundreds of thousands of children are living with HIV/AIDS. Many more
are otherwise seriously affected when they are forced to withdraw from
school to care for sick parents, are forced to work to replace their parents’
income, or are orphaned (losing one or both parents to AIDS). India is still
framing a promised legislation to end discrimination faced by people with
HIV and their families. While the government says it is committed to preventing
such abuse, there continue to be reports of hospitals and employers
rejecting people living with HIV/AIDS. Despite promises by the then-minister
of health in 2002 to provide free anti-retroviral treatment to 100,000 people
(prioritizing children), only 7,333 people were enrolled in the government’s
program as of April 2005.
Attacks on Human Rights Defenders
Although the Congress-led central government has set up a National
Advisory Council that includes some human rights defenders and also holds
consultations with nongovernmental organizations to frame social welfare
policies, human rights defenders in Indian-administered Kashmir and in
Gujarat have been threatened. In Kashmir, human rights lawyers and activists
have reported threats from both security forces and militants. Through the
years of the conflict, several human rights defenders have been attacked, both by security forces and armed groups. Without proper accountability, it is difficult
to identify those responsible. Kashmiri human rights groups seldom
document abuses by militants because they fear retaliation. In 2005, some
Gujarati lawyers and activists pursing justice in the 2002 riot cases continued
to receive anonymous, threatening phone calls.
Key International Actors
As a test of its growing capabilities, India refused offers of help with immediate
relief and rescue after the December 2004 tsunami, and, in fact, assisted
other affected countries. The Indian government has since received substantial
assistance from international donors for the rehabilitation of tsunami survivors.
Ties between the United States and India have strengthened through increasing
trade, joint military exercises, training of U.S. troops by Indian counterinsurgency
experts, and Washington’s 2005 promise to provide India with
assistance to develop its nuclear energy program. Prime Minister Singh visited
the U.S. in July 2005, and, in a joint statement, both countries said they
were “committed to the values of human freedom, democracy and rule of
law.” Through the new U.S.-India Global Democracy Initiative, both committed
to assist countries that seek to build institutions and resources that
strengthen the foundations to make democracies credible and effective.
Despite such commitments, India has not used its increasing influence with
smaller neighbors—achieved through significant amounts of financial and
military aid—to press for better compliance with human rights standards.
The notable exception is Nepal—there, its suspension of military assistance
and engagement with political parties after the February 2005 coup by the
king has been important in promoting the restoration of democracy.
Indonesia
The December 2004 earthquake and tsunami overshadowed all other issues
in Indonesia in 2005. While the disaster helped propel an August 2005 peace
agreement for Indonesia’s northwest Aceh province, Indonesia struggled to
cope with the massive rehabilitation and reconstruction needs posed by the
crisis. The Indonesian military continued to commit human rights violations
in Papua, and impunity reigned in other parts of Indonesia. There were disturbing
signs of a return to intimidation of the press and criminalization of
dissent. In September Indonesia’s parliament finally ratified the two main
international human rights covenants, on civil and political rights, and economic,
social and cultural rights. Three bombs killed at least twenty-three
people in Bali in October, in an attack similar to that of October 2002.
Aceh: Tsunami and Subsequent Peace Agreement
The tsunami devastated Aceh, which lies only ninety miles from the epicenter
of one the worst natural disasters in recent history. Over 127,000 people
were killed there in the span of minutes; an additional thirty-seven thousand
are still missing and presumed dead. More than half a million displaced continue
to rely on outside help for basic necessities. Aftershocks, including the
March 28, 2005 Nias Island quake, which killed at least 905 people and displaced
almost 107,000, continue to traumatize the populations in Aceh and
North Sumatra. It will take years for Aceh to recover from the physical, emotional,
and human toll of the earthquake and tsunami.
In August 2005, the government of Indonesia and the Free Aceh Movement
(Gerakan Aceh Merdeka, GAM) signed a comprehensive peace agreement
after thirty years of devastating armed conflict. In August and September,
approximately 200 monitors from the European Union and the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) arrived in the province to observe the
initial implementation of the agreement, which includes the release of all
GAM prisoners convicted of treason, a disarmament program, and a significant
reduction of government troops in the province. The agreement also
covers the planned establishment of an ad hoc court in Aceh to hear cases of human rights violations. As of November, the ceasefire and implementation
of the peace agreement appeared to be holding, with prospects for a sustainable
peace in the region stronger than ever.
Papua
There was a significant build-up of troops in Papua, the easternmost part of
the country, with reports of widespread displacement of civilians, arson, and
arbitrary detention in the central highlands region. In August a reported
10,000 Papuan protestors held the largest ever demonstration in the province
over the failure of the government to implement special autonomy as mandated
in a 2001 agreement. In October the government finally set up the
Papuan Peoples Council (MRP) in accordance with provisions in the 2001
Act on Papuan Special Autonomy and a subsequent government regulation.
To date there has been no judicial accounting for atrocities committed in
Papua in 2000. In September 2005 two police officers standing trial for the
December 2000 killing in Papua of three students and the torture of up to
100 civilians were acquitted by a human rights court in Sulawesi.
Papua has the highest HIV prevalence in Indonesia, and discrimination
against people living with HIV/AIDS is widespread.
Terrorism
Indonesia faces a domestic terrorist threat, with more than 200 civilians
killed since 2002 in bomb attacks targeting Western interests. Indonesia is
addressing this threat through criminal prosecutions and a slowly improving
police force, although the perpetrators of some of the attacks remain at large.
Abu Bakar Bashir, believed by many to be the spiritual head of the terrorist
organization Jemaah Islamiyah, was convicted in March 2005 of criminal
conspiracy behind the 2002 Bali bombings. Due to poor conduct of the prosecution,
he was acquitted of the more serious charge of planning a terrorist
attack. He received a sentence of only thirty months, which was further shortened to twenty-five-and-a-half months in an August 2005 Independence
Day sentence reduction.
Impunity and the TNI
The Indonesian armed forces (Tentara Nasional Indonesia, TNI) continue to
violate international human rights and humanitarian law with impunity.
Military operations in Papua and Aceh are characterized by undisciplined and
unaccountable troops committing widespread abuses against civilians, including
extrajudicial executions, torture, forced disappearances, beatings, arbitrary
arrests and detentions, and drastic limits on freedom of movement.
Torture of detainees in police and military custody is also widespread across
the country; some of the detainees tortured are children. Indonesia’s executive
and judicial branches regularly fail to address such abuses.
September 30, 2005, marked the fortieth anniversary of the alleged coup
attempt that precipitated former Indonesian President Soeharto’s rise to
power. The Indonesian Communist Party remains banned for allegedly plotting
the coup attempt, and former members or supporters continue to suffer
discrimination. At least half a million people were killed in anti-communist
purges after the coup attempt, and hundreds of thousands more were imprisoned
without charge or trial. To date there has been no accountability for
atrocities committed in 1965 and 1966. There has also been no legal
accounting for the majority of atrocities committed during Soeharto’s more
than three decades in power, or for the violence instigated by pro-Soeharto
forces in a failed attempt to stave off his 1998 fall from power.
Trials for the 1984 killing of civilians by Indonesian security forces at
Tanjung Priok, Jakarta, finished in July 2005 with the appeals court overturning
the convictions of twelve of the fourteen defendants. The other defendants
had been acquitted the previous year amid reports of political interference
and witness intimidation.
Despite significant international pressure and interest, trials of senior
Indonesian officers in Jakarta failed to give a credible judicial accounting for
atrocities committed in East Timor in 1999 (see East Timor chapter).
Freedom of Expression
Although political space for dissent increased enormously after the fall of
President Soeharto, the June 2005 conviction and six-month sentence for a
student in Bali for burning a portrait of President Susilo Bambang
Yudhoyono illustrates how broadly-worded laws limiting freedom of expression
are still used by authorities to target outspoken critics.
After the fall of Soeharto, Indonesia for a time was considered a center of
media freedom in Southeast Asia. However, the trend more recently has been
toward a more restrictive environment characterized by extensive restrictions
on, and intimidation of, journalists in Aceh, and ongoing use of criminal
defamation laws to target journalists and editors who criticize public figures.
In May 2005 two newspaper editors, Darwin Ruslinur and Budiono
Syahputro, were each sentenced to nine months in jail after a judge found
them guilty of defaming a local Golkar Party leader in Lampung, Sumatra. In
April an appeals court upheld a one-year prison sentence for Bambang
Harymurti, the editor of the prominent independent Jakarta news magazine
Tempo, for an allegedly defamatory article about a well-connected businessman.
Freedom of Religion
In July 2005 Indonesia’s Council of Ulemas issued a fatwa against the
Ahmadiyah, prompting a series of attacks against their places of worship.
Founded in 1889 by Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, the Ahmadiyah identify themselves
as Muslims but differ with other Muslims as to whether Mohammad
was the “final” monotheist prophet; consequently, some other Muslims perceive
the Ahmadiyah as heretics. The police regularly failed to respond to the
attacks, and at the time of writing no charges had been brought against any
perpetrator. By November 2005 at least two local regencies in Java had
banned all Ahmadiyah religious activity in those areas, in direct violation of
Indonesian constitutional religious freedom guarantees.
Indonesian Migrant Workers
Over a million Indonesians work abroad, sending home remittances critical
to the country’s economy. Women comprise over 75 percent of these migrant
workers.
In addition to problems these workers encounter while abroad (see the
Malaysia and Saudi Arabia chapters), many women domestic workers confront
a wide range of human rights abuses during recruitment, pre-departure
training, and return to Indonesia. These abuses include being confined in
locked, overcrowded training centers for months on end, and many fall
deeply into debt to pay exorbitant agency fees. Some girls and women seeking
employment become victims of human trafficking.
Indonesia has taken some positive steps to address this issue, but 2004
migrant workers legislation is deeply flawed. Indonesian officials have not
vigorously implemented necessary protections, such as effectively monitoring
and prosecuting labor agencies or fighting corruption.
Child Domestic Workers in Indonesia
At least 688,000 children, mainly girls, are estimated to work as domestics in
Indonesia. Typically recruited between the ages of twelve and fifteen, often
on false promises of decent wages and working conditions, girls may work
fourteen to eighteen hours a day, seven days a week, and earn far less than
the prevailing minimum wage. In the worst cases, child domestics are paid no
salary at all and are physically and sexually abused. Domestic workers in
Indonesia are not recognized as workers by the government, and are excluded
from the nation’s labor code, which affords basic labor rights to workers in
the “formal” sector such as a minimum wage, overtime pay, an eight-hour
work day and forty-hour work week, weekly day of rest, vacation, and social
security. The Ministry of Manpower does not monitor the “informal” sector,
and no effective mechanisms exist for domestics to report cases of abuse. The
exclusion of all domestic workers from these rights denies them equal protection
of the law and has a discriminatory impact on women and girls, who
constitute the vast majority of domestic workers.
Human Rights Defenders
On September 7, 2004, one of Indonesia’s most outspoken and respected
human rights defenders, Munir Said Thalib, died under suspicious circumstances
on a plane to the Netherlands. The autopsy report, released in
November 2004, concluded that Munir had died from arsenic poisoning.
In December 2004 President Yudhoyono established, by presidential decree,
an independent fact-finding team to investigate Munir’s killing. The team’s
unpublished report identified Garuda airlines pilot Pollycarpus Priyanto as a
leading suspect in the case, and linked him to senior employees of the
Garuda airline and high-ranking intelligence officials. On August 9, 2005,
the trial of Pollycarpus began at the Central Jakarta District Court.
Pollycarpus was charged with committing or participating in the planned
murder of Munir, either alone or in collaboration with two other named suspects.
However, the indictment against Pollycarpus made no mention of the
fact-finding team’s report or findings. The trial is ongoing at this writing.
The fact-finding team also issued a summons to retired army Lt. Gen.
Hendropriyono, the head of Indonesia’s State Intelligence Body at the time
of the murder. He refused to comply with the summons, and subsequently
filed criminal defamation charges against two respected human rights defenders,
Usman Hamid (the head of Kontras) and Rachland Nashidik (the head of
Imparsial), who were members of the fact-finding team.
In Aceh, human rights defenders still suffer threats and intimidation from
security forces and GAM when monitoring and investigating human rights
abuses.
Key International Actors
In February 2005 the United States lifted long-running restrictions and
resumed full International Military Education and Training (IMET) for
Indonesia. First imposed following the massacre of civilians at Santa Cruz
cemetery in East Timor in 1991, the restrictions had remained in place pending
Indonesia’s cooperation with the FBI in an ongoing investigation into the killing of two Americans and one Papuan in Papua in August 2002. In
November the U.S Congress voted to maintain some restrictions on U.S
military assistance to Indonesia in foreign military financing, pending
progress in accountability for human rights violations, and increased civilian
control over the military.
Indonesia’s relationship with the United States continues to focus on joint
efforts to fight terrorism. The United States has made it clear that cooperation
in the “war on terror” is more critical than human rights to normalization
of the U.S.-Indonesia relationship.
In February 2005 U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan announced the establishment
of a commission of experts to review the prosecution of serious
human rights violations committed in East Timor in 1999, given Indonesia’s
failure to do so effectively. After initially being refused visas to enter the
country, the commission traveled to Jakarta in May 2005. The commission’s
report to the secretary-general, published in July, found that the trials in
Jakarta for crimes committed in East Timor in 1999 were “manifestly inadequate,”
showing “scant respect for or conformity to relevant international
standards,” primarily due to a lack of commitment on the part of the prosecution,
and a lack of expertise, experience and training. The commission recommended
that Indonesia accept international support to strengthen its
prosecutorial capacity, advising that the Indonesian government be given a
clear six-month timetable to show progress on the commission’s recommendations.
At the time of writing neither the U.N. Security Council nor the
secretary-general had acted on any of the commission’s recommendations.
The Consultative Group on Indonesia (CGI) meeting, an annual conference
of Indonesia’s largest donors convened by the World Bank, continues to
pledge significant sums, although donors are increasingly conditioning assistance
on good governance and legal reform.
Malaysia
Malaysia made only marginal progress on human rights in 2005. Although
the government of Prime Minister Abdullah Badawi publicized the findings
and 125 recommendations of the government-appointed Royal Commission
to examine police abuse, and prosecuted two Malaysians for abusing
Indonesian domestic workers, significant obstacles to human rights remain.
These include the use of antiquated preventive detention laws that allow for
arbitrary detention without charge or trial of persons who are a threat to
national security and public order, restrictions on religious freedom, and
abuses against refugees and migrants.
Detention without Trial
Under the Internal Security Act (ISA), the government is holding over one
hundred detainees without charge or judicial review in violation of international
standards prohibiting arbitrary detention and the right to a prompt
and fair trial. The government has used the ISA to silence critics and political
opponents of the ruling United Malay National Organization (UMNO).
After September 11, 2001, the ISA was used to arrest people accused of associating
with militant Islamist groups. In 2005 it was also used to detain individuals
allegedly involved in counterfeiting and forging documents.
This unchecked system of detention is conducive to abuse of detainees. On
December 8-9, 2004, prison guards beat and humiliated more than twentyfive
ISA detainees, some of whom have been detained for three years, in
Kamunting Detention Center in Perak state. The beatings occurred after
detainees in one cellblock resisted the unannounced search of their cells conducted
as part of an official effort to impose a more rigid disciplinary regime,
and the beatings extended to detainees in cellblocks that did not resist the
inspection. No official investigation into the incident is known to have taken
place, and no personnel involved in the abuse have been disciplined.
In September 2005, nine ISA detainees who had been in detention for four
years for alleged ties with Islamist militant groups had their detention
renewed for another two years. Subsequently, in November 2005, three of them were released. One was released unconditionally, whereas two remain
under a restricted residence order requiring them to report to the police
once a week and forbidding them to leave their residential districts.
Malaysia’s use of preventive detention laws extends to criminal suspects
whom the police find difficult to prosecute due to lack of evidence. Under
the 1969 Emergency Public Order and Prevention of Crime Ordinance
(Emergency Ordinance) the government is authorized to detain individuals
who are a threat to public order without charge or trial. A detainee is initially
held incommunicado for sixty days and denied access to counsel. The minister
of internal security may then order such a person to be detained for two
years, renewable indefinitely. Demonstrating how government authorities can
show scant respect for judicial orders, in May 2005 forty-eight out of fifty-six
Emergency Ordinance detainees released on habeas corpus petitions were
rearrested, on orders of the Ministry of Internal Security, within days of their
release, on the same charges and without any additional evidence against
them.
More than one thousand persons are detained under the Emergency
Ordinance, at the Simpang Renggam Rehabilitation Center in Johor state. In
November 2004 over four hundred of these detainees began a hunger strike
to protest the conditions and the length of their detention. The Malaysian
Bar Council visited the detention center that month and found overcrowded
cells and detainees in need of immediate medical attention. In June 2005, the
Parliamentary Caucus on Human Rights—comprised of members of parliament
from the ruling party and the opposition—visited Simpang Renggam
and also concluded that the detention center was overcrowded and unhealthy.
Human Rights Watch was denied access to the facility, but investigations
through interviews with former detainees revealed inhumane conditions of
confinement, including overcrowded cells, inedible food infested with worms,
limited access to fresh air or exercise, and unhygienic living conditions.
The Royal Commission recommended the repeal of the Emergency
Ordinance because the “law had outlived its purpose” and had “facilitated the
abuse of fundamental liberties,” namely, deprivation of liberty without trial.
Restrictions on Religious Belief
Islam is the official religion of Malaysia, and ethnic Malays by definition
must be Muslim. Faiths of other ethnic groups are protected under the constitution.
Under Shar’ia law, applicable only to Muslims and enforced at the
state level, Malays wishing to renounce Islam (apostasy) to profess other
faiths or beliefs, and Muslims who hold beliefs that “deviate” from Sunni
Islam, are subject to criminal sanctions.
In July 2005 a mob of masked persons launched a pre-dawn attack on a sixacre
commune of the Sky Kingdom religious sect in Terengganu state. The
commune’s inhabitants were predominantly Malaysian followers of Ayah Pin
(Ariffin Muhammad), who claims to be the reincarnation of the holy figures
of Buddhism, Christianity, Hinduism and Islam. The mob damaged religious
structures, homes, and vehicles. Malaysian police failed to arrest anyone
involved in the attack.
In August 2005 forty-five members of the Sky Kingdom were charged with
violating Islamic precepts under section 10 of the Terengganu Shariah
Criminal Offenses Enactment of 2001. If convicted, they could be fined and
jailed for up to two years.
Crackdown on Migrants and Refugees
In March 2005, the Malaysian government began expulsions under
“Operation Firm,” following through on plans announced in 2004 to round
up and deport some 1.2 million undocumented migrant workers. Preceding
this was a four-month amnesty during which four hundred thousand undocumented
migrants returned home without being penalized under the immigration
law. At the time of this writing, more than nine thousand undocumented
migrants, mostly Indonesians who did not repatriate, are being held in detention
centers awaiting trial for immigration violations, which are punishable
by caning, heavy fines, or imprisonment.
Refugees, abused migrant workers, and trafficking victims were also rounded
up during “Operation Firm.” At the request of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), Malaysian authorities in May 2005
released over five hundred refugees and persons of concern who had been
arrested under the 2002 Immigration Act. As of August 2005, 973 persons of
concern were detained in prison and immigration detention centers, and 222
of them were being prosecuted for immigration violations.
The exodus of undocumented workers from Malaysia created labor shortages
in the agricultural, construction, manufacturing, and service sectors, forcing
the government to import workers from Burma, India, Pakistan, and Sri
Lanka. In May 2005 the government allowed formerly illegal workers from
Indonesia and other countries who had left under the amnesty to return and
seek work. In July the minister of home affairs announced plans to absorb
sixty thousand asylum seekers, mainly Rohingyas and Chin from Burma,
Achenese from Indonesia, and Moro from the Philippines, into the labor
force.
Malaysia is not a signatory to the 1951 Convention on the Status of
Refugees, and in 2005 it deported over twenty Rohingya refugees to Burma.
In contrast, it has allowed 131 Thai Muslims fleeing Thailand’s southern
Narathiwat province, which has been gripped with violence, to remain in
Malaysia since August 2005. The Malaysian government has stated that it
will not repatriate them unless it receives assurances from the Thai government
that they will not be harmed.
Migrant Domestic Workers
In 2004 Human Rights Watch documented pervasive human rights abuses
against domestic workers, including excessively long work hours, lack of rest
days, unpaid wages, and physical and sexual abuse. Migrant domestic workers
continue to be excluded from Malaysia’s Employment Act of 1955, which
would entitle them to one rest day per week and an eight-hour work day. In
May 2004, the Malaysian government signed a Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) with Indonesia regarding migrant workers, but
excluded domestic workers. Despite assurances by the governments in 2004
that they would create an MOU within three months to provide greater legal
protection to domestic workers, they have yet to do so.
In June 2005 Malaysian courts sentenced a Malaysian man to twenty years in
jail for beating to death his Indonesian domestic worker, and another
employer received a twelve-year prison term for raping his Indonesian
domestic worker.
Human Rights Defenders
Malaysian human rights defenders operate with little intimidation from the
Malaysian government. However, human rights advocate Irene Fernandez
continued to be on bail pending the outcome of her appeal against a 2003
conviction under Malaysia’s restrictive press laws for “maliciously publishing
false news,” for which she had been sentenced to a year in prison. Fernandez
had been arrested in 1995 when Tenaganita, a nongovernmental organization
she headed, published a report documenting beatings, sexual violence, and
inadequate food and water in Malaysia’s immigration detention camps.
Fernandez was awarded the 2005 Right Livelihood Awards, known as the
alternative Nobels.
Key International Actors
The United States, once a critic of Malaysia’s misuse of the ISA, has stopped
voicing its disapproval. In June 2005 Malaysian Inspector General of Police
Tun Sri Mohamed Bakri Omar, in asserting that governments have valid
grounds to enact laws that restrict human rights, cited the U.S. Patriot Act
and the United Kingdom’s Prevention of Terrorism Act 2005 as justifications
for Malaysia’s continuing to detain individuals indefinitely without charge.
Malaysian cabinet minister Datuk Mohamed Nazri told Human Rights
Watch in July 2005 that the U.S. no longer criticizes Malaysia’s use of the
ISA because of U.S. detention practices at Guantánamo Bay.
Nepal
The human rights situation in Nepal worsened markedly in 2005. On
February 1 King Gyanendra staged a coup against the civilian government,
which he claimed was a necessary step to tackle the nine-year-old Maoist
insurgency. Security forces arrested all leaders of major political parties.
Authorities severed all communications links within Nepal and with the outside
world. Many civil and political rights, including freedom of movement
and freedom of assembly, were suspended.
Approximately three thousand political, human rights, and student activists
were detained for months after the coup. The crackdown forced many
human rights defenders to leave the country and others to curtail their work.
After months of internal bickering, the political parties in September 2005
organized a series of protests against the king’s usurpation of power.
However, a renewed clampdown on the press towards the end of 2005
demoralized the political opposition and the otherwise vibrant and defiant
media.
Despite the king’s promise to resolve the civil war, the conflict continued
with the same brutal intensity until September 2005, when the Maoists
declared a unilateral ceasefire. The government said that it doubted the sincerity
of the ceasefire and at this writing had not reciprocated. In spite of
renewed commitments to abide by international standards, both sides continue
to engage in serious violations of international humanitarian law. The
establishment of a U.N. human rights office has generated some hope that
the tide of abuses might be curtailed through vigorous monitoring and public
censure of violations.
Abuses Associated with the February Coup
The royalist government has further clamped down on civil and political
rights since February 1, 2005. The government prevents political parties and
trade and student unions from operating freely, the media is restricted, and
individuals have almost no recourse to the law. Extrajudicial killings, illegal
detentions, and “disappearances” continue to be instigated by the Royal Nepalese Army (RNA) while the Maoists continue to engage in extortion,
murder, forced displacement of civilians, and abductions. While these abuses
existed before the coup, the ability of human rights defenders and the media
to document abuses is now more difficult.
New laws and institutions have been designed to anchor the government’s
new restrictions in place. In the months after the takeover, the king maintained
emergency powers through legislative changes that solidified control
over key institutions, such as the National Human Rights Commission
(NHRC), civil service, and media. The Human Rights Commission Act was
amended to allow the king to change the composition of the NHRC
appointment committee, undermining its independence and neutrality.
Human Rights Watch found that the government and the RNA have consistently
hampered the work of the judiciary and NHRC, despite cosmetic steps
designed to give a contrary impression. Strict media regulations have prohibited
the broadcasting of any news critical of the king and the royal family.
FM radio stations, often the only source of news for most Nepalis, have been
banned from broadcasting news. A code of conduct restricting the activities
of national and international social organizations was introduced in
November. The code of conduct is another legal tool which can be used to
curtail the work of human rights NGOs and any other critic of the government.
The king’s refusal to cede any authority to political parties has polarized the
parties and reduced any chance of dialogue. The government has reacted violently
to peaceful demonstrations instigated by the increasingly frustrated
parties. As a result, the parties have reached out to the Maoists in a bid to
isolate the king, which has resulted in the government labeling of them as
“terrorists.”
Abuses Associated with the Civil War
Both sides continue to commit abuses against civilians. Assisting or refusing
to assist either side puts villagers at risk of reprisals by the army or the
Maoists. Both sides use civilian militias, and the RNA has provided support
for Village Defense Forces. The threat posed by these militias was starkly demonstrated in Kapilvastu where mobs associated with the Village Defense
Force went on a three-day rampage in retaliation for a Maoist attack on two
village officials. At least 46 people were killed, most of them unarmed civilians,
and a 14-year-old girl was raped. Six hundred private houses were
burned and destroyed.
In 2005 Nepal continued to have the largest reported number of enforced
“disappearances” in the world. In almost all cases, the disappeared persons
were last seen in the custody of government security forces in informal places
of detention, making it virtually impossible for family members and lawyers
to locate or gain access to them. While the NHRC declared that it had good
access to detention centers after the coup, interviews with NHRC members
revealed that they had to give prior written notice of visits, and that detainees
were removed prior to the visits. The ICRC, which has faced similar obstacles,
decided in May to halt its inspection of places of detention.
While there has been a limited degree of compliance with habeas corpus
orders, individuals are frequently rearrested without charges immediately
upon release. The army staged a few high profile courts martial in 2005, but
even individuals convicted of egregious crimes received light sentences. In
the Doramba case, the major responsible for the company which summarily
executed nineteen captured Maoists received just two years of imprisonment.
In the widely publicized case of the torture and killing of fifteen-year-old
Maina Sunuwar by government soldiers, a military tribunal only found only
three army officers guilty of negligence and sentenced them to six months in
prison; the court then set the men free for time served in pre-trial detention.
The RNA’s human rights cell, instead of investigating these cases, has
engaged in a concerted campaign to denounce those, including the NHRC,
who have documented and investigated allegations of war crimes. In
September 2005 the U.N. special rapporteur on torture visited Nepal and
said that torture and ill-treatment is systematically practiced in Nepal by the
police, armed police, and the RNA in order to extract confessions and to
obtain intelligence. In the case of the Maoists, he found “shocking evidence
of torture and mutilation” in order to extort money, punish non-cooperation, Maoist Abuses
The Maoists continue to perpetrate serious abuses. These include summary
executions of civilians, often preceded by torture, in many cases in front of
villagers and family members. The Maoists have assassinated or executed suspected
government informants, local political activists and non-Maoist party
officials, local government officials and civil servants, and individuals who
refuse extortion demands from the Maoists. The Maoists have also executed
off-duty army and police officers, often capturing them when they go to their
villages to visit family members. In April and May the Maoists carried out
several summary executions in Nawalparasi, Kapilvastu, and Chitwan districts.
In June, the Maoists detonated a bomb that exploded in the path of a
civilian bus carrying 150 passengers, claiming as justification the presence of
armed soldiers on the bus. At least thirty-nine civilians were killed. Basic civil
and political rights such as freedom of speech and association are essentially
nonexistent in Maoist-held areas.
The Maoists regularly abduct students from schools for political indoctrination.
Most students are released, although some remain behind in what the
Maoists describe as “voluntary” recruitment. In April 2005 Maoists carried
out attacks on several schools as part of a campaign for the closure of all private
schools. Hundreds of schools across the country remain closed due to
threats by Maoists.
There are reports of the Maoists using children in combat, particularly as
spies, couriers, and messengers. Human Rights Watch interviewed a twelveyear-
old year old girl who was forcibly abducted and forced to cook for a
Maoist unit. In spite of vehement denials by Maoists, journalists who have
traveled through Maoist-controlled areas describe meetings with children
being trained in their camps and engaging in front-line combat.
Violence and Discrimination Based on Gender and Sexual
Orientation
Gender-based violence—including domestic violence, sexual assault, and trafficking
into forced labor and forced prostitution—remains pervasive and
and intimidate others.
Maoist Abuses
The Maoists continue to perpetrate serious abuses. These include summary
executions of civilians, often preceded by torture, in many cases in front of
villagers and family members. The Maoists have assassinated or executed suspected
government informants, local political activists and non-Maoist party
officials, local government officials and civil servants, and individuals who
refuse extortion demands from the Maoists. The Maoists have also executed
off-duty army and police officers, often capturing them when they go to their
villages to visit family members. In April and May the Maoists carried out
several summary executions in Nawalparasi, Kapilvastu, and Chitwan districts.
In June, the Maoists detonated a bomb that exploded in the path of a
civilian bus carrying 150 passengers, claiming as justification the presence of
armed soldiers on the bus. At least thirty-nine civilians were killed. Basic civil
and political rights such as freedom of speech and association are essentially
nonexistent in Maoist-held areas.
The Maoists regularly abduct students from schools for political indoctrination.
Most students are released, although some remain behind in what the
Maoists describe as “voluntary” recruitment. In April 2005 Maoists carried
out attacks on several schools as part of a campaign for the closure of all private
schools. Hundreds of schools across the country remain closed due to
threats by Maoists.
There are reports of the Maoists using children in combat, particularly as
spies, couriers, and messengers. Human Rights Watch interviewed a twelveyear-
old year old girl who was forcibly abducted and forced to cook for a
Maoist unit. In spite of vehement denials by Maoists, journalists who have
traveled through Maoist-controlled areas describe meetings with children
being trained in their camps and engaging in front-line combat.
Violence and Discrimination Based on Gender and Sexual
Orientation
Gender-based violence—including domestic violence, sexual assault, and trafficking
into forced labor and forced prostitution—remains pervasive and deeply entrenched in Nepal. Legal discrimination continues to prevent
women from equal property, marriage, and divorce rights and from passing
citizenship to their children or foreign spouses. There is no domestic violence
law, and several limitations in the rape and sexual offense laws prevent
victims from seeking redress through the justice system.
Nepali authorities continue to turn a blind eye to a persistent pattern of
police abuse of metis (biological males who cross-dress), men suspected of
having sex with men; women suspected of having sex with women;, and
HIV/AIDS outreach workers. In other cases, police have deliberately failed
to protect such individuals against abuses.
Humanitarian Concerns
The conflict and coup led to increased concerns about the humanitarian situation
in 2005, the primary concern being the rising numbers of internally
displaced persons (IDPs). Recent IDPs have tended to be poor, often lower
caste people, fleeing threats from either Maoists or security forces. Many
have fled from the hills to urban centers in the Terai or India.
Nepal continues to host over one hundred thousand refugees from Bhutan
and has failed to make progress in finding a durable solution to the fifteenyear
impasse. The office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees is
planning to withdraw assistance in 2005, leaving the fate of the refugees
uncertain. This population is at high risk of statelessness. Tibetan refugees
also were affected by the January 21 closure of the Tibetan Refugee Welfare
Office (TWRO), ostensibly because it was not registered. Only Nepali
nationals are permitted to register an organization.
Key International Actors
On April 11, 2005, the Government of Nepal and the U.N. Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) reached an agreement to
establish an office in Nepal to monitor and investigate abuses of human
rights by both parties to the conflict. The office has a mandate to independently
monitor the human rights situation as well as support the NHRC and civil society organizations. On September 16, the High Commissioner issued
a report on the office’s activities in Nepal which provided an overview of the
human rights situation. The report charged the government with extra-judicial
executions, disappearances, arbitrary arrests, and curbs on the rights of
free speech, assembly, and association.
With the exception of Chinese and Pakistani officials, who called the King’s
actions an internal matter for Nepal, international reaction to the King’s
takeover was uniformly critical. The United States., United Kingdom, and
India recalled their ambassadors following the coup. Several other governments
issued statements condemning the King’s actions. All major arms-supplying
countries suspended lethal assistance.
In late 2004, the U.S. Congress passed provisions linking further security
assistance to Nepal with government efforts to resolve disappearances, comply
with habeas corpus orders, cooperate with the NHRC, and take steps to
end torture by security forces. The U.S. has determined that these conditions
have not been met.
Donors have had difficulty implementing their programs given the security
situation and the political uncertainty. The government has also acknowledged
lower levels of development spending due to the security situation.
Since February 1, 2005, most donors have opted to focus on direct service
delivery rather than budgetary support.
North Korea
The regime of leader Kim Jong Il, the subject of an intense personality cult,
is among the world’s most repressive. North Korea (The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, DPRK) in 2005 stepped back from the previous
year’s efforts and made little progress in human rights: the country’s dismal
human rights conditions, including arbitrary arrests, pervasive use of torture,
and lack of due process and fair trials, remain of grave concern. There is no
organized political opposition, labor activism, or independent civil society.
There is no freedom of information or freedom of religion. Basic services,
such as access to health care and education, are provided according to a classification
scheme based on the government’s assessment of an individual’s and
his/her family’s political loyalty.
In September 2005, North Korea asked the World Food Programme (WFP)
to switch its emergency food aid to long-term development aid, despite the
agency’s concerns that such a change was premature and could negatively
affect the most vulnerable sections of the population. In a meeting with
United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan, Vice Minister of Foreign
Affairs Choe Su Hon indicated North Korea would rather forego Western
food aid than have to discuss human rights with donors. North Korea also
asked Western aid organizations to wind down their operations by the end of
the year. As of this writing, North Korea is not showing any signs of reversing
the decision. China and South Korea, the two largest donors, continue to
provide food and other aid directly to North Korea.
The move came after North Korea took a few positive steps seemingly in
response to international criticism of its human rights record. It deleted a
provision in its Penal Code that allowed arbitrary application of laws, adopted
the principle of “no criminality unless prescribed by law,” and invited two
members of the U.N. Committee on the Rights of the Child to Pyongyang.
Absence of Political Pluralism, Freedom of Information and
Freedom of Religion
The ruling Workers’ Party controls the parliament, which has only symbolic
authority, and all other smaller parties are pro-government and state-controlled.
State elections are held periodically, but all candidates are state candidates.
Voting is openly monitored by state officials, and results in an almost
100 percent turnout and 100 percent approval rate. There is no organized
political opposition in North Korea. The norm for actual or perceived “political
crimes” is collective punishment of entire families, including young children.
Offenses related to the personality cults of Kim Jung Il and his late
father and predecessor Kim Il Sung are subject to particularly cruel punishment.
There are no independent nongovernmental organizations of any kind.
All media are either run or controlled by the state, and all publications are
subject to official censorship. Recent North Korean escapees have said, however,
that some North Koreans in the northern border area have been watching
Chinese TV and even South Korean soap operas on DVDs smuggled
from China, defying risks of harsh punishment. North Korea fears that exposure
to images of a free and wealthy South Korean society could lead to “ideological
contamination” and “subversive behavior.”
North Korea does not allow practice of religious faith outside a small number
of churches and temples that it uses for state propaganda.
Discrimination in Education, Jobs, and Health Care
North Korea’s politically determined classification system restricts nearly all
aspects of education, labor, and health care. Membership in the Workers’
Party, which is imperative to an individual’s professional success, is restricted
to people whose political background fits certain criteria. Although all North
Korean children are required to attend school for eleven years, it is generally
children of the elite who are allowed to advance to college and hold prominent
occupations. Access to medical care is also strictly based on the classification
system, as hospitals admit and treat patients depending on their social
background. Many North Korean citizens, especially children, suffer from diseases that can be easily treated. The numerous trade unions in all industrial
sectors are controlled by the state. Strikes and collective bargaining are
illegal, as are all independently organized labor activities.
Detention, Torture, and Execution
No legal counsel is provided or allowed to criminal suspects, and many of
them are tortured or mistreated during the interrogation process. All prisoners
are subjected to forced labor and face cruel, inhuman, and degrading
treatment; many die in prison because of mistreatment, malnutrition, and
lack of medical care. Torture appears to be endemic. Under North Korea’s
penal code, premeditated murder and so-called anti-state crimes such as treason,
sedition, and acts of terrorism are punishable by death. During the food
crisis in the 1990s, North Korea began executing people accused of crimes
related to economic difficulties, such as stealing grain from agricultural cooperatives.
Numerous eyewitness accounts by North Korean escapees have
detailed how executions are carried out publicly, often at crowded marketplaces,
and in the presence of children.
North Koreans in China
According to a South Korean refugee relief organization, Good Friends, the
number of North Koreans in the three northeastern Chinese provinces
where they were most concentrated decreased from hundreds of thousands in
the late 1990s to no more than fifty thousand in 2005, largely due to economic
improvement in North Korea. People who return from China to
North Korea can face detention, torture, and even execution, especially if
they are found to have had contact with westerners or South Koreans,
although an increasing number of North Koreans reportedly avoid punishment
by bribing border guards. Chinese authorities routinely harass aid
workers providing assistance to North Koreans.
Humanitarian groups report persistent problems with the trafficking of
North Korean women. Many are abducted or duped into forced marriages,
prostitution or outright sexual slavery, while some voluntarily enter such situations
to survive or to earn money.
South Korean and Japanese Abductees
According to South Korea’s Unification Ministry, a total of 3,790 South
Koreans were kidnapped and taken to North Korea between 1953 and 1995,
of whom 486 remain detained. Some of the abductees have been used in
propaganda broadcasts to South Korea, while others have been used to train
North Korean spies. North Korea has rejected repeated requests from families
of the South Korean abductees to confirm their existence, to return
them, or, in the cases of the dead, to return their remains.
Separately, North Korea has admitted to having abducted thirteen Japanese
citizens in the 1970s and 1980s. It allowed five of them to return home in
2002, but said the others had died. This issue remains a source of intense
diplomatic dispute between the two countries. North Korea sent to Japan
what purported to be the remains of two deceased abductees, but they were
found to be remains of other persons.
Key International Actors
The international community’s main preoccupation with North Korea over
the past decade has been over the country’s nuclear ambition. In September
2004 North Korea announced that it had created nuclear weapons “to serve
as a deterrent against increasing U.S. nuclear threats.” In September 2005
the fourth round of six-party talks involving North Korea, South Korea, the
United States, China, Japan, and Russia concluded with North Korea pledging
to give up its nuclear weapons program in return for an energy package
from the other parties, while the U.S. promised not to attack or invade
North Korea. As of this writing, the six parties were holding a fifth round of
talks to discuss how to implement the agreement from the previous round.
South Korea’s government maintains a policy of engaging North Korea by
being its largest trade partner and donor while remaining silent on its human
rights record. On the other hand, South Korea continues to recognize all
North Koreans arriving in South Korea as southern citizens (about 7,000
North Koreans have resettled in South Korea so far, via China), and provides
them with generous resettlement subsidies.
The North Korea Human Rights Act, which the U.S. adopted in 2004, opens
up the possibility for North Korean refugees to be admitted for resettlement
in the United States. Thus far, however, little action has been taken, and it is
unclear how many refugees could benefit or when. The U.N. Commission
on Human Rights adopted a resolution for the third straight year calling on
North Korea to respect basic human rights. In November 2005, the U.N.
General Assembly passed a resolution against North Korea, citing “systemic,
widespread and grave violations of human rights.”
North Korea has largely shunned talks with U.N. human rights experts,
except for a few meetings on children’s and women’s rights. It has not
responded to repeated requests by Vitit Muntarbhorn, special rapporteur on
North Korea, to engage in dialogue.
Pakistan
Six years after seizing power in a coup d’etat, President Pervez Musharraf’s
military-backed government did little in 2005 to address ongoing human
rights concerns, such as legal discrimination against and mistreatment of
women and religious minorities, a rise in sectarian violence, arbitrary detention
of political opponents, harassment and intimidation of the media, and
lack of due process in the conduct of the “war on terror” in collaboration
with the United States. In October a major earthquake in Pakistan’s North
West Frontier Province and Pakistan-administered Kashmir resulted in at
least eighty-five thousand deaths and seventy-five thousand injured, and massive
displacement of the local population.
Musharraf continued to tighten his personal grip on power. In October 2004
he secured the passage of “The President to Hold Another Office Act” in
order to remain army chief. In 2005 he stated that he will remain army chief
as long as “the national interest demands it,” and refused to rule out holding
on to both the presidency and army chief post beyond elections scheduled for
2007.
Gender-based Violence and Discrimination
As in previous years, violence against women remained rampant in Pakistan.
Under Pakistan’s existing Hudood Ordinance, proof of rape generally
requires the confession of the accused or the testimony of four adult Muslim
males who witnessed the assault. If a woman cannot prove her rape allegation
she runs a very high risk of being charged with fornication or adultery, the
criminal penalty for which is either a long prison sentence and public whipping,
or, though rare, death by stoning. The testimony of a woman carries
half the weight of a man’s testimony under this ordinance. The government
has yet to repeal or reform the Hudood Ordinance, despite repeated calls for
its repeal by the government-run National Commission on the Status of
Women, as well as women’s rights and human rights groups. Informed estimates
suggest that tens of thousands of cases under the Hudood laws are
under process at various levels in Pakistan’s legal system.
According to Pakistan’s Interior Ministry, there have been more than 4,100
honor killings in the last four years. Nongovernmental groups recorded over
600 honor killings in 2004. Proposed legislation on honor killings drafted in
consultation with nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) was sidelined in
favor of a far weaker bill. Consequently, provisions of Pakistani law that allow
the next of kin to “forgive” the murderer in exchange for monetary compensation
remained in force, and continued to be used by offenders to escape
punishment in cases of honor killings.
Domestic and international human rights organizations and media drew
attention this year to the government’s dismissive attitude regarding violence
against women. In January 2005 Shazia Khalid, a doctor, was raped by a
masked intruder alleged to be an army officer in Balochistan province.
Khalid, who subsequently fled to London, accused President Musharraf’s
principal secretary of acting on behalf of the Pakistan Army in personally
coercing her to leave the country. Mukhtaran Mai, who was gang-raped on
the orders of a village council in 2002, was denied permission to travel to the
United States in June, in order to prevent her from “maligning” Pakistan.
The ban was lifted after an international outcry.
President Musharraf subsequently sparked international outrage by publicly
stating that rape has become a “money-making concern,” and suggesting that
many Pakistanis felt it was an easy way to get a foreign visa. He specifically
mentioned both Mukhtaran Mai and Shazia Khalid in this context. Despite
the international and domestic condemnation, President Musharraf has not
apologized for these remarks or withdrawn them.
Sectarian Violence
Sectarian violence continues to increase. Those implicated are rarely prosecuted
and virtually no action has been taken to protect the affected communities.
While estimates suggest that over 4,000 people, largely from the
minority Shi’a Muslim sect, have died in such violence since 1980, the last six
years have witnessed a steep rise in incidents. For example, on May 27, 2005,
eighteen people were killed and dozens injured in a suicide bombing at the
Shi’a Bari Imam shrine near Islamabad, where hundreds had gathered for a religious festival. On May 30, a Shi’a mosque in Karachi was attacked, killing
five worshippers and wounding twenty. In retaliatory violence, a Shi’a mob
burned down a fast food restaurant, killing six employees.
Sectarian violence also increased in the predominantly Shi’a Northern Areas.
In January Agha Ziauddin, a leading Shia cleric, was murdered in the
Himalayan city of Gilgit. At least 15 people died in ensuing sectarian violence,
and tensions have continued to simmer. Gilgit, Skardu, and other
towns in the Northern Areas have remained under intermittent curfew
including for twelve days in October in the aftermath of the kidnapping of a
local Shi’a activist, allegedly by the paramilitary force Pakistan Rangers.
Human rights organizations and independent analysts assert that Pakistan’s
intelligence agencies are complicit in the sectarian violence in the Northern
Areas.
Religious Freedom
Discrimination and persecution on grounds of religion continued in 2005,
and an increasing number of blasphemy cases were registered. As in previous
years, the Ahmadi religious community in particular was the target for arrests
under various provisions of the Blasphemy Law for allegedly contravening
the principles of Islam, and attacked by religious extremists. On October 7
Ahmadi worshippers were attacked in a mosque near Mandi Behauddin in
Punjab. Eight were killed and at least eighteen were injured. Other religious
minorities, including Christians and Hindus, also continue to face discrimination.
“War on Terror”
Since 2001 the conduct of the “war on terror” in Pakistan has involved serious
violations of human rights. Suspects arrested and held on terrorism
charges frequently were detained without charge and subject to trials without
proper judicial process. For example, Zain Afzal and Kashan Afzal, U.S. citizens
of Pakistani origin, were abducted from their home in Karachi in
August 2004 by Pakistani intelligence agents. They were released on April
22, 2005, without having been charged, after Human Rights Watch intervened. During eight months of illegal detention, the two brothers were
repeatedly interrogated and threatened by U.S. FBI agents operating in
Pakistan, and were subjected to torture by the Pakistani security services.
Military operations are ongoing in South Waziristan, adjacent to the Afghan
border, and previously noted problems persist, including collective punishment,
extrajudicial executions, arbitrary detentions, and limited access to
prisoners.
Arbitrary Arrest and Detention of Political Opponents
The government continued to use the National Accountability Bureau and a
host of anti-corruption and sedition laws to jail or threaten political opponents.
Makhdoom Javed Hashmi, of the Alliance for the Restoration of
Democracy, began a twenty-three year sentence for sedition, a charge
brought against him for reading an anti-Musharraf letter to journalists in
April 2004. In April 2005 thousands of opposition Pakistan People’s Party
(PPP) supporters, including several PPP parliamentarians, were arbitrarily
arrested in a countrywide crackdown. Though many of those arrested were
subsequently released without charge, cases against hundreds were filed
under the Anti-Terrorism Act and under Pakistan’s criminal procedure code.
Scores continue to face charges and the fear of re-arrest. On May 11 Shahbaz
Sharif, president of the Pakistan Muslim League (PML-N), was forcibly
deported to Saudi Arabia when he attempted to end three years of involuntary
exile. Prior to his arrival at Lahore Airport, scores of PML-N leaders
and supporters were arrested and released subsequently.
During the summer of 2005, Musharraf presided over a three-phase local
government election marked by brazen intimidation, coercion, and pre-poll
rigging. Some forty people died in election-related violence, making this the
most violent electoral exercise in Pakistan’s recent history. During the campaign,
many opposition candidates faced violence and intimidation at the
hands of the police and civil administration. Independent observers reported
numerous instances of kidnapping, mistreatment, and arbitrary detention of
opposition supporters, as well as pre-election and election day irregularities.
Freedom of Expression
Pakistan observed World Press Freedom Day on May 3, 2005, with arrests
and beatings of journalists in Islamabad and Lahore. Baton-wielding police
violently dispersed a peaceful rally of approximately fifty journalists gathered
at the Parliament building in Islamabad. In Lahore, security forces attacked
approximately 200 journalists as they rallied peacefully at the Punjab governor’s
mansion to press for fairer working conditions.
On May 11, 2005, the BBC’s highly regarded Islamabad correspondent
Zaffar Abbas was detained along with his cameraman as he attempted to
cover the abortive return from exile of PML-N leader Shahbaz Sharif.
Several other journalists were also mistreated in the incident. On July 18
Pakistani military police arrested Swedish citizens Leon and David Flamholc
and Tahir Shah, a British writer of Afghan origin, in Peshawar. The three
documentary filmmakers were illegally held in solitary confinement for fifteen
days and arbitrarily deported on August 3. Rashid Channa, a reporter
with the Dawn group of newspapers, was abducted from his home by plainclothes
personnel on July 24, held illegally for more than 12 hours, and finally
charged with attempted murder, allegedly on the orders of the Sindh
provincial government. “Why are you filing anti-chief minister stories?”
Channa was reportedly asked as he was arrested. He was released after rights
groups intervened.
On March 2, 2005, the BBC World Service was forced to suspend Urdu-language
news programs broadcast to the major cities via the radio station Mast
FM103. On November 14, the same radio station and two satellite television
channels were ordered to cease broadcasting the BBC’s special extended bulletins
on the earthquake. The government refused to comment on the decision.
Attacks on Human Rights Defenders
On May 14, 2005, human rights defenders organized a “mixed marathon,” an
event designed to highlight violence against women and to support their
right of access to public spaces. The marathon was organized by the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan and affiliated NGOs. The event was attacked
by police; Asma Jahangir, the U.N. special rapporteur on freedom of religion
and head of the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, the country’s largest
such nongovernmental group, was publicly beaten. The police, under orders,
also attempted to strip her naked. Some forty others, including Hina Jilani,
the U.N. special rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders, were
also beaten and arrested by the provincial police and the federal Intelligence
Bureau. They were released later the same day.
Key International Actors
Pakistan remains heavily dependent on the United States for economic and
military aid. The United States has notably failed to press for human rightsrelated
legal reform in the country, in exchange for Pakistan’s support in the
U.S.-led “war on terror.” For its part, the government of Pakistan has
excused its failure to uphold human rights and the rule of law by citing
domestic political pressure from hard-line religious groups and militant
organizations.
Pakistan has still only signed five international conventions. It has signed neither
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights nor the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
Papua New Guinea
In 2005, Human Rights Watch conducted research in Papua New Guinea
(PNG) for the first time. The summary that follows draws from that
research—which focused on police violence against children—and does not
purport to offer a comprehensive survey of human rights conditions in the
country.
Police Violence
The police routinely use violence, including torture, against individuals in
custody. Children are frequent targets. Detainees report being beaten, shot,
burned, knifed, gang raped, and forced to have sex with other detainees.
Police rarely are held accountable, either internally or in a court of law.
Government mechanisms external to the police—the public solicitor’s office,
the Ombudsmen’s Commission, and civil claims against the state—are not
effective in diminishing police violence or providing victims with redress.
The Ombudsman’s Commission, however, has taken useful steps to address
government corruption.
In November, police fired into a group of students who had thrown stones as
police attempted to arrest and beat their headmaster. Up to three students
were reportedly killed and roughly twenty injured, some as young as age nine
or ten. The Minister of Police promised to investigate and hold guilty officers
accountable.
A 2004 review of the police commissioned by the Minister of Police found
that breakdown of discipline and loss of integrity had rendered the force
largely ineffective. It recommended urgent and widespread reforms, including
the appointment of a Police Ombudsman. Almost none of the reforms
recommended by the 2004 review were implemented in 2005, except payment
of past due compensation to officers and improvement of police housing.
Detention Conditions
At police stations, detainees are held for weeks or months in squalid conditions
that violate basic international standards. Police typically provide no
medical care even to seriously injured detainees. In some stations, detainees
lack bedding and sufficient food and water. Children routinely are mixed
with adults in police lockups, even where separate cells are available.
Girls and Women
Violence against women and girls, including domestic violence, is pervasive.
Police often ignore complaints of sexual or domestic violence. Instead of
assisting women and girls, some police demand sex from victims. Girls’ and
women’s low status also is reflected in discrimination in education, health
care, and access to paid employment; heavy household workloads; and
polygamy.
Despite extensive evidence available to the authorities, no officers were prosecuted
in 2005 for beatings and gang rape of women and girls arrested in the
raid on the Three-Mile Guest House in March 2004.
Juvenile Justice
An interagency working group, with strong support from United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF), is continuing its efforts to develop a juvenile
justice system. As of May 2005, seven juvenile courts were operating in some
capacity. In 2004 and early 2005, policies were adopted for police, magistrates,
and correctional officials that severely limited the circumstances and
conditions under which children could be detained. In April 2005, fifteen
volunteer juvenile court officers were commissioned to monitor police treatment
of children in police stations. Police inaugurated a single processing
center intended for all children detained in the capital. But by September,
this center was still not operating. The failure to hold police accountable for
implementing the guidelines and for using violence against children threatens
to undermine these developments.
HIV/AIDS
Experts believe that at least eighty thousand people—around 3-4 percent of
the population in the capital, the highest rate in the South Pacific region—
are living with HIV. Some face violence and discrimination in their communities.
Police sexual abuse of males and females increases the risk of HIV transmission.
By targeting sex workers and men and boys engaged in homosexual
conduct, police violence helps drive these individuals underground and away
from lifesaving information on HIV prevention and health services. Public
shaming of sex workers as “AIDS carriers” prevents people from seeking
HIV-related services for fear of being stigmatized. Police continue to harass
persons possessing condoms, including by forcing individuals to chew and
swallow condoms and their plastic wrappers. Such responses deter condom
use and undermine desperately needed HIV/AIDS prevention work by
NGOs and the government.
Education
School fees and related costs pose a significant barrier to children’s education
and are often linked to non-attendance, dropout, and the entry of children
into child labor. School fees are high compared with the average annual
income. According to the PNG Department of Labor, caps on school fees in
2004-2005 ranged from 100 kina [US$31.65] through grade two to 1,200
kina [US$379.75] for day students in grades eleven through twelve. Per capita
gross national income was U.S.$510 in 2003.
Key International Actors
Australia remains the largest foreign donor by far, reflecting its proximity,
colonial history, and continuing special relationship with Papua New Guinea.
Much of its aid is directed to the police force. In late 2004 and early 2005,
several hundred Australian Federal Police were deployed alongside Papua
New Guinea police, but were withdrawn in May, following the Papua New
Guinea Supreme Court’s decision that the immunity granted to Australian officers was unconstitutional. By November, it was agreed in principle that
that some forty officers would be redeployed as advisors only on corruption,
training, and prosecutions.
UNICEF has taken the lead on juvenile justice, with AusAID funding several
recent reforms. Other donors include the Asian Development Bank, the
European Union, Germany, Japan, New Zealand, and the World Bank.
Sri Lanka
The human rights situation in Sri Lanka worsened in 2005. The December
2004 tsunami wrought tremendous destruction, particularly to the areas
already most affected by the country’s protracted civil war. Thirty thousand
people died and up to eight hundred thousand were displaced. Sectarian
interests hijacked aid distribution mechanisms, compromising the modest
successes of the post-tsunami recovery and rehabilitation effort. Killings, particularly
of Tamils in opposition to the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
(LTTE), an armed group advocating a separate homeland for Tamils, reached
an alarming rate of one per day by June 2005, and included the assassination
of Foreign Minister Lakshman Kadirgamar in August. The LTTE continued
to recruit child soldiers. Torture and mistreatment by police continued to be
a problem.
Presidential elections were held on November, 17, 2005, with Mahinda
Rajapakse, of the ruling party, winning by a slim margin. There was very low
voter turnout at the polls in the north and the east after the LTTE discouraged
Tamils from voting. Rajapakse’s candidacy was backed by hard-line
Sinhala nationalist parties.
Political Killings
Since February 2002, when the government and the LTTE signed a ceasefire
agreement (CFA), an estimated two hundred Tamils have been killed for
apparently political reasons. Most of the killings have been attributed to the
LTTE. As of September 2005, the Norwegian-led Sri Lanka Monitoring
Mission (SLMM) had received 1,466 reports of abductions for politically
motivated reasons, and had certified at least 641 cases of abduction as violations
of the CFA.
On February 11, 2005, E. Kaushalyan, the LTTE’s Batticaloa-Amparai district
political head, was killed together with five other members of his convoy.
He was the most senior member of the LTTE to be killed since the
CFA.
In May 2005, Dharmeratnam Sivaram, a senior journalist and the outspoken
editor of the pro-Tamil news website www.tamilnet.com, was killed by
unknown assailants in Colombo. Relanghai Selvarajah, a Tamil radio producer
fiercely critical of the LTTE, was shot dead in Colombo on August 13. On
October 12, K. Rajadorai, the president of Jaffna Central College, and also a
LTTE critic, was shot dead by a suspected LTTE cadre. Rajadorai had close
connections with the Eelam People’s Democratic Party, an anti-LTTE Tamil
party disarmed under the CFA. Numerous EPDP members have been victims
of attack allegedly by the LTTE.
On August 13, 2005, unknown gunmen shot and killed Sri Lanka’s foreign
minister, Lakshman Kadirgamar, at his home in Colombo. Kadirgamar, a
Tamil member of the ruling party, the Sri Lanka Freedom Party, had led the
campaign to have the LTTE labeled a terrorist organization by several countries.
It was widely acknowledged that he topped the LTTE’s list of political
targets.
President Chandrika Kumaratunga immediately announced emergency rule
following Kadirgamar’s assassination. In contrast to her past responses to the
killings of Tamils, she immediately called for a thorough investigation,
deploying thousands of police officers throughout Colombo.
In the context of the political killings, many human rights defenders, particularly
Tamils in the north and east, have been forced to either stop their work
or go into hiding. Several human rights defenders have had to flee the country
over the last year as a direct result of the intimidation generated by the
killings.
Child Soldiers
The LTTE has a history of recruiting children to serve in combat. Sri Lanka
has ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, which prohibits all use of children under eighteen in armed conflict
and all recruitment of children by non-state armed groups.
Under a 2003 action plan signed by the LTTE and the Sri Lankan government,
the LTTE agreed to release children from its forces. But not only has the LTTE failed to comply, human rights and other groups have reported
ongoing child recruitment by the LTTE, which in spite of international condemnation
refuses to acknowledge the practice. Recruitment rates dropped
during the first half of 2005 following the tsunami, but increased significantly
in mid-2005, with numerous reports of child recruitment taking place at temple
festivals in the east. During July alone the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF) documented 139 cases of child recruitment, the highest
level recorded during any single month since late 2003. During the first nine
months of 2005 UNICEF documented a total of 483 cases of child recruitment;
the true total is believed to be higher, as many cases are never reported.
During the same period, 146 children were released from the LTTE.
Those who campaign against child conscription are at risk. On October 11,
2005, the principal of Kopay Christian College in Jaffna, who publicly voiced
his criticisms, was shot dead in his home.
Police Torture and Deaths in Custody
In 2003 the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) and the Police
Commission agreed on measures including ensuring that families and lawyers
have access to detainees, displaying written summaries of detainees’ rights in
police stations, and holding officers in command responsible for torture in
their stations. In spite of these attempts at reform, the NHRC reported an
increase in custodial deaths, with at least nineteen cases reported in 2005
alone, and cases of police torture continue to be reported. For example, on
February 2, 2005, D.D. went to visit a friend in Kiriella police custody.
While there, two police officers detained and assaulted D.D. They also made
him place his fingerprints on an item of evidence, and forced him to sign a
false statement. On May 19, twenty-six-year-old H.F. was severely tortured at
Panadura police station. He was forced to sit with his head between his
knees, and was beaten and kicked all over. The police took him to a doctor
who insisted on hospitalizing H.F., but the police refused and returned him
to the police station. He was further forced to sign a statement claiming that
his injuries had occurred prior to his arrest.
There are reports of police torture of children as well. On June 11, 2005, an
eleven-year-old boy accused of stealing money was beaten and sexually tortured
in the Kahawatte police station. The police officers squeezed his genitals,
tied his legs, and beat him severely in order to extract a confession. In
another case, a twelve-year-old boy was severely beaten by police from the
Wattegama police station. The police had come to his house to look for his
father, and, not finding the father there, assaulted the young boy instead.
The police continue to enjoy great impunity. While some cases of deaths in
custody and torture have been investigated, no one has been prosecuted or
punished as yet. In May 2005 the Supreme Court acquitted all the defendants
in the October 2000 mob killing of twenty-seven Tamil detainees at the
Bindunuwewa detention facility. The youngest inmate in the camp was
twelve years old at the time of his death. An independent commission of
inquiry into the killings faulted the local police commissioners, A.W.
Dayaratne and Jayantha Senivaratna, for failure to protect the inmates from
the attack despite prior knowledge that a planned demonstration might turn
violent. Neither officer has been indicted or even disciplined, and all others
who were tried were acquitted.
Tsunami
Reconstruction work is taking place in the communities affected by the
December 26, 2004 tsunami, but not at a pace to match the needs. Nearly a
year on, government bureaucracies and delays in international financing have
left most of the displaced still in temporary shelters.
Since early 2005, minority Tamil and Muslim communities have accused the
government of discrimination in the distribution of post-tsunami aid. In an
attempt to address some of these concerns, the government of Sri Lanka and
the LTTE signed an agreement known as the Post-Tsunami Operational
Management Structure (P-TOMS, also known as the “joint mechanism”),
intended to ensure fair and equitable distribution of aid to the north and east.
However, the implementation of P-TOMS has stalled due to political parties’
quarrels over who has the right to participate in and control the process.
Those opposed to the LTTE, particularly rival Tamil parties, objected to the
government-like authority given to the LTTE under the joint mechanism.
The Sri Lanka Muslim Congress complained about its exclusion from the
joint mechanism, and interpreted it as further evidence of discrimination
against its community. The JVP, a Sinhala nationalist party, decried any
agreement signed with the LTTE, left the ruling coalition in protest, and
launched a legal challenge that led the Supreme Court to issue a stay order
on the implementation of sections of P-TOMS.
Key International Actors
The donor community has increasingly spoken out against political killings
in the past year, notably in a March 2005 statement by the European Union’s
commissioner for external relations. The SLMM, which has resisted including
human rights monitoring, finally acknowledged that such killings do fall
within its mandate. Following the killing of Lakshman Kadirgamar, the international
community, and particularly the four co-chairs of the donor conference,
stressed the need to re-examine the CFA and to strengthen respect for
it by all parties to the conflict. In September the E.U. imposed a travel ban
on the LTTE, announcing that its member states would no longer receive
LTTE delegations. It also reiterated its condemnation of political killings and
child recruitment by the LTTE.
Thailand
The steady erosion of respect for human rights that has characterized Prime
Minister Thaksin Shinawatra’s administration reached a new low in 2005
with killings in the south by security forces and insurgents and the introduction
of draconian new security legislation. Continuing failure to investigate
widespread killings by security forces in the 2003 anti-drug campaign has
deepened the culture of impunity, while critical media have come under
direct assault.
In this increasingly hostile environment, members of Thailand’s once-thriving
human rights and media community face serious questions about their
ability to continue doing their work.
The Executive Decree on Government Administration in
Emergency Situations
The Executive Decree on Government Administration in Emergency
Situations, summarily put in place by Prime Minister Thaksin in July 2005
and later ratified by parliament, has undermined or revoked many key safeguards
against human rights abuses. The decree gives authorities sweeping
powers to declare a state of emergency, arrest and detain suspects, restrict
movement and communication, censor the media, and deny access to the
Administrative Court and to redress for victims of abuses by government
officials and the security forces.
While the emergency law was put in place to address violence in the south,
there is no geographical limit on where it can be invoked. The decree allows
authorities to detain suspects for an initial period of thirty days in informal
places of detention without guarantee of immediate access to lawyers This
raises the prospect that detainees will be held in secret, undisclosed, or inaccessible
locations where monitoring is impossible and there is no judicial
oversight or access to counsel or family. This is an unprecedented and dangerous
provision that carries a heightened risk of “disappearances” and is
almost certain to lead to abuses. There is no limit to the number of times such detention can be extended, creating the risk of arbitrary, disproportionate,
and indefinite limitations on fundamental human rights and freedoms
guaranteed under the Constitution of Thailand and the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR).
Violence in the Southern Border Provinces
Almost 1,000 people have been killed since a new spate of violence began in
the southern border provinces of Pattani, Yala, and Narathiwat in January
2004—some at the hands of the security forces and others by insurgent
groups. Violence has included arson attacks on government buildings, bombs,
beheadings, and assassinations. On October 16, 2005, a Buddhist monk was
murdered when Phrom Prasit Temple in Pattani province was burned, marking
the first direct militant attack on a Buddhist temple since the spate of violence
began in the three southern border provinces last year.
Unrealistic deadlines set by Prime Minister Thaksin to solve cases of insurgent
attacks quickly and restore peace in the region have created pressure on
the security forces to resort to extrajudicial means and human rights violations.
For example, in massive operations to identify and capture those
responsible for the January 2004 raid on an army depot in Narathiwat
province, a number of people allegedly were arbitrarily arrested and disappeared
by the security forces. However, the Thai government has to date
refused to include statistics on “disappearances” in official reports released to
the public. Promises of investigation and justice appear to be only rhetorical,
aiming to defuse criticisms and political pressure. To date, there have still
been no criminal persecutions in the Krue Sae Mosque (April 28, 2004) and
Tak Bai (October 25, 2004) incidents, in which nearly two hundred Muslims
were killed by the security forces.
Growing fear and suspicion of the security forces have caused hundreds of
Muslims to seek asylum in Malaysia. At this writing, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) was in the process of determining
the status of 131 Thai Muslims who fled to Malaysia in October 2005.
The Anti–Drug Campaign
Prime Minister Thaksin announced a new phase of the war on drugs from
October to December 2005. Almost immediately, new reports of suspected
drugs dealers shot dead by the police began to appear in many parts of the
country.
There remains no significant progress in the investigation of drug-related
murders during the first phase of the war on drugs, from February to April
2003. Of 2,598 cases, the police had investigated only 752 at this writing.
Arrest warrants were issued in 117 cases, with interrogation of suspects continuing
in ninety others. The remaining cases were dropped due to a lack of
witnesses and evidence. The unwillingness of the police to investigate these
deaths, combined with the unusually high numbers of drug-related murders,
has created widespread suspicion that many deaths were due to extra-judicial
killings and police brutality.
Human Rights Defenders
Prime Minister Thaksin and government officials continue to publicly denigrate
non-governmental organizations (NGOs). At the National Human
Rights Commission workshop on August 6, 2005, Prime Minister Thaksin
specifically told NGOs not to “sink the boat” by reporting human rights
abuses in Thailand to the international community.
There have been reliable reports of surveillance and harassment of some
human rights defenders, particularly those working on issues related to violence
in the southern border provinces. In March 2004, Somchai Neelapaijit,
a prominent Muslim human rights lawyer, was abducted in Bangkok and is
now presumed dead. Somchai had been repeatedly threatened after alleging
police torture of insurgent suspects in the southern border provinces. Five
police officers were arrested in 2004 in relation to his case, but have not been
prosecuted for kidnapping or murder.
Another eighteen human rights defenders have been murdered since Prime
Minister Thaksin came to power in 2001. Most were killed after raising public concern about economic development activities by individuals or companies.
The latest case took place in June 2005 when a renowned conservationist
Buddhist monk, Pra Supoj Suwajo, of Suan Bha Metthadharm Temple in
Chieng Mai province, was hacked to death after he staged a campaign against
the alleged encroachment of forest and public land by a national politician .
Prosecutors have largely failed to pursue these cases. As a result, Thailand’s
once-thriving human rights community now operates in an increasingly tense
climate of fear and impunity.
To curry favor with the regime in Rangoon, the Thai government has also
cracked down on the work of exiled Burmese human rights defenders monitoring
the human rights of refugees and migrant workers.
Restrictions on Media Freedom
The Thai government continues to restrict media freedom by withholding or
threatening to withhold advertising contracts, operating licenses, or work
permits from media outlets, and by filing defamation cases seeking large
monetary damage awards against prominent advocates and independent journalists
in order to limit critical coverage.
In September 2005, Prime Minister Thaksin personally filed criminal and
civil defamation suits against veteran journalist Sondhi Limthongkul, Sarocha
Pornudomsak, and Thai Day Dot Com, Co. The 500 million baht sought in
the civil suit represent the largest damages ever pursued by any politician or
government official.
Members of Thailand’s media, concerned about possible government
reprisals, have begun to censor their own work by devoting less attention to
human rights abuses and other issues of national importance. As a result, the
government has even greater freedom to pursue a range of controversial policy
initiatives, including anti-drug campaigns and counter-insurgency operations.
Some of the most brutal state-sponsored human rights abuses in the
country’s modern history have had little or no public discussion.
Refugee Protection
Prime Minister Thaksin continues to backtrack on Thailand’s longstanding
humanitarian stance toward Burmese refugees in an effort to improve relations
with Burma’s military junta.
On March 31, 2005, the Thai government enforced a plan requiring all
Burmese refugees to move to camps along the Burmese border. According to
the Thai authorities, those who fail to register for relocation to the camps—
including those officially recognized by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)––will be arrested and deported back
to Burma. Those who do not register will no longer be allowed to receive
protection or assistance from UNHCR in Thailand and will be barred from
resettlement abroad. However, many of the Burmese urban refugees are hesitant
to relocate to the border camps, fearing the move may trap them in a
detention-like environment without political freedom and access to telephones
or other means of communication with the outside world. Others are
fearful for their security because of mistreatment by camp officials, crossborder
violence, or political and ethnic conflicts within the camps.
Key International Actors
The United States is the key bilateral actor in Thailand. While the U.S. raises
human rights concerns on a regular basis with Thailand, activists were disappointed
by the White House visit accorded to Prime Minister Thaksin in
September 2005 and the failure of President Bush publicly to address the
erosion of human rights protections under Thaksin. Bush instead emphasized
the two leaders’ close friendship.
In June 2005, the United Nations Working Group on Enforced or
Involuntary Disappearances expressed “great concern” over missing Muslim
human rights lawyer Somchai Neelaphaijit. In July 2005, the United Nations
Human Rights Committee expressed concerns over the climate of impunity
created by the Executive Decree on Government Administration in
Emergency Situations and persistent allegations of extrajudicial killings and
other serious human rights violations.
In an apparent response to those concerns, Prime Minister Thaksin gave a
speech at the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and United Nations
Summit in September 2005 asserting that lack of coordination and inadequate
guidelines can draw United Nations agencies into domestic political
issues. “This can be a cause of resentment, rejection, and non-cooperation …
and make the United Nations irrelevant,” he said.
Vietnam
With Vietnam’s membership into the World Trade Organization pending,
the government took some steps in 2005 to counter international concern
about its human rights record. The government released some religious and
political prisoners, officially outlawed forced recantations of faith, and published
a white paper defending its record on human rights.
Despite these gestures, Vietnam’s denial of fundamental rights remained
largely unchanged during 2005. Authorities continue to persecute members
of independent churches, impose controls over the Internet and the press,
restrict public gatherings, and imprison people for their religious or political
views. Legislation remains in force authorizing the arbitrary “administrative
detention”—without trial—for up to two years of anyone suspected of threatening
national security.
During 2005 the government released at least twelve political and religious
prisoners, but arrested many more. Most of those arrested were minority
Christians in the Central Highlands, collectively known as Montagnards,
who the government alleged were separatists. The top two leaders of the
Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam remained under house arrest. At least
seven Hoa Hao Buddhists were sentenced to prison during 2005.
Controls over Freedom of Expression and the Internet
There is no independent, privately-run media in Vietnam. Domestic newspapers
and television and radio stations remain under strict government control,
and direct criticism of the Communist Party is forbidden. Foreign
media representatives are required to obtain authorization from the Foreign
Ministry for all travel outside Hanoi.
The government attempts to control public access to the Internet and blocks
websites considered objectionable or politically sensitive. In May 2005, the
government blocked the Vietnamese-language website of the British
Broadcasting Corporation. A government directive issued in July 2005 prohibits
Internet use by “reactionary and hostile forces.” In 2004, the Ministry of Public Security established an office to monitor the Internet for unauthorized
use and “criminal” content, including disseminating “state secrets.” A
January 2004 government directive requires Internet café owners to monitor
customers’ email messages and block access to banned websites.
Several dissidents have been imprisoned for alleged “national security”
crimes after using the Internet to disseminate views disliked by the government.
They include Pham Hong Son, who is serving five years of imprisonment
on espionage charges after he disseminated articles about democracy on
the Internet; Nguyen Khac Toan, serving twelve years after being arrested in
an Internet café, where he allegedly “vilified” government officials in emails
sent abroad; and Nguyen Vu Binh, a journalist who was sentenced to seven
years of imprisonment after he posted an article on the Internet criticizing
the government.
Freedom of Assembly
Public demonstrations are extremely rare, especially after harsh government
crackdowns against mass protests in the Central Highlands in
2001 and 2004. In March 2005, the prime minister signed Decree
38/1005/ND-CP, which stiffened restrictions on freedom of assembly. It
bans public gatherings in front of places where government, party, and
international conferences are held, and requires organizers of public
gatherings to apply for and obtain government permission in advance.
Freedom of Religion
Followers of religions not officially recognized by the government continue
to be routinely persecuted. Security officials disperse their religious gatherings,
confiscate religious literature, and summon religious leaders to police
stations for interrogation.
In 2004, the United States designated Vietnam a “country of particular concern”
for its violations of religious freedom. International pressure resulted in
a number of prisoner releases in 2005, and the passage of a new ordinance on religion in 2004. A February 2005 decree by the prime minister bans forced
recantations of faith and loosens some restrictions on Christian organizations.
However, the government continues to require religious organizations to
register with the government in order to be legal, and prohibits religious
activities determined to cause public disorder, harm national security, or sow
divisions. Local authorities have used the new regulations as grounds to
arrest minority Christians suspected of belonging to churches that operate
independently. In addition, forced renunciation ceremonies continue despite
the new decree banning such practices. Since March 2005, Human Rights
Watch has received reports of renunciation ceremonies taking place in Lao
Cai, Quang Nai, Ha Giang, and Gia Lai provinces.
Minority Christians
Ethnic Hmong Christians in the northwest and Hre Christians in Quang Nai
province have been beaten, detained, and pressured by local authorities to
renounce their religion and cease religious gatherings. In February and
March 2005, religious repression and a heightened military presence in Lai
Chau province caused a number of Hmong Christian families to flee to
neighboring China, Burma, and Laos. In March 2005, officials in Dien Bien
province launched an official four-month campaign to eradicate
Protestantism amongst the Hmong.
In the Central Highlands, the government has continued its persecution of
Montagnards, particularly those thought to be following “Dega Christianity,”
a form of evangelical Christianity that is banned by the Vietnamese government.
Since 2001, close to 300 Montagnard Christians have been imprisoned
on charges that they are separatists using their religion to “undermine
national unity.” Similar claims have been made by officials in the northwest,
who claim that the Hmong’s Vang Chu religion is a front for separatist activity.
The unregistered Vietnam Mennonite Church remains under surveillance
and its members continue to encounter conflicts with local authorities. While Rev. Nguyen Hong Quang, the Mennonite general secretary, was released
from prison in 2005, evangelist Pham Ngoc Thach remained in prison.
Buddhists
One monk from the banned Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam (UBCV),
Thich Thien Mien, was released from prison in 2005. However the government
continues to persecute UBCV members and withhold any recognition
of this group, once the largest organization of Buddhists (the majority religion)
in the country. The UBCV’s Supreme Patriarch, Thich Huyen Quang,
and its second-ranking leader, Thich Quang Do, have been confined without
charges to their monasteries for years, under police surveillance. The Foreign
Ministry restricts visitors to the monks, including diplomats and journalists,
on grounds they are under investigation for possession of “state secrets.”
Members of the Hoa Hao sect of Buddhism, while officially recognized by
the government, have also been subject to police harassment and surveillance.
Two members were arrested in February 2005 for making religious videotapes.
In May and June 2005, police disrupted Hoa Hao Buddhist ceremonies
and funeral gatherings, reportedly destroying religious banners and an altar.
In June 2005 Hoa Hao Buddhists announced a hunger strike to protest lack
of government response to a complaint submitted by 500 followers that they
were “terrorized and oppressed” by authorities in An Giang.
Two Hoa Hao Buddhists, Vo Van Buu and Tran Van Ut, self-immolated on
August 5, 2005, in protest against suppression of their religion and detention
of their leaders. Police reportedly used tear gas and water cannons to disperse
funeral proceedings for the two, attended by thousands of followers. The
Foreign Ministry called Tran Van Ut’s immolation “an extremist act of
destroying himself.” In September 2005, Hoa Hao monk Vo Van Thanh
Liem, who had submitted written testimony on human rights in Vietnam for
a June 2005 U.S. congressional hearing, was sentenced to nine years of
imprisonment. At least six other Hoa Hao members were sentenced to prison
during 2005.
In July 2005, nine members of the Cao Dai religion were sentenced to prison
for between three and thirteen years for “fleeing abroad to oppose the government.”
They had been arrested and repatriated from Cambodia in
September 2004 when they tried to deliver a letter of protest to international
diplomats during a meeting of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations in
Phnom Penh.
Arbitrary Arrest, Torture, and Unfair Trials
Hundreds of religious and political prisoners remain behind bars. There is
compelling evidence of torture and other mistreatment of detainees. Prison
conditions are extremely harsh and fall far short of standards. Human Rights
Watch has received reports of solitary confinement of detainees in cramped,
dark, unsanitary cells; lack of access to medical care; and of police beating,
kicking, and using electric shock batons on detainees, or allowing inmates or
prison gangs to carry out beatings of fellow prisoners with impunity.
Police officers routinely arrest and detain suspects without written warrants.
Political trials are closed to the international press corps, the public, and
often the families of the detainees themselves. Defendants do not have access
to independent legal counsel.
Defending Human Rights
No independent or nongovernmental human rights organizations operate in
Vietnam. In September 2004, Vietnam denied a visa to U.S. Representative
Loretta Sanchez, an outspoken critic of the country’s human rights record
and co-founder of the Congressional Caucus on Vietnam. In August 2005,
Vietnam’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs released an eighty-two page white
paper entitled, “Achievements in protecting and promoting human rights in
Vietnam.”
Key International Actors
Vietnam’s international donors, who number about fifty bilateral and multilateral
donors, pledged U.S.$3.4 billion in aid for Vietnam at the December 2004 Consultative Group meeting, a substantial increase over 2004. While
donors have publicly focused on economic growth and poverty reduction
programs, they have increasingly expressed concerns about the government’s
imprisonment of dissidents, suppression of freedom of expression and of religion,
and its poor handling of the crisis in the Central Highlands.
In 2005 the U.N. Working Group on Arbitrary Detention declared Thich
Huyen Quang and Thich Quang Do victims of arbitrary detention. In 2005
officials from the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and
foreign diplomats made several visits to the Central Highlands. Among those
visited were Montagnard returnees from Cambodian refugee camps. Most of
these visits were carried out in the presence of government or party officials.
A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) signed in January 2005 between
UNHCR and the governments of Cambodia and Vietnam commits Vietnam
not to punish returnees for their illegal departure, but it makes no such
promise with respect to punishment or prosecution of returnees for practicing
their religion or expressing their political opinions.
Several countries broadened their public support for dissidents in 2005. After
repeated requests, the British ambassador and the head of the E.U. delegation
to Vietnam received authorization to visit Thich Quang Do in
September. The European Parliament held a hearing in September 2005 on
human rights in Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos.
In November 2005, the U.S. embassy praised Vietnam’s release of religious
prisoners and promulgation of new laws on religion, but continued Vietnam’s
designation as a “country of particular concern” for religious freedom violations.
In June 2005, Prime Minister Phan Van Khai made a state visit to the
United States, the highest-level visit by a Vietnamese official since the end of
the Vietnam War.
Armenia
Although the international community continued in 2005 to look favorably
on Armenia for its economic performance, the government has failed to
improve its human rights record. The crackdown on opposition parties and
supporters in 2004 led to fewer public demonstrations in 2005, and, consequently,
less overt government pressure on the opposition. However, the
authorities continued to use their powers to limit political activity.
In July 2005, after years of failing to meet Council of Europe obligations to
amend the constitution to introduce a system of stronger checks and balances
among the different branches of government, Armenian authorities secured
the approval of Council of Europe legal experts on a raft of constitutional
amendments. The opposition (and media freedom activists) were critical, saying
that too much power would remain with the executive, and some opposition
parties decided to campaign against the amendments, which were to go
to a referendum in November. The government made little progress on
measures against corruption, a widespread problem in the country, and
forced land aquisition by government-backed urban developers resulted in
allegations of abuses against homeowners.
Law enforcement authorities restrict freedom of assembly and use torture
and other violent and intimidating practices when carrying out their work.
The authorities have a history of putting pressure on human rights defenders
who are critical of the government. In 2005, such pressure extended to the
ombudsperson’s office.
Freedom of Assembly
The authorities restrict the right to freedom of assembly, particularly in the
case of opposition rallies and demonstrations. May 2005 amendments to the
2004 law on public gatherings resulted in few improvements. On repeated
occassions in 2005, nongovernmental organizations and political parties
attempted to hold public gatherings at which police or unidentified people
interfered, grabbing banners and placards, or triggering disturbances. One
such incident occurred on April 20, when the head of the New Times political party, Aram Karapetian, held a public meeting with residents in the town
of Sevan. Unidentified people began fighting with rally participants, and one
shot and injured in the leg a university student who was participating in the
rally. A police investigation concluded that the rally participants had themselves
incited the disturbances, and no one was charged in relation to the
shooting. In another incident in May, police reportedly threatened to detain
people who wanted to attend a rally of the opposition People’s Party of
Armenia in a village near Yerevan.
State Violence and Intimidation
Torture and ill-treatment in police custody remain widespread in Armenia.
Torture usually occurs in pre-trial detention with the aim of coercing a confession
or evidence against third parties. Abuse and mistreatment within the
army is also widespread, with dozens of suspicious deaths occuring every
year.
In May 2005, police allegedly beat supporters of an independent candidate,
Artur Shaboyan, in local elections in the town of Hrazdan. According to
media reports, police used batons and electric-shock equipment to attack
Shaboyan supporters outside several polling stations.
In June, law enforcement authorities arrested Yektan Turkyilmaz, a Turkish
scholar who had been carrying out historical research using Armenian
archives, for failing to obtain official permission to take old books out of the
country. After his arrest, security officers questioned him and his associates
about his research and political views. They denied him access to a lawyer for
two days and then provided him with a state-appointed lawyer, not of his
choice. In August, after significant international pressure, he was released on
a two-year suspended prison sentence.
Media
Although Armenia has significant independent and opposition print media,
the government continued to restrict full media freedom in the country.
Television channels A1+, Noyan Tapan, and Russian NTV, which had aired independent news coverage about Armenia, remained unable to broadcast
because the government had taken away their broadcasting frequencies. The
proposed constitutional amendments would increase the independence of the
National Commission on Television and Radio, the body that issues and
revokes broadcasting licenses, by giving parliament the power to appoint half
of the members and the president the power to appoint the other half (currently,
the president appoints all the members of the commission).
Nevertheless, media associations, nongovernmental organizations, and the
ombudsperson have criticized the Council of Europe for endorsing the proposed
constitutional amendments, which they argue fails to guarantee the
independence of the electronic media. They further criticize the authorities’
failure to institute changes to increase the independenceof the commission
overseeing state-run Armenian Public Television and Radio, set up in 2005 to
provide independent public television, one of Armenia’s obligations to the
Council of Europe.
Freedom of Religion
Despite amendments to the law on alternative service introduced in
November 2004, Jehovah’s Witnesses continue to be persecuted for their
refusal to perform military service. According to the Armenian Helsinki
Association, in September 2005 sixteen Jehovah’s Witnesses were serving
prison terms, and nineteen were awaiting trial, for refusing to perform military
service.
On June 9, 2005, according to Forum 18 News Service, a court in
Stepanakert, in the unrecognized republic of Nagorno-Karabakh, sentenced
Armen Grigorian, an Armenian conscientious objector, to two years in prison
for refusing to perform military service. A year earlier, the Armenian military
had forcibly taken Grigorian, an eighteen-year-old from a Jehovah’s Witness
family, from Yerevan to a military unit in Nagorno-Karabakh. His request for
alternative civilian service was rejected. When he refused to sing the national
anthem and swear the military oath, army officials beat him and later forced
him to stand in his underwear in front of about 1,800 soldiers and explain
why he refused to perform military service.
Human Rights Defenders
In May 2005, the government successfully applied to the Constitutional
Court to curtail the powers of the ombudsperson to access court documents,
arguing that the powers breached the principle of the independence of the
courts. The decision came after the ombudsperson released her first annual
report, which criticized the government for its human rights record. Later in
May, security services reportedly confiscated a computer from the office of
the ombudsperson that had confidential information about people who had
made complaints to the office; ostensibly the computer was seized as evidence
against an employee of the office previously arrested and accused of
taking a bribe. Larisa Alaverdian, the ombudsperson, claimed that the security
services did not have a warrant to take the computer, and that they used
information it contained to harass a law firm that had helped two individuals
to file complaints to her office.
Key International Actors
Although the Council of Europe continued to engage Armenia to make
progress in complying with its membership obligations, local groups criticized
the organization for weak monitoring of those obligations and for
approving the government-proposed amendments to the constitution. Many
of Armenia’s obligations to the Council of Europe remain unfulfilled, including
resolving the problem of the use of administrative arrests for political
purposes, providing plurality in the electronic media, and resolving the issue
of alternative service.
In April 2005, the European Union decided to proceed with the European
Neighbourhood Policy joint preparations for action plans with the countries
of the South Caucasus, including Armenia. This is the first time that the
E.U. has offered closer economic, political, and cultural relations in exchange
for progress on concrete human rights benchmarks, and therefore marks a
significant opportunity for the E.U. to encourage human rights improvements
in Armenia. The potential of this opportunity to trigger meaningful
reforms will depend, however, on how specific the human rights benchmarks are in the final action plan document, which was being negotiated between
the Armenian government and the E.U. throughout the latter half of 2005.
The United States and Russia continued to compete for influence in
Armenia. The United States protested over the lack of transparency in the
sale of Armenia’s electricity grid to a Russian company, which increased
Russia’s hold over Armenia’s energy sector. Russia’s withdrawal from its bases
in Georgia resulted in Russia relocating part of its military hardware to
Armenia. Increasing ties with the United States led to Armenia sending
forty-six troops to join coalition forces in Iraq in January 2005. In March,
Armenia and the United States signed an action plan regarding Armenia’s
participation in the Millennium Challenge Account, a multi-million-dollar
U.S. aid program. The action plan focuses on development of fiscal policy,
banking, corruption, and agriculture.
Azerbaijan
Azerbaijan’s government has a long-standing record of pressuring opposition
political parties and civil society groups and arbitrarily limiting critical
expression. In the run-up to the November 2005 parliamentary elections the
repressive environment intensified, despite considerable efforts by the international
community to encourage Azerbaijan’s compliance with international
human rights standards. Election day itself fell far short of these standards.
In the elections the government used a variety of tactics that impaired the
integrity of the process and ensured that pro-government candidates won the
majority of seats. Government policies appear to support an environment in
which state officials are free to use violence to achieve their ends without fear
of being held accountable. Although the government has released political
prisoners, the system of repression against perceived government critics
ensures that new politically motivated cases will continue to be generated.
Independent and opposition press face major barriers to their work.
Elections and Associated Rights
Azerbaijan has a history of seriously flawed elections. In 2005, repression and
harassment of opposition party members, an overwhelmingly pro-government
bias in the electronic media, and government control of election commissions
ensured that the parliamentary elections would not be free and fair.
The government’s registration of candidates without party-based bias was an
improvement on previous elections but was later overshadowed by other serious
violations. Measures taken to improve the election process, such as allowing
inking of voters’ fingers with invisible ink to prevent multiple voting and
lifting the ban on monitoring by foreign-funded nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs), proved ineffective because they were introduced late in the
election campaign.
During the election campaign period, the government continued to restrict
freedom of assembly, despite lifting the absolute ban on opposition gatherings
that had existed until June 2005. The authorities refused to allow rallies
to be held in city centers, and police carried out mass arrests and beat protesters who attempted to gather for unauthorized meetings or rallies.
Officials exerted pressure on government workers, particularly teachers, to
attend the ruling Yeni Azerbaijan Party candidates’ meetings with voters. At
the same time, police detained campaign workers for opposition and independent
candidates and warned them to stop their political work. The timing
and circumstances surrounding two separate alleged coup d’etats by opposition
groups raised serious concerns that the government was using these
cases to increase repression against the oppostion and to influence the elections.
Based on these two sets of allegations, the government arrested three
youth movement members and about a dozen high-level government officials
and opposition supporters, and accused them of preparing a coup d’etat.
Election day was marred by numerous irregularities throughout the country.
Local and international observers documented serious violations, including
ballot box stuffing, repeat voting, and tampering with results of protocols. At
the time of writing, the authorities had responded to international calls to
rectify falsifications on election day by cancelling the results in several election
districts, firing several local officials, and detaining four others.
State Violence
Torture, police abuse, and excessive use of force by security forces are widespread
in Azerbaijan. In pre-trial detention severe beating is a common form
of torture, although electric shock, threats of rape, and threats against family
members are also used, usually to coerce a confession or other information
from a detainee. Torture and ill-treatment is less common in post-conviction
prison facilities, although a series of incidents were alleged in the context of a
February 2005 special operation by Ministry of Interior troops to combat
illegal activity in the prisons. Former inmates of prisons number 12 and 13
told Human Rights Watch that security forces beat hundreds of prisoners,
forcing some to run through a gauntlet of troops who beat them with batons.
The government has not taken any significant measures to combat the environment
of impunity for government officials who commit torture or other
forms of ill-treatment. On the contrary, Vilyat Eviazov, the head of the Organized Crime Unit, a body known for its use of torture, was promoted to
deputy minister of interior in April 2005.
Political Prisoners
The existence of political prisoners is a long-standing problem that
Azerbaijan committed to resolving when it joined the Council of Europe in
2001. In the eighteen months prior to June 2005 Azerbaijan made progress
on this issue, releasing more than one hundred political prisoners. However,
according to the Council of Europe, political prisoners remain in custody and
Azerbaijan is yet to find a permanent solution to this problem, such increasing
the independence of the judicuary. In 2005 opposition supporters continued
to be imprisoned and charged in what appear to be politically motivated
cases.
Media Freedom
Authorities use a variety of informal measures to prevent or limit news critical
of the government from reaching the public. The government pressures
opposition and independent media outlets by limiting their access to printing
houses and distribution networks, initiating defamation cases resulting in the
imposition of crippling fines, restricting access to official information, and
harassing journalists. Major television outlets, from which the vast majority
of the population gets its news, are either state-owned or affiliated, and the
government controls the issuing of radio and television broadcast licenses
through a board that consists entirely of presidential appointees. A public television
station, set up by the government because of its obligations to the
Council of Europe, started broadcasting in August 2005.
Media monitoring carried out by independent monitors during the pre-election
campaign showed that the content of all the national television stations’
news broadcasts was overwhelmingly pro-governmental.
In one of the worst incidents of violence against journalists in Azerbaijan in
many years, on March 4, 2005, an unknown attacker shot dead Elmar
Husseinov, founder and editor of the independent weekly magazine Monitor.
The magazine regularly published harsh criticism of the government, including
allegations of corruption among high-level officials and their families.
Monitor stopped publication after Husseinov’s death.
Human Rights Defenders
The authorities continue to deny registration to many human rights NGOs,
usually on minor technical grounds. Human rights defenders are at times
subjected to physical and verbal attacks and other forms of pressure and
harassment. For example, in March and April 2005, pro-government television
channels made harsh and provocative statements against human rights
defenders. According to Leila Yunus, the Director of the Institute for Peace
and Democracy, in late March a presenter on Lider TV stated, “The whole
activity of Leyla Yunus is directed against the statehood of Azerbaijan. And
yet she applies to the law-enforcement bodies for protection. Should such
people be protected?” On April 2 the authorities refused to allow Ilgar
Ibrahimoglu, religious freedom activist, to leave the country to present a
statement at the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in Geneva.
Key International Actors
By the end of 2005 construction of the new major oil pipelines routed across
Azerbaijan, Georgia, and Turkey had been completed, and a gas pipeline was
due for completion in mid-2006. The huge foreign investment in these projects
has focused international attention on issues of security and stability in
the region, sometimes at the expense of human rights.
United States policy toward Azerbaijan has focused on military cooperation
and oil interests. Since 2001, U.S. military aid and cooperation has increased
significantly, and Azerbaijan has cooperated in U.S. military operations, sending
approximately 150 troops to Iraq. Although the U.S. government criticized
the parliamentary elections and put pressure on Azerbaijan to investigate
and rectify incidents of falsification on election day itself, its response to
pre-election violations was inconsistent and sometimes weak.
In April 2005, the European Union decided to proceed with preparing the
European Neighbourhood Policy action plans with the countries of the south
Caucasus, including Azerbaijan. This is the first time that the E.U. has
offered closer economic, political, and cultural relations in exchange for
progress on concrete human rights benchmarks, and therefore marks a significant
opportunity for the E.U. to encourage human rights improvements in
Azerbaijan. However, the potential of this opportunity to trigger meaningful
reforms will depend on the specificity of the human rights benchmarks in the
final action plan document, which was being negotiated between the
Azerbaijani government and the E.U. throughout the latter half of 2005.
The Council of Europe has played a constructive role in addressing human
rights problems in Azerbaijan, pressing for the release of political prisoners,
greater pluralism, and a devolution of political power away from the presidency.
In 2005, it concentrated on promoting free and fair parliamentary
elections, and resolving the issue of political prisoners.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) is one of
the largest multilateral investors in Azerbaijan, having committed more than
?459 million in projects, approximately half of which goes to the private sector.
Although acknowledging many serious shortcomings in Azerbaijan’s
human rights record and transition to democracy, the EBRD’s strategy for
Azerbaijan, approved in May 2005, confirmed the government’s commitment
to the principles of article 1 of the bank’s founding document, which includes
multiparty democracy, pluralism, and market economics. Despite its conclusion
that Azerbaijan’s progress in implementing these principles was “slow
and uneven,” and that “many challenges remain,” the Bank did not make use
of its political mandate to link further engagement to concrete human rights
improvements.
The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) was
deeply involved in election monitoring for the parliamentary elections, providing
665 election observers from forty-two countries. During the election
campaign period and immediately following the elections, the OSCE published
three interim reports and a preliminary report that described numerous violations of OSCE commitments and Council of Europe standards for
democratic elections.
Bosnia and Herzegovina
While a number of themes unrelated to the 1992-95 war in Bosnia and
Herzegovina—including prison conditions, rights of asylum seekers, and
implementation of libel laws—received attention during 2005, war crimes
accountability and the return of persons displaced by the war remained the
key human rights issues in the country.
War Crimes Accountability
Republika Srpska (the Serb-majority entity) for the first time transferred war
crimes indictees to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). On January 15, 2005, Bosnian Serb authorities transferred
Savo Todovic, former deputy commander in a detention camp in Foca,
to the tribunal. Gojko Jankovic, also charged in relation to crimes against
Bosnian Muslims in Foca, surrendered to Bosnian Serb authorities on March
13. Finally, Sredoje Lukic, charged with crimes against Bosnian Muslims in
Visegrad in 1992, surrendered on September 14. Todovic had been in hiding
in Serbia, while Jankovic and Lukic had been living in Russia. The circumstances
surrounding their surrender in Republika Srpska remain unknown.
On October 9 and 10, 2005, Republika Srpska police raided several buildings
in Banja Luka, Kotor Varos and Celinac, ostensibly in an attempt to apprehend
war crimes indictee Stojan Zupljanin.
Six war crimes trials took place in Republika Srpska during the year, more
than in the entire period since the end of the war. While still insufficient,
recent efforts to prosecute war crimes suspects in the Bosnian Serb entity
may indicate a change in the decade-long policy of impunity. Two war crimes
trials were completed in Banja Luka, the capital of Republika Srpska; three
war crimes trials were ongoing in Trebinje and one in Banja Luka at year’s
end. In all but one trial the defendants were Bosnian Serbs. Republika Srpska
also arrested sixteen Bosnian Serb war crimes suspects in June, September,
and November 2005, at the request of the Bosnian State Prosecutor and cantonal
prosecutors in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (the Bosniacand
Croat-majority entity).
The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina held twenty trials against suspects
of various ethnicities during 2005. A major impediment to successful
war crimes prosecutions in the Federation was the non-availability of Bosnian
Croat and Serb suspects who had fled to Croatia and Serbia after the war and
received citizenship there. The constitutions of Croatia and Serbia prohibit
extradition of their nationals to other countries.
Availability of the accused is likely to be the greatest challenge to the effective
functioning of the newly established special war crimes chamber, based
in the Bosnian capital Sarajevo as part of the State Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The chamber became operative in 2005, and the first case,
against Boban Simsic, a Bosnian Serb, began on September 14.
Return of Refugees and Displaced Persons
With the exception of a few areas in Republika Srpska (Prijedor, Doboj,
Janja) and the Federation (Drvar, Bugojno, Stolac), the current figures on the
return of refugees and displaced persons in the country appear too small to
reverse the effects of the wartime ethnic cleansing. According to the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), as of the end of
September 2005, just over a million, out of a total of more than two million
people forcibly displaced during the war, had returned to their home areas.
Of these, 453,464 persons had returned to municipalities where they currently
constitute an ethnic minority (so-called “minority returns”). However,
both the local authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina and respected human
rights activists argued during the year that the official figures grossly exaggerate
the actual number of minority returns, because, according to a field
survey by the Bosnian Helsinki Committee for Human Rights, fewer than
half of those who repossessed their properties and registered as returnees
remained to actually live in their pre-war places of residence.
The return figures were particularly discouraging in 2005. Between January
and the end of September, UNHCR registered 5,059 minority returns, a
twelve-fold drop compared to the same period in 2002. Continuing attacks
and harassment targeting returnees, scarce employment opportunities in
places of return, insufficient funding for reconstruction of destroyed properties, and obstacles affecting social and economic needs of prospective
returnees, frustrated the return process.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights activists faced a hostile environment when their activities challenged
the dominant attitudes relating to the wartime period. In the
Federation, the work of the independent Research and Documentation
Center was largely ignored by the government, and met with occasional
threats from private actors, because the organization assessed the number of
casualties during the Bosnian war at around one hundred thousand. The estimate
challenged the widespread belief among the war’s principal victims, the
Bosnian Muslims, that the number of casualties exceeded two hundred thousand.
The Helsinki Committee for Human Rights in Republika Srpska experienced
similar responses to its efforts to promote accountability for war
crimes and ongoing human rights abuses. The High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Paddy Ashdown, failed to express strong support
for the work of independent human rights groups in the country.
Key International Actors
The focus of the work of the Office of the High Representative (OHR),
which oversees civilian aspects of the 1995 Dayton Peace Accords, was police
reform. On October 5, 2005, under intensive pressure from the OHR, the
United States, and the European Union, the Republika Srpska parliament
finally accepted the fundamentals of the proposed reform, which envisage a
more unified police force. Between December 2004 and October 2005, the
OHR imposed sixteen laws at the state and entity level, and removed eleven
officials and public servants from office.
The debate in Bosnia about the proper role for the high representative intensified
during the year, with an increasing number of critics arguing that the
removals from office under a procedure that allows for no legal remedies,
and the practice of imposing laws, did not encourage respect for human
rights and the rule of law. In an authoritative report published in March
2005, the Council of Europe’s European Commission for Democracy Through Law (Venice Commission) concluded that the need for wide powers
had existed in the early period following the conclusion of the 1995 Dayton
Peace Agreement, but that the longer such an arrangement stayed in place,
the more it risked becoming incompatible with Council of Europe human
rights standards.
On January 17, 2005, a trial chamber of the ICTY sentenced Bosnian Serbs
Vidoje Blagojevic and Dragan Jokic to eighteen and nine years in prison
respectively, for their role in the killings of some eight thousand Muslim men
in Srebrenica in July 1995. The ICTY Appeals Chamber affirmed the sentences
of four Bosnian Serbs and two Bosnian Croats guilty of crimes in
Prijedor and in central Bosnia.
Three important trials against Bosnian Muslim indictees took place in 2005.
On November 16, a trial chamber acquitted the Bosnian Army General Sefer
Halilovic, accused of crimes against Bosnian Croat civilians in Herzegovina
in 1993. In the trial against Generals Enver Hadzihasanovic and Amir
Kubura, both charged with war crimes against Bosnian Croats and Serbs in
central Bosnia in 1993-94, the prosecution and the defense presented closing
arguments in July 2005. The trial of Naser Oric, commander of Bosnian
Muslim forces in the Srebrenica area, for crimes against Serb civilians, continued
throughout the year. The spate of trials against Bosnian Muslims
somewhat eroded the once unanimous support for the tribunal’s work within
Bosnia’s most numerous ethnic community. At the same time, support for the
tribunal increased among Bosnian Croats and Serbs, where the prevailing
stance since the war has been one of mistrust.
On November 21, 2005, the day of the tenth anniversary of the Dayton
Peace Accords, the E.U. General Affairs and External Relations Council
decided to start negotiating a Stabilization and Association Agreement (SAA)
with Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Council had previously decided, on
October 3, that it was not possible to open the negotiations because of the
failure of the Republika Srpska parliament to accept the proposed police
reform. The Council emphasized that the establishment of a more unified
and efficient police force, free from political interference, was crucial for
respect for human rights, the rule of law, and the protection of minorities.
The parliament of Republika Srpska accepted the principles of the proposed
reform on October 5.
On December 2, 2004, the E.U.-led peacekeeping force in Bosnia (EUFOR)
replaced the NATO-led Stabilization Force (SFOR). For the second consecutive
year, international forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina did not arrest a
single Bosnian citizen indicted by the ICTY. While most indictees resided in
Serbia and were not within the reach of the seven thousand EUFOR troops
or a 150-strong contingent of U.S. troops based in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bosnian Serb wartime leader Radovan Karadzic was believed to be hiding in
the eastern parts of the country. The absence of a requisite political will and
intelligence resources may account for the failure of the international forces
to locate Karadzic and bring about his arrest.
The Council of Europe’s European Commission against Racism and
Intolerance (ECRI) issued a report in February 2005 faulting ethnically based
political parties with nationalist policies that engender “severe problems of
racism and racial (including ethnic and religious) discrimination and segregation”
and make it difficult for those not belonging to locally or nationally
dominant ethnic groups to access rights and opportunities.
Croatia
In 2005, improved cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) earned Croatia a positive decision by the
European Union on opening negotiations on membership. There was little
progress, however, in the return of Serb refugees. With the majority of
defendants continuing to be ethnic Serbs, Croatia has yet to demonstrate that
its efforts to pursue war crimes suspects before domestic courts reflect a principled
commitment to justice over and above ethnic considerations.
A decade after the 1991-95 war in Croatia, tensions between the majority
Croat population and the Serb minority have eased. However, there were
some worrying trends in 2005 threatening to reverse the course. In the key
multi-ethnic towns of Knin and Vukovar, local boards of the Croatian
Democratic Union (HDZ) formed municipal governments in coalition with
ultra-nationalist Croat parties following the May 15 local elections, while
sidelining the centrist Independent Democratic Serb Party (SDSS). The
SDSS nevertheless continues to support the minority HDZ government at
the state level. Violent incidents directed at ethnic Serbs were more frequent
in 2005 than in previous years.
Refugee Returns
Between three hundred thousand and 350,000 Croatian Serbs left their
homes during the 1991-95 war, mostly for Serbia and Montenegro, and
Bosnia and Herzegovina. As of September 2005, the government had registered
122,000 Serb returnees. Croatian Serb associations and the
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) mission to
Croatia assessed the actual number of returnees as significantly lower—
between 60 and 65 percent of the registered figure—because many Croatian
Serbs had left again for Serbia and Montenegro or Bosnia and Herzegovina
after only a short stay in Croatia.
There was no tangible progress in 2005 on the issue of lost tenancy rights in
socially-owned property. Croatian authorities had terminated the tenancy
rights of up to thirty thousand Serb families after they fled their apartments during and after the war. In June 2003, the Croatian cabinet adopted a set of
measures to enable former tenancy rights holders in Zagreb and other big
cities to rent or purchase government-built apartments at below-market
rates. As of early November 2005, only a dozen former tenancy rights holders
had benefited from the two-year-old program. The absence of results
only exacerbated the skepticism among refugees that the program would
eventually deliver benefits. Only 3,628 former tenancy rights holders had
filed applications under the program as of September 2005.
The bleak prospects for receiving an adequate substitute for lost tenancy
rights made many refugees place their hopes in the European Court of
Human Rights (ECtHR). On December 15, 2004, the Grand Chamber of
the ECtHR agreed to re-hear a case decided four months earlier, in which
the ECtHR upheld Croatian court decisions terminating the tenancy rights
of a woman who had left Zadar shortly before the outbreak of hostilities in
1991 and had not returned to her apartment within the six-month period
specified by Croatian law at the time. The re-hearing of the case, Blecic v.
Croatia, took place in September, and a ruling was pending at this writing.
Limited economic opportunities for minority returnees, partly caused by
employment discrimination, also greatly impedes return. A December 2002
constitutional law on minority rights obliges the state to ensure proportionate
representation of minorities in the state administration and the judiciary,
as well as the executive bodies and administration of self-government units.
In most areas, there are no Serb returnees in the police, the judiciary, or the
regional offices of the state ministries. Private entrepreneurs, although not
bound by the law to hire Serbs, have proved to be more willing to do so than
government agencies.
Violent acts against ethnic Serbs suddenly increased during 2005. The May
18 killing of eighty-one-year-old Dusan Vidic in his house in Karin, near
Benkovac, was particularly shocking. Two months later, on July 19, two elderly
Serb returnees were beaten in front of their house in the village of
Ostrovica, also near Benkovac. In Pakostani, Benkovac and Zagreb, attackers
damaged vehicles with Serbian registration plates. Groups of young men
attacked or threatened Serbian bus passengers who were traveling through Rijeka and Delnice, as well as Serbian train passengers at the railway stations
in Vinkovci and Zagreb. Graffiti with the message “Srbe na vrbe!” (“[Hang]
the Serbs on the willow trees!”) appeared in Rijeka and Udbina. Two men
broke windows at the entrance of the Serb Orthodox Church in Drnis on
November 12. On May 21, a bomb exploded next to the premises of a Serb
political party in Vukovar, and the following night, unknown perpetrators
threw bombs at the municipal assembly buildings in the majority Serb villages
of Borovo Selo and Trpinja, near Vukovar. In all but a few cases the
police failed to apprehend the perpetrators.
Accountability for War Crimes
Ante Gotovina, a Croatian army general accused of crimes against Croatian
Serbs in 1995, remained at large four years after the issuing of his indictment
by the ICTY. Deputy Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor stated in January 2005
that if she came across Gotovina she would not report this to the police
because she “would not recognize him.” The statement, made during the
campaign for the presidential election, was broadly interpreted as an expression
of the benevolence with which key officials regarded Gotovina.
ICTY Chief Prosecutor Carla Del Ponte warned on several occasions during
the year that Croatia was not doing enough to apprehend Gotovina.
However, Del Ponte began to backpedal as the October 3 meeting of the
E.U. General Affairs and External Relations Council drew near. The meeting
was to decide on whether the European Union would open membership
negotiations with Croatia, and the assessment of Croatia’s cooperation with
the ICTY would be the crucial factor in the decision. In a report submitted
to the council on October 3, the ICTY prosecutor concluded that Croatia
was fully cooperating. Many observers remained unconvinced that Croatia
had indeed made significant progress in the previous months, and interpreted
the statement by Del Ponte as a bow to political pressure from some E.U.
member states.
The number of war crimes trials against ethnic Serbs (eleven) greatly outnumbered
trials of ethnic Croat indictees (six). Trials of ethnic Serbs also
tended to involve more defendants, making the contrast between the numbers of individuals standing trial from each ethnic group even starker. Most
notable among these were the Miklusevci case and the Lovas case before the
Vukovar District Court, and the Branjin Vrh case before the Osijek County
Court, all ongoing at this writing.
The absence, for the second consecutive year, of any new indictment against
accused Croats raises serious concerns about the sincerity of the Croatian
government’s accountability efforts. The six trials in 2005 were retrials of
cases from the 1990s or the early 2000s: Mihailo Hrastov (originally opened
in 1993, now re-tried for the third time); Pakracka poljana (1997); Bjelovar
group (2001); Virovitica group (2002); Lora (2002); and Paulin Dvor (2003).
Another remaining concern is the ability of the Croatian courts to conduct
trials in a fair and effective way, given the high number of reversals of first
instance judgments by the Croatian Supreme Court. Much progress is also
needed in the protection of witnesses and inter-state cooperation, in spite of
certain positive developments in those areas in 2005, related to the Lora
retrial.
Key International Actors
On October 3, 2005, the Council of the European Union decided to open
formal negotiations on membership with the Republic of Croatia. The allbut-
exclusive focus on the issue of ICTY cooperation has in the past prevented
the E.U. from using its unique position to vigorously demand greater
progress on other pressing issues such as refugee return, treatment of minorities,
and domestic war crimes trials. However, on October 9, European
Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn stressed to his hosts in Zagreb that
the issues of refugee return, minority rights, and the rule of law would be
critical in the European Commission’s assessment of the progress Croatia
made in meeting the criteria for E.U. membership. The same issues figured
prominently in the Accession Partnership document, issued by the commission
on November 9. The new emphasis is welcome, although it has probably
come several years too late to have any real impact—the process of
refugee return is gradually coming to a halt, the memory of war crimes witnesses is becoming unreliable, and the availability of evidence is becoming
increasingly problematic.
The OSCE mission to Croatia has continued to pursue a dialogue with the
government, while issuing valuable reports critical of its return-related practices,
minority rights record, and progress in domestic war crimes trials.
Nevertheless, political considerations have led the mission to sometimes
attenuate the criticism of Croatia’s human rights record. In a frank assessment
of the mission’s accomplishments in the past two years, the departing
head of mission, Peter Semneby, acknowledged in an April 2005 interview
that the return issue was being resolved less successfully than he had expected,
because “resistance ... proved to be more difficult than I had anticipated.”
On October 7, 2005, U.S. Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
Nicholas Burns reiterated that the U.S. would continue to block Croatia’s
efforts to join NATO until the capture of Ante Gotovina.
Various Council of Europe bodies—the Committee of Ministers, the
European Commission against Racism and Intolerance, and the Advisory
Committee on the Framework Convention on National Minorities—concluded
during the year that Croatia still needed to make substantial progress
regarding the return of refugees, especially in the matter of housing, fairness
in the administration of justice, and in tackling ethnic discrimination.
European Union
The course of integration of the European Union hit a major obstacle in
2005 when voters in France and the Netherlands rejected the new
Constitutional Treaty, leaving it endorsed by barely half of the twenty-five
member states and prompting some of the undecided states to shelve their
own referendum plans. The E.U.’s expansion project nevertheless continues,
with human rights conditionality being a point of leverage in the negotiations
that led to the opening of formal accession talks with Croatia and Turkey (see
separate country chapters).
In matters such as migration and asylum, and counterterrorism, common
E.U. approaches as well as policy and practice in individual E.U. states continue
to reflect a tendency to circumvent international human rights obligations.
Counterterrorism Measures
The issue of counterterrorism in Europe was dominated in 2005 on the one
hand by the terrorist threat taking on characteristics hitherto not experienced
in E.U. states, and on the other by further developments in E.U. governments’
counterterrorism policy negatively impacting fundamental human
rights. The former was shown most vividly when London was struck on July
7 by three simultaneous bomb attacks on its underground train network, and
a fourth on a bus, killing fifty-six people (including the four bombers), making
it the deadliest attack in modern British history. It also marked the E.U.’s
first experience of suicide bombers who were, moreover, British nationals.
On July 21, exactly two weeks later, there was a failed attempt to stage an
almost identical attack, involving bombers on three London underground
trains and a bus. The next day police shot dead a Brazilian man on a London
underground train, having apparently mistaken him for a terrorist suspect.
The incident, which raised questions about police surveillance methods as
well as about application of a policy authorizing use of lethal force by police,
was immediately referred for investigation by the Independent Police Complaints Commission. At the time of this writing, its report was expected
at the end of 2005.
A Spanish court in September sentenced an alleged al-Qaeda leader to twenty-
seven years’ imprisonment for conspiracy to commit murder by having
provided logistical support to the perpetrators of the September 11, 2001,
attacks in the United States, and for being the leader of a terrorist organization.
Seventeen co-defendants were convicted of belonging to or collaborating
with a terrorist group. A terrorism trial opened in Belgium at the beginning
of November, with thirteen defendants (all Moroccans or Belgians of
Moroccan descent) accused of providing support to the perpetrators of the
2004 Madrid train bombings and the 2003 bombings in Casablanca,
Morocco.
At the beginning of November The Washington Post, citing U.S. government
sources, reported that the U.S. had used secret detention facilities in Europe
and elsewhere to illegally hold terrorist suspects without rights or access to
counsel. While the article did not identify the locations, its allegations were
consistent with Human Rights Watch’s own research suggesting the existence
of secret detention facilities in Poland and Romania (the former an E.U.
member state, the latter an acceding state). Both the European Commission
and the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe immediately
announced investigations, and the International Committee of the Red Cross
requested access to the alleged facilities.
Indefinite or Prolonged Detention
The U.K.’s highest court, the House of Lords Judicial Committee (commonly
known as the “Law Lords”) ruled in December 2004 that the indefinite
detention without charge or trial of foreigners suspected of terrorism was
incompatible with the U.K.’s Human Rights Act (which incorporates the
European Convention on Human Rights into domestic law). In response, the
U.K. government announced a “twin-track” set of alternatives to indefinite
detention. This includes recourse to “control orders” that seriously restrict
the movement and activities of any person who is suspected of terrorismrelated
activities (irrespective of nationality), and the use of “diplomatic assurances” to deport to their home countries foreign nationals who would
be at risk of torture or ill-treatment upon return, despite clear evidence that
assurances are an ineffective safeguard against such treatment (see below).
Human Rights Watch criticized the legislation introducing control orders on
the grounds that there were insufficient procedural safeguards given the serious
restrictions on liberty that could be imposed through the orders. The
Prevention of Terrorism Act 2005 became law in March 2005.
The U.K. government in September published new draft counterterrorism
legislation which included extending the maximum period that terrorism suspects
could be detained without charge, to ninety days (from the current
fourteen, already the longest in Europe), and adding and a new criminal
offense of “encouraging” terrorism (see below). The draft legislation passed
in the House of Commons in November, although the government’s proposal
for the extension to ninety days had been defeated and an amendment
approved instead whereby detention without charge for terrorism suspects
would be extended to twenty-eight days. Human Rights Watch argued that
the case for any extension had not been made, and that detention without
charge for up to twenty-eight days could become a form of arbitrary detention,
and might infringe the right of an arrested person to be informed
promptly of any charge against him. At this writing, the draft legislation was
being debated in the House of Lords.
The Italian government introduced a new antiterrorism law in late July 2005,
and, after a very brief parliamentary review, it entered into force at the beginning
of August. It introduced a number of new offenses, and increased penalties
for others. Among its most troubling provisions, it extended the maximum
period during which a suspect could be held for questioning without
charge and without a lawyer present from twelve to twenty-four hours, and
broadened the range of law enforcement authorities empowered to detain
and question terrorist suspects. It also allowed authorization of senior police
officers to order immediate expulsion of persons residing illegally in Italy
who they determined were a threat to national security; appeals against such
expulsions would be without suspensive effect.
Draft new antiterrorism legislation in France, presented to parliament in
November, included a provision to reclassify “criminal association” in relation
to a terrorist offense from a misdemeanour to a felony. The overly vague
nature of the offense permits detention on the basis of limited evidence. Its
use to detain suspects who are later released without charge has been widely
criticized as a form of preventive detention. The reclassification would
increase the maximum permissible pre-trial detention period from three
years and four months, to four years and eight months. It would also double
the maximum possible sentence, to twenty years. The proposed law would
also increase the period that police are allowed to detain suspects in terrorism
cases from four days to six.
Evidence Obtained under Torture
In October, the U.K. Law Lords began consideration of whether evidence
extracted under torture that had been obtained from third countries is permitted
in domestic British law. The case was an appeal brought by ten men
previously subject to indefinite detention as terrorism suspects against an
August 2004 majority decision by the Court of Appeal that the U.K. government
was entitled to rely on torture evidence in special terrorism cases, provided
that the U.K. “neither procured nor connived at” the torture, a decision
contrary to international human rights law. Human Rights Watch was
part of a coalition of fourteen human rights and anti-torture organizations
that intervened in the House of Lords case. The Law Lords’ ruling, expected
by the end of 2005, is likely to have profound implications for the worldwide
ban on torture.
Refoulement and Diplomatic Assurances
Important rulings were made against individual E.U. governments over their
resort to “diplomatic assurances,” but governments continue to press ahead
with strategies that both challenge head on, and seek to side-step, the
absolute prohibition against refoulement—the return of a person to a country
where he or she would be at risk of torture or ill-treatment. This alarming
trend prompted the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe in October 2005 to remind European governments that “the prohibition of torture…
is absolute and applies in all circumstances. It is not negotiable.” In his
annual report to the U.N. General Assembly, the U.N. Special Rapporteur
on Torture, Manfred Nowak, likewise emphasized that “diplomatic assurances
are unreliable and ineffective in the protection against torture and illtreatment,”
and called on governments to “observe the principle of nonrefoulement
scrupulously.”
Five E.U. governments were reported to have united in a challenge to the
landmark 1996 European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) ruling Chahal v.
United Kingdom, affirming the absolute prohibition against refoulement.
The U.K., Italy, Lithuania, Poland and Slovakia obtained permission in
October to intervene as interested parties in the case of Ramzy v.
Netherlands, pending before the ECtHR at the time of writing, in which an
Algerian man suspected of involvement in terrorism, Mohammed Ramzy, was
challenging deportation on the grounds that he would be at risk of torture if
returned to Algeria. Reportedly, the governments concerned were seeking to
overturn Chahal in favour of the position that the right of an individual not
to be tortured could be balanced against the national security interests of the
state (the essence of the dissenting opinion by a minority of ECtHR judges
in Chahal).
In May 2005 the U.N. Committee against Torture ruled that Sweden had
violated the absolute prohibition on torture by expelling terrorism suspect
Ahmed Agiza to Egypt in 2001. Sweden had sought to justify the transfer by
saying that it had secured assurances from Egypt that Agiza would be treated
humanely, but Agiza credibly alleged that after his forcible return to Egypt
he was tortured. The U.N. committee concluded that the assurances Swedish
authorities secured from Egyptian officials concerning Agiza could not be
trusted as sufficient protection. It noted that Egypt had a well-documented
history of torture abuses, especially when dealing with terrorism suspects,
and that its routine use of torture, in combination with interest in Agiza by
the U.S. as well as Egypt, should have led to a “natural conclusion” that
Agiza was at risk of torture upon return.
The transfer of Agiza and another man, Mohammed al-Zari, had been
undertaken by U.S. intelligence operatives to whom Swedish officials handed
custody of the two men at Stockholm’s Bromma Airport, and as such
amounted to “extraordinary rendition.” In March, a report by the Swedish
chief parliamentary ombudsman concluded that the Swedish security service
and the airport police “displayed a remarkable subordinance to the American
officials” and “lost control of the situation,” resulting in the ill-treatment of
Agiza and al-Zari, including physical abuse and other humiliation, at the airport
immediately before they were transported to Cairo. The U.N. committee
said that the ill-treatment at Bromma Airport should have made it clear
to Swedish authorities that the men would be at risk of torture if they were
returned to Egypt.
An appeals court in the Netherlands ruled in January 2005 against the extradition
to Turkey of Nuriye Kesbir, a high-level member of the former
Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK), who was subject to an extradition warrant
from Turkey alleging that she had committed war crimes as a PKK military
operative in the civil war in Turkey’s southeast. In May 2004 a lower court
had determined that although Kesbir’s fears of torture and unfair trial in
Turkey were not completely unfounded, there were insufficient grounds to
halt the extradition. The court gave exclusive authority to the government to
either grant or reject the extradition request, but advised the Netherlands
minister of justice to seek enhanced diplomatic assurances from Turkey
against torture and unfair trial. The appeal court concluded that diplomatic
assurances could not guarantee that Kesbir would not be tortured or ill-treated
upon return to Turkey.
The ECtHR Grand Chamber issued a decision in February 2005 in the case
of Mamatkulov and Askarov v. Turkey, in relation to which Human Rights
Watch and the Advice on Individual Rights in Europe (AIRE) Centre had
submitted an amicus curiae brief. The two men had been extradited from
Turkey to Uzbekistan in 1999 based on assurances against torture and unfair
trial by the Uzbek authorities. It had been anticipated that the Grand
Chamber might rule on the reliability and/or sufficiency of diplomatic assurances
against torture from the government of Uzbekistan, but the court
determined that it did not have sufficient information before it to rule on whether Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights (prohibiting
torture or ill-treatment) had been violated; the court did not engage in a
discussion of the reliability or sufficiency of the assurances. Nevertheless, the
decision concluded that Turkey should have been bound by a ECtHR request
to delay the men’s extradition until the court had an opportunity to review
the men’s application.
The U.K. government, in August and October 2005, signed memoranda of
understanding (MOUs) with Jordan and Libya containing undertakings that
people deported to those countries from the United Kingdom would not be
tortured or ill-treated there. The U.K. government also confirmed that it was
seeking such arrangements with Tunisia, Lebanon and Algeria, and there are
credible reports that a similar agreement was being sought with Egypt.
In August, the U.N. special rapporteur on torture expressed “fears that the
plan of the United Kingdom to request diplomatic assurances for the purpose
of expelling persons in spite of a risk of torture reflects a tendency in Europe
to circumvent the international obligation not to deport anybody if there is a
serious risk that he or she might be subjected to torture,” adding that “diplomatic
assurances are not an appropriate tool to eradicate this risk.”
The ineffectiveness of diplomatic assurances as a safeguard against torture,
and the danger that such assurances pose to the absolute nature of the nonrefoulement
obligation were extensively documented by Human Rights
Watch in an April 2005 report titled, “Still at Risk: Diplomatic Assurances
No Safeguard against Torture,” as well as in subsequent statements critical of
the U.K.’s bilateral agreements based on blanket diplomatic assurances.
Between August and October, more than twenty foreign nationals suspected
of involvement in terrorism were detained pending their deportation on the
grounds of national security, including persons previously subject to indefinite
detention in the United Kingdom. Some of the men, who originate from
Jordan, Libya, and Algeria among other countries, had previously been
granted asylum in Britain. Four of the Algerians were released on bail in
October, but the majority remained in detention at this writing. No deportations
had taken place under the agreements at this writing, and it remained unclear what weight the U.K. courts would attach to the promises of humane
treatment when evaluating the risk of torture in future appeals against deportation
brought by the detainees.
New Offenses of Incitement
The London bombings gave impetus to legislative and other initiatives
directed towards confronting terrorist recruitment. Some of the proposed
measures had troubling implications for freedom of expression. At the level
of common E.U. policy, the tone was set by a September 2005 commission
communication on “Terrorist Recruitment: Addressing the Factors
Contributing to Violent Radicalization.” The European Council was to adopt
a strategy on this issue by the end of the year, as part of its action plan on
terrorism. A new Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of
Terrorism, adopted in May, requires states to criminalize “public provocation
to commit a terrorist offense,” whether or not involving direct advocacy of
terrorism, when such “provocation” is done with intent.
The draft new counterterrorism legislation published in September by the
U.K. government included a new offense criminalizing speech that amounts
to “encouragement,” including speech that justifies or glorifies terrorism, and
the closure of places of worship used to “foment extremism.” Human Rights
Watch was concerned that such measures would undermine the right to nonviolent
expression by criminalizing speech even where there is no intention
to incite violence. Denmark in September initiated the first case under an
antiterrorism law enacted in 2002 that forbids instigation of terrorism or
offering advice to terrorists, and carries a penalty of up to six years in prison.
The accused, a Moroccan-born Danish citizen, was charged in relation to
having downloaded from the Internet and distributed inflammatory speeches
and images including beheadings carried out by Iraqi insurgents.
In August the U.K. government announced a list of “unacceptable behaviours”
added to the list of national security grounds for the deportation or
exclusion of foreign nationals. These included the speech or publication of
views deemed to “foment, justify or glorify terrorism,” provoke others to
commit terrorist acts, or “foster hatred” that might lead to inter-community violence in the United Kingdom. This went further than a July 2004 law in
France allowing the expulsion of foreigners who engage in acts that “explicitly
and deliberately” incite discrimination, hatred or violence. While expulsions
under French law were subject to appeal, an expulsion order was not
automatically suspended while the appeal was pending, and there were cases
in which persons had been expelled to their countries of origin, only to have
the expulsion order overturned on appeal. In Germany, a new immigration
law entered into effect on January 1, 2005, allowing authorities to expel those
who publicly endorse or promote terrorist acts or incite hatred “in a manner
conducive to disturbing public safety.”
On November 9, 2005, after thirteen consecutive nights of rioting across
France, Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy announced that all adult foreigners
convicted of involvement in the rioting, including those with residence permits,
would be deported.
Asylum Seekers and Migrants
As Human Rights Watch has consistently acknowledged, migration into the
E.U. poses clear challenges for European governments, and few would question
the legitimacy or urgency of policies to address these. However, common
E.U. policy in this area continues its development exclusively in the
direction of keeping migrants and asylum seekers out of and away from
Europe. Moreover, exclusionary practices stepping beyond the rule of law are
seen in at least two E.U. states, Italy and Spain, which have actively engaged
in expulsions without respect for the individual right to seek asylum. These
and other E.U. states also implement returns with scant regard for whether
the receiving countries could offer effective protection.
Common E.U. Immigration and Asylum Policy
The European Commission in September published a proposal for a directive
on “common standards and procedures for returning illegally-staying
third-country nationals.” While the draft directive contains improved language
on human rights protection in comparison to the previous iteration of
the proposal, a number of concerns remain. The text also falls short of meeting the criteria laid out in a set of common principles of return developed by
a coalition of human rights and European refugee nongovernmental organizatrions,
including Human Rights Watch. Key concerns include the absence
of a mandatory right of appeal against removal with suspensive effect, and the
imposition of a re-entry ban that could amount to a double penalty with
potentially far-reaching consequences for the principle of non-refoulement.
At the time of writing, this directive was pending “co-decision” by the
European Council and the European Parliament.
The Asylum Procedures Directive, agreed by the European Council in April
2004, was submitted for consultation with the European Parliament, which in
September 2005 expressed “severe reservations” and called for over one hundred
amendments to the document. In a reaffirmation of the principle that
an asylum seeker should have his/her claim individually assessed, the
Parliament argued that any applicant should have the right to “rebut the presumption
of safety” associated with the proposal for “safe third country” lists.
Human Rights Watch and others had called in March 2004 for withdrawal of
the draft directive on grounds that the “most contentious provisions are all
intended to deny asylum seekers access to asylum procedures and to facilitate
their transfer to countries outside the E.U.” The European Parliament’s proposed
amendments were not binding on the council. At this writing there
had been no further movement towards adopting the draft directive.
Readmission Agreements
Human Rights Watch research in countries on the E.U.’s new eastern frontiers
confirmed concerns that some of the new E.U. member states do not
have systems offering full and fair asylum determination procedures, or policies
and practices in place to ensure that no person is sent back to a place
where his or her life or freedom is threatened. As documented in the
November 2005 Human Rights Watch report, “On the Margins—Ukraine:
Rights Violations against Migrants and Asylum Seekers at the New Eastern
Border of the Europe Union,” border guards in Poland and Slovakia who
intercept persons crossing from Ukraine interview and process them generally
within forty-eight hours, with no genuine effort to identify them by name, origin or status, and without their having access to lawyers or interpreters or
the possibility to challenge a decision by the border guard to return them to
Ukraine. Effected under bilateral readmission agreements between the E.U.
states concerned and Ukraine, some of these returns lent substance to concerns
that, while in theory readmission agreements are not designed to interfere
with the right to asylum, in practice those liable to return can include
asylum seekers whose protection needs have not been determined.
European Community readmission agreements (applicable to all E.U. member
states except Denmark, where an abstention applied) were concluded
with Albania and Russia in April and October respectively, and were being
negotiated with four other countries including Ukraine and Morocco.
Processing Migrants and Asylum Seekers Outside the E.U.
A communication from the European Commission on Regional Protection
Programmes (RPPs) was hailed by the E.U.’s Justice and Home Affairs
Council in October as the E.U.’s first step “in improving access to protection
needs and durable solutions for those in need of international protection, as
quickly and as close to their home as possible.” Pilot RPPs were due to be
launched before the end of 2005.
In its November 2005 report on Ukraine (located in the region covered by
the first pilot RPP), Human Rights Watch noted that RPPs offered the possibility
of real improvements to the target countries’ protection capacity, but
raised concerns that the RPPs might undermine the right to seek asylum in
the E.U., by resulting in premature designation of the target countries as
“safe third countries,” which would then expedite the return of asylum seekers
who had transited them without first considering their protection needs.
Similarly, the office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) welcomed the RPP proposal, but stressed the need for guarantees
that RPPs would be complementary to existing asylum provisions in E.U.
states.
The E.U. continues to press ahead with programs for strict control of access
to Europe, and its migration policies towards neighbouring countries emphasize
enforcement rather than protection.
By bilateral arrangement with Libya, Italy continue to expel—without a
proper assessment of their asylum claims—people who arrive from North
Africa and were being held on the island of Lampedusa under Italy’s mandatory
detention policy for illegal migrants and asylum seekers. In March 2005,
nearly five hundred Egyptians were expelled to Libya and sevety-six directly
to Egypt, handcuffed and blindfolded for their charter flights. Nearly two
hundred persons were expelled to Libya in May and June. The expulsions
ignored the evidence that, as a place in which the basic human rights of
migrants are frequently violated and that has not ratified the 1951
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, Libya cannot be regarded as a
“safe third country” for return.
The Italian Minister of Interior told the Italian Parliament after the March
expulsions that the government’s actions were in full compliance with their
human rights obligations, but they were criticized by UNHCR, whose officials
had been denied access to Lampedusa at that time. A delegation of
Members of the European Parliament (MEPs) visiting the Lampedusa facility
at the end of June queried the appropriateness of third countries’ consular
officials being involved in detainee identification procedures there, given the
danger this presented to a potential asylum seeker, and were informed that
“nobody” had recently claimed asylum, an assertion the MEPs described as
“incredible,” as this would make Lampedusa “the first centre in Italy where
this does not happen.”
In early October, faced with mass attempts by undocumented migrants to
force entry into Spain’s North African enclaves of Ceuta and Melilla, the
Spanish government expelled to Morocco at least 73 people who had reached
the enclaves, including several who had sought to claim asylum. The expulsions
were reportedly carried out without an individual assessment that
would have enabled presentation of asylum claims. On October 23, Morocco
deported forty-nine Malians from this group to their home country despite
the fact that at least two had applied for asylum in Morocco. There are alarming reports of human rights violations against migrants deported to
Morocco from Spain or detained in Morocco as they tried to enter Ceuta or
Melilla, including expulsions in inhumane conditions to the desert borders
with Algeria and Mauritania. At least eleven people were shot dead as
Spanish and Moroccan troops attempted to block entry to the enclaves.
Morocco admitted that its border guards were responsible for four of the
fatalities, while an internal Spanish inquiry exonerated Spanish forces.
Human Rights Watch called for independent investigation into the deaths, as
did the U.N. Special Rapporteur on the Human Rights of Migrants, Dr.
Jorge Bustamente, who also called on Morocco to end collective deportations.
Georgia
Since the Rose Revolution at the end of 2003, the government has had an
uneven record on human rights. In 2005, it continued to prioritize its campaign
against corruption and for territorial integrity. Its ambitious reform
agenda is supported by the international community. However, at times it
carries out reforms hastily, without broad and open consultation and without
the thoroughness or detail necessary to eradicate entrenched human rights
problems. As a result, human rights abuses continue unchecked in many
spheres, following patterns established under former governments.
On a range of issues, including religious and political freedom and independence
of the judiciary, government reforms are producing mixed results.
Although the media is now relatively free, it has become less critical and
there are signs of increasing government influence on media content. The
government has taken some positive steps to prevent torture but torture and
due process violations continue to be reported. Refugees remain vulnerable
to abuse.
Mixed Results on Reform
Constitutional amendments adopted in 2004 increased the president’s influence
over the judiciary, further eroding judicial independence. In April 2005,
after months of uncertainty, a presidential decree changed the Tbilisi court
structure and led to the dismissal of significant numbers of judges. The
decree, administered by the High Council of Justice, a body headed by
President Saakashvili, did not set out criteria for deciding which judges
would be removed from their positions. The arbitrary decision-making
process heightened the sense of executive prerogative.
The environment for religious freedom has significantly improved since the
change in government when violent attacks against minority religions began
to subside, suggesting that the attackers were somehow linked to the former
government. In a positive move the authorities arrested Vasili Mkalavishvili,
the leader of many of the attacks, and in January 2005, he was convicted and
sentenced to six years in prison. In another positive step, the parliament passed amendments to the civil code in April 2005 making it easier for religious
organizations to be registered. Discrimination against unregistered religious
groups had been a major obstacle to religious freedom in Georgia.
Torture
Torture, impunity, and denial of due process remain serious problems in
Georgia. By 2005, the government had begun to acknowledge these longstanding
concerns and took some steps to combat them.
Legislative amendments to criminal laws in 2005 made out-of-court statements
inadmissible as evidence unless confirmed in court and reduced pretrial
detention time limits (to take effect from 2006). Further, the authorities
prosecuted several police officers for torture or other ill-treatment and
helped to set up a monitoring system for police stations under the framework
of the Public Defender’s Office. According to Georgian nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) and those involved in the monitoring program, by
mid-2005 there had been a reduction in the number of complaints of torture
in the capital, Tbilisi. They told Human Rights Watch, however, that there
had been a corresponding increase in police violence at the time of arrest and
during transportation to the police stations. They also said that the widespread
problem of torture in other parts of the country remained largely
unaffected by government measures, in part because resources were lacking
to monitor effectively police stations in the regions.
Media Freedom
Since the Rose Revolution, the government has improved legislative protections
for freedom of expression, including by decriminalizing libel, but the
media has become more pro-government and less critical than it was during
the Shevardnadze era. Newspapers remain relatively free of government
pressure. However, major television channels are biased in favor of the government
in their news and current affairs coverage. Journalists, NGOs, and
representatives of international organizations have told Human Rights Watch
that the government uses its influence with the owners of the major television
channels to control the content of their programs. The owners give little editorial independence to staff and sometimes censor programs that are critical
of the government.
On April 3, 2005, the owner of Imedi television, Badri Patarkatasishvili,
ordered the station not to broadcast a story on police corruption on the
weekly television program Droeba (Time). The next day, Patarkatasishvili
explained why he had refused to allow the program to be broadcast, saying
“if I want to tell something to the government, I can tell it personally and
directly.” NGOs and representatives of international organizations told
Human Rights Watch that the presidential administration sometimes directly
contacts chief editors, telling them how to cover certain issues. Journalists,
however, are reluctant to speak publicly about government interference with
or efforts to influence the content of their work. There are reportedly few
protections against unfair dismissal, and journalists are rarely willing to risk
their positions by speaking out publicly.
Refugees
Chechen refugees remain vulnerable to abuse in Georgia. They lack adequate
housing, medical care, and employment opportunities. Refugees are subjected
to police harassment and threats of refoulement.
In March 2005, two Kists (ethnic Chechens from Georgia), who were
Russian citizens, reportedly went to the Ministry of Refugees and Housing in
Tbilisi, seeking asylum. Officers from the Ministry of Interior arrested them
and took them to the border with Azerbaijan, where Azerbaijani authorities
reportedly refused them entry unless they agreed to return to Russia. They
spent several weeks in the neutral zone between the Georgian and
Azerbaijani borders before returning to Georgia. On May 28, 2005, Russian
authorities organized the repatriation of eighteen Chechen refugees from
Georgia. Although no force was used, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees did not consider the repatriation voluntary due
to the lack of access to objective and accurate information about conditions
in the country of origin.
Although Georgia passed amendments to its refugee law in April 2005 and
has ratified the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, its laws
and practice in refugee determination and protection do not comply with
international standards. For example, pre-screening mechanisms prevent registration
of asylum claims, and there are insufficient protections against
refoulement for refugees and for those who may have been excluded from
refugee status, but who would risk torture or ill-treatment if returned.
Human Rights Defenders
Although the government works closely with a number of human rights
NGOs, it has excluded some of the country’s most critical human rights
defenders from important initiatives, such as the monitoring of prison facilities
and police stations. In December 2004, unidentified persons made several
threatening calls to the offices of an NGO called “Former Political
Prisoners for Human Rights,” and in 2005, representatives of the Human
Rights Information and Documentation Center told Human Rights Watch
that government officials had telephoned their offices and warned them to
stop work on particular cases.
Key International Actors
The European Union (E.U.), pursuant to its European Neighbourhood
Policy, decided to go ahead with plans to prepare “action plans” for countries
of the south Caucasus, including Georgia. This is the first time that the E.U.
has offered Georgia closer economic, political, and cultural relations in
exchange for measurable human rights progress. As such, it marks a significant
opportunity for the E.U. to encourage human rights improvements in
Georgia. The potential of the initiative to trigger meaningful reforms will
depend, however, on the nature and specificity of the human rights benchmarks
included in the final action plan document, which was still being negotiated
between the Georgian government and the E.U. at this writing.
In 2005, the Council of Europe extended deadlines for Georgia’s compliance
with its commitments and obligations, due to the change of government after
the Rose Revolution. Council of Europe experts continue to provide opinions on how proposed legal reforms comply with European and international
human rights standards. However, the government does not always take into
account their recommendations. In June 2005, the Council of Europe recommended
that the government address the problem of discrimination against
the Azerbaijani minority in Georgia.
U.S. backing of President Saakashvili’s government has led to a less critical
attitude toward human rights abuses in the country. In a speech during his
highly publicized visit to Georgia in May 2005, President Bush claimed that
Georgia is a place where free speech flourishes, the rights of minorities are
respected, and a vigorous opposition is welcomed, ignoring significant evidence
to the contrary. In his speech, Bush did not raise any human rights
concerns. The U.S. provides substantial support to Georgia through its assistance
and military cooperation programs. In 2005, the U.S. approved
U.S.$300 million in aid to Georgia over the next five years under the
Millennium Challenge Account. Georgia has 850 troops serving in Iraq.
In 2005, relations with Russia remained difficult due to increased tensions
over the breakaway republics of South Ossetia and Abkhazia, Georgia’s joint
initiatives with Ukraine to promote democracy within the region, and intense
negotiations over the withdrawal of Russian military bases, which ended in
agreement and a timetable for withdrawal.
Kazakhstan
Government antagonism toward the political opposition created a hostile
environment in advance of December 2005 presidential elections. New legislation
ostensibly designed to reform the elections process and bolster national
security further weakened civil and political rights in the country.
Kazakh authorities continue to interfere with citizens’ rights to free assembly
and expression, use politically motivated lawsuits to silence independent
media, and limit access to opposition and independent Internet sites. While
laws that would have severely restricted nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) were struck down in 2005, the government intensified pressure on
civil society groups, including foreign NGOs.
Elections
On August 19, 2005, the Constitutional Council of Kazakhstan announced
that presidential elections would be held on December 4—a year earlier than
some had argued was legally mandated. The decision came after heated
debate about the exact length of the president’s term of office, as different
articles of the constitution appeared to contradict one another on this issue.
Opposition politicians complained that holding elections on such short
notice placed them at a significant disadvantage.
The current government dominates all political life in the country, limiting
the options available to the electorate. At the time of the announcement,
only one opposition movement capable of mounting a credible challenge, For
a Fair Kazakhstan (ZSK), was registered. In September, international and
domestic media overwhelmingly predicted a victory for the incumbent,
Nursultan Nazarbaev, who has ruled Kazakhstan since 1989. Opposition
activists warned of popular dissatisfaction if the elections were not free and
fair.
An election law enacted on April 15, 2005 strictly regulates the actions of
foreigners and international organizations. Among other provisions, it bans
foreign support of any political movement and external financing of elections. The law also bans public demonstrations from the day before voting
until after official election results are announced. A new law on national
security, passed on July 8, stipulates heavy fines for international NGOs that
become involved in the election process on behalf of any political movement.
Political Opposition
Kazakh authorities dealt harshly with opposition political groups in 2005.
Reversing one of the most significant steps toward democratic reform it had
taken in recent years, the government filed suit against the leading opposition
party. On January 6, 2005, the Special Economic Court in Almaty shut
down the Democratic Choice of Kazakhstan (DVK), on the ground that a
party statement calling for civil disobedience allegedly posed a threat to
national security. Throughout the appeals process, which the DVK lost, the
authorities harassed and intimidated party supporters. As of this writing, former
DVK leader and co-founder Galimzhan Zhakianov remains in a minimum
security facility where he is serving a seven-year sentence on charges of
abuse of office. He was convicted in 2002 after a trial that was widely condemned
as unfair.
In 2005, supporters of President Nazarbaev attacked the leading opposition
candidate for president, ZSK Chairman Zharmahan Tuiakbai, on at least two
occasions. On April 9, a brick narrowly missed Tuiakbai at a rally in eastern
Kazakhstan and, on May 2, some fifty men stormed a ZSK meeting, declaring
their intention to kill Tuiakbai “for Nazarbaev.” A police investigation
into the incident yielded one arrest, which resulted in probation. On the
night of September 25, an arsonist reportedly used Molotov cocktails to
destroy the Kostanai office of the ZSK.
Civil Society
Although the Constitutional Council in 2005 struck down two laws that
would have substantially circumscribed the activities of NGOs, serious
administrative harassment of such groups continues to mar Kazakhstan’s
rights record. Following political upheavals in other post-Soviet states,
Kazakh tax authorities began audits of at least thirty-three international organizations operating in the country. NGO activists viewed these probes as
government intimidation.
The rights to free assembly and expression continue to be circumscribed. In
one particularly serious incident, police and Special Forces (OMON) officers
detained about eighty people on May 1, 2005, in the capital, Astana, after
they had participated in a public rally and pop concert in support of a presidential
policy initiative. Law enforcement agents detained and beat young
people wearing orange scarves and carrying orange balloons as they left the
rally. Police told the detainees that wearing orange was a problem because of
its symbolic role in the political unrest in Ukraine. Detainees were threatened
with expulsion from university or destruction of their businesses. The
organizers themselves were charged with holding an “unsanctioned procession”
despite the fact that the concert had been approved by the local government.
Press Freedom
The government uses politically-motivated lawsuits extensively to silence
independent media. Government agencies use laws making it a crime to
insult the “honor and dignity” of the president, legislators, or other authorities
(articles 318, 319, and 320 of the criminal code) to punish media outlets
that publish information critical of the president or his government. The law
does not require that the offending statements be false in order to trigger
heavy penalties. In May 2005, the leading independent newspaper,
Respublika, was ordered closed following a court decision dissolving the company
that published it. The decision followed a government lawsuit over the
paper’s reprint of an interview with a Russian politician who allegedly made
disparaging remarks about the Kazakh state and people. Authorities also
interfered with the printing of Set’kz (Network KZ), the successor to
Respublika, under the pretext of problems with the paper’s license.
In March, the newspaper Soz (Voice) lost its appeal against a five-milliontenge
(U.S.$40,000) fine levied in an “honor and dignity” lawsuit filed by the
National Security Committee (KNB, successor to the KGB). Although Soz paid the judgment in full, the KNB pressed the courts to stop publication of
the paper, and printing was halted briefly in early June.
The Kazakh government continues to limit access to opposition and independent
Internet sites through the government-run provider, Kaztelecom,
and another major network, Nursat.
Human Rights Defenders
On March 3, 2005, Kazakhstan’s ombudsman, Bolot Baikadamov, accused the
country’s leading human rights organization, the Kazakh International
Bureau of Human Rights and Rule of Law (KIBHR), of publishing biased
information and distorting the situation in Kazakhstan in its reports on
human rights developments. Baikadamov’s comments were made directly to
the president, but were later publicized. In mid-August the offices of the
KIBHR were burglarized; the organization’s staff believed the incident was
politically motivated.
Key International Actors
United States
The U.S. government budgeted an estimated $74.2 million in assistance to
Kazakhstan in 2004, more than half of which was allocated to security and
law enforcement programs. U.S. aid also went to bolstering health care, civil
society programs, and market reform. An annual report on human rights
released by the State Department’s Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and
Labor in February said the Kazakh government “severely limited citizens’
right to change their government.” In September, members of the
Commission for Security and Cooperation in Europe voiced doubts about
Kazakhstan’s bid for chairmanship of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). The senators pointed to the upcoming
presidential election as a test of Kazakhstan’s commitment to democracy. In
October 2005, U.S. Secretary of State Condoleeza Rice visited Kazakhstan
on a tour of Central Asian states and praised the republic as an “island of stability.” She held meetings with President Nazarbaev and leading opposition
presidential candidate Zharmahan Tuiakbai. Another opposition figure, Tolen
Tokhtasynov, was arrested en route to his meeting with Secretary Rice.
European Union
The European Union is currently the single largest source of foreign direct
investment in Kazakhstan. It has had a Partnership and Cooperation
Agreement (PCA) with Kazakhstan since 1999. During its annual
Cooperation Council with Kazakhstan, held in July, and in other public statements,
the E.U. “emphasized the need for increased efforts” on the part of
the Kazakh authorities to “comply fully with international norms and standards…
in particular as regards elections, freedom of media, the ability of
political parties to operate freely and the registration of NGOs with the public
authorities.” The conclusions further expressed the “expectation” that the
forthcoming presidential elections would be free and fair, and noted that “any
country applying for the chairmanship of the OSCE must exemplify the principles
of the Organization.” The E.U., however, again stopped short of using
the PCA to articulate specific reform steps with a clear timeline for compliance.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
The OSCE maintains a center in Almaty. During a February visit to Astana,
OSCE Chairman-in-Office Dimitrij Rupel urged the government of
Kazakhstan to implement substantial political reform and lamented the fact
that the parliament was “largely devoid of any opposition party representation.”
After changes to the election law brought about restrictions on free
assembly, the OSCE publicly urged the president to refer the new regulations
to the Constitutional Council. The OSCE also voiced concerns about
new national security legislation and hosted forums on human rights, the
environment, and journalism.
Shanghai Cooperation Organization
Kazakhstan hosted the 2005 summit of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO) in Astana. The organization’s members are Russia,
China, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan. High on the
agenda was cooperation in the fight against “terrorism, extremism, and separatism,”
which was considered especially pressing given the brewing international
tension over the government of Uzbekistan’s insistence that its neighbors
forcibly return Uzbek citizens wanted by Uzbekistan for terrorism. The
Uzbek government has claimed that terrorists were responsible for the massacre
in Andijan on May 13, 2005. (See Uzbekistan.)
Kazakhstan became involved in an international standoff over the fate of
Lutfullo Shamsuddinov, an Uzbek human rights activist who gathered information
about government abuses on May 13 and who subsequently fled to
Kazakhstan with his family. Shamsuddinov was declared a refugee by the
office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Nonetheless,
the Uzbek government demanded that Kazakh authorities extradite
Shamsuddinov on bogus charges of terrorism. The international community
strenuously objected to his forcible return. After detaining him for six days,
the Kazakh government agreed to release Shamsuddinov and he was flown to
safety in another country.
Kyrgyzstan
Popular demonstrations swept through Kyrgyzstan in March 2005, leading to
the ouster and resignation of President Askar Akaev. Echoing the “rose” and
“orange” revolutions that brought regime change in Georgia and Ukraine,
the country-wide protests and disintegration of the Akaev government dramatically
altered the political landscape in Kyrgyzstan.
Following deeply flawed parliamentary elections in February and March
2005, people took to the streets. Outraged by the corruption and repression
that characterized the parliamentary vote—including attacks on independent
media and the perceived unfair advantage given to candidates who were relatives
of the president—protestors in southern Kyrgyzstan and later in the
capital took over administrative buildings and defiantly expressed their dissatisfaction
with the status quo. A variety of grievances merged into a single
demand: the resignation of President Askar Akaev.
Violent clashes between police and protestors flared over several days, and
eyewitnesses reported the presence in the crowd of government saboteurs
who attacked protestors and police alike, causing chaos and panic. Dozens of
people were reportedly injured and government and private property was
damaged. However, police dropped their weapons and refused to use violence
to suppress the protestors who arrived at the Kyrgyzstan White House on
March 24, 2005. The demonstrators forced their way in and took over the
seat of government. One of the leaders during the weeks of protest, longtime
politician Kurmanbek Bakiev, was named the new president. President
Akaev fled the country and later formally resigned his post.
Political prisoner Feliks Kulov was released by protestors on March 24, 2005.
On April 6, the Supreme Court overturned his conviction on charges of
abuse of power; a second conviction, for embezzlement, was quashed on
April 11. Kulov withdrew as a candidate for the July presidential election and
President Bakiev, whose leadership was confirmed in that election, later
appointed him Prime Minister.
Promises of Reform
In the immediate aftermath of the revolution, the people of Kyrgyzstan had
high hopes that the Bakiev government would put a stop to the corruption
and repression that had undermined the Akaev administration.
As of this writing, promises of reform made during the early days of the
Bakiev administration had not materialized. While Bakiev twice in 2005
announced his support for the abolition of the death penalty in Kyrgyzstan
and called for constitutional amendments, no such legislation had been introduced
as of late November.
One of the main reforms urged by civil society activists is the creation of a
new constitution that would restore freedoms stripped during the Akaev era
and would settle important issues regarding the structure of the government,
such as whether Kyrgyzstan should be a presidential or parliamentary republic.
The Constitutional Committee, set up to draft a new constitution, initially
received praise for including civil society representatives in addition to
government officials among its members. However, observers later criticized
the body as ineffective and marred by infighting and noted that President
Bakiev had increased the number of government representatives vis-a-vis representatives
of civil society.
Continuing reports of police abuse in 2005, including torture of adult and
children detainees, further undermined people’s confidence in the government’s
promises of reform.
In a positive development, local rights groups and media watchdogs reported
increased freedom of the media following the change in government.
Human Rights Defenders
During the final months of the Akaev government, as the country geared up
for parliamentary elections, human rights defenders suffered intense persecution.
Tursunbek Akun, a prominent human rights defender and leader of the
NGO Human Rights Movement of Kyrgyzstan, was kidnapped on
November 16, 2004. He was held for fifteen days by men he believed to be
associated with police and national security services. Akun was discovered on
December 1 at a Bishkek hospital where doctors found he was suffering from
“deep psychological trauma.” A private doctor later diagnosed him with a
brain concussion.
Kyrgyz government officials denied that Akun was the victim of kidnapping
or forced disappearance and failed to investigate the possible role of law
enforcement agents in the crime. The spokesman for the Ministry of Internal
Affairs and the deputy chairman of the National Security Service publicly
accused Akun of staging his own disappearance for self-promotion and to discredit
law enforcement bodies. Akun claimed that he had been held by members
of the security forces in the basement of an unknown house, where his
kidnappers allegedly demanded that he stop collecting signatures in support
of Akaev’s resignation. Prior to his abduction, Akun had been actively advocating
for the early resignation of President Akaev. As of September 2005, no
one had been held accountable for the kidnapping and police had halted their
investigation.
Aziza Abdurasulova, head of the human rights NGO Kylym Shamy (Candle
of the Century), was active in the search for Akun while he was missing. On
November 26, 2004, a person who identified himself as a police officer tried
to force her into his car, claiming she had a stolen cell phone and that she
had to be taken to the police station. Her phone had in fact been given to her
by the Bishkek office of the U.S.-based organization Freedom House.
Abdurasulova fled from the officer. She later received calls on her cell phone
from senior police officers asking to meet with her. At a press conference, the
spokesman for the Ministry of Internal Affairs accused her of trying to draw
public and political attention to herself with allegations that police officers
had attempted to abduct her.
With a new government in place, the long-exiled head of the Kyrgyz
Committee for Human Rights (KCHR), Ramazan Dyryldaev, was able to
return to the country. The KCHR continued to face serious obstacles to its operations, however. During the Akaev government, the KCHR had been
stripped of its registration and an alternate group was granted registration
under the same name; it is illegal in Kyrgyzstan for two groups with the same
name to be registered. As of this writing, the genuine KCHR had not been
re-registered.
Key International Actors
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) criticized
the former Akaev government for failing to ensure that the February and
March 2005 rounds of parliamentary elections complied with international
standards. In its report on the July elections that followed President Akaev’s
ouster, the OSCE noted that the “election marked tangible progress by the
Kyrgyz Republic towards meeting OSCE commitments, as well as other
international standards for democratic elections.”
Following a meeting with then-Foreign Minister Roza Otunbaeva in
September, European Commissioner for External Relations Benita Ferrero-
Waldner stressed the “unique window of opportunity for the Kyrgyz government
to show its political commitment to fully embrace democratic values,
develop economic and social policies, which will benefit the Kyrgyz population,
and tackle corruption.”
With relations already at a low point after Uzbek president Islam Karimov
condemned the March “revolution,” tensions between Kyrgyzstan and
Uzbekistan escalated further when hundreds of Uzbeks sought refuge in
Kyrgyzstan following the May 13 massacre of largely unarmed protesters by
security forces in the Uzbek city of Andijan. Uzbek authorities pressured the
Kyrgyz government to return Uzbek asylum seekers and obtained the handover
of four men on June 9. Under strong international pressure, the government
of Kyrgyzstan vowed not to return any more of the refugees.
On July 29, 2005, the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees airlifted 439
Uzbeks from Kyrgyzstan to Romania. One month later, the government of
Uzbekistan cancelled its contracts to supply natural gas to Kyrgyzstan. Uzbek
authorities went on to implicate Kyrgyzstan in what they claimed was an Islamic insurgency in Andijan. The state prosecutor’s office charged that the
“rebels” had trained in southern Kyrgyzstan. The Kyrgyz authorities denied
these allegations.
Kyrgyz-Russian cooperation grew closer in 2005 after Kyrgyz authorities
allowed Russia to double the number of its troops at the Kant airbase.
Relations between Kyrgyzstan and the U.S. government deteriorated in the
final months of the Akaev administration. The U.S. Ambassador to
Kyrgyzstan, Stephen M. Young, strongly criticized the government for not
allowing free and fair parliamentary elections. During the March unrest in
southern Kyrgyzstan, the U.S. government called for dialogue and expressed
hope that political changes in Kyrgyzstan would be non-violent. The United
States engaged with the newly-installed Bakiev government on issues ranging
from the use of the Manas airbase near Bishkek to the Uzbek refugee issue.
In April 2005, a group of visiting senators pledged to support the country’s
political transition. During the fiscal year 2004 (October 1, 2003 through
September 30, 2004), U.S. foreign assistance to Kyrgyzstan was U.S.$50.8
million. U.S. expenditures to Kyrgyzstan were expected to increase in 2005.
At a summit of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) held in
Astana in July 2005, Kyrgyzstan joined Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Russia,
China, and Tajikistan in signing a declaration on strengthening cooperation
in the “fight against terrorism, separatism and extremism.” Despite an official
SCO statement urging the U.S. to set a date for withdrawal from military
bases in Central Asian countries, President Bakiev assured U.S. Secretary of
Defense Donald Rumsfeld that the U.S. could use the base in Kyrgyzstan for
as long as necessary. At the present time, there are more than nine hundred
U.S. troops stationed at Manas airbase.
Russia
Russia slipped deeper into authoritarianism in 2005, as a series of political
changes that President Vladimir Putin proposed in the aftermath of the
September 2004 Beslan massacre became law. In November, the State Duma
took the first step toward approving a draconian law that, if enacted, would
substantially curtail the activities of nongovernmental organizations (NGOs)
in Russia.
The armed conflict in Chechnya continues unabated. In March 2005,
Human Rights Watch concluded that enforced disappearances by Russian
forces and their proxies in Chechnya are so widespread and systematic that
they constitute crimes against humanity.
The government took modest but important steps in 2005 to resolve some of
the country’s entrenched human rights problems, including the brutal hazing
of conscripts in the armed forces that has claimed dozens of lives and contributed
to hundreds of suicides in recent years.
The North Caucasus
Events in 2005 demonstrated the continuing inability of the Russian government
to bring peace to Chechnya and its neighboring regions. The conflict
continues to claim civilian lives every day.
Enforced disappearances continue to be the conflict’s hallmark abuse, with
local groups estimating that between two thousand and five thousand people
have “disappeared” since 1999 including, according to official figures, more
than 140 in the first nine months of 2005. The “disappearances” have followed
a clear pattern: the victims are overwhelmingly men between the ages
of eighteen and forty, and are always unarmed at the time of apprehension.
The perpetrators, in the majority of cases, are clearly identifiable as Russian
troops or as belonging to pro-Moscow Chechen commandos. Most “disappearances”
have happened in two standards sets of circumstances: in large
Russian raids during which troops blocked off and systematically search
entire villages or towns, or during targeted raids in the middle of the night.
The Russian government, though long aware of both the frequency and pattern
of enforced disappearances, has taken few steps to stop the practice.
As part of Russia’s policy of “Chechenization” of the conflict, pro-Moscow
Chechen forces under the command of Ramzan Kadyrov have played an
increasingly active role in the conflict. In 2004 and 2005, they gradually
replaced federal troops as the main perpetrators of “disappearances.” They
run their own prisons—entirely outside any official penitentiary structure—
where they detain, and often ill-treat, hundreds of people. These troops are
also responsible for the reprehensible practice of taking hostages among relatives
of rebel leaders as a way of forcing the latter to surrender. The Kremlin
not only tolerates these practices but has effectively endorsed them by naming
Ramzan Kadyrov deputy prime minister of Chechnya and bestowing a
Hero of Russia award on him.
Chechen rebels also continue committed egregious violations of human
rights. Following the death of rebel leader Aslan Maskhadov in March, they
stepped up their campaign against civil servants and regular police both in
Chechnya and the neighboring regions of Ingushetia and Dagestan.
Only a few cases against servicemen and police officers charged with abuses
against Chechen civilians have reached the courts. In March 2005, a court
found police officer Sergei Lapin guilty of abuse of authority for ill-treating
Zelimkhan Murdalov and sentenced him to eleven years in prison. In two
other cases, juries acquitted servicemen charged with the murder of nine
people. In the majority of cases involving serious abuses, however, military
and civilian prosecutors have failed to conduct meaningful investigations. In
many cases, investigators have failed even to question eyewitnesses. Unable
to secure justice within Russia, hundreds of victims have filed applications
with the European Court of Human Rights.
Hostilities between law enforcement agencies and insurgents in the
Kabardino-Balkaria region dramatically illustrate the increasing instability in
the North Caucasus. On October 13, 2005, armed insurgents launched a
major attack on police stations, the airport, and government buildings in
Nalchik, the region’s capital, taking several hostages. The hostilities reportedly resulted in more than 130 deaths, including at least forty-four civilians
and local police officers. Although Chechen rebel leader Shamil Basayev
claimed responsibility for the attack, most insurgents appeared to have been
locals.
Political Rights and Freedoms
In 2005, the government pushed through a package of political changes that
increased President Putin’s power. New legislation abolished direct elections
for governors, ended single constituency voting in parliamentary elections,
established new membership requirements for political parties seeking to
participate in parliamentary elections, and raised the minimum threshold for
entry of these parties into the State Duma from 5 to 7 percent.
Under the new legislation, Russia’s president nominates candidates for all
regional governorships. Regional parliaments have the right to reject these
candidates but if they do so three times, the president can dissolve the parliament.
In 2005, President Putin nominated candidates for more than thirty
governorships, all of whom were rapidly approved by the regional parliaments.
The changes to election laws are likely to make the next State Duma even
more monolithic than today’s. The end of single constituency voting will cost
most independent deputies their seats. The new rules also require that political
parties have at least fifty thousand members in order to be able to compete
in parliamentary elections.
When Mikhail Kasyanov, a former prime minister, hinted he might run for
president in 2008, law enforcement bodies suddenly opened investigations
into alleged wrongdoing during his term in office. The prosecution of
Mikhail Khodorkovsky and Platon Lebedev, the former head and a key shareholder
of the Yukos oil company, ended in guilty verdicts and an eight-year
prison term for each. Many observers believe the men were prosecuted primarily
because the Kremlin perceived them as a political threat.
Human Rights Defenders
Pressure on NGOs escalated in 2005. A proposed new law, adopted in the
first of three required readings in the State Duma in November, would dramatically
increase the government’s powers to interfere with their work and
would close down foreign NGOs operating in Russia. The law was still pending
at this writing.
NGOs that work on human rights issues in Chechnya came under increasing
fire in 2005. These groups, the activists who lead them, and the people they
work with increasingly faced administrative and judicial harassment, and, in
the most severe cases, persecution, threats, and physical attacks. For example,
the authorities opened two criminal cases against the Russian-Chechen
Friendship Society, accusing it of inciting racial hatred and violating tax laws.
If found guilty, Stanislav Dmitrievsky, its director, could face five years in
prison.
Although harassment of critical NGOs that do not work on Chechnya was
less severe, the working environment deteriorated significantly in 2005.
Government officials at both the federal and regional level stepped up their
verbal attacks on these groups. In a number of regions, officials used legislation
that prohibits extremism to shut down NGOs while in others they selectively
used registration procedures or audits to harass groups of which they
disapproved.
Entrenched Problems
The government made some modest steps in 2005 toward resolving
entrenched human rights problems in large state institutions but still need to
take more far-reaching measures to fully address these concerns. Torture and
ill-treatment of criminal suspects by police, institutionalization and poor
treatment of orphans, and inhumane treatment of persons in psychiatric
institutions remain widespread and unaddressed.
The Ministry of Defense signed a memorandum of understanding with the
human rights ombudsman that allows for monitoring of human rights conditions in military bases. It also announced that it would start regularly publishing
information on deaths in the armed forces. Despite these positive
steps, violent hazing continued unabated, with the defense ministry announcing
that thirteen conscripts had died as a result of hazing and two hundred
others had committed suicide in the first nine months of 2005.
The government’s record on combating HIV/AIDS has been mixed.
Although high-level officials paid considerably more attention to the problem
than in previous years and increased budget allocations to address
HIV/AIDS-related concerns, steps to undo a 2004 measure to decriminalize
small-scale possession of narcotic drugs threatened to undermine HIV prevention
work. Criminalization of small-scale possession of narcotic drugs
drives drug users away from HIV prevention services out of fear of police
abuse and arrest, and exposes them to health risks in prison that would put
them at risk of HIV or exacerbate existing HIV infection.
Key International Actors
While many global leaders in 2005 expressed concern over the post-Beslan
political changes, they otherwise continued to signal warm support for the
Russian president. German Chancellor Gerhardt Schroeder and President
Putin attended each other’s birthday parties, and Italian Prime Minister
Silvio Berlusconi praised Putin as a “true democrat.” The European Union
and the United States failed to forcefully address the deteriorating human
rights situation in Russia during summits with Russian leaders.
Several international organizations have voiced concern over the shrinking
political space in Russia. The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe criticized the prosecution of Mikhail Khodorkovsky and Platon
Lebedev, saying that “the prosecutions went beyond the mere pursuit of justice
to include such elements as to weaken an outspoken political opponent,
intimidate other wealthy individuals and regain control of strategic economic
assets.” In its newly adopted country strategy for Russia, the European Bank
for Reconstruction and Development noted the continuing concentration of
power in the executive and observed that “in the absence of a vibrant civil society and without vibrant political debate in legislature, policy making will
fail to benefit from the diversity of views in the electorate.”
Criticism of Russia’s conduct in Chechnya remains muted. The international
community continues to call for a peaceful solution of the conflict without
offering a clear vision of how lasting peace could be achieved. In contrast to
previous years, in 2005 the European Union failed to table a resolution
expressing concern about the Chechnya conflict at the U.N. Commission on
Human Rights. Russia continues to refuse access to Chechnya to the U.N.
special rapporteurs on torture and extrajudicial executions.
The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe continues to criticize
abuses both by Russian troops and their proxies, and by the Chechen rebels.
The Council of Europe Committee for the Prevention of Torture conducted
its seventh visit to the region in December 2004, but the Russian government
has not allowed the publication of any of its reports on Chechnya. In
February 2005, the European Court of Human Rights found the Russian
government guilty of violating the right to life and the prohibition of torture
with respect to a number of Chechen civilians who had died in 1999 and
2000 at the hands of Russian troops.
Serbia and Montenegro
Serbia and Montenegro is a loose union of two republics which face different
human rights challenges. In 2005, inadequate official responses to intimidation
and violence against ethnic minorities continued to be a problem in
Serbia. Cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) depended on the government of Serbia, where most of
the ICTY indictees resided years after the tribunal brought charges against
them. Also in Serbia, treatment of human rights defenders took a marked
turn for the worse. In both republics, the judiciary appeared subservient to
the executive.
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
Serbia and Montenegro’s cooperation with the ICTY has improved significantly
after the near stalemate for the most part of 2004. Between October
2004 and April 2005, the government transferred fourteen indictees to the
tribunal in the Hague. Serbian generals Nebojsa Pavkovic, Vladimir
Lazarevic and Sreten Lukic, all indicted for war crimes in Kosovo in 1999,
were among those surrendered, although the year before the government had
insisted that they should be tried in Belgrade. Serbia also surrendered nine
Bosnian Serb former army and police officials charged with genocide and
crimes against humanity for the killing of eight thousand Bosnian men in
Srebrenica in July 1995.
The change of attitude towards the ICTY resulted more from the willingness
of the international community to use a “carrot and stick” approach than
from any new-found commitment to justice on the part of the Serbian
authorities. The cooperation began only after European Union and United
States officials made it clear that closer relations with Serbia were dependent
on the latter’s full cooperation with the tribunal. In a troubling trend, Serbian
government representatives often praised the accused who decided to surrender
as “patriotic” and “responsible,” without making any reference to the
crimes for which they were indicted. On December 30, 2004, Minister of Interior Vladan Jocic even expressed his conviction that the Serbian army
and police generals indicted for crimes in Kosovo were innocent.
Four indictees were believed to remain at large in Serbia and Montenegro as
of November 2005, or to travel back and forth between Serbia and
Montenegro and Republika Srpska (Bosnia and Herzegovina), including
Ratko Mladic, the former commander of the Bosnian Serb army.
Domestic War Crimes Trials
The prosecution of war crimes cases before domestic courts in Serbia is hampered
by a lack of political support in the country to establish accountability.
The creation of a special war crimes chamber in 2003 appeared to signal an
increased seriousness of purpose, but so far the chamber has dealt with only
one crime, the November 1991 killing of two hundred Croats near Vukovar,
Croatia. Two more indictments involving twelve persons were issued in
August and October 2005, relating to war crimes in Bosnia, but the two trials
had not started as of mid-November. There were no persons holding positions
of seniority in the army or police among the accused.
Judiciary
The executive in Serbia openly encroached upon the independence of the
state prosecutor’s office in 2005. Invoking his supervisory powers, Minister of
Justice Zoran Stojkovic insisted in a newspaper interview in January 2005
that the prosecutors launch criminal proceedings against six individuals who
had held positions in the Serbian government between 2001 and 2003. On
February 13, Stojkovic repeated a call for the prosecution of former Deputy
Prime Minister Cedomir Jovanovic. A municipal prosecutor in Belgrade
indicted Jovanovic in September for abuse of official position in 2001, but
the municipal court in October rejected the indictment as groundless.
In a newspaper interview published on September 17, 2005, Stojkovic stated
that he had asked the competent bodies to look into the legality of certain
activities of opposition leader Vladan Batic in 2003, when he had been Serbia’s justice minister. On September 28, police detained Batic for 48 hours
and then released him without charge.
The slow and inept handling by the Montenegrin judiciary of a case possibly
implicating government officials in commission of a war crime in the 1990s
exemplified the longtime concerns about the lack of judicial independence in
the republic. The case concerned the handing over of eighty Bosnian Muslim
refugees in Montenegro to Bosnian Serb soldiers in May 1992, resulting in
the execution of most of the refugees. Dozens of victims’ families sued the
state for compensation in 2004, but as of October 2005 only four civil proceedings
had begun. Under public pressure, in October, the Montenegrin
state prosecutor requested the opening of a criminal investigation into the
1992 case. The prosecutor’s motion was seriously flawed by including a
dozen victims among the potential witnesses and omitting important documents
from the evidence. The motion also failed to include any senior official
among the suspects.
Ethnic and Religious Minorities
Compared to the previous year, in 2005 incidents of ethnically motivated
attacks decreased in the Vojvodina region of northern Serbia, but intensified
in other parts of Serbia, often taking the form of anti-Semitic and anti-
Muslim graffiti, as well as physical assaults on Roma. Criminal and misdemeanor
sentences against the perpetrators of ethnically motivated crimes
were light. On July 26, for example, the district court in Nis sentenced eight
defendants to prison sentences of between three and five months for their
roles in burning down the city mosque in March 2004. On March 23, 2005, a
Belgrade misdemeanor court sentenced to ten days’ imprisonment three persons
who had written graffiti at the entrance to the Jewish cemetery calling
for “Jewish parasites” to be expelled from Serbia.
In a positive development, in areas of southern Serbia bordering Kosovo and
mainly inhabited by ethnic Albanians, the authorities have made initial steps
to include Albanians in the judiciary and to incorporate Albanian culture and
history in the local school curriculum. There has also been some progress in
providing pre-school education for Roma children in Serbia. However, thousands of Roma continue to face discrimination in most areas of life, and lack
basic access to education, health services and housing.
Human Rights Defenders
High-profile government officials expressed hostility towards leading human
rights defenders. The head of the State Security Service, Rade Bulatovic, and
Minister for Capital Investments, Velimir Ilic, suggested in July and
September 2005 that leading human rights organizations in Serbia were
working for unspecified foreign powers. In June and July the head of the parliamentary
group of Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica’s Democratic Party of
Serbia repeatedly expressed contempt for “characters like Natasa Kandic [one
of Serbia’s most prominent human rights activists],” while Justice Minister
Stojkovic accused Kandic of indifference to Serb victims of war crimes.
Physical assaults on Serbian Helsinki Committee Director Sonja Biserko and
break-ins at her home and at the home of well-known human rights lawyer
Biljana Kovacevic-Vuco during 2005 appeared to be the work of Serbian
extremists incited by such statements. Verbal harassment of these three leading
activists in public places was frequent.
Key International Actors
The U.S. government, which enjoys considerable influence with the authorities
in Serbia, took a more uncompromising stance than in previous years on
the issue of Serbia’s cooperation with the ICTY. In January 2005, for the second
consecutive year, the U.S. withheld a portion (U.S.$10 million) of the
economic assistance planned for 2005 to Serbia, over its non-cooperation
with the tribunal. The aid was released for payment in June, following the
transfer of a number of indictees to the Hague in the intervening period. On
October 7, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Nicholas Burns reiterated
that assistance would be again suspended if Serbia did not surrender
Ratko Mladic.
The overall perception of the work of the ICTY among the Serbian public
remained negative, although it improved somewhat during the year as a
result of the improved cooperation by the Serbian authorities and the increase of prosecutions for crimes committed against ethnic Serbs. The trial
of former President Slobodan Milosevic, on charges of crimes against
humanity and genocide, continued into its fourth year, amidst a lively debate
in Serbia and abroad, on the effect the trial has had on the process of coming
to terms with the past in Serbia.
The E.U. rewarded Serbia and Montenegro politically for the improved
cooperation with the ICTY by deciding in October 2005 to open negotiations
on a Stabilization and Association Agreement, following a positive feasibility
study by the European Commission in April. The October decision, by
the European Council, did not include an explicit “brake clause” that would
suspend the negotiations if the E.U. were dissatisfied with the human rights
situation in the country, but it put a heavy emphasis on the importance of
continued cooperation with the ICTY. The European Parliament adopted a
resolution on Vojvodina on September 29, finding that no real progress has
been made in reversing the deterioration in the conditions for national and
ethnic minorities in Vojvodina, and calling for E.U. monitors to be sent to
the province.
Kosovo
The U.N. Security Council’s decision in October 2005 to approve the start
of negotiations over Kosovo’s final status is arguably the most significant
development since the United Nations placed Kosovo under international
administration in 1999. In the field of human rights, however, the picture
remains bleak. Insecurity and lack of free movement for minorities, justice
system failures, and widespread discrimination remain serious problems. The
return of internally displaced and refugees from Kosovo to their homes continues
to be stalled.
Protection of Minorities
Despite improvements in the security situation in Kosovo, members of ethnic
minorities, particularly Serbs and Roma, still cannot move about freely.
Minorities generally travel with specially provided transport or under military
or police escort—and typically from one minority enclave to another.
Due to security incidents and generalized fear, previously disbanded escorts
have had to be reinstated in some locations, particularly for transport of children
to schools.
While rates of reported inter-ethnic crime fell in 2005, many organizations
working with minorities suspect that the decrease simply reflects greater
physical separation and lack of interaction between communities since major
clashes between majority Albanians and Serbs and widespread rioting in
March 2004.
While most minority homes destroyed in March 2004 have been reconstructed,
displaced persons trying to visit them have reported continuing threats
and intimidation. Ethnic Albanians living in Serb-majority areas or who travel
to such areas report similar concerns.
The fragile nature of the security situation was reinforced by a series of incidents
in the second half of 2005, including the killing of two young Serbs on
the road to Strpce in August; the subsequent destruction of a nearby
Albanian war memorial and shooting of an ethnic Serb police officer on duty
near the memorial; the shooting of the highest ranking Serb police officer in
Gjilan in late September; and confirmed reports of armed masked men (calling
themselves “The Army for Kosovo’s Independence”) operating in the
western part of the province in October.
Minorities continue to face persistent discrimination in employment and in
the provision of education, social welfare, and health services, and have limited
access to administrative offices and courts. The anti-discrimination law
remains little more than words on paper.
Among minorities, the situation for Roma is perhaps the grimmest. Their
often precarious plight is illustrated by the displaced Roma who have been
living adjacent to the Trepca mine in North Mitrovica since 1999. In 2004,
the high level of lead contamination in the area led the World Health
Organization to recommend an immediate evacuation of children and pregnant
women and temporary relocation of all others. At this writing, the
Roma remained at the site.
Return of Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons
Fewer than 5 percent of the more than 200,000 displaced Kosovar minorities
who fled their homes in the second half of 1999 have returned home. Many
are living under makeshift arrangements elsewhere in Kosovo; many others
are living as refugees outside Kosovo. The trend of decreasing voluntary
minority returns continues. As of September, there had been approximately
1,500 such returns during 2005. By comparison, there were approximately
2,300 returns during 2004 (itself a 37 percent decrease from the previous
year).
As in previous years, returns that did take place in 2005 were often incomplete
or partial returns, predominately to rural and mono-ethnic areas. The
first Serb return to an urban area where there was not already an established
Serb presence did not take place until March 2005, with sixteen families
returning to Klina.
Progress on the return of the 4,100 persons displaced by the March 2004
riots has been patchy. As of September 2005, more than 1,300 persons
remained officially displaced. Among the two-third no longer considered
officially displaced, few have returned to reconstructed homes in their former
communities, preferring instead to remain in metal containers in Gracanica,
in settlements on the outskirts of towns, in unaffected minority enclaves, or
outside Kosovo.
In March 2005, UNHCR revised its findings on protection needs of minorities
in Kosovo, and concluded that while individual cases should continue to
be assessed, there was no longer a security basis for blocking forcible returns
of Ashkaelia, Egyptian, Bosniak and Gorani minorities. On that basis,
UNMIK relaxed its forced returns policy, which has resulted in an increase in
forced returns from western Europe, especially of the first three groups,
despite concerns from NGOs in Kosovo about the sustainability of such
returns.
Impunity and Access to Justice
While the challenges in establishing a new justice system in Kosovo are considerable,
progress to date has been disappointing. The failure to bring to
justice many of those responsible for serious crimes has created a climate of
impunity that recent efforts have done little to change.
The shortcomings in the justice system, previously identified by Human
Rights Watch, include a growing backlog of cases; a shortage of qualified
judges; virtually nonexistent mechanisms for witness protection and relocation;
poorly-trained and inadequately supported investigators and prosecutors;
inadequate defense counsel; perceptions of bias by local judges; and
problematic sentencing practices. The problems affect all communities (particularly
minorities), undermining confidence in the criminal justice system
and the rule of law.
The poor record on prosecuting war crimes and post-war inter-ethnic and
political violence continues, especially for offences carried out between 1998
and 2000. The second major trial of former Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA)
members only began in October 2004. At writing, the proceedings had been
completed and the three accused were awaiting judgment. In September
2005, four Kosovo Serb suspects were arrested on charges of war crimes.
Despite some progress on the resolution of outstanding cases of missing persons
from Kosovo, more than 2,500 cases remain.
In March 2005, the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia indicted then-Prime Minister of Kosovo Ramush Haradinaj and
two others (Idriz Balaj and Lahi Brahimaj) for their involvement in the
“intimidation, abduction, imprisonment, beating, torture and murder” of
Serb, Albanian, and Roma civilians while Haradinaj was a KLA commander
and the others his subordinates in 1998 and 1999. Haradinaj resigned and
surrendered to the Tribunal the same month and was granted conditional
release in June 2005.
While the criminal justice response to the March 2004 violence might appear
a dramatic improvement in comparison to the dismal rate of prosecutions for
offences prior to that date, the reality is more sobering. While 424 people were charged with criminal acts relating to the violence, most were charged
only with misdemeanors; by November 2005, only about one-half of the
cases had been decided; and the majority of decisions imposed no more than
minor penalties or fines, often below those stipulated in Kosovo’s minimum
sentencing guidelines.
Of fifty-six cases from March 2004 relating to more serious offences—including
charges for murder; the incitement of violence or organization of riots;
and arson—fewer than one-third had been resolved at this writing. Less than
half of the cases had even reached the courts. The vast majority of those that
were decided resulted in suspended sentences. The sixteen- and eleven- year
sentences imposed on two of the men who murdered a Serb man in Gjilan
and brutally attacked his mother were a notable exception.
The problems with the criminal justice system are mirrored in Kosovo’s civil
courts. An extreme case backlog (up to 60,000 according to some estimates),
limited access to the courts for ethnic minorities, and failure to implement
court decisions, are among the chief continuing obstacles.
Key International Actors
UNMIK has not recovered from the damage to its already tarnished reputation
caused by the March 2004 violence. Neither the appointment of a new
special representative and other senior personnel in 2004 nor the ongoing
transfer of powers to the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government (set to
become Kosovo’s interim government),has managed to stem the diminishing
credibility of UNMIK among all communities in Kosovo.
In October 2005, the U.N. Secretary-General’s Special Envoy to Kosovo Kai
Ede submitted a report on Kosovo’s progress toward meeting the conditions
established by the international community for the start of negotiations on
the province’s final status. While concluding that talks should commence, the
report contained a frank assessment of the international community’s human
rights failures in Kosovo, including the “climate of impunity” in which “far
too few perpetrators of serious crimes are ever brought to justice.” The report also made plain that “the overall return process has virtually come to a
halt.”
Following the Eide Report and the recommendation of the U.N. secretarygeneral,
the Security Council approved the start of status talks, expected at
this writing to commence by the end of 2005, emphasizing that “particular
and time-conscious attention should be given to protecting minorities…[and]
creating the necessary conditions to allow sustainable returns.”
The expected transformation of the Ombudsperson office from an international
to a local institution at the end of 2005 raised concerns about whether
the office would be able to effectively monitor the activities of UNMIK and
other international and national bodies, threatening an important mechanism
of accountability in Kosovo.
A change of leadership at the E.U. mission helped repair a rift between the
mission and the provisional government resulting from the E.U.-led privatization
process. E.U. negotiators are likely to play an important role in the
status talks.
Tajikistan
Human rights conditions worsened in Tajikistan following political upheaval
in neighboring Kyrgyzstan in March 2005 and violence in Uzbekistan in
May. Concerned with possible domestic unrest, the government jailed opposition
leaders and journalists on spurious charges. Ongoing state persecution
of independent media led to the closure of key print and broadcast outlets.
Flawed parliamentary elections also marred Tajikistan’s rights record in 2005.
Although it noted improvements over previous elections, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) characterized the February
2005 polls as failing to meet international standards.
February Parliamentary Elections
According to the final report of the OSCE observation mission, the February
27, 2005, election for the lower house of parliament failed to meet international
and domestic standards. In particular, the OSCE report cited the
detention of key political leaders, government domination of the campaign
process, and restrictions on independent media as significant obstacles to a
free and fair election.
The OSCE report also noted improvements over previous elections in
Tajikistan. The polling was peaceful and there was a measure of choice
among candidates. Despite the restrictions on independent media, the OSCE
determined that state media was “reasonably balanced” in the run-up to elections.
However, the report noted that two state-owned newspapers refused to
publish the OSCE’s preliminary report on the election, even as a paid advertisement.
Observers noted serious problems with the polling process itself. OSCE
monitors concluded that the counting process was “poor” or “very poor” at
54 percent of the polling stations they visited. Within five days of the first
round of voting, four opposition parties announced that they would not recognize
the results of the election, but their protest did not have a significant
impact on domestic or international policies.
Political Opposition
As the February elections approached, the government began to pressure
members of the political opposition. In August 2004, police raided the offices
of the Taraqqiyot (Tajikistan Development) party after its members published
an open letter accusing President Emomali Rakhmonov of practicing the
“politics of genocide.” The authorities seized documents they claimed insulted
the president, which is criminalized in Tajikistan, and prosecutors charged
the deputy chairman of the party, Rustam Faziev, the letter’s author, with violating
the lèse majesté law. In June 2005, a court sentenced Faziev to five
years and ten months in prison. At this writing, ailing party Chairman Sulton
Kuvatov was due to face trial on the same charges pending improvement in
his health.
In December 2004, Russian police arrested Mahmudi Iskandarov in Moscow
at the request of Tajik authorities. The government had implicated
Iskandarov—a vociferous critic of President Rakhmonov, presidential hopeful,
and leader of the Tajik Democratic Party—in an attack on two government
offices in Tojikobod in August 2004. Russian authorities released him
on April 3, 2005, but he disappeared just two days later and eventually turned
up in custody in Tajikistan. Iskandarov claimed that he had applied for
refugee status after his initial release from Russian custody, but said that
Russian police had kidnapped him off the street and transferred him to
agents who flew him to Dushanbe. On October 5, 2005, after a trial that lasted
more than two months, Iskandarov was found guilty on six counts, including
terrorism and illegal possession of weapons. He was sentenced to twentythree
years in prison and fined 1.5 million soms (approximately
U.S.$470,000).
Prosecutors also charged a group of individuals, including Iskandarov’s former
driver, in connection with the attack. One of the defendants, Bakhtior
Saidov, claimed at trial that investigators had tortured him and the other
members of the group and forced them to plead guilty to the August 2004
attack. On October 4, 2005, all the men were found guilty and received sentences
ranging from eleven to twenty-two years in prison.
After the uprising in Kyrgyzstan and public demonstrations in Uzbekistan,
the government broadened its repression of dissident political activists. A
court convicted Nizomiddin Begmatov and Nasimjon Shukurov, who ran as
Social Democratic Party (SDP) candidates in the February 2005 parliamentary
elections, on charges of hooliganism and sentenced them to twelve and
eighteen months in prison, respectively. They were contesting the election
on behalf of the party when they allegedly addressed a judge with foul language
during a court hearing. The SDP leadership decried their conviction
as political persecution.
The government also charged Saifiddin Faizov of the Islamic Renaissance
Party with hooliganism for allegedly using foul language in a mosque. IRP
leaders contend that the charges were meant to discredit their image in the
majority-Muslim country and to punish Faizov for his work as an active campaigner
in the February polls. Police briefly detained another IRP member,
Abdulvose Abdujalilov, in July on charges of teaching Islam to minors without
legal authorization.
Nongovernmental Organizations
In the wake of popular upheavals in a number of post-Soviet states, the Tajik
government has become increasingly concerned about foreign sponsorship of
civil society groups. On April 14, 2005, the Tajik foreign ministry announced
that foreign embassies and aid organizations would have to report to the government
their contacts with local political and civic activists. Under the new
regulations, diplomats and international organizations are required to give
Tajik authorities advance notice of any meetings with local activists.
Press Freedom
The Tajik government uses a range of administrative methods to crack down
on freedom of the press. In August 2004, for example, the government shut
down Jionhon printing house, which published Ruzi Nav, another independent
paper. Prosecutors have since charged the paper’s editor, Rajabi Mirzo,
with insulting the president. The paper remains out of print.
Tajikistan’s practice of targeting the printing houses that publish opposition
newspapers continued in 2005 with the January closure of the printing house
that published Nerui Sukhan. Authorities also charged the paper’s editor-inchief,
Mukhtor Bokizoda, with tax evasion, but eventually dropped the
charges. In July, the government allowed the newspaper to reopen, but tax
authorities shut it down again after only one issue.
Tajik regulatory authorities shut down two private broadcasters in April 2005,
leaving the capital with no alternative to state television. The government
ordered closure of TV Somonian because its license had apparently expired.
TV Gul-i-Bodom was taken off the air over accusations that it had violated
regulations on election coverage, but it was allowed to resume operations in
July. Free press advocates regarded both closures as politically motivated.
In May 2005, the Institute for War and Peace Reporting (IWPR) reported
allegations that the license applications of some thirty print and other media
outlets were still pending. Some of these delays were due to the lack of a
statute on broadcasting. A draft statute introduced by authorities in April
2005 was strongly opposed by independent broadcasters who believed the
proposed legislation would open the door to Soviet-style censorship.
The state also engaged in repression of individual journalists. On April 24,
2005, authorities arrested independent reporter Jumaboi Tolibov in Aini on
charges of hooliganism and resisting arrest. Free press advocates suspected he
was detained for his criticism of the district prosecutor. The public outcry at
this arrest was so great that, on June 8, a crowd of more than 120 people
demonstrated in support of him. In July, a court in Shahristan sentenced
Tolibov to two years in prison for drunken behavior and abusing his government
post as head of the legal department of a district administration.
In June 2005, the deputy editor-in-chief of Nerui Sukhan, Vahhob Odinaev,
was accused of violating Tajikistan’s press law in connection with a story that
allegedly contained a libelous statement about a university professor. He was
ultimately convicted, however, under a negligence statute. The court sentenced
him to a year in prison and ordered the confiscation of 30 percent of
his wages.
Key International Actors
On October 16, 2004, Russia and Tajikistan signed a bilateral agreement
revising their security relationship. Under the terms of the agreement, Russia
will maintain an important military base in the country. Most significantly,
Russia agreed to hand over control of the Tajik-Afghan border entirely to
Tajikistan. Russian troops abandoned the last border post on July 12, 2005,
marking a substantial shift in the Russian-Tajik relationship. Russian forces
had remained on the border after Tajik independence in 1991, ostensibly to
stem the flow of drugs from Afghanistan.
The United States continues to weigh in on Tajik policy, expressing concern
about detentions of dissident politicians and the lack of free press in the
country. It is also an important source of foreign aid. In FY 2005, the United
States disbursed an estimated U.S.$43.6 million in assistance to Tajikistan.
The State Department’s Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor
characterized Tajikistan’s human rights situation as “poor” in its 2004 report
on the country, citing unfair elections, the use of torture, and poor prison
conditions. Secretary of State Condoleeza Rice visited Tajikistan in October
and held talks with President Rakhmonov on the U.S. military presence in
the region.
The European Union has been a major donor to Tajikistan since 1992.
Tajikistan has received more aid per capita from the E.U. than any other
Central Asian country during this period. In October 2004, Tajikistan and
the E.U. signed a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA), which
formalized closer ties between the two parties. An interim agreement governing
trade was signed at the same time.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) maintains
an office in Dushanbe that serves as a base for its monitoring and development
activities. In addition to monitoring the 2005 parliamentary elections,
the OSCE also has weighed in on governance and rights issues. OSCE
chairman Dimitrij Rupel visited Tajikistan in April 2005, meeting with
President Rakhmonov and urging the government to lift media restrictions
and punish corruption. In September 2005, Miklos Haraszti, the OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media, expressed concern that nothing
had been done to address the closure of several independent newspapers by
the Tajik government.
In September 2005, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) criticized the Tajik government for breaking a pledge to the
United Nations when it forcibly deported an Afghan woman and four of her
children.
Turkey
Human rights developments in Turkey were mixed during 2005. The government
shows some commitment to reform, but is clearly inhibited by antireform
elements within the judiciary, police, and army. The main achievement
of the year was sustained progress in combating torture, with the number
of reports of ill-treatment in police stations continuing to fall. Little
progress was made, however, toward guaranteeing language freedoms and
freedom of expression. In an alarming development, there were episodes of
police using unwarranted lethal violence during street disturbances. Political
violence by the Kurdish Workers’ Party (PKK) flared during the year,
increasing tension and provoking heavy-handed responses, including human
rights violations, by state forces.
In October Turkey began negotiations for full membership of the European
Union—a process expected to take a decade or more, during which time the
E.U. will continue to monitor Turkey’s protection of human rights and
respect for minorities.
Freedom of Expression and Religion
As of November 2005 no individuals were known by Human Rights Watch
to be serving prison sentences for the non-violent expression of their opinions.
However, scores of people were charged with speech-related offenses
and threatened with imprisonment, most being indicted under provisions
criminalizing insults to the president, the flag, and state institutions. The
government failed to eliminate these provisions from the revised criminal
code, introduced in June.
In October 2005 writer Cemal Tokpınar was sentenced to a year’s imprisonment
for an article suggesting that Turkey’s 1999 earthquake was a divine
punishment inflicted upon the military. The newspaper article contained no
advocacy of violence, but Tokpınar was convicted under criminal code article
216 for “incitement to religious hatred … in a manner liable to threaten public
order.” Novelist Orhan Pamuk faced charges for “insulting Turkishness.”
His supposed crime was his statement in a magazine interview, that “thirtythousand
Kurds and one million Armenians were killed in these lands.”
Women who wear the headscarf for religious reasons continue to be excluded
from higher education, the civil service, and political life. Female lawyers
who wear the headscarf are not permitted to enter courtrooms, and in July
the Ankara Bar took disciplinary action against a lawyer who wore a headscarf
while carrying out her duty to a client in a bailiff’s office.
Respect for Minorities
Turkey’s courts and state officials repeatedly obstruct language freedoms. As
of November 2005 not a single private broadcaster had been given permission
to broadcast in Kurdish. In March state television channel TRT stated
that “regulations” did not permit it to show musician Birol Topalo˘glu singing
in the Laz language. In June the Ankara governor refused to authorize the
Kurdish Democracy Culture and Solidarity Association (Kürt-Der), claiming
that the organization’s program “to secure the social and individual rights of
Kurds” was unconstitutional. In July the Bingöl governor imposed a
U.S.$800 “administrative fine” on local Human Rights Association (HRA)
President Rıdvan Kızgın for printing the association’s letterhead in Kurdish
as well as Turkish, supposedly a breach of the Associations Law requirement
that correspondence be exclusively in Turkish.
Extrajudicial Execution
In November 2005, grenades thrown into a bookshop in ˛ Semdinli, Hakkari
province, killed one man and wounded eight. Local people captured two gendarmes
and a “confessor” (a former PKK member now working for the security
forces) in the vicinity, together with a grenade and a map showing the
bookshop. Gendarmes in an armored vehicle fired on a crowd gathered at the
scene of the crime, killing another man. The “confessor” and the armored
vehicle commander were arrested but the other two gendarmes were
released.
Freedom of Assembly
Police repeatedly used unwarranted force to break up peaceful demonstrations
in 2005. In March, Istanbul police assaulted demonstrators who had
gathered for International Women’s Day. Male and female demonstrators
were beaten and sprayed with pepper gas. Prime Minister Recep Tayyip
Erdo˘gan briefly condemned the police violence, but upbraided the press for
bringing the incident to public notice.
Still more alarming, the police frequently used lethal force when public gatherings
gave way to disturbances. In various incidents, eight demonstrators
were shot dead by police. For example, in November, police shot and killed
five demonstrators in Hakkari province who were protesting the S˛ emdinli
attack.
Torture and Ill-treatment in Police Stations and Psychiatric
Hospitals
Reports of ill-treatment continue to decline thanks to improved safeguards
for detainees, including the right to see a lawyer from the first moments of
detention. Police compliance with laws and regulations is generally good,
even in remoter areas of the southeast. In some provinces, delegations from
local human rights boards, including bar association and medical chamber
representatives, made unannounced monitoring visits to police stations and
gendarmeries. There were, however, still some reports of beating and torture
in police stations. For example, in October 2005, four minors reported they
had been tortured at police headquarters in Ordu, where no monitoring visits
had been conducted. The boys said police officers had stripped and beaten
them, squeezed their testicles, and threatened them with rape. The medical
reports showed that the boys, released without charge, suffered extensive
bruising.
In January 2005, the Turkish parliamentary human rights commission reported
that, during a visit to Saray Rehabilitation Center, a psychiatric institution
in Ankara, it had discovered children tied to their beds and imprisoned naked
in cold rooms. Mental Disability Rights International reported in September that psychiatric hospitals in Istanbul and Izmir were inflicting electroconvulsive
treatment (ECT) on patients without muscle relaxants and anesthesia.
The Council of Europe’s Committee for the Prevention of Torture had
already condemned this painful and dangerous practice in a 1997 visit to
Turkey. The report also described how children were subjected to ECT, and
had their hands and feet bound to their beds for long periods.
Internal Displacement
Most of the 378,335 Kurdish villagers forcibly displaced by security forces
during the conflict of the 1980s and 1990s are still unable to return to their
homes in the southeast. The government’s Return to Village and
Rehabilitation Project has failed to provide even the most basic infrastructure,
and villagers are unwilling to return to settlements that do not have
electricity, telephone service, or a school. Implementation of a 2004 law to
compensate the displaced has been uneven, with some villagers receiving
appropriate sums while others’ claims were unfairly dismissed.
The threat of violence from village guards—paramilitaries armed and paid by
the government to fight the PKK—remains an important obstacle to return.
Some returning villagers were attacked by village guards during the year. In
March 2005, a village guard shot and killed thirteen-year-old Selahattin
Günbay, near Nusaybin in Mardin province, because he was allegedly grazing
animals on the guard’s pasture.
Human Rights Defenders
The government took some steps to recognize the value of human rights
organizations, and invited them, together with other Turkish civil society
groups, to a consultation about reform and the E.U. process in September
2005. Nevertheless, human rights defenders were once again threatened with
physical violence and subjected to numerous criminal prosecutions as well as
efforts to discredit them as unpatriotic or treacherous. In May, speaking at
the funeral of a soldier killed by a mine, Gen. Hürflit Tolon reproved human
rights organizations for their absence. The widely reported comment
alarmed defenders, as similar statements by the military preceded the nearfatal shooting of HRA President Akin Birdal in 1998. In June 2005, Istanbul
HRA President Eren Keskin and two board members, who had narrowly survived
an attack by a lone gunman in 2001, received death threats from the
Turkish Revenge Brigade, the extreme right-wing group that had assumed
responsibility for the Birdal attack.
Key International Actors
In October 2005, the attention of Turkey and the international community
was focused on the E.U.’s decision, after extended discussion, to open membership
negotiations. The E.U. maintains a strong and effective engagement
with the Turkish government on human rights issues. Confronted with media
reports of the police attack on the International Women’s Day demonstration
in March, visiting E.U. troika representatives declared that they were
“shocked by images of the police beating women and young people demonstrating
in Istanbul.” In September E.U. Enlargement Commissioner Olli
Rehn expressed “serious concern” about the prosecution of Orhan Pamuk
and visited the writer in his home.
In February 2005, the European Commission against Racism and Intolerance
(ECRI) in a report on Turkey mentioned non-Muslim minorities’ difficulties,
including administrative barriers to building places of worship and training
clergy. Noting persistent suspicion of minorities of any kind, ECRI urged the
government to establish an agency to combat racism and intolerance.
In January 2005, the U.N. special representative on human rights defenders
published a report on her 2004 visit to Turkey. She expressed concern about
the harassment of human rights defenders, and called on state officials and
the media to refrain from stigmatizing human rights defenders as “enemies.”
She also urged that human rights defenders be given full access to places of
detention. In May, during an informal visit to Turkey, the U.N. special representative
on internal displacement highlighted emerging problems in the
implementation of the law on compensation.
The European Court of Human Rights issued scores of judgments against
Turkey concerning torture, unfair trial, arbitrary detention, and extrajudicial execution. In July 2005, the court found the Turkish government responsible
for violations of the right to life concerning twenty-two people shot dead by
police during disturbances in Istanbul in 1995 ( ˛ Sim˛sek and others v. Turkey).
Turkmenistan
Headed by president-for-life Saparmurat Niazov, Turkmenistan remains one
of the most repressive and closed countries in the world. Regressive government
policies in education, culture, and health care caused increasing concern
in the international community. In an attempt to mollify international
critics, Niazov conceded to soften registration rules for religious groups,
revoked the notorious law providing for a U.S.$50,000 fee for registering a
marriage with a foreigner, and granted citizenship to over sixteen thousand
refugees and stateless persons. Despite these small positive steps, the overall
human rights situation in Turkmenistan remains dismal.
During the first ever review of Turkmenistan by the U.N. Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD) in August, the government
came under heavy criticism on numerous counts of rights violations, including
its policy of forced assimilation; restrictions on national and ethnic
minorities in access to employment; forcible internal displacement and other
restrictions on freedom of movement; closure of minority cultural institutions
and of schools teaching in minority languages; limitations on access to
foreign culture and art, as well as to foreign media and the Internet; impediments
on Turkmen students wishing to study abroad; and the dominant role
played by the Ruhnama in school curricula.
Persecution of “Internal Enemies”
In June 2005, several defendants were brought to trial in closed court on
charges of conspiring to assassinate the president in November 2002. One of
them, Begench Beknazarov, was sentenced to life imprisonment, while the
rest received lengthy prison terms. The fate of more than fifty others convicted
in previous years for the 2002 assassination attempt remains unknown,
as they are still denied visits by and correspondence with relatives. There are
unconfirmed reports that some may have died in custody or are seriously ill.
Nearly incessant reshuffles initiated by Niazov in the central government and
regional administrations are frequently accompanied by arrest and internal
exile, confiscation of property, and persecution of the dismissed officials’ family members. In July two influential government figures, Rejep Saparov, the
former head of the Presidential Administration, and Yelly Kurbanmuradov,
the former Deputy Prime Minister in charge of gas and petroleum, were sentenced
to prison terms of twenty and twenty-five years respectively on
charges of corruption and links with foreign intelligence services. As in many
other cases, a brief and closed court hearing only served to rubber stamp
harsh verdicts that had apparently been decided by the president before the
trial even started.
Authorities persisted in their refusal to drop charges brought in 2004 against
seventy-eight-year-old writer Rakhim Esenov, who stands accused of the
unauthorized publication abroad of a novel on medieval India, and of smuggling
eight hundred copies of it into Turkmenistan. In March 2005 state
security officials denied Esenov permission to travel to Russia for medical
treatment.
The law equating any criticism of presidential policy to high treason is still in
place, making any open dissent impossible. In July, Niazov called on the
police to identify and fine persons who “spread false rumors.” Dissident
Gurbandurdy Durdykuliev remains in a psychiatric hospital in a remote
region, having been confined there after asking the president to allow a
peaceful demonstration. Relatives of political émigrés openly criticizing
Niazov continue to face persecution.
Regression in Education and Culture
Study of Ruhnama, a “new holy book” written by president Niazov, is taking
the dominant position in school and university curriculum and is gradually
replacing other disciplines. By late 2005, Russian-language instruction in
grade school had been severely curtailed, and teaching in the languages of
other ethnic minorities had ceased altogether. For many children, access even
to education within the diminished curriculum is seriously impeded because
authorities continue, despite legal prohibition, to widely employ child labor
in agriculture.
In February, President Niazov declared his intention to close all libraries
with the exception of the central library and those attached to universities.
Although this directive has not been fully implemented, over a hundred
libraries were closed, including all district and most city libraries.
Civil Society and Media
Despite the October 2004 decriminalization of membership in unregistered
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), independent NGOs were unable to
resume activities, or to register. Their activists remained under security
police surveillance, and they frequently found themselves effectively confined
to their homes ahead of planned meetings with visiting senior international
officials.
In February 2005, Victor Panov, one of the few Russian journalists officially
accredited in Turkmenistan, was arrested on false espionage charges and
three weeks later was deported to Russia. Also in February, Nikolai
Gerasimov, a former correspondent for the Neutralny Turkmenistan newspaper,
was forced to leave the country following threats he received after having
given an interview to Radio Liberty’s Turkmen service.
Internet access remains severely restricted, and the last remaining Internet
club in Turkmenistan was shut down in April. That same month import of
foreign periodicals was banned.
Religious Freedom
Despite a certain loosening of religion-related legislation, all confessions
faced difficulties registering, which is essential for lawful activities in
Turkmenistan. According to official data, as of August only 118 mosques and
churches were registered, several times less than the number registered in the
mid-1990s.
President Niazov not only banned the construction of new mosques (several
old ones having been demolished or transferred to other uses in 2004), but in
June also liquidated the theological faculty of Ashgabat State University, the only educational establishment authorized to teach Islam. Niazov ordered
that religious practices be unified, through publication of a list of approved
Islamic rites and launch of a campaign against those who independently
interpret Islam. Under this campaign two Muslims were arrested in
Dashoguz in July as “Wahhabis.”
Authorities were delaying registration of twelve parishes and a convent of the
Russian Orthodox Church, and denied visas to several priests who were
assigned to Turkmenistan. At the same time, Niazov suggested that the
Moscow Patriarch should separate Turkmen parishes from the Central Asian
Diocese, which was seen by observers as a step towards an “independent
Orthodox church” controlled by the Turkmen authorities.
Although under United States pressure authorities registered five protestant
congregations in 2005, many religious minorities still cannot obtain registration
(among them Shia Muslims, Roman Catholics, Lutherans, and the
Armenian Apostolic Church). In some cases even registered congregations
continue to face harassment and restrictions. Police questioned religious
activists, obstructed religious meetings, and confiscated religious literature.
Some believers, including Jehovah’s Witnesses, were beaten and intimidated
by the police for “rejecting the Muslim faith.” In December 2004 and
February 2005, two Jehovah’s Witnesses were given prison terms for evading
military service on religious grounds. Two others, convicted in May and June
2004, continued to serve their sentences.
Key International Actors
In December 2004 and again in November 2005, the Third Committee of
United Nations General Assembly adopted resolutions on Turkmenistan
expressing concern about serious human rights violations and lack of
progress in key areas mentioned in the U.N. Commission on Human Rights
resolutions of 2004 and 2005. In an apparent response to international criticism,
Turkmenistan acceded to several U.N. instruments in 2005, including
the optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
sale of children, child prostitution, and child pornography, and the
Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women. It also submitted its initial report to the CERD, the first ever report
submitted by Turkmenistan to any U.N. treaty body, which was examined by
the Committee in August 2005.
Relations between Turkmenistan and the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) remained tense. OSCE experts were denied
visas to observe the December 2004 parliamentary elections. However, in
early 2005, Niazov agreed to resume dialogue with the OSCE and, as reported,
even went as far as to promise OSCE Chairman-in-Office Dimitrij Rupel
to give up his presidency for life and retire in 2009. In May OSCE High
Commissioner on National Minorities Rolf Ekéus was allowed to visit the
country, and September marked the first time that a representative of the
Turkmen government participated in the OSCE human dimension implementation
meeting in Warsaw.
U.S. pressure contributed to further softening of the legislation on religion
and simplified procedures for registration of religious minority groups.
Despite the U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom’s recommendation,
however, the U.S. State Department again failed to make full use
of the leverage at its disposal and designate Turkmenistan a “country of particular
concern” under the terms of the International Religious Freedom Act.
The European Union’s Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with
Turkmenistan remained frozen. Russia, in contrast, has muted its criticism of
Niazov even on the controversial issue of Turkmenistan’s unilateral abolition
of dual Russian-Turkmen citizenship.
Ukraine
Presidential elections in November 2004, which were neither free nor fair,
sparked a popular uprising in support of presidential candidate Viktor
Yushchenko. In what became known as the Orange Revolution, thousands of
Ukrainian citizens took to the streets to peacefully protest the government’s
manipulation of the elections in favor of Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovich.
Yushchenko secured a victory over Yanukovich in repeat elections on
December 26 and was sworn in as president in January 2005.
While the new government enjoyed relative stability for the first nine
months of 2005, many government agencies remained unformed and economic
indicators deteriorated. Following a wave of resignations by senior
presidential administration and other officials amid mutual recriminations of
corruption, Yushchenko fired Prime Minister Yulia Timoshenko, his closest
ally in the Orange Revolution, on September 8, 2005. Yurii Yekhanurov was
sworn in as prime minister on September 21 following a political compromise
brokered between Yushchenko and his former rival Yanukovich to
secure parliamentary approval.
The popular uprising that helped sweep Yushchenko to the presidency was
rooted in the belief among many Ukrainians that a Yushchenko administration
would improve the government’s record in economic, social, and political
spheres and demonstrate greater respect for human rights and political
liberties. For years, under the leadership of President Kuchma, the government
had imposed strict controls on media coverage, manipulated electoral
processes, and ignored widespread discontent.
Upon taking office, the Yushchenko government announced its intention to
protect and promote human rights and to rectify the abuses of the previous
government. While some important measures were taken in 2005, numerous
serious human rights problems remain.
Media Freedom
Under the Yushchenko government, state manipulation of television and
other media rampant in previous years appears to have ceased, although
major television and radio stations remain under the control of either the
state or a few wealthy business owners, rendering media outlets vulnerable to
political pressures. Attempts to pass legislation that would establish independent
public television and radio outlets have failed despite the new government’s
stated support for reform of the media sector.
Upon entering office, Yushchenko pledged to make the investigation into the
unsolved kidnapping and murder of investigative journalist Georgy
Gongadze in 2000 a priority. Many considered progress on this front a political
litmus test of the seriousness with which the new authorities were pursuing
the restoration of the rule of law in Ukraine. In September 2005, a parliamentary
commission accused former President Kuchma and three senior
officials, including the current Parliamentary Speaker, Vladimir Litvin, of
masterminding the murder and recommended that the Prosecutor General’s
Office open criminal cases against the men. At this writing, the Prosecutor
General’s Office still had not done so. In August, the Prosecutor General’s
Office identified and charged three police officers with Gongadze’s murder,
but closed the investigation without finding and charging senior Interior
Ministry official Olixy Pukach, who allegedly led the group that killed
Gongadze, and without identifying those who ordered the crime.
Torture and Conditions in Detention
The national human rights ombudsman has campaigned vocally to end the
practice of torture and ill-treatment in Ukrainian police detention facilities
and prisons, but the problem persists. In its December 2004 report on
Ukraine, the Council of Europe’s Committee for the Prevention of Torture
noted that detainees are at high risk of being physically ill-treated at the time
of their apprehension and while in police custody, particularly when being
questioned. Those responsible for crimes against detainees are very rarely
investigated or prosecuted. Serious problems in detention facilities include
overcrowding, substandard conditions of detention, high rates of tuberculosis and other infectious diseases, as well as inadequate food, medical, and other
provisions.
Migrants hoping to enter E.U. countries increasingly attempt to transit
through Ukraine. Ukraine, however, fails to comply with its international
obligations related to migration management and the right to seek asylum.
Police and border guards regularly detain undocumented migrants, including
asylum-seekers, in appalling conditions in border guard and police detention
facilities, often for many months. Migrants rarely have access to interpreters
or legal counsel and are unable to challenge their detention. Government
officials often refuse to accept applications for asylum, and the migration
service is ill-equipped to handle the applications it does receive. Refoulement
is also a serious concern. In the first four months of 2005, 1,500 migrants
were deported from Ukraine. UNHCR estimates that of these, four hundred
persons (mostly from Afghanistan and Chechnya) should have been granted
access to asylum procedures. Despite having ratified the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status of Refugees and the 1967 protocol, Ukrainian legislation
fails to provide adequate protection to persons who risk persecution if
deported.
Human Rights Abuses Fueling the HIV/AIDS Epidemic
As many as five hundred thousand people are living with HIV/AIDS in
Ukraine, and Ukraine is believed by many to be home to the world’s fastest
growing HIV/AIDS epidemic. The epidemic is fueled by a wide range of
human rights abuses against those at greatest risk of HIV/AIDS: injection
drug users, sex workers, men who have sex with men, and prisoners. As a
result of their HIV status, these vulnerable groups face discrimination in
access to health and social services and violations of their right to privacy. In
addition, they often face discrimination in the workplace and ill-treatment by
police.
The government has enacted a body of legislation and policies designed to
protect the rights of people living with and at high risk of HIV/AIDS.
However, drug and law enforcement officials regularly prevent people living
with or at high risk of HIV/AIDS from obtaining critical services, often subjecting them to violence or other ill-treatment. Proposed changes in drug
policies to criminalize possession of small amounts of narcotics, pending at
this writing, threaten to further accelerate HIV infection rates by driving
those most vulnerable to HIV infection away from HIV prevention services
and exposing many to health risks in prison that would put them at risk of
contracting HIV or exacerbate existing HIV infection. Methadone and
buprenorphine, widely recognized as among the most effective means to treat
opiate dependence, are critical to prevent HIV among injection drug users
(IDUs) and to support antiretroviral treatment adherence for HIV-positive
IDUs. Ukraine began to provide buprenorphine on a limited basis, but law
enforcement opposition to methadone has thus far prevented its use.
Racism
Racism and xenophobia remain entrenched problems in Ukraine. Police regularly
target minorities for so-called “document checks,” which almost always
result in bribes or illegal detention accompanied by beatings or other illtreatment.
Numerous anti-Semitic attacks were reported in 2005, but police have been
reluctant to label the incidents as hate crimes. In January, ten Orthodox
Jewish children and three adults were assaulted by skinheads near a synagogue
in Simferopol. A group of young men yelling anti-Semitic insults
attacked and repeatedly stabbed Yeshiva student Mordechai Molozhenov in
Kyiv in August. Two weeks later, also in Kyiv, a group of eight young people
attacked and beat Rabbi Mikhail Menis and his fourteen-year-old son. In all
cases, police again denied that anti-Semitism had anything to do with the
attacks.
Roma in Ukraine continue to suffer frequent and unremedied police abuse,
despite repeated appeals by Romani organizations to the police, prosecutors,
and the Ombudsperson calling for effective investigations and punishments.
In a positive development, the Parliament’s Human Rights Committee held
its first ever hearing on “The Situation of the Romani People,” on April 12,
2005.
Discrimination against Women and Trafficking in Persons
Women in Ukraine do not enjoy equal access to employment opportunities
as a result of discriminatory attitudes among both public and private employers,
including blatantly discriminatory recruitment practices. Men hold a disproportionate
number of senior government and managerial positions and
receive better pay than women in comparable jobs. Women are forced into
the low-paying and unregulated informal economy or remain unemployed. A
large number of women opt to seek better economic opportunities abroad,
rendering them vulnerable to trafficking. According to the Interior Ministry,
up to four hundred thousand women under the age of thirty have left
Ukraine in the last decade.
Ukraine remains a primary source country and an important transit country
for the trafficking of women, men, and children to Europe, the Middle East,
and Russia for sexual exploitation and forced labor. Anti-trafficking legislation,
prosecutions of those complicit in trafficking, and implementation of
rehabilitation programs for victims remain inadequate.
Key International Actors
International organizations continue to monitor closely Ukraine’s human
rights record. The Council of Europe’s Parliamentary Assembly has maintained
its monitoring procedure on Ukraine and issued a report in October
2005 which noted the first achievements of the new leadership but reiterated
statements from previous reports regarding Ukraine’s failure to meet many
key human rights obligations.
The European Court of Human Rights took a number of key decisions in
cases related to Ukraine in 2005. In the case of the Ukrainian Media Group
vs. Ukraine, the Court ruled that there had been a violation of freedom of
expression when domestic courts ruled in favor of two politicians in defamation
cases against a Kyiv newspaper. In the case Gongadze vs. Ukraine, the
Court ruled that Ukrainian authorities failed to protect the life of slain journalist
Georgii Gongadze, failed to conduct an effective investigation into his
death, treated Gongadze’s wife, Myroslava Gongadze, in an inhuman and degrading manner during the course of the investigation, and failed to provide
Myroslava Gongadze with an effective remedy. The court awarded
Myroslava Gongadze, who fled to the United States after her husband’s
death, 100,000 euros (U.S.$118,000) in damages.
The European Union offered Ukraine no immediate prospects for accession,
but signed a three-year Action Plan with Ukraine that deepened cooperation
and includes requirements that the government further strengthen human
rights guarantees. The European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development’s Country Strategy for Ukraine noted that women face employment
discrimination.
The U.S. continues to maintain close ties with Ukraine, but in its June 2005
Report on Human Trafficking criticized the government for not taking sufficient
action to combat the problem.
Uzbekistan
Uzbekistan’s disastrous human rights record worsened further in 2005 after a
government massacre of demonstrators in Andijan in May. The government
committed major violations of the rights to freedom of religion, expression,
association, and assembly, and such abuses only increased after the May massacre.
Uzbekistan has no independent judiciary, and torture is widespread in
both pre-trial and post-conviction facilities. The government continues its
practice of controlling, intimidating, and arbitrarily suspending or interfering
with the work of civil society groups, the media, human rights activists, and
opposition political parties. In particular, repression against independent
journalists, human rights defenders, and opposition members increased this
year. Government declarations of human rights reform, such as an announcement
that the government will abolish the death penalty and the president’s
declaration of support for habeas corpus, had no practical impact.
The Andijan Events
On May 13, 2005, Uzbek government forces killed hundreds of unarmed
protesters as they fled a demonstration in Andijan, in eastern Uzbekistan. To
date the government has taken no steps to investigate or hold accountable
those responsible for this atrocity. Instead it denies all responsibility and persecutes
those who seek an independent and transparent investigation.
In the early hours of May 13, gunmen attacked government buildings, killed
security officials, broke into the city prison, took over the local government
building (hokimiat), and took hostages. The trigger for the attacks was the
trial of twenty-three respected local businessmen for religious extremism,
charges widely perceived as unfair. Towards dawn, the instigators began to
prepare for a large protest in a public square, in front of the hokimiat, and
mobilized people to attend. By mid-morning, as word spread, the protest
grew into the thousands, as people came of their own will and vented their
grievances about poverty and government repression. When government
forces sealed off the square and started shooting indiscriminately, the protesters
fled. Hundreds of them were ambushed by government forces and were gunned down without warning. This stunning use of excessive force has been
documented by the United Nations and other intergovernmental organizations.
The Aftermath of Andijan
Since the Andijan massacre, the government has engaged in a concerted campaign
to re-write the history of the events. Government authorities deny
responsibility for the deaths, blaming them instead on Islamic extremists who
were intent on overthrowing the government and creating an Islamic state in
the Fergana valley. Foreign journalists were forcibly ejected from the city,
and had their notes and equipment confiscated. Local law enforcement and
mahalla (neighborhood) committee members went door to door warning residents
not to speak with journalists or foreigners or to discuss the events of
May 13. The Uzbek government detained hundreds—perhaps thousands—of
people in Andijan and coerced testimony from them about the events. On
September 20 a trial of fifteen defendants charged with more than thirty
crimes relating to the Andijan events began in the Supreme Court. The trial
fell far short of international standards and gave rise to concerns that the
defendants could have been subjected to torture or coercion. All of the
defendants confessed to the charges; although defense lawyers were present
at the trial, they did not mount an active defense of their clients. All witnesses
supported the government’s version of events except for one woman who
gave detailed testimony of soldiers firing on civilians. All fifteen defendants
were convicted and sentenced to prison terms ranging from fourteen to
twenty years. Following the announcement of the verdicts, U.N.
Commissioner for Human Rights Louise Arbour issued a statement voicing
concern over the convictions, saying the trial had been “marred by allegations
of irregularities and serious questions remained about its fairness.” A
series of trials of approximately one hundred more defendants was expected
to take place in the lower courts.
Persecution of Human Rights Defenders and Independent
Journalists
The crackdown on civil society following the Andijan events focused particularly
on human rights defenders. Since the Andijan massacre, human rights
defenders have faced increased harassment, surveillance, house arrest, interrogation,
arbitrary arrest, criminal charges, and interference with their work.
Some human rights defenders have faced public Soviet-style denunciations
and hate rallies, and eviction from their homes. At least thirteen defenders
and journalists were forced to flee the country fearing persecution.
Authorities arrested or detained at least forty-seven defenders and journalists;
thirteen remain in detention pending criminal charges related to their work,
five have been charged and released pending trial, and two have been tried
and sentenced to terms of imprisonment of six months and ten years.
Human rights defenders who attempted to document the Andijan events,
called for accountability, or spoke publicly about the government’s role in the
massacre were particularly vulnerable. For example, Saidjahon Zainabitdinov,
chairman of the Andijan human rights group Appeliatsia (“Appeal”) whose
accounts of the Andijan events appeared widely in the foreign press, was
arrested on May 29, 2005, and charged with slander, terrorism, and preparation
or distribution of information threatening public security and public
order. On August 26 a court sentenced Radio Liberty journalist Nosir Zokir
to six months’ imprisonment for insulting a security officer. Seven activists
from the human rights organizations Ezgulik (“Goodness”), the Human
Rights Society of Uzbekistan, and the International Human Rights Society
and the Birlik (“Unity”) opposition party in Andijan province were arrested
for attempting to conduct an inquiry into the Andijan events and for possession
of a Birlik party statement about the massacre, and at this writing awaited
trial.
On August 27, 2005, authorities arrested Elena Urlaeva, a tenacious human
rights activist with the Society for Human Rights and Freedoms of the
Citizens of Uzbekistan and a member of the unregistered Ozod Dekhon
(“Free Peasants”) political party. Police charged Urlaeva with desecrating
national symbols for attempting to distribute a caricature of the Uzbek national emblem and forcibly committed her to a psychiatric hospital for
observation and evaluation. In September an expert psychiatric commission
concluded that Urlaeva did not require treatment, but the police transferred
her to a different hospital where a second commission concluded that she was
“insane” and required compulsory psychiatric treatment. In October Urlaeva
was committed by court order to a psychiatric hospital and forcibly treated
with psychotropic drugs. She was released on October 27, but was still compelled
to undergo outpatient treatment.
Also in October 2005, police arrested Mukhtabar Tojibaeva, an outspoken
critic of the government and chairwoman of the Burning Hearts human
rights club in Margilan, on the eve of her departure for an international conference
for human rights defenders at risk. Tojibaeva had been actively
involved in defending the rights of the group of twenty-three businessmen
whose trial had sparked the Andijan events. She was charged with extortion
and fraud, and, at this writing, awaited trial.
Restrictions on Nongovernmental Organizations (NGOs)
The authorities continue to interfere with civil society groups and refuse to
register any independent human rights groups. The government also continues
to tighten restrictions on local groups, taking steps to close hundreds of
NGOs in cities around Uzbekistan. It severely limits the work of others by
requiring groups to receive advance permission to carry out events, demanding
participant lists for activities, and restricting the transfer of grant money
from international donors. The government also took steps in 2005 to expel
or restrict international NGOs. In September, a court in Tashkent ordered
the liquidation of Internews, a media support organization. The Ministry of
Justice initiated suspension proceedings against other international NGOs,
including the International Resources and Exchanges Board (IREX) and
Freedom House, for alleged violations of administrative regulations. A court
ordered IREX to suspend its activities for six months, and a criminal investigation
was initiated against IREX staff for providing internet services without
a license. Proceedings against Freedom House were ongoing. The government revoked or refused to grant accreditation to the staff of several international
NGOs, including IREX and the International Republican Institute.
Religious Persecution
For years the government has imprisoned on “fundamentalism” charges individuals
whose peaceful Islamic beliefs, practices, and affiliations fell outside
strict government controls. Approximately seven thousand people are
believed to have been imprisoned since the government’s campaign against
independent Islam began in the mid-1990s. The government justifies this
campaign by referring to the “war on terror,” failing to distinguish between
those who advocate violence and those who peacefully express their religious
beliefs; it used the May 2005 events in Andijan to give new validation to the
campaign. By November, Human Rights Watch had documented 194 religious
believers convicted in 2005 with at least sixty-nine more awaiting trial;
the true numbers are believed to be much higher.
Conditions in Uzbekistan’s prisons are poor, and religious and political prisoners
suffer particularly harsh treatment. According to testimony by relatives,
prisoners are forced to sign statements begging President Islam Karimov for
forgiveness, renouncing their faith, and incriminating themselves as terrorists.
Prisoners who refuse are punished with beatings, time in punishment
cells, and even new criminal prosecutions.
Torture
The government has made no visible progress on ending the use of torture in
practice, and only minimal progress on implementing the recommendations
made by the U.N. special rapporteur on torture after his visit to Uzbekistan
in 2002. Human Rights Watch continues to receive credible allegations of
torture during investigations and pre-trial custody, as well as in prisons.
Police use torture and other illegal means to coerce statements and confessions
from detainees, and investigators routinely block defense attorneys
from visiting their clients, a critical safeguard against torture in pre-trial
detention. President Karimov made a statement supporting habeas corpus, but as of this writing, this key protection against torture had not been implemented.
Courts ignored defendants’ claims at trial that they had confessed under torture
and accepted such confessions into evidence (despite an instruction by
the Supreme Court to judges to exclude any evidence obtained under illegal
means). In trials such as those of religious believers, defendants were routinely
sentenced to long prison terms based solely or predominantly on such confessions.
Key International Actors
International actors such as the European Union, the United States, the
U.N. and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
played a key role in calling for an independent investigation into the Andijan
massacre and for accountability for government officials found responsible,
calls that the Uzbek government rejected. Representatives from embassies
and the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
(ODIHR) monitored the trials.
The close strategic partnership between the United States and Uzbekistan
cooled considerably after the Andijan massacre. On July 30, 2005, the Uzbek
government notified the U.S. embassy in Tashkent that the United States
had 180 days to withdraw its forces from a military base in southern
Uzbekistan that it had used since 2002 to support operations in Afghanistan.
In the fall of 2005, the U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom
formally recommended that the State Department designate Uzbekistan a
“country of particular concern” for religious freedom, pursuant to the
International Religious Freedom Act. In its subsequent decision issued in
November, however, the Department of State failed to heed this recommendation.
In a landmark decision in October, the E.U. partially suspended its
Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with Uzbekistan—the first time it
has ever done so with any country. The E.U. also imposed sanctions, including
an embargo on arms sales to Uzbekistan and a visa ban on top Uzbek officials directly responsible for the massacre. The E.U. issued an initial list
of twelve government officials subject to the ban in mid-November, with
Minister of Interior Zokirjon Almatov topping the list. In blatant violation of
the spirit of this ban, Germany granted a visa on humanitarian grounds to
Almatov for medical treatment at a clinic in Hannover just days before the
list of names was formally announced. Germany also maintained troops in
Termez in southern Uzbekistan.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development adopted a new
country strategy for Uzbekistan in July, in which it upheld its unprecedented
decision of 2004 to suspend public sector lending over human rights concerns.
In addition, the Bank conditioned its further engagement with the private
sector on there being no direct or indirect link to the government or
specific government officials. It also made clear that it would be monitoring
its existing portfolio in Uzbekistan, both in the private and public sphere.
The World Bank and the Asian Development Bank were both revising their
strategies for Uzbekistan as this report went to press.
The U.N. called for an independent inquiry into the Andijan killings.
Requests for access to Uzbekistan by a number of U.N. special mechanisms,
including the special rapporteur on extrajudicial executions and the special
representative for human rights defenders, remained unanswered. In
November 2005, the Third Committee of the General Assembly adopted a
strongly-critical resolution on Uzbekistan expressing grave concern about the
human rights situation in the country and calling on the government to agree
to an international commission of inquiry into the Andijan massacre.
Russia and China stood out among nations for publicly supporting
Uzbekistan after the Andijan massacre. At the July 2005 summit of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), of which Uzbekistan, Russia,
and China are members, the heads of state signed seven agreements aimed at
the fight against “terrorism, separatism and extremism.” The summit framed
the Andijan events as part of a wider threat of destabilization rather than as
an excessive government response to a largely peaceful demonstration. At the
meeting, Russia, China, and the SCO reiterated the Uzbek government’s
core assertions regarding Andijan. Russia announced joint maneuvers with Uzbek troops, and both Russia and China declared that they would continue
arms sales to Uzbekistan. Russia and Uzbekistan signed a new partnership
agreement.
Egypt
Many aspects of Egypt’s poor human rights record came in for unprecedented
public criticism in 2005 as Egyptian democracy activists challenged
President Hosni Mubarak’s quarter century of authoritarian rule and the U.S.
administration pressed the Egyptian leader to promote basic political rights
such as freedom of expression and freedom of assembly. President Mubarak
easily won a fifth presidential term in the country’s first-ever contested presidential
election in early September, which took place largely without incident,
but the first rounds of nationwide parliamentary elections in November
were marked by extensive irregularities and, in some cases, violence by progovernment
forces. Serious issues like routine torture remain unaddressed.
Emergency rule continued to provide the basis for arbitrary detention and
trials before military and state security courts. Approximately fifteen thousand
people remain in prolonged detention without charge under the terms
of the Emergency Law, according to the Cairo-based Human Rights
Association for Assistance to Prisoners. Several car bomb attacks on tourist
sites since October 2004 led to additional mass arrests, arbitrary detentions,
and credible allegations of torture.
Emergency Rule
The government last renewed the Emergency Law (Law No. 162 of 1958) in
February 2003, and must do so again by May 2006 or allow it to expire. The
law, with its prohibition on demonstrations and public rallies, remained in
effect during the presidential election campaign, but the government did not
interfere with opposition rallies linked to the campaign. President Mubarak
indicated he would suspend the law or allow it to expire, but only after instituting
what he termed “a firm and decisive law that eliminates terrorism and
uproots its threats.” Egyptian human rights defenders fear that such legislation
would perpetuate many objectionable features of Law 162/1958.
Political Violence and Internal Security
A large car bomb explosion on October 7, 2004, at the Taba Hilton hotel, on
the border with Israel, killed more than thirty persons and wounded more
than a hundred. The government announced on October 25 that it had identified
nine persons responsible, of whom five were in custody, two were killed
carrying out the attack, and two remained at large. Nevertheless, over the
following months the State Security Investigation (SSI) arm of the Ministry
of Interior carried out mass arbitrary arrests in and around al-`Arish, the
North Sinai commercial and administrative center, detaining an estimated
2,500-3,000 persons. In April 2005 the government-appointed National
Council for Human Rights (NCHR), in its first annual report, stated that at
least two thousand persons remained in detention without charge.
On July 23, 2005 three suicide car bombers struck a hotel and tourist markets
at Sharm al-Shaikh, at the southern tip of the Sinai Peninsula, killing sixtyseven
persons. Three previously unknown groups claimed responsibility.
Although security forces arrested several suspects in the days following the
attack, in late August they detained an estimated 500-600 persons in a sweep
of the mountainous Jabal Halal area of northern Sinai. As of late October
2005 the government had not provided information about whether any of the
hundreds arrested had been released or charged in connection with the
attack.
In April, three separate shooting and small explosives attacks in Cairo resulted
in the deaths of three tourists, as well as the attackers, and injured more
than a dozen persons, mostly Egyptian.
The U.S. military command in Iraq said in October that 78 Egyptians, the
largest number from any single country, were among the 312 foreign fighters
captured thus far while allegedly taking part in the insurgency there.
Torture
Security forces and police routinely torture and mistreat detainees, particularly
during interrogations. Torture in the past was used primarily against political dissidents, but in recent years it has been rife in police stations as
well, affecting ordinary citizens. In 2004 the Egyptian Organization for
Human Rights (EOHR) reported 292 known torture cases between January
1993 and April 2004, 120 of which resulted in the death of the suspect or
prisoner. According to EOHR, there were at least seventeen additional cases
of deaths in police or security force custody between May 2004 and July
2005. Human Rights Watch and Egyptian human rights organizations documented
credible allegations of torture during interrogation from many persons
detained following the Taba bombing (see above). A high-level Ministry
of Interior official confirmed to Human Rights Watch in February 2005 that
the government had not conducted a single criminal investigation of SSI officials
for torture or ill-treatment in the past nineteen years, or imposed any
disciplinary measures, despite numerous credible allegations of serious abuse
in SSI custody.
Restrictions on Freedom of Association and Freedom of
Expression
Egypt’s law governing associations, Law 84/2002, severely compromises the
right to freedom of association, giving the government unwarranted control
over the governance and operations of nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs). The law provides criminal penalties for “unauthorized” activities,
including “engaging in political or union activities, reserved for political parties
and syndicates,” as well as for carrying out activities prior to an NGO’s
official authorization and for receiving donations without prior approval from
the Ministry of Social Affairs.
Egypt maintains strict controls over political associations as well. In July
2005, the parliament passed government-sponsored revisions to the Political
Parties Law (Law 40/1956) providing that new parties be legally registered
automatically unless the Political Parties Affairs Committee (PPC), headed
by the chair of the National Democratic Party (NDP), rejects the application.
The revised law also empowers the PPC to suspend an existing party’s
activities if it judges this to be “in the national interest” and to refer alleged
breaches of the law to the Prosecutor General.
The government also revised the Law on Political Rights (Law 73/1956),
introducing criminal penalties for journalists and publications convicted of
publishing “false information” intended to affect election results. The government
took no steps to follow through on President Mubarak’s public commitment
of February 2004 to revise the 1996 Press Law to eliminate, among
other things, criminal penalties for offenses such as libel and defamation.
According to Egyptian human rights monitors, the Prosecutor General in the
first eight months of 2005 summoned 22 journalists and writers for questioning
on alleged defamation charges after they wrote articles critical of public
officials.
Ill-treatment of Street Children
The government periodically conducts arrest campaigns of homeless or truant
street children who have committed no crime. In custody many face beatings,
sexual abuse, and extortion by police and adult suspects, and police deny
them access to food, bedding, and medical care. The authorities do not routinely
monitor conditions of detention for children, investigate cases of arbitrary
arrest or abuse in custody, or discipline those responsible. In many
cases, the police detain children illegally for days before taking them to the
public prosecutor on charges of being “vulnerable to delinquency.”
Women’s Rights
Despite recent reforms of Egypt’s family and nationality laws, additional
steps are needed to amend laws that discriminate against women and girls, to
prosecute gender-based violence, and to grant women and girls equal citizenship
rights. Discriminatory personal status laws governing marriage, divorce,
custody, and inheritance have institutionalized the second class status of
women in the private realm and undermined their legal standing. The penal
code does not effectively deter or punish domestic violence, and police are
routinely unsympathetic to the concerns of battered women and girls.
Religious Intolerance and Discrimination against Religious
Minorities
Although Egypt’s constitution provides for equal rights without regard to
religion, discrimination against Egyptian Christians and intolerance of
Baha’is and unorthodox Muslim sects remains a problem. Egyptian law recognizes
conversions to Islam, but not from Islam to other religions. Muslims
who convert to Christianity face difficulties in getting new identity papers
and some have been arrested for allegedly forging such documents. Baha’i
institutions and community activities are prohibited by law.
Key International Actors
The U.S. has long been Egypt’s largest provider of foreign military and economic
assistance, amounting to U.S.$1.3 billion in military aid and U.S.$535
million in economic assistance in 2005. Early in 2005 Deputy Secretary of
State Robert Zoellick reportedly warned visiting Egyptian officials that
U.S.$200 million of the annual assistance would be withheld until opposition
leader Ayman Nour was released from jail. In September Egypt hosted the
six-week Bright Star joint military exercise involving 8,600 U.S. troops as
well as some 8,000 troops from ten other countries.
President George Bush said in May 2005 that he “embraced” President
Mubarak’s decision to allow for a contested presidential elections, and he
criticized the widely-publicized May 25 beatings of dissidents by ruling party
vigilantes. Secretary of State Condoleeza Rice cancelled a planned February
visit to Egypt to protest Ayman Nour’s jailing. When she visited Cairo in
June she expressed concern that in Egypt “peaceful supporters of democracy…
are not free from violence. The day must come when the rule of law
replaces emergency decrees.” Both Bush and Rice endorsed publicly the need
for international election monitors, but the Egyptian government remained
opposed to their presence during the September voting.
The Association Agreement between Egypt and the European Union, which
came into force in June 2004, is premised on “respect for human rights and
democratic principles,” but Egypt’s human rights violations do not seem to have disturbed its operation. In late 2005 Egypt and the European
Commission commenced negotiations on an Action Plan under the
European Neighbourhood Policy, but progress was uncertain as Egypt
reportedly resisted inclusion of numerous human rights-related commitments.
In September, the United Kingdom quietly began efforts to deport three
Egyptian Islamists, trying to secure Egyptian diplomatic assurances that the
three would not be mistreated if returned to Egypt, even though efforts to
get such assurances from Cairo in 1999 regarding one of the men, Hani al-
Seba`i, had failed. The British Embassy approached the government-appointed
NCHR to play a monitoring role, but the NCHR declined. As of
November 2005 there were credible reports that the U.K. was seeking to
conclude a memorandum of understanding with Egypt containing a blanket
undertaking that people deported there from the U.K. would not be tortured
or ill-treated.
Egypt failed to respond to a request from the U.N. special rapporteur on torture
for an invitation to visit the country, a request that has been outstanding
since 1996. The U.N. Committee against Torture, in a May 2005 ruling that
Sweden had violated the absolute prohibition on torture by expelling terrorism
suspect Ahmed Agiza to Egypt in 2001, noted that Egypt had a well-documented
history of torture abuses, especially when dealing with terrorism
suspects (for further details see European Union chapter).
Iran
Respect for basic human rights in Iran, especially freedom of expression and
opinion, deteriorated considerably in 2005. The government routinely uses
torture and ill-treatment in detention, including prolonged solitary confinement,
to punish dissidents. The judiciary, which is accountable to Supreme
Leader Ali Khamenei, has been at the center of many serious human rights
violations. Abuses are perpetrated by what Iranians call “parallel institutions”:
paramilitary groups and plainclothes intelligence agents violently attack
peaceful protesters, and intelligence services run illegal secret prisons and
interrogation centers. President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, elected in June
2005, appointed a cabinet dominated by former members of the intelligence
and security forces, some of whom are allegedly implicated in the most serious
human rights violations since the Islamic Republic of Iran was established
twenty-six years ago, such as the assassination of dissident intellectuals.
Freedom of Expression and Opinion
The Iranian authorities have systematically suppressed freedom of expression
and opinion since April 2000, when the government launched a campaign
involving closure of newspapers and the imprisonment of journalists and editors.
Consequently, very few independent dailies remain, and those that do
self-censor heavily. Many writers and intellectuals have left the country, are
in prison, or have ceased to be critical. During 2005 the authorities also targeted
websites and Internet journalists in an effort to prevent online dissemination
of news and information. Between September and November of 2004,
the judiciary detained and tortured more than twenty bloggers and Internet
journalists, and subjected them to lengthy solitary confinement. The government
systematically blocks websites with political news and analysis from
inside Iran and abroad. On February 2, 2005, a court in the province of
Gilan sentenced Arash Sigarchi to fourteen years in prison for his online
writings. In August 2005, the judiciary sentenced another blogger, Mojtaba
Saminejad, to two years in prison for “insulting” Iran’s leaders.
Torture and Ill-treatment in Detention
With the closure of independent newspapers and journals and the suppression
of reporting on human rights abuses, treatment of detainees has worsened
in Evin prison as well as in detention centers operated clandestinely by
the judiciary and the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps. The authorities
have subjected those imprisoned for peaceful expression of their political
views to torture and ill-treatment. Judges often accept coerced confessions.
The authorities use prolonged solitary confinement, often in small basement
cells, to coerce confessions (which are videotaped) and gain information
regarding associates. Combined with denial of access to counsel, prolonged
solitary confinement creates an environment in which prisoners have
nowhere to turn to seek redress for their treatment in detention.
The judiciary issued an internal report in July 2005 admitting serious human
rights violations, including widespread use of torture, illegal detentions, and
coercive interrogation techniques. However, the judiciary failed to establish
any safeguards, follow up on its findings, or hold any officials responsible.
Impunity
There is no mechanism for monitoring and investigating human rights violations
perpetrated by agents of the government. The closure of independent
media in Iran has helped to perpetuate an atmosphere of impunity.
In recent years, public testimonies by numerous former prisoners and
detainees have implicated Tehran’s public prosecutor Saeed Mortazavi and his
office in some of the worst cases of human rights violations. Despite extensive
evidence, Mortazavi has not been held responsible for his role in illegal
detentions, torture of detainees, and coercing false confessions. The case of
Iranian-Canadian photojournalist Zahra Kazemi, who died in the custody of
judiciary and security agents led by Mortazavi in June 2003, remains unresolved.
Lawyers representing Kazemi’s family revealed that in addition to
signs of torture including fractures to her nose, fingers, and toes, Kazemi
received heavy blows to her head, once during her initial detention by the
head of the intelligence unit at Evin prison on June 23, 2003, and another blow during an interrogation led by Mortazavi three days later. According to
autopsy reports, Kazemi died of severe blows to her head. The judiciary had
accused a low-ranking Intelligence Ministry official, Reza Ahmadi, of
Kazemi’s unintentional homicide, and had proceeded with a hastily organized
trial held in May 2004 which cleared Reza Ahmadi of the charges. Following
an appeal by lawyers representing Kazemi’s family, an appeal hearing was
convened in July 2005, in which the lawyers demanded that the judiciary
launch an investigation into charges of intentional homicide, but the judge
refused their request. The judiciary has taken no further steps to identify or
prosecute those responsible for Kazemi’s killing.
Human Rights Defenders
In 2005, the authorities intensified their harassment of independent human
rights defenders and lawyers in an attempt to prevent them from publicizing
and pursuing human rights violations. The judiciary summoned Noble Peace
Prize winner Shirin Ebadi in January 2005 without specifying charges against
her. After she challenged her summons as illegal, and following an international
outcry, the judiciary rescinded its order. In July, the authorities once
again threatened to arrest Ebadi after she publicized several high-profile
human rights cases. On July 30, the judiciary detained Abdolfattah Soltani, a
lawyer and member of the Center for Defense of Human Rights, after
Soltani and Ebadi protested the judiciary’s inaction in Zahra Kazemi’s case.
No formal charges have been filed against Soltani; the judiciary appears to be
using his illegal detention as a way to intimidate and silence other human
rights defenders and lawyers. Prominent dissident and investigative journalist
Akbar Ganji, who exposed the role of high-ranking officials in the murders of
writers and intellectuals in 1998, remained imprisoned for a sixth year.
Minorities
Iran’s ethnic and religious minorities are subject to discrimination and, in
some cases, persecution. The Baha’i community continues to be denied permission
to worship or engage in communal affairs in a public manner. In
April 2005, protests erupted in the southern province of Khuzistan, home to nearly two million Iranians of Arab descent, following publication of a letter
allegedly written by Mohammad Ali Abtahi, an advisor to then-President
Mohammad Khatami, which referred to government plans to implement
policies that would reduce the proportion of ethnic Arabs in Khuzistan’s population.
After security forces opened fire to disperse demonstrators in Ahvaz,
the confrontation turned violent and spread to other cities and towns in
Khuzistan. The next day, Abtahi and other government officials called the
letter a fake. During the clashes, security forces killed at least fifty protestors
and detained hundreds more.
In July 2005, security forces shot and killed a Kurdish activist, Shivan Qaderi,
in Mahabad. In the wake of this incident protests were held in several cities
and towns in Kurdistan demanding that the government apprehend Qaderi’s
killers and put them on trial. Government forces put down the protests,
killing at least seventeen people and detaining several prominent Kurdish
journalists and activists. In October 2005, they were released on bail.
Key International Actors
In 2005 the policy of the European Union towards Iran was dominated by
negotiations over Iran’s nuclear programs, with human rights concerns a secondary
matter. The European Union has pledged to tie Iranian respect for
human rights to progress in co-operation on other issues, but so far with little
impact. Australia and Switzerland also have “human rights dialogues” with
Iran but have not made public any relevant benchmarks for assessing
progress.
Against strenuous Iranian objections, the United Nations General Assembly
adopted a resolution in November 2004, noting serious violations and the
worsening of the human rights situation in Iran. However, in 2005, unlike in
previous years, no resolution was introduced at the U.N. Commission on
Human Rights concerning the human rights situation in Iran. Under a standing
invitation issued in 2002 from Tehran to the thematic mechanisms of the
U.N. Commission on Human Rights, the Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention and the special rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the
right to freedom of opinion and expression visited the country and subsequently issued reports critical of government practices. However, the government
has failed to implement their recommendations, and in some cases
there were reprisals, such as re-arrest, against persons who testified to the
experts. In January 2005 the special rapporteur on violence against women
visited Iran, and the special rapporteur on adequate housing made a visit in
August. Iran has not responded to requests by the U.N. special rapporteurs
on torture and on extrajudicial executions to visit the country.
Relations between the United States and Iran remain poor. President Bush in
August 2005 said that U.S. military action against Iran was an “option on the
table,” but the administration reportedly remains divided on this point.
Iraq
The human rights situation in Iraq deteriorated significantly in 2005, with a
continuing rise in the number of armed attacks by insurgent groups, including
the deliberate targeting of civilians and violent attacks such as suicide
bombings. The level of abductions of Iraqis, in many cases for ransom, has
remained high, while those of foreign nationals has decreased – reflecting in
part the departure of foreign personnel working with humanitarian agencies,
media outlets and others as a result of deteriorating security conditions.
Counterinsurgency attacks by U.S.-led international and Iraqi forces further
aggravated the human rights situation, resulting in the killing of civilians in
violation of the laws of armed conflict. There was also continuing concern
about the absence of basic precautions by the U.S. military to protect civilians,
including at checkpoints, brought to the fore by the killing of an Italian
intelligence officer in March 2005. The subsequent U.S. military investigation
exonerated all U.S. military personnel involved in the shooting, but
showed that the army had failed to implement lessons learned during two
years of manning checkpoints.
Evidence of the torture and other mistreatment of detainees held in the custody
of U.S. forces in 2003 and 2004 has continued to emerge in the wake of
the Abu Ghraib revelations in April 2004. Some of the evidence is based on
accounts by U.S. military personnel, who have described routine and severe
beatings of detainees, including subjecting them to forced stress positions,
sleep deprivation, extremes of hot and cold, denial of food and water, and the
application of chemical substances to detainees’ skin and eyes. The accounts
show that abuses have resulted from civilian and military failures of leadership
and confusion about interrogation standards and the application of the
Geneva Conventions. They contradict claims by the Bush administration that
detainee abuses by U.S. forces abroad have been infrequent, exceptional and
unrelated to policy.
Efforts to boost economic reconstruction and the rebuilding of Iraq’s devastated
infrastructure continue to be hampered by general instability in the
country and the level of violence caused by insurgency and counterinsurgency attacks. This is despite progress made in the political process, including
the holding of general elections in January 2005, the convening of the
Transitional National Assembly in March, the formation of the Iraqi
Transitional Government in April and the holding of a referendum on a draft
constitution in October.
The Governing Authority and the Political Process
Elections were held on January 30, 2005 for twenty government bodies,
including a Transitional National Assembly. The U.N.-assisted elections took
place amid conditions of extreme insecurity and political turmoil, limiting the
ability of all eligible voters to participate. Following prolonged delays, the
successor Transitional Government, headed by prime minister Ibrahim al-
Ja’fari, was formed on April 28.
On October 15, a draft constitution was adopted by national referendum.
According to official results, 63 per cent of eligible voters participated, with
over 78 percent voting in favor. The drafting process was fraught with difficulties
amid efforts to secure the participation of Sunni political groups that
had boycotted the January elections and to achieve consensus on key issues
including the role of religion and federalism. The constitution contained key
fundamental principles and individual rights, but left many of them subject to
implementing legislation. A mechanism was established for further review of
the constitution following parliamentary elections, scheduled for December
15, 2005.
Attacks against Civilians by Insurgent Groups
Insurgent groups perpetrated widespread attacks against civilians throughout
2005, claiming the lives of hundreds of Iraqis and other nationals. Among the
groups responsible for these abuses are al-Qaeda in Iraq, Ansar al-Sunna and
the Islamic Army in Iraq, which have all targeted civilians for abductions and
executions. The first two groups have repeatedly boasted about massive car
bombs and suicide bombs in mosques, markets, bus stations and other civilian
areas.
These abuses took place in the context of the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq and
the ensuing military occupation that resulted in tens of thousands of civilian
deaths and sparked the emergence of insurgent groups. Chief among the justifications
insurgent groups use is that the U.S. illegally invaded Iraq and
killed thousands of Iraqi civilians since March 2003.
The victims of targeted assassination by insurgent groups include government
officials, politicians, judges, journalists, humanitarian aid workers, doctors,
professors and those deemed to be collaborating with the foreign forces
in Iraq, including translators, cleaners and others who perform civilian jobs
for the U.S.-led Multi-National Force in Iraq (MNF - I). Insurgents have
directed suicide and car bomb attacks at Shi`a mosques, Christian churches
and Kurdish political parties with the purpose of killing civilians. Claims that
these communities are legitimate targets because they may support the foreign
forces in Iraq have no basis in international law, which requires the protection
of any civilian who is not actively participating in the hostilities.
Torture and Killings by Iraqi forces
The torture and ill-treatment of detainees in Iraqi custody remains a serious
concern, with the level of reported incidents rising. The vast majority of allegations
concern forces of the Iraqi Ministry of Interior, as well as members of
the Iraqi armed forces under Ministry of Defense authority. Detainees in pretrial
detention on security-related offenses, in particular, are subjected to various
forms of torture or ill-treatment, including routine beatings, sleep deprivation,
electric shocks to sensitive parts of the body, prolonged suspension
from the wrists with the hands tied behind the back, deprivation of food and
water for prolonged periods, and severely overcrowded cells. Former
detainees held by Ministry of Interior forces in connection with alleged terrorist
offenses linked to insurgent activity report other forms of torture,
including having weights attacked to their testicles, or having a string tied
tightly round their penis and then being forced to drink large amounts of
water.
Iraqi government officials have publicly committed to investigating the abuse
of detainees and to holding criminally responsible those found guilty of the torture of detainees and the killing of civilians. At this writing, neither the
Ministry of Interior nor the Ministry of Defense had established an effective
mechanism for the monitoring of abuses by law enforcement personnel or
the armed forces, nor set up a system for bringing those accused of such
offenses to justice. In addition to assistance provided by MNF-I personnel,
other training programs through the European Union and NATO to train
personnel from the Iraqi police, armed forces, the judiciary and penitentiary
personnel were ongoing during 2005, but with little focus on issues related to
monitoring and accountability.
Accountability for Past Crimes
The Statute of the Iraqi Special Tribunal, established in December 2003 to
try members of the former Iraqi government for genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes, was amended and adopted by Iraq’s Transitional
National Assembly in October 2005, one week before the first trial was
scheduled to begin on October 19. The Assembly renamed the tribunal the
“Supreme Iraqi Criminal Tribunal” (SICT).
Serious doubts remain about the capacity of the Tribunal, as constituted, to
conduct fair trials that meet international human rights standards for the
prosecution of the crimes in its Statute. Reliance on Iraqi criminal law, which
does not adequately ensure protection of the rights of accused, could further
undermine the legitimacy of the Tribunal. There remain inadequate protections
against self-incrimination, an inappropriate standard of proof, and inadequate
procedural and substantive measures to ensure an adequate defense,
including the right to confront and examine witnesses. Defense counsel for
some of the accused claim that their ability to mount an effective defense has
been hampered by lack of adequate access to the accused and to the court’s
evidence against them. Additionally, prejudicial comments by senior public
officials, the politicization of control of the Tribunal and the susceptibility of
judges to dismissal seriously undermine the court’s appearance of independence
and impartiality. After the opening of the first SICT trial on October
19, two defense counsel were assassinated, highlighting the grave risks faced by all who participate in the trials. The defense counsel killings intensify concerns
about the accused’s right to a competent and effective defense.
As of October 2005, the MNF retained physical custody of over 90 “high
value detainees”, most of whom remained held at Camp Cropper near
Baghdad International Airport, and include members of the former Iraqi
government awaiting trial before the Iraqi Criminal Tribunal. U.S. forces
began granting these detainees family visits starting in July 2005, in some
cases more than two years after arresting them. It is unclear how many continue
to be held without access to defense counsel.
Key International Actors
As of July 2005, the United States retained approximately 140,000 military
personnel deployed in Iraq as part of the United Nations Security Councilauthorized
MNF-I. The mandate of the MNF-I, under Security Council resolution
1546, adopted in June 2004, was scheduled for review in December
2005. The United Kingdom remains the key military and political partner to
the United States in the MNF-I, retaining approximately 8,300 troops in
Iraq, deployed primarily in the south-eastern governorates. Other countries
with a military presence in Iraq include Poland, Italy, Ukraine, Denmark,
Romania and Japan, totaling some 12,700 troops.
In a report to the U.S. Secretary-General in September 2005, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI) said the human rights situation
in Iraq continued to give rise to serious concern. The report cited “ongoing
insurgent attacks and acts of terrorism, including kidnapping and torture”, as
well as ‘continuing concern about military operations conducted by the
Multinational Force in the north and north-west of Iraq, resulting in civilian
deaths, injury and displacement from excessive or apparently indiscriminate
use of force.”
Israel/Occupied Palestinian Territories (OPT)
Following the death of Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat in November 2004,
Palestinians held their second-ever national elections on January 9, 2005.
The main contender, Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen), became the second
Palestinian president with 62.52% of the vote. The Palestinian Authority
(P.A.) postponed Legislative Council elections, which were due to take place
in 2005, until January 2006, but held first-ever municipal elections in four
stages across the West Bank and Gaza, with Hamas gaining a substantial
leadership role in local politics, especially in Gaza. The P.A. has postponed a
fifth and final round of voting, which includes fifty-nine local councils, until
2006.
On February 8, 2005 Mahmoud Abbas and Israeli Prime Minister Ariel
Sharon met in Sharm el-Sheikh for the first Israeli-Palestinian summit in
four years. The summit ended in a loose ceasefire agreement “that all
Palestinians will stop all acts of violence against all Israelis and at the same
time Israel will cease its military activity against all Palestinians everywhere.”
While Islamic Jihad and Hamas said they were not bound by the ceasefire,
they did commit to respecting a mutual period of calm.
As part of the ceasefire, Israel agreed to release nine hundred Palestinian
prisoners, which it did in February and June. Approximately eight thousand
Palestinian political and security prisoners remain imprisoned by Israel. Israel
also currently holds more than six hundred Palestinians under administrative
detention (detention without trial or charge, which can be indefinitely
renewed).
In August and September 2005, Israel unilaterally withdrew approximately
eight thousand settlers, along with military personnel and installations, from
the Gaza Strip and four small settlements in the northern West Bank near
Jenin. While Israel has since declared the Gaza Strip a “foreign territory”
and the crossings between Gaza and Israel “international borders,” under
international humanitarian law (IHL), Gaza remains occupied, and Israel
retains its responsibilities for the welfare of Gaza residents. Israel maintains
effective control over Gaza by regulating movement in and out of the Strip as well as the airspace, sea space, public utilities and population registry. In
addition, Israel declared the right to re-enter Gaza militarily at any time in
its “Disengagement Plan” Since the withdrawal, Israel has carried out aerial
bombardments, including targeted killings, and has fired artillery into the
northeastern corner of Gaza.
While the total number of Israeli and Palestinian casualties fell in 2005 following
the February ceasefire, the overall human rights situation in Israel and
the OPT remained grave. Since the beginning of the current intifada in
September 2000, Israel has killed nearly three thousand Palestinians in the
West Bank and Gaza, including more than six hundred children. During the
same period, Palestinian fighters have killed more than nine hundred Israelis
inside Israel and in the OPT. Most of those killed on both sides were civilians.
The Israeli authorities continue a policy of closure, imposing severe and frequently
arbitrary restrictions on freedom of movement in the West Bank,
Gaza Strip, and East Jerusalem, contributing to a serious humanitarian crisis
marked by extreme poverty, unemployment, and food insecurity. The movement
restrictions also have severely compromised Palestinian residents’
access to health care, education, and other services. As of August 1, 2005, the
U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) reported
376 closure obstacles, down from 605 in February. However, this decrease, a
result of the Sharm summit and the subsequent decrease in fighting, is offset
by an increase in the number of “flying checkpoints” (currently an average of
sixty each month), which usually consist of a military jeep blocking a road
and checking all traffic for an undisclosed period of time; an increase in concrete
military towers and “road protection barriers”, which block Palestinian
traffic from entering settler-only roads through the OPT; and the increased
movement restrictions associated with the “separation barrier” or “wall” that
Israel is building mostly inside the West Bank.
During 2005, Israel continued with its construction of the wall, notwithstanding
the International Court of Justice’s Advisory Opinion declaring the
construction of the wall inside the OPT a violation of IHL, and demanding
that Israel cease further construction inside the OPT. While the stated Israeli security rationale for the wall is to prevent Palestinian armed groups from
carrying out attacks in Israel, 85 percent of its route extends into the West
Bank, facilitating the eventual annexation to Israel of most of the large illegal
Jewish settlements constructed over the past several decades as well as some
of the most productive Palestinian farmlands and key water resources.
In July 2005, the Israeli Knesset approved legislation that effectively bars
Palestinians from the OPT from suing Israel for death, injury or damages
caused by Israeli security agents. The amendment to the Civil Wrongs
(Liability of State) Law, 5712-1952 further strips Palestinians of an effective
remedy for serious human rights abuses, which is required under international
human rights law. The Knesset passed the bill at a time when the Israel
Defense Forces (IDF) had criminally investigated fewer than ten percent of
the Palestinian civilian deaths since September 2000, and have convicted only
a handful of IDF soldiers for causing death or injury. In August, an Israeli
court handed down an eight year sentence, by far the longest of the past five
years, to the soldier found responsible for lethally shooting Briton Tom
Hurndall in Gaza in 2002. The IDF maintains the policy that killings of
Palestinians will be investigated only under “exceptional circumstances,”
which neither the IDF nor the government has ever defined. The Israeli
authorities’ failure to bring perpetrators to justice fosters a culture of impunity.
The Knesset also passed legislation in July 2005 barring family reunification
between Israeli citizens (mostly Palestinians) and their Palestinian spouses
from the OPT, except in certain age categories. Since 2002 Israel has frozen
family reunification and forced thousands of married couples and their children
to live apart or live together illegally. This law violates the right not to
be subjected to arbitrary interference with one’s family as set out in international
human rights treaties ratified by Israel.
In the OPT, despite Abbas’ pledges of restored law and order and his reorganization
of the security services, including firing long-standing officials
who P.A. authorities deemed inept or corrupt, control of the Palestinian
Authority over Palestinian population centers is frequently nominal at best,
and conditions of lawlessness have increased in the Gaza Strip and parts of the West Bank in 2005. Palestinian gunmen carried out several assassinations
against persons alleged to have collaborated with Israeli security forces, and
fighting between various Palestinian factions, security services and armed
groups has led to armed clashes on the streets, vigilante killings and even the
kidnapping of foreigners on several occasions in Gaza.
Since taking office, Abbas has overseen the execution of five death row
inmates. At least twenty-two people remain on death row, many of them
tried in the notorious Palestinian security or military courts where minimum
standards of due process are not met. On June 22 Abbas ordered that the
Palestinian justice system retry those whom the State Security Court had
sentenced to death. It is unclear whether this process has begun.
Unlawful Use of Force
The Israeli army and security forces continued to carry out daily arrest raids
and military operations in Palestinian areas during 2005. There have been
over two thousand IDF incursions into Palestinian population centers this
year. The IDF often carried out the operations in a manner that failed to
demonstrate that it had used all feasible measures to avoid or minimize harm
to civilians and their property. In one such incident, an August 24 arrest raid
in the Tulkarem refugee camp, the IDF shot and killed five unarmed
Palestinians, including three seventeen-year-olds. This incident reflects a
growing pattern of IDF “arrest operations” in which security forces kill the
target of arrest or bystanders rather than seeking to apprehend the target.
More than 20 Palestinians were killed in assassinations or extra-judicial
killings in 2005.
In 2005, the number of Palestinian suicide bombings and similar attacks targeting
civilians inside Israel reached their lowest point since the beginning of
the current intifada in 2000. Palestinian armed groups carried out three
lethal suicide bombing attacks inside Israel in 2005, killing fifteen Israelis and
injuring scores more. Armed groups also carried out several roadside shootings
and bomb attacks in the OPT, killing several Israeli civilians. In addition,
on several occasions, Palestinian armed groups in the Gaza Strip fired
home-made rockets, known as Qassams, and mortar shells into Israel and at Jewish settlements in the Gaza Strip (up until the withdrawal in August),
which killed several Israelis, Palestinians, and foreign workers. These
weapons are inherently indiscriminate and are generally fired at civilian areas,
in contravention of IHL. Abbas publicly denounced such tactics and called
for an end to the armed uprising. Yet the Palestinian Authority appeared
unable to stop those who have ordered or organized such attacks.
The Wall
On February 20, 2005 Israel modified the planned route of the wall. While
the new route runs closer to the Green Line in some areas, such as the
southern West Bank, in other areas it will run far inside the West Bank in
order to capture key Israeli settlements such as Ariel (twenty-two kilometers
inside the West Bank), the Gush Etzion bloc (with fifty thousand settlers)
near Bethlehem and the Maaleh Adumim settlement east of Jerusalem. The
new route is 670 km, twice the length of the “Green Line” (the 1949
armistice line between Israel and Jordan which served as the de facto border
between Israel and the West Bank after Israel’s 1967 occupation); only about
one-fifth of the route follows the Green Line itself. During 2005 Israel still
failed to make the case why a wall constructed entirely on the Israeli side of
the Green Line would not have been at least as effective in providing security
inside Israel. Instead, the current wall will bring over three hundred thousand
West Bank and East Jerusalem settlers and a minimum of 135,000 acres of
West Bank territory over to the Israeli side. Despite Israel’s contention that
the wall is a “temporary” security measure, it captures settlements that Israel
has vowed to hold onto permanently. On July 21 Sharon said that the Ariel
bloc of settlements “will be part of the State of Israel forever.”
The construction of the wall and settlement expansion essentially have cut off
East Jerusalem from the rest of the West Bank. In June the Israeli cabinet
approved the final details of the 60-kilometer fence around Jerusalem that
will cut off some fifty-five thousand Palestinian Jerusalem residents from
their city. Israel also has announced plans to build in the three thousand acre
piece of West Bank land between Jerusalem and the West Bank settlement of Maaleh Adumim, known as E-1, and to surround the entire area with the
wall. This will effectively sever the northern and southern West Bank.
Key International Actors
In April 2005, after meeting with Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, U.S.
President George Bush “reiterated that the United States supports the establishment
of a Palestinian state that is viable, contiguous, sovereign and independent.”
Yet while the Bush administration expressed displeasure at Israel’s
decision to build in the E-1 area of the OPT, and paid lip service to the call
for a freeze in settlement expansion, it provided no political or economic
sanctions on Israel’s continued building. Sharon publicly vowed to continue
building despite U.S. displeasure.
Israel remained the largest recipient of U.S. military and economic aid,
receiving almost U.S.$3 billion in 2005. In contrast, after a May meeting
between Bush and Abbas, Bush pledged U.S.$50 million in aid to the P.A. for
housing and other construction following the Israeli withdrawal from Gaza.
However Congress later earmarked part of this money to be used to beef up
“border crossings” along the wall, which are mostly located on occupied
West Bank land. In September 2005, following the Israeli withdrawal, the
United States approved disbursement of a U.S.$3 million supplemental grant
to the P.A. security services.
Also in September, the Quartet (the United Nations, Russia, the European
Union and the United States) foreign ministers met to welcome the successful
conclusion of the Israeli withdrawal and call for renewed efforts to return
to the Road Map (a performance-based plan with three phases which is supposed
to build confidence in preparation for final status negotiations to end
the conflict). Their final statement read: “The Quartet reaffirms that any
agreement on final status issues must be reached through negotiations and
that a new Palestinian State must be truly viable, with contiguity in the West
Bank and connectivity to Gaza.” The Quartet also called for an end to settlement
expansion and expressed concern regarding the route of the wall.
Jordan
King Abdullah II is invested with extensive executive and legislative powers
under Jordan’s constitution. He issues decrees and dismisses and appoints key
government officials, including a new prime minister and cabinet in April and
a new chief of intelligence in May 2005. The government and the king have
announced their intention to anchor the right to freedom of expression in
law, but in practice the exercise of basic rights such as freedom of expression,
association and assembly remains restricted. Security forces carry out arbitrary
arrests and detain people without charge in the name of counterterrorism.
A lack of determined government action against “honor” crimes and discrimination
continues to circumscribe women’s political, civil and economic
rights.
Human Rights Defenders
In its first annual report, issued in 2005, Jordan’s National Center for Human
Rights, a government-regulated body, painted an unflattering picture of the
state of political and civil rights and transgressions by security forces.
Established by law in 2002, the center has a mandate to follow up on individual
human rights violations, but many victims complain that it does not
expend serious effort on their cases, especially when sensitive issues such as
torture, unfair trials, or redress for victims are involved. The center has fostered
public debate on prison conditions in the country following the release
in October 2004 of a report documenting one case of torture in detention.
Jordan’s independent human rights organizations do not systematically investigate
abuses, publish reports, or assist victims. They cite a lack of resources,
or a preference for work on training and capacity building.
Freedom of Expression
Jordanians are not entirely free to express their opinions. Criticisms of the
king and the intelligence forces are strictly taboo and carry serious penalties.
Articles of the Penal Code criminalize speech slandering public officials, criticizing the king and his family, and harming relations with other states. High
government officials have indicated that the authorities will no longer
enforce these laws, and criticism of the government (as distinct from the
king), as well as Israeli, other Arab states, and United States’ policies, or voicing
support for Islamist causes, is tolerated, but within limits. For example,
Ali Hattar and Riyadh Nuwaisa, two prominent political activists, were
arrested on slander charges after they criticized the U.S. at a conference in
Amman in December 2004. A court sentenced Hattar to three months in
prison; Nuwaisa was acquitted.
The government has barred over 150 clerics from preaching in recent years.
Around forty have been banned since the beginning of 2004, according to
one of their lawyers, despite the fact that courts had cleared them of charges
under the Law on Preaching and Guidance in Mosques.
The government censors printing houses, especially those used by smaller
circulation weekly newspapers. Intelligence officers have stopped print runs,
and demanded changes in or cancellation of articles, most recently on
September 19, 2005, concerning an article in the weekly Al-Wahda.
Managers of newspapers, as well as editors, can be held criminally liable for
content in breach of the law, such as alleged slander.
King Abdullah in February convened a National Agenda Committee to
undertake a comprehensive review of legislation and propose amendments
for political reform, including laws governing elections and political parties.
In the area of free expression, the committee has reportedly proposed lifting
the requirement that working journalists must belong to the Jordanian Press
Association. In July, the Cabinet submitted to parliament a draft Journalism
and Publications Law that would prohibit forcing journalists to reveal sources
or arresting journalists in the course of their work. It would abolish pre-publication
censorship, and a decision to ban a publication would require a court
ruling, not merely an administrative decision.
Freedom of Association and Assembly
In March, then Prime Minister Faisal al-Fayez’s government introduced a bill
that would regulate the 120,000 members of Jordan’s twelve professional
associations under one law, and that would restrict discussion at association
gatherings to purely professional and internal matters, prohibiting political
discussion. Most disturbingly, the government proposed to appoint twothirds
of the members of each association’s disciplinary committee, which was
empowered to punish infractions of the new law with suspension from work
for up to one year.
In April, the king replaced al-Fayez with Prime Minister Adnan Badran. The
new government has not sought parliamentary approval of the law on professional
associations. It also appears to have withdrawn another draft bill of the
al-Fayez government, the Welfare Societies bill, that reportedly would have
imposed strict regulation and Ministry of Interior supervision over nongovernmental
organizations—requiring, for example, ministerial approval for
every foreign-funded project, and giving ministry officials the right to confiscate
NGO documents.
In 2004, parliament ratified a 2001 temporary Law on General Assemblies,
under which organizers of public gatherings must seek permission from the
relevant governor three days in advance. A governor is not bound to consider
only public safety concerns when deciding whether to give or withhold permission,
and the authorities have used the law to withhold permission for
demonstrations and other public gatherings, especially those in support of
the uprising in the Occupied Palestinian Territories. For example, the governor
of Amman in late August 2005 banned a festival in support of
Palestinians organised by the Islamic Action Front in Amman’s 2nd District.
Arbitrary Detention and Torture
Jordan’s General Intelligence Department (GID) arrests Jordanian Islamists
and detains them at its own detention facility for prolonged periods, often
without charge or on baseless charges. The GID routinely denies detainees
access to legal representation, and grants requests for family visits with considerable delay, if at all. Some security detainees allege torture and ill-treatment
during interrogation, the alleged abuse almost invariably taking two
forms. One is severe beatings on the lower legs and feet with a metal or bamboo
stick, with some victims allegedly then being forced by GID officers to
walk with lacerated and bruised feet on a mixture of vinegar and salt. The
other form is solitary confinement for periods of months at a time with little
or no exposure to daylight.
Provincial governors and their deputies have the authority to detain persons
they deem a “danger to society” but who have not committed any crime.
Such persons, who usually have committed prior offenses, remain in detention
until they can meet a personal, material or monetary bail guarantee. If
they breach conditions of bail, such as daily reports to the police station, or if
no guarantor comes forward, they remain imprisoned for up to one year.
Women’s Rights
The arbitrary detention on a governor’s orders of people deemed a “danger
to society” also applies to women who are detained in order to protect them
from threats of harm from family members as a result of alleged “honor”
offenses. In Jordan’s second largest province, Zarqa’, there were some eleven
such cases in September 2005. Honor crimes continue to remain a serious
problem in Jordan. Laws provide lax penalties for murders committed “in a
fit of fury”—a defense frequently invoked in so-called “honor killings.”
Family members reportedly killed twelve women in the ten months of 2005
for alleged sexual misconduct.
There is an ongoing debate over the future of a women’s quota in parliament,
first introduced in 1997. In the 2003 elections, allotted seats went to the six
women candidates with the highest percentages of votes, although none won
a seat outright. Some women’s rights activists favor a requirement for parties
to reserve candidate places for women in order to increase their representation,
rather than increase the quota of women’s seats in parliament.
Political Reform
The 110 deputies in Jordan’s lower house of parliament cannot initiate legislation
or exercise effective control over government actions, but they debate
national issues and ratify laws and international agreements. They can issue a
vote of no confidence in the government and overrule a royal veto of legislation.
The king appoints the upper house’s forty members, who also must ratify
laws, and he can dissolve parliament. During 2001-03, when the king
delayed elections after dissolving parliament, the government passed over
150 laws by decree, which parliament may now review.
Key International Actors
U.S. assistance in 2005, at $660 million, constitutes over one-fifth of Jordan’s
annual budget, according to the IMF (the European Union, by comparison,
promised to give ?63 million in assistance to Jordan for 2006). The country’s
dependence on U.S. assistance increased after it lost access to subsidized
Kuwaiti oil in early 2005, leading the king to pressure parliamentarians to
approve a bilateral immunity agreement sought by the U.S. The agreement
would obligate Jordan not to surrender to the International Criminal Court
U.S. citizens (and non-citizens working for the U.S. government) under
Jordanian jurisdiction, even if they are accused and sought by the ICC for
genocide, war crimes, or crimes against humanity (U.S. legislation in late
2004 conditioned foreign economic assistance for ICC states parties on countries’
ratifying such an agreement). The king signed the immunity agreement
in December 2004 during a visit to Washington, but the lower house of parliament
refused to ratify it in July 2005. The king is expected to resubmit it.
Following the July 7 London bombings, the United Kingdom concluded a
Memorandum of Understanding with Jordan under which Jordan undertakes
not to torture or mistreat persons the U.K. deports to Jordan. Abu Qatada, a
Jordanian residing in the U.K., currently faces deportation hearings under
these new arrangements.
Libya
Human rights conditions in Libya improved slightly in 2005 as the country
continued its slow international reintegration, but serious problems remain.
The government severely curtails freedom of expression and association, banning
political parties and independent organizations. It continues to imprison
individuals for criticizing Libya’s unique political system, the government, or
its leader Col. Muammar Qaddafi. Due process violations and torture remain
concerns, as do disappearances from past years.
Political Prisoners
Dozens and probably hundreds of individuals are in prison for engaging in
peaceful political activity. Many were imprisoned for violating Law 71, which
bans any group activity based on a political ideology opposed to the principles
of the 1969 revolution that brought Qaddafi to power. Violators of the
law can be put to death. Among the prisoners are eighty-six members of the
Muslim Brotherhood, a non-violent political and social organization, who
have been in prison since 1998 after trials that violated Libyan and international
law. The court sentenced its two leaders to death, and they remained
on death row throughout 2005. In a positive development, the Supreme
Court ruled in October that the brotherhood members should get a new
trial, which will proceed in 2006.
In September, the government released five long-term political prisoners
who had been serving prison terms up to life for participation in a banned
political group. Later that month, a government committee recommended
that 131 political prisoners be released because they no longer posed a threat
to society, among them the eighty-six imprisoned members of the Muslim
Brotherhood. As of December all 131 people remained in prison.
The most prominent political prisoner is Fathi al-Jahmi, a former government
official, who strongly criticized Qaddafi in interviews with international
media in March 2004. The Internal Security Agency held al-Jahmi, his wife
and son for about six months in 2004, ostensibly for their own protection.
They released the family members late that year, but continued to hold alJahmi without a trial at a special facility throughout 2005, denying him regular
visits from a doctor and his family. According to the family, the government
denied them visits since early June.
The fate of dozens of political prisoners remains unknown. According to one
Libyan group based abroad, more than 250 political prisoners have disappeared.
Libyan officials told Human Rights Watch that one of these men,
Ahmad ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Thulti, arrested in 1986, had died of natural causes
in prison, but the government has not officially informed the family or
returned the body.
Freedom of Expression
Freedom of expression is severely curtailed, although Libyan lawyers, academics
and journalists are slowly beginning to address topics previously
taboo. A pervasive security service monitors the population, and self-censorship
is rife.
There are no private radio or television stations, and government authorities
or the Revolutionary Committees Movement, a powerful ideological organization,
control the country’s main newspapers. The state-run media glorifies
the government and its leaders and rarely, if ever, presents alternative or critical
views. The only access to uncensored news comes via the Internet and
satellite television, which is widely viewed.
The Internet is spreading quickly in Libya, with dozens of opposition or
independent websites based abroad. The government has occasionally
blocked some Internet sites. In January 2005 the government arrested writer
`Abd al-Raziq al-Mansuri, who worked with a United Kingdom-based website,
apparently due to his critical work. In October, a court sentenced him to
one-and-a-half years in prison for the illegal possession of a handgun.
On May 21, unidentified men abducted Daif al-Ghazal, who had been active
in the Revolutionary Committees Movement and had written for the movement’s
newspaper, al-Zahf al-Akhdar. He reportedly was disenchanted with
the movement and had been writing critical articles for a website based
abroad. The authorities found al-Ghazal’s decomposing body with signs of torture and a gunshot to the head on June 2. The government denied
responsibility and said it had arrested two men in relation to the crime.
Freedom of Association
Libya has many professional organizations and associations but no truly independent
nongovernmental organizations. Some lawyers complained that the
Law on Associations (Law 19) needed amending to facilitate the process of
registration by a non-political body. In June 2005 the head of the official
journalists union resigned from his post because, among other reasons, the
government had refused to allow an independent journalists organization. In
November the official lawyers union issued an unusually strong protest statement
because the government did not allow them to appoint their own union
heads. Law 71, described above, and other restrictive legislation severely limits
the right to establish independent groups, with violators punished by
death.
Two human rights groups exist in Libya, most prominently the human rights
program at the Qaddafi International Foundation for Charity Associations,
run by Muammar Qaddafi’s influential son Seif. In 2005 the foundation ran
campaigns against torture and called for the release of political prisoners. A
quasi-official institution, it is also the most vocal domestic critic of the government.
Torture and the Death Penalty
Five Bulgarian nurses and a Palestinian doctor remained on death row for
infecting 426 Libyan children with HIV, despite credible claims that they
were tortured to extract confessions. On June 7, 2005, a Tripoli court acquitted
ten Libyans accused of using torture against the defendants. The
Supreme Court will review the case on January 31, 2006.
Despite government claims that it will not execute anyone until a new penal
code comes into effect (see below), the state continues to execute persons on
death row, most recently two Turks and four Egyptians sentenced to death
for murder.
Detention of Women and Girls in “Social Rehabilitation”
Women and girls suspected of transgressing moral codes may be detained
indefinitely in “social rehabilitation” facilities—portrayed as “protective”
homes for wayward women and girls or those whose families reject them.
There, the government routinely violates women’s and girls’ human rights,
including those to due process, liberty, freedom of movement, personal dignity,
and privacy. Many women and girls detained in these facilities have
committed no crime, or have already served a sentence. Some are there
because they were raped and are now ostracized for staining their family’s
honor. There is no way out of these facilities unless a male relative takes custody
of the woman or girl or she consents to marriage.
Treatment of Foreigners
Libya has no asylum law or procedure. It has not signed the 1951 Refugee
Convention and it has no formal cooperation agreement with the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Throughout the year, the government
continued to deport thousands of foreigners, mostly sub-Saharan
Africans, who had entered the country without authorization, sometimes
back to countries where they could face persecution or torture. Foreigners
reported beatings and other abuse throughout the deportation process.
Signs of Reform
The government initiated some important reforms in 2005, but promises of
change lagged behind implementation. In January, the government abolished
the People’s Court, a body that had tried most political cases without adequate
due process guarantees. The cases before the court at the time of closure
were transferred to the regular courts, but many of the people already
imprisoned by the People’s Court remain in prison.
Throughout the year, the government reviewed many Libyan laws and,
according to the secretary of justice, there is an “ambitious plan to reform
legislation to bring it into line with international human rights standards.”
Legal experts drafted a new penal code and code of criminal procedure, and officials said the main legislative body, the General People’s Congress, would
review the drafts by the year’s end. The goal of the new penal code, the secretary
of justice said, is to reduce both the death penalty and imprisonment
as a punishment. The death penalty would remain, he said, for the “most
dangerous crimes” and for “terrorism.”
The most recent version of the penal code draft is unknown, but a review of
a 2004 draft suggests the government will accept a very broad definition of
terrorism, which it might then use to imprison people who are expressing
peaceful political views. The government used to imprison opponents
because of their “anti-revolutionary behavior,” but today the government
uses the rhetoric of anti-terrorism to silence dissent.
The government pledged itself to examine some human rights abuses of the
past, notably the 1998 deaths of prisoners in Abu Selim prison at the hands
of guards. The government says that guards responded properly to a revolt
and attempted escape. Former prisoners and Libyan human rights groups
abroad say the guards executed hundreds of prisoners after they had regained
control of the prison. In 2005, the government said it had established a committee
to investigate the incident, but it remains unclear how the committee
will conduct its work or when it will produce its findings.
Libya periodically opened itself to scrutiny from human rights groups after
years of denying them entry. Physicians for Human Rights sent a doctor in
February to examine the political prisoner Fathi al-Jahmi. In April-May,
Human Rights Watch conducted research in the country for the first time.
Key International Actors
The United States and European governments steadily improved their relations
with Libya throughout 2005. In part this was driven by energy companies
who are eager to tap Libya’s vast oil reserves, but Western governments
are also drawn to Qaddafi’s cooperation in the global war on terror. In addition
to renouncing weapons of mass destruction in 2003, Libya has provided
valuable intelligence on militant Islamic individuals and groups. In return,
countries like the U.S. and U.K. have added the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group (LIFG), fighting to overthrow Qaddafi since the late 1990s, to their
lists of terrorist groups.
In October 2005, the British government signed a Memorandum of
Understanding with Libya that allows the U.K to deport individuals to Libya
if the Libyan government gives diplomatic assurances the deportees will not
be subjected to torture. As of November deportation proceedings were under
way for five members of the LIFG.
Libya’s secretary of foreign liaison and international cooperation (foreign
minister) met U.S. Secretary of State Condoleeza Rice in New York in
September 2005, the highest bilateral meeting between the two countries in
more than twenty years. Full diplomatic relations are stymied because Libya
remains on the U.S. government’s list of countries that sponsor terrorism.
The U.S. government at times criticized human rights abuses in Libya,
notably in the State Department’s 2004 human rights report. In October
President Bush called on Libya to free the five Bulgarian nurses sentenced to
death in the HIV-infection case.
Morocco
Morocco continues to present a mixed picture on human rights. It has made
great strides in addressing past abuses and allowed considerable space for
public dissent and protest in recent years. But authorities, aided by complaisant
courts, continue to use repressive legislation to punish peaceful
opponents; and the police use excessive force to break up demonstrations,
especially in outlying areas.
Arrests of suspected Islamist extremists eased in 2004 and 2005. However,
several hundred who had been arrested in the weeks after the Casablanca
bombings of May 2003 remained in prison at this writing in late 2005. Many
of these had been held in secret detention for days or weeks and subjected to
mistreatment, and sometimes torture, while under interrogation, and then
convicted in unfair trials of having links to terror cells. Reports of such mistreatment
have been more sporadic among those arrested since 2004.
On April 14, 2005, King Mohamed VI freed forty-four Islamists in a royal
grace. But hundreds more remained in prison, including more than twenty
sentenced to death after the 2003 Casablanca attacks. (Morocco has not
applied the death penalty since 1993.) In May, Islamist prisoners staged a
large hunger strike to demand better conditions and their retrial or release.
Royal graces in August and November freed seventy-seven and 164 Islamist
prisoners, respectively.
Reforms to the family law, enacted in 2004, have raised the minimum age of
marriage for women from fifteen to eighteen, made the family the joint
responsibility of both spouses, rescinded the wife’s duty of obedience to her
husband, and placed the practice of polygyny under strict judicial control.
Concerns remain about the judiciary’s lack of familiarity with the reforms and
about a legal loophole that allows judges to use religious principles to decide
matters not covered in the text.
Morocco has one of the highest child labor rates in the Middle East and
North Africa. Its school attendance rates for working children are among the
lowest for any country outside sub-Saharan Africa. An estimated 11 percent of children (about six hundred thousand) age seven through fourteen work.
In 2004 Morocco raised the minimum age of employment to fifteen, the
minimum school-leaving age, but thus far has done little to enforce the ban
on underage workers or prosecute those who otherwise abuse working children.
The Justice System and Legal Reforms
Amendments to the code of criminal procedure that took effect in October
2003 have enhanced the rights of defendants. Articles 396-415 strengthen the
right of appeal and resulted in decisions by appeals courts in 2005 that
reduced sentences for many defendants convicted under the anti-terror law.
Nevertheless, in cases with a political color, courts routinely deny defendants
a fair trial, ignoring requests for medical examinations lodged by defendants
who claim to have been tortured, refusing to summon exculpatory witnesses,
and convicting defendants solely on the basis of apparently coerced confessions.
Prosecutions of state agents for abusing persons in their custody are
rare.
The trial of journalist Ali Mrabet in 2005 illustrates the lack of judicial independence.
A hitherto obscure association sued the outspoken reporter for
libel because he had used the term “refugees” to characterize Sahrawis living
in camps in Tindouf, Algeria, rather than the officially preferred characterization
of them as “captives” of the Polisario organization, which seeks independence
for the Western Sahara. On April 12, 2005, a Rabat court found
this remark sufficiently libelous to fine Mrabet and ban him from practicing
journalism for ten years.
Freedom of Association and Assembly
The right to freedom of association, guaranteed by the constitution, is
curbed in practice. According to a 2003 decree, an association’s founders
need only inform authorities of its creation. But authorities sometimes subvert
this process by refusing to issue a receipt affirming that the requisite
notice has been given.
Most types of public assemblies require authorization from the Interior
Ministry, which can refuse permission if it deems them liable to “disturb the
public order.” This discretion is exercised more often when the demonstrators’
agenda is critical of government policies. Public protests are frequent in
the capital of Rabat, and usually are not disturbed. On occasion, however,
police wielding batons break them up with force and brutality.
Repression of demonstrations is harsher in outlying regions. On May 11, the
government arrested three who organized a march in the Rif region to
demand earthquake relief on charges of “insulting civil servants and elected
officials” and “encouraging others to revolt.” Eight days later, when thousands
of local residents marched to protest their arrest, security forces, assisted
by helicopters, used force and tear gas to disperse the demonstrators.
Thirty-five were arrested and nine were sentenced to terms of six to nine
months. In November, those who had not already completed their sentences
were freed by a royal grace.
In the Western Sahara, authorities continue to prosecute advocates of independence
and are quick to put down protests. In late May and early June,
pro-independence demonstrations erupted in Lâayoune and spread to other
cities. In some cases, the participants threw stones and Molotov cocktails at
police. Amnesty International said it had received “consistent reports” of the
security forces using “excessive force when dispersing protesters and when
carrying out arrests.” In some cases, Amnesty stated, security force officers
allegedly beat “demonstrators on the spot to ‘punish’ them for their political
beliefs.” Authorities arrested more than one hundred persons; twenty-one
were sentenced to up to six years in prison, on charges that included “participation
in a criminal gang,” “use of weapons,” “destruction of public property,”
and “violence toward state agents in the exercise of their duty.”
Press Freedom
Media criticism of the authorities is often quite blunt, but is nevertheless circumscribed
by a press law that provides prison terms for libel and for expression
critical of “Islam, the institution of the monarchy, or the territorial integrity” of Morocco (a phrase understood to mean Morocco’s claim to the
Western Sahara).
On November 25, 2004, Parliament adopted a law liberalizing broadcast
media. However, it requires foreign media seeking licenses for stations inside
Morocco to “scrupulously respect the values of the monarchy and its heritage
in terms of Islam and territorial integrity.”
According to Reporters without Borders, at least ten journalists were assaulted,
detained, or expelled while attempting to cover tensions in the Western
Sahara between April and June 2005. It was hardly the first time that
Morocco mistreated journalists as part of efforts to control coverage of this
region.
On June 28, 2005, Nadia Yassine of the Justice and Charity Islamist movement
appeared in court to answer charges of “attacking the institution of the
monarchy” after the weekly Al-Ousbouyia Al-Jadida (The New Weekly)
quoted her as saying that the monarchy was ill-suited for Morocco and would
soon collapse.
On August 15, a Casablanca court convicted Ahmed Reda Benchemsi and
Karim Boukhari of the weekly TelQuel to a suspended prison term and a
heavy fine for having libeled a parliamentarian in an unflattering profile of
her career. Their appeal was still in progress as this report went to press. Also
convicted of criminal libel in 2005 was Ali Mrabet (see above).
Acknowledging Past Abuses
In 2005, Morocco’s Equity and Reconciliation Commission (ERC), launched
in 2004 by the king, continued its research into grave human rights violations
committed between 1956 and 1999, stimulating taboo-breaking discussions
of past repression. Between December 2004 and May 2005, it took testimony
from some 20,000 victims and their beneficiaries, and organized seven public
hearings for victims—sometimes before television cameras. It was due by the
end of 2005 to complete a report documenting the history of repression in
Morocco and determine how much compensation the state is to pay victims.
Critics have pointed out that the ERC cannot publicly name or sanction
individual perpetrators, and thus will contribute little to ending impunity. A
few of those suspected of committing grave abuses during the period under
study continue to hold high posts or serve as deputies.
In October 2005 the ERC announced that it had found the bodies of fifty
“disappeared” persons near a former secret prison, it was the first announcement
concerning its efforts to locate the hundreds of Moroccans who “disappeared”
between the 1960s and 1980s after being picked up by security
forces.
Human Rights Defenders
Authorities largely tolerate the work of the many human rights organizations
active in Rabat and Casablanca. Harassment is more common in remote
regions and smaller towns. In June and July, police arrested six Sahrawi
human rights defenders, accusing them of having instigated violent disturbances
in Lâayoune. According to the Moroccan Human Rights Association
(AMDH) and Amnesty International, two of them, Hussein Lidri and Brahim
Noumria, were tortured during interrogation. They belong to the AMDH’s
Lâayoune section.
Key International Actors
Morocco is an important ally of the United States because of its cooperation
in fighting terrorism, the 2004 signing of a bilateral free-trade agreement,
and its generally pro-West policies. In June 2004, the United States designated
Morocco “a major non-NATO ally,” thus easing restrictions on arms sales.
In its Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2004, the U.S. State
department referred to allegations of torture and mistreatment of persons
arrested as suspected militants. This did not prevent the United States from
repatriating five suspected militants, who had been held at the Guantanamo
Bay detention center, into Moroccan custody in August 2004.
The U.S. Embassy wrote to Human Rights Watch in September 2005, stating:
“It is U.S. policy to seek assurances from countries concerning the treatment
of the returnees prior to their repatriation. The U.S. has followed the
legal proceedings for the five returnees and is not aware of any abuse carried
out against them, nor have such charges been made.” However, U.S. officials
acknowledged that they did not speak to any of the five since their release
from detention in Morocco. They said they followed their cases through
third parties. It is not clear whether U.S. authorities assessed the likelihood
that fear of reprisal prevented the detainees from speaking truthfully.
An association agreement has been in effect between Morocco and the
European Union since 2000. Morocco is the leading beneficiary of funds
from the E.U.’s Meda program, having received 1.25 billion euros in grants
over the past decade. The program for 2005-2006 is budgeted at 275 million
euros. E.U. public comments on Morocco’s human rights situation are rare.
France is Morocco’s leading trade partner and the leading provider of investments
and public development aid. French officials made almost no public
comments on human rights in Morocco during 2005.
Saudi Arabia
Human rights violations are pervasive in Saudi Arabia, an absolute monarchy.
Despite international and domestic pressure to implement reforms, improvements
have been halting and inadequate. King Abdullah’s succession to the
throne after King Fahd’s death in August inspired some hope among Saudi
citizens for future reform. King Abdullah quickly pardoned three prominent
reformers who had earlier been sentenced to long prison terms for voicing
criticism of the government, and announced a new labor law promising
increased rights for women and migrant workers, but overall human rights
conditions in the kingdom remain poor.
Saudi law does not protect many basic rights. The government does not
allow political parties, and places strict limits on freedom of expression.
Arbitrary detention, mistreatment and torture of detainees, restrictions on
freedom of movement, and lack of official accountability remain serious concerns.
The kingdom carried out some seventy-three executions as of late
September 2005, more than double the thirty-two executions in the whole of
2004. Saudi women continue to face serious obstacles to their participation in
the economy, politics, media, and society. Many foreign workers face
exploitative working conditions; migrant women working as domestics often
are subjected to round-the-clock confinement by their employers, making
them vulnerable to sexual abuse and other mistreatment. The government
continued to harass independent Saudi Arabian human rights defenders and
stifle their efforts to establish independent rights monitoring groups.
Political Violence and Internal Security
A December 6, 2004 attack on the United States consulate in Jeddah killed
nine people; al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula clamed responsibility. A
series of car bomb attacks on Saudi security installations in Riyadh occurred
on December 29, 2004. In late June 2005 the government issued a list of
thirty-six Saudi and foreign terror suspects wanted domestically. Throughout
2005 Saudi security forces carried out raids, killing or capturing wanted men
including five suspects on the June 2005 list and all but one on a previous December 2004 list of twenty-six suspects; the government gave no information
on those captured. Interior Minister Prince Nayif in February said that
fighting between militants and security forces over the past two years had
killed 221 people, including ninety-two suspected militants. In April, the
Saudi government executed three convicted militants in al-Juf, the first executions
for political crimes, according to officials.
At least several hundred Saudis have reportedly traveled to Iraq to take part
in insurgent activities. The Associated Press reported that on May 30, 2005,
Syrian authorities deported more than thirty Saudis who allegedly had sought
to join the Iraqi insurgency. Since early 2005 Saudi border patrols reportedly
apprehended sixty-three Saudis seeking to illegally enter Iraq.
In August 2005, the Saudi government released from detention five Saudis
formerly detained by the U.S. at Guantanamo Bay; they had been transferred
to Saudi Arabia in May 2003. In July, the U.S. transferred three more Saudis
from Guantanamo Bay to Saudi Arabia, where at least one, Salih al-Awshan,
remains in detention. As of October the U.S. was negotiating with Saudi officials
over the transfer into Saudi Arabian custody of some or all of the 121
Saudis still at Guantanamo Bay.
Political Reform
Saudi Arabia’s political reform movement focused in 2005 on the release of
three prominent advocates of constitutional reform who had been in detention
since March 2004 after they refused to sign a pledge to cease all public
activism. A Saudi court on May 15, 2004, had sentenced the three—Matruk
al-Falih, Abdullah al-Hamid, and Ali al-Dumaini—to between six and nine
years in prison for calling for a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary
elections. Their lawyer, Abd al-Rahman al-Lahim, was arrested on
November 6, 2004, after publicly criticizing the trial of the three as unfair. In
August 2005 King Abdullah pardoned the four, as well as Dr. Sa’id Mubarak
al-Zu’air, jailed since April 2004 for remarks he made on the al-Jazeera TV
channel, and the king later met with some of them.
Municipal Elections
The first elections since the 1960s, for half of the country’s municipal council
seats, went ahead in three stages between February and April 2005 after having
been postponed from 2004. The government has reportedly nominated
the remaining councilors, but the councils have yet to begin work. Election
regulations forbade candidates from uniting in electoral lists, and limited the
two-week campaigns to printed materials and meetings in private homes.
The election sparked intense debate between conservatives and liberals, especially
after both Sunni and Shi’a religious sheikhs endorsed groups of candidates,
so-called “golden lists,” which were widely circulated by mobile telephone
text messaging, in contravention of regulations.
Women’s Rights
Women in the kingdom continued to suffer from severe discrimination in the
workplace, home, and the courts, and from restrictions in their freedom of
movement and their choice of partners. The religious police enforce strict
gender segregation and women’s public dress code of head-to-toe covering.
Women were not allowed to vote or stand as candidates in the municipal
elections. Women are also excluded from the weekly majlis (council), where
senior members of the royal family listen to the complaints and proposals of
Saudi citizens.
Women cannot work, study, or travel without explicit permission from a male
relative. Their freedom of movement is further restricted by a law prohibiting
them from driving. While a new labor law passed in late September 2005
reportedly expands the professional fields where women are eligible for work,
they continue to be barred from jobs that are deemed “not suitable to their
nature.”
Migrant Workers
The estimated 8.8 million largely South and Southeast Asian and Arab foreign
workers in Saudi Arabia comprise a third of the country’s population,
according to Minister of Labor Ghazi al-Gosaibi. Many face exploitative working conditions, including sixteen-hour workdays, no breaks or food and
drink, and often remain confined to locked dormitories during their time off.
Security forces deported tens of thousands of illegal immigrants in 2005.
Arrested foreign workers face torture and prolonged incommunicado detention.
Nongovernmental organizations in several Asian countries and those countries’
diplomatic missions in Saudi Arabia documented hundreds of abuses of
migrant workers in Saudi Arabia, such as unpaid wages, long working hours,
and physical and sexual abuse. The isolation of women domestic workers in
private homes, and the lack of legal protection, puts them at risk of serious
abuse. For example, in April 2005 Indonesian maid Suniati Binti Nibaran
Sujari barely survived burn injuries she alleged her employer inflicted on her.
The Saudi court system offers little or no redress. Nur Miyati, another
Indonesian maid, in March accused her employers of torture. While they
remained free, she was detained successively in a hospital, a prison, and a
women’s rehabilitation center before being released into the custody of the
labor attaché of the Indonesian embassy.
Indonesia suspended sending unskilled labor to Saudi Arabia from March
until August 2005, when the two countries concluded a bilateral agreement
on standard employment contracts, regulated weekly and annual time-off,
and minimum wages. The Saudi government issued a new labor law in
September 2005 that continues to exclude domestic workers, although a special
annex promises to regulate their relations with employers. The law entitles
non-domestic migrant workers to one day of rest per week and twentyone
vacation days annually. On July 24 the Ministry of Labor announced the
creation within the ministry of a new Department for the Protection of
Domestic Workers, to receive complaints and impose penalties. Deputy
Minister Ahmed al-Zamil warned that employers would be barred from hiring
expatriates and transferring employment sponsorships if they violate the
law, and that they may be prosecuted. There was no information available on
how the government applied these sanctions.
Human Rights Defenders
The Prosecution and Investigation Department (mabahith) detained and
interrogated human rights defenders during the year. As a condition for their
release, the authorities forced activists to pledge to refrain from speaking to
the media or human rights organizations and to cease their human rights
advocacy. The government also maintained travel bans on several human
rights activists.
International—especially U.S.—media attention to Saudi reform and rights
initiatives has not led to changes in restrictive practices or measurably
enhanced public access to information about rights violations. A nongovernmental
national society for human rights began work in 2004, but it lacks
independence, expertise, and determination to investigate and publicize sensitive
human rights abuses. The society visited prisons and deportation centers,
but failed to monitor the trial of the three reformers mentioned above.
The society remains dependent on the good will of members of the royal
family to provide redress. In September 2005, the government announced
the formation of a governmental human rights commission, reporting directly
to the prime minister (a position held by the king), with a remit to bring
Saudi Arabia’s government practices into line with human rights standards.
Key International Actors
The U.S. is a key ally of Saudi Arabia and a major trading partner. The strain
in bilateral relations in the aftermath of the September 11, 2001 attacks eased
considerably in 2005. The U.S. agenda in its relations with Saudi Arabia
appeared to prioritize measures to reduce crude oil prices, boost counterterrorism
cooperation, and open Saudi markets to foreign investment and goods
through Saudi Arabia’s accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO),
which took place in November..
U.S. officials praised the Saudi municipal elections. In April, then-Crown
Prince Abdullah visited President Bush’s ranch in Texas. They discussed educational
reform in addition to oil prices and counterterrorism cooperation.
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice visited Riyadh in June, where she highlighted the detention of the constitutional reformers. Undersecretary of State
for Public Diplomacy Karen Hughes visited Riyadh in September, where she
raised the prohibition on Saudi women driving.
In November 2005, the U.S. State Department’s annual International
Religious Freedom Report designated Saudi Arabia as “a country of particular
concern” for the second year in a row. In June, the State Department’s
annual report on human trafficking downgraded Saudi Arabia from tier II to
III – i.e., countries that “do not comply with the minimum standards for the
elimination of trafficking and are not making significant efforts to do so.”
Responding to each of the reports, the White House announced that
President Bush had chosen not to impose sanctions on Saudi Arabia.
Syria
Syria’s human rights situation is poor, and showed little or no improvement
in 2005. Emergency rule, imposed in 1963, remains in effect, despite public
calls by Syrian reformers for its repeal. In June, a state security court acquitted
Aktham Na`issa, president of the Committees for the Defence of
Democratic Liberties and Human Rights in Syria, of charges that he opposed
“the objectives of the revolution” and disseminated “false information” aimed
at “weakening the State,” but the authorities continue to harass and imprison
other human rights defenders and non-violent critics of government policies.
The government strictly limits freedom of expression, association, and
assembly. Thousands of political prisoners, many of them members of the
banned Muslim Brotherhood and the Communist Party, remained in detention.
Syrian Kurds, the country’s largest ethnic minority, continued to protest
their treatment as second-class citizens. Women face legal as well as societal
discrimination, and have little means for redress when they are victims of
sexual abuse or domestic violence.
The February 2005 assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik
Hariri sharply intensified international pressure on the Syrian government.
Bowing to this as well as Lebanese popular pressure, Syria withdrew its
troops from Lebanon on April 26.
Arbitrary Detention, Torture, and “Disappearances”
In March 2005, the government released 312 political prisoners. They
included Muhannad al-Dibs and Muhammad `Arab, Damascus University
students, whom the Supreme State Security Court (SSSC) had just sentenced
to three years in jail for organizing a protest against the suspension of two
Aleppo University students; they were convicted of “resistance” and “support
of goals contrary to the revolution.” On November 2, the government freed
a further 190 political prisoners as part of its “overall reforms.” Among those
released in the second group were `Ali Abdullah, a member of the Atasi political
discussion forum, and Muhammad Ra`dun, president of the Arab
Organization for Human Rights (AOHR), as well as members of “Islamist organizations.” Security forces had arrested Abdullah on May 16 for his suspected
ties to the Muslim Brotherhood and Ra`dun on May 22 for his affiliation
with the AOHR and for allegedly publishing false information.
Dr. `Arif Dalila, a prominent economics professor and a proponent of political
liberalization, continues to serve a ten-year prison term imposed in July
2002 for his non-violent criticism of government policies. Ma’mun al-Humsi,
a democracy activist and former member of parliament, is serving a five-year
jail term for “attempting to change the constitution.” The London-based
Syrian Human Rights Committee (SHRC) estimates that about four thousand
political prisoners remain in detention in Syria. The authorities refuse
to divulge information regarding numbers or names of people in detention
on political or security-related charges. Moreover, 2005 passed without any
government acknowledgement that its security forces had “disappeared” an
estimated seventeen thousand persons—Lebanese citizens and stateless
Palestinians— in Lebanon in the early 1990s. Many of these people are
known or believed to be imprisoned in Syria.
In recent years, dozens of people suspected of being connected to the
Muslim Brotherhood have been arrested upon their voluntary or forced
return home from exile. Syrian authorities arrested `Abd al-Sitar Qattan, for
example, on November 23, 2004, upon his return from Saudi Arabia, and
reportedly prosecuted him before the SSSC under Law 49 (1980), which
states, in part, that affiliation with the Muslim Brotherhood is punishable by
death.
The government also targeted students whom it suspected of having ties with
Islamist groups. In March 2005, the government arrested over forty students
of Tishrin University, in Latakia, for being affiliated with an Islamist movement
called Sunna` al-Hayat (Makers of Life). At least some of the detained
students were reportedly tortured, according to the Damascus-based Human
Rights Association in Syria.
An unprecedented coalition of political reform activists, on October 16, publicly
issued the “Damascus Declaration for Democratic and National
Change,” which calls for establishing a democratic system that respects citizens’ rights, ensures freedom of speech and association, and ends discrimination
based on religious or political beliefs. As of November the government’s
reaction was unknown.
New Arrests of Human Rights Activists
Human rights activists continue to be frequent targets of government harassment
and arrest. Among those arrested in the past year and still in detention
are Salim al-Salim, an activist from Homs in the Society of Human Rights in
Syria, arrested on February 24; Nizar Rastawani, from Hama, arrested on
April 18; the writer and activist `Ali al-Abdullah, arrested on May 15 for having
publicly read a letter written by `Ali Sadr al-Din al-Bayanuni, Londonbased
leader of the Muslim Brotherhood, about the group’s agenda; and
Habib Salih, arrested on May 29 in response to his writings and his appearance
on satellite television channels. In the case of Rastawani, security agents
refused to admit he was in their custody until his missing car was spotted at
one of their security branches ten days after they arrested him.
The government prevented many human rights activists from traveling.
According to the SHRC, the authorities are presently preventing over 190
activists from traveling outside the country.
Discrimination and Violence Against Kurds
Kurds are the largest non-Arab ethnic minority in Syria, comprising about 10
percent of the population of 18.5 million. Activists have long called for an
end to systematic discrimination, including the arbitrary denial of citizenship
to an estimated 120,000 Syria-born Kurds.
Since the March 2004 clashes between Kurdish demonstrators and security
forces in Qamishli that left more than thirty dead and four hundred injured,
tensions in that city and surrounding areas have remained high. A prominent
Kurdish cleric, Muhammad Ma`shuq al-Khaznawi, disappeared during a visit
to Damascus in May 2005; the Interior Ministry denied having al-Khaznawi
in its custody, and authorities found his body in eastern Syria three weeks
after his disappearance. His sons and Kurdish activists blamed state security for the abduction and murder, stating that there were signs of torture on his
body. After the announcement of al-Khaznawi’s death, more than five thousand
protesters gathered in Qamishli to condemn the killing. The protest
escalated when looters, allegedly local Arabs, pillaged more than eighty
Kurdish shops.
In September 2005, police beat a Syrian Kurdish woman to death when she
attempted to stop the demolition of illegally built homes outside Damascus.
According to defense lawyer and human rights activist Anwar Bunni, residents
were primarily poor Kurdish workers.
On November 2, Syrian authorities freed seven Kurds, including three
women, who had been arrested earlier in the year for belonging to a “secret
organization aiming to annex part of Syrian territory to a foreign country.”
Discrimination against Women
Syria’s constitution guarantees gender equality, and many women are active
in public life, but personal status laws as well as the penal code contain provisions
that discriminate against women. The penal code allows a judge to suspend
punishment for a rapist if the rapist chooses to marry his victim, and
provides leniency for so-called “honor” crimes, such as assault or killing of
women by male relatives for alleged sexual misconduct. Wives require the
permission of their husbands to travel abroad, and divorce laws remain discriminatory.
Key International Actors
The United Nations Security Council passed Resolution 1559 on September
2, 2004, calling for the complete withdrawal of all foreign—i.e. Syrian—
troops from Lebanon, and reiterating support for Lebanon’s sovereignty and
independence. The Security Council on April 7, 2005, adopted Resolution
1595, launching an investigation into the February 14 assassination, in
Beirut, of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri. Lebanese authorities
arrested four senior pro-Syrian Lebanese intelligence and security officers
in August on suspicion of involvement in the Hariri assassination, but the preliminary report of chief U.N. investigator Detlev Mehlis, submitted to
Secretary-General Kofi Annan on October 20, implicated senior Syrian security
officials as well. On October 31, the Security Council unanimously
adopted Resolution 1636 threatening “further action” against Syria if it did
not fully cooperate with the investigation.
France, the United Kingdom, and the United States were among states
which pressed Syria to implement Resolution 1559 and fully withdraw its
forces from Lebanon. The European Commission and Syria initialed an
Association Agreement in October 2004, but U.K. Foreign Secretary Jack
Straw said on July 12, 2005, that the signing would likely not take place in
2005. The text stipulates that Syria must implement all international nonproliferation
accords, and that “respect for human rights and democratic
principles” constitutes “an essential element of the agreement.”
Tunisia
President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali and the ruling party, the Constitutional
Democratic Assembly, dominate political life in Tunisia. The government
uses the threat of terrorism and religious extremism as a pretext to crack
down on peaceful dissent. Government critics are frequently harassed or
imprisoned on trumped-up charges after unfair trials. Over four hundred
political prisoners remained incarcerated, nearly all of them suspected
Islamists. There are continuous and credible reports of torture and ill-treatment
being used to obtain statements from suspects in custody. Sentenced
prisoners also face deliberate ill-treatment. However, during 2005 authorities
allowed the International Committee of the Red Cross to start visiting prisons,
and ended the practice of placing certain political prisoners in prolonged
and arbitrary solitary confinement.
Human Rights Defenders
Authorities have refused legal recognition to every truly independent human
rights organization that has applied over the past decade. They then use the
pretext of an organization’s “illegal” status to hamper its activities. On
September 3, police encircled the Tunis office of the non-recognized
National Council on Liberties in Tunisia (CNLT) and, as they had done
many times before, prevented members from meeting. Authorities also prevented
the non-recognized Tunisian Journalists’ Syndicate from holding its
constitutive assembly on September 7.
In 2005 the independent Tunisian Human Rights League (a legally recognized
group) was beset by lawsuits filed by dissident members over procedural
matters. The broader context shows that these suits are part of a larger
pattern of repression; the courts ruled systematically in favor of these plaintiffs,
providing a legal veneer for swift and large-scale police operations to
prevent League meetings, including its general assembly scheduled for
September. The government has continued to block grants issued by the
European Union to the League, and Tunisia’s mainstream press obliges with a blackout on criticism by the League and other human rights organizations
of Tunisia’s rights record.
Authorities tried to undermine another legally recognized organization, the
Tunisian Association of Magistrates, after it elected a leadership calling for
more judicial independence. In July judges close to the ruling party attempted
to oust that leadership in a special vote. In August authorities evicted the
leadership from the association’s headquarters on the disputable grounds that
it had been repudiated in the July vote.
Human rights defenders, like dissidents generally, are subject to heavy police
surveillance, sporadic travel bans, dismissal from work, interruptions in
phone service, physical assaults, harassment of relatives, suspicious acts of
vandalism and theft, and slander campaigns in the press. In early May CNLT
spokesperson Sihem Bensedrine was the target of an especially vulgar series
of articles in at least four pro-government newspapers.
Police arrested lawyer and dissident Mohamed Abou on March 1, 2005— the
day after he published an article online comparing President Ben Ali unfavorably
to Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon. To disguise that this was the real
reason for Abou’s arrest, authorities prosecuted him instead for an article he
had written in August 2004 deploring Tunisian prison conditions and on a
second, trumped-up charge of assaulting a woman lawyer in 2002. He
received a three-year prison sentence.
The Justice System
The judiciary lacks independence. Investigative judges often question defendants
without their lawyers present. Trial judges frequently turn a blind eye
to torture allegations and procedural irregularities, convicting defendants
solely or predominantly on the basis of coerced confessions. Civilians are
sometimes tried on terror charges in military courts, verdicts of which carry
no right of appeal.
In political cases lawyers are frequently hobbled in their attempts to mount
an effective defense of their clients. They sometimes encounter obstacles to
obtaining their clients’ complete court file or gaining access to their clients in detention before trial.
Media Freedom
Tunisia’s press remains largely controlled by the authorities. None of the
print and broadcast media offers critical coverage of government policies,
apart from a few low-circulation independent magazines. The private dailies
are all loyalist, often slandering government critics in a manner that is
deemed too base for the official media. In 2005 Tunisia got its second private
radio station and first private television station, but here too private ownership
was not synonymous with editorial independence.
The government blocks certain political or human rights websites that focus
on critical coverage of Tunisia. As of September 2005, the government was
blocking access to more than thirty such sites, although censorship had been
lifted on other sites, such as those of Le Monde and Liberation and of various
international human rights organizations.
In light of Tunisia’s record on freedom of expression, human rights organizations
criticized Tunisia’s designation as host of the World Summit on the
Information Society (WSIS) in November 2005. During that event, authorities
prevented Tunisian and international human rights organizations from
organizing an alternative “Citizens’ Summit” in Tunis.
Counterterrorism Measures
Tunisian authorities claim that they have long been in the forefront of combating
terrorism and extremism, alluding to their long-running crackdown
against the once-tolerated Islamist Nahdha movement. In December 2003
Tunisia adopted the “Law in Support of International Efforts to Fight
Terrorism and the Repression of Money-Laundering.” It contained a broad
definition of terrorism that could be used to prosecute persons for peaceful
exercise of their right to dissent.
Tunis, and the suspicious stabbing of French journalist Christophe Boltanski
on a Tunis street on November 11.
France made diplomatic representations, “on a humanitarian basis,” on behalf
of a few political prisoners, selected because they had relatives who were
French citizens or who resided in France. Tunisian authorities freed one of
these, Lotfi Farhat, in July.
In 2004, France returned to Tunisia Taher Belkhirat, despite strong evidence
that he would face persecution there. Tunisian authorities arrested him upon
his arrival and, in 2005, sentenced him in an unfair trial to ten years in prison
(reduced to five years on appeal) on charges of membership in, and recruiting
for, a terrorist organization operating abroad. In January 2005, the French
Council of State issued a ruling voiding Belkhirat’s expulsion order—months
after he had been expelled to and jailed in Tunisia.
United Arab Emirates (UAE)
The UAE is a federation of seven emirates: Abu Dhabi, ‘Ajman, Al Fujayrah,
Sharjah, Dubai, Ra’s al Khaymah, and Umm al Qaywayn. The president and
vice president are elected by the Federal Supreme Council, which is composed
of the rulers of each emirate. The UAE has experienced rapid economic
development and growth during the past several decades, but it lags in
the development of its civil society: the country does not hold elections for
any public office, and political participation is limited to the ruling family in
each emirate. The government has not signed most international human
rights and labor rights treaties. Migrant workers, comprising nearly 90 percent
of the workforce in the private sector, are particularly vulnerable to serious
human rights violations.
Freedom of Association and Expression
A major obstacle to monitoring and reporting human rights violations in the
UAE is the lack of independent nongovernmental organizations. The government
actively discourages formation of such organizations. In July 2004 a
group of lawyers and activists led by prominent lawyer Mohammad al-Roken
filed an application with the Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare under the
Association Law to form the Emirates Human Rights Society. In April 2005
another group of thirty activists headed by human rights campaigner Khalifa
Bakhit al-Falasi also filed application for a human rights association.
According to the Associations Law, the Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare
should reply to these requests within a month of their filing, but as of
October 2005 the ministry had not responded to these applications.
For the past five years, the government has barred twelve prominent UAE
commentators and academics from disseminating their views. In June 2000
the government sent a letter to Abu Dhabi Television stating that “based on
information from the administration we urge all producers to refrain from
hosting the following [twelve] individuals in programs for the Abu Dhabi
channel and the Emirates channel.” The ban effectively applies to the print
media as well as radio and television broadcasts. Otherwise, the media is relatively free from official censorship, but is susceptible to heavy self-censorship
due to pressures from officials and influential business interests.
Migrant Labor
Nearly 80 percent of the UAE’s population are foreigners, and foreigners
account for 90 percent of the workforce in the private sector, including as
domestic workers. The UAE’s extensive economic growth has attracted large
sums in domestic and foreign investment, and a recent construction boom is
one of the largest in the world. There are persistent credible reports of abuses
committed by employers, especially in small firms and against low-skilled
workers. A main factor is the immigration sponsorship laws that grant
employers extraordinary control over the affairs of migrant workers.
Abuses committed against migrant workers include nonpayment of wages,
extended working hours without overtime compensation, unsafe working
environments resulting in death and injury, squalid living conditions in labor
camps, and withholding of passports and travel documents by employers.
In 2005 the UAE witnessed an increasing number of public demonstrations
by migrant workers protesting nonpayment of wages. During a protest on
September 24 (one of at least three that month), 800 workers blocked a main
highway in Dubai. They were part of a group of six thousand workers
employed by Al Hamed Development and Construction of Abu Dhabi, and
had not been paid for more than five months. In an unprecedented development,
the minister of labor and social welfare, Ali bin Abdullah al-Kaabi,
required the company to pay all overdue wages within twenty-four hours,
and prohibited it from hiring migrant workers for the next six months.
Since becoming minister in November 2004, al-Kaabi has introduced a number
of promising reforms that have met stiff resistance from the business
community. Following a surge in heat-related illness and injuries at construction
sites in July 2005, the ministry directed construction companies to give
their workers an afternoon break from 12:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. during the
months of July and August. However, a number of companies defied this
order and publicly stated that they prefer to pay fines rather than comply.
Women domestic workers are often confined to their places of work, and
may be at particular risk of abuse including unpaid wages, long working
hours, and physical or sexual abuse.
Trafficking
According to the U.S. State Department, human trafficking to the UAE is an
endemic problem. Large numbers of young boys are annually trafficked to
the UAE to be trained as camel jockeys, and in 2005 the UAE government
estimated the number of children working as camel jockeys to be between
1,200 and 2,700; international organizations have put the numbers much
higher, at between five thousand and six thousand. Responding to the international
criticism, UAE President Sheikh Khalifa bin Zayed al Nahyan issued
a federal decree in July 2005 requiring that all camel jockeys must be eighteen
years of age or older. The law stipulated that violators will be jailed for
up to three years and/or fined a minimum of Dh50,000 (U.S.$13,600). The
government’s ability to institute mechanisms of enforcement will be tested in
the coming year.
Key International Actors
The UAE has emerged as a major business and trading hub in the Middle
East, attracting substantial foreign investments. The U.S., Japan, and the
European Union are among the UAE’s main trading partners. In April 2004
the UAE signed a Trade and Investment Framework Agreement (TIFA) with
the U.S., and the two countries in November 2004 began negotiations
toward a Free Trade Agreement (FTA).
In its 2005 annual report on human trafficking, the U.S. State Department
downgraded the UAE to the third tier, including it among “countries whose
governments do not fully comply with the minimum standards for the elimination
of trafficking and are not making significant efforts to do so.” In
September 2005 the White House, in a memorandum to the secretary of
state, said that the UAE had taken actions that averted the need for the president
to make a decision to impose or waive sanctions under the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000. According to this memorandum, the UAE’s
efforts to combat trafficking would be re-evaluated in six months.
The UAE in October 2004 acceded to the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women. However, it is not a signatory
to other major international human rights instruments such as the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families, and the Convention against Torture.
United States
The United States government has been widely condemned for violating
basic human rights in the fight against terrorism. Since 2001, the Bush
administration has authorized interrogation techniques widely considered
torture, including by its own Department of State in its annual human rights
reports. It has held an unknown number of detainees as “ghosts” beyond the
reach of all monitors, including the International Committee of the Red
Cross. And it has become the only government in the world to seek legislative
sanction to treat detainees inhumanely.
In addition to focusing on U.S. counterterrorism practices, Human Rights
Watch in 2005 continued to work on other pressing human rights concerns
in the United States, including abysmal prison conditions, continued use of
the death penalty, racial disparities (brought to public consciousness in 2005
by Hurricane Katrina and its aftermath), and increasingly restrictive asylum
and other immigration policies.
Guantanamo Bay and Military Commissions
Approximately 505 men remain in long-term indefinite detention at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. The United States continues to assert authority to
hold “enemy combatants” without charges and without regard to the laws of
armed conflict as long as the war on terror continues.
In March 2005, the Pentagon completed a one-time administrative review of
each detainee at Guantanamo to determine whether he should be considered
an “enemy combatant.” The proceedings were stacked against the detainees:
they were presumed to be enemy combatants, were denied the assistance of
counsel, were not able to bring in outside witnesses, and were not able to see
all of the evidence against them. All but thirty-eight of the detainees were
deemed enemy combatants (most of the thirty-eight are believed to be
Uighurs from China). The Pentagon is also conducting annual reviews to
determine if an enemy combatant is no longer a threat or useful for intelligence-
gathering purposes and can be released. Neither U.S. domestic law
nor international laws of war authorize such grounds for indefinite detention.
A total of nine detainees have been charged with crimes, including a
Canadian citizen who was fifteen years old at the time of his arrest in
Afghanistan. These detainees would be tried by military commissions, but
commission proceedings are halted until the U.S. Supreme Court rules on
their legality. The Court’s ruling is not expected until mid 2006.
Responding to a consistent critique of the commissions by human rights
groups and others, the U.S. Senate passed legislation—not yet approved by
the full Congress at this writing—that would permit civilian appellate court
review of military commission rulings. Following a 2004 U.S. Supreme
Court ruling that the Guantanamo detainees must have a meaningful opportunity
to contest their detention before a neutral decision-maker, habeas corpus
cases for some seventy-four detainees have been filed in U.S. courts. In a
frontal attack on the detainees’ use of habeas proceedings, the Senate passed
legislation in November 2005 to curtail their access to the courts to challenge
indefinite detention or torture. The full Congress was expected to
approve the legislation by year’s end.
At least 131 detainees began a hunger strike in August 2005 to protest their
indefinite confinement, pledging to starve themselves to death unless they
were brought to trial or released. Two dozen have been kept alive by forcefeeding.
In October, the United States responded to a three-year-old request by a
team of independent United Nations experts to visit Guantanamo, but
denied them the ability to meet privately with the detainees. The experts
refused the invitation, because having access to detainees is a requirement for
all their prison visits.
Torture Policy
The Bush administration asserts that it does not use or condone torture. Its
definition of torture, however, remains unclear. At the end of 2004, the
Department of Justice (DOJ) issued a memorandum repudiating earlier policies
that had permitted a broad range of brutal interrogation tactics by,
among other legal sleights-of-hand, redefining torture to exclude all techniques that did not inflict pain “equivalent in intensity to the pain accompanying
serious physical injury, such as organ failure, impairment of bodily
function or even death.” The Department has not, however, ever revealed
what its definition currently is.
Authorized Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) interrogation techniques
apparently include a notorious method the administration has renamed
“waterboarding” (when practiced by Latin American dictatorships, it was
called “the submarine”)—forcefully submerging a suspect’s head in water or
otherwise making him believe he is about to drown. The director of the CIA
has stated that waterboarding is a “professional interrogation technique.”
As noted above, the Bush Administration asserts that U.S. treaty obligations
to refrain from cruel, inhuman and degrading (CID) treatment do not apply
to the conduct of nonmilitary U.S. personnel interrogating non-U.S. citizens
outside of the United States.
Led by Vice President Cheney, the Bush administration strongly resisted
efforts by Congress to strengthen the legal ban against torture. A measure
proposed by Republican Senator John McCain to prohibit torture and other
ill-treatment of detainees anywhere by the U.S. military and the CIA passed
90-9 in the Senate but at this writing had not been approved by the full
Congress at least in part because of administration objections.
Detainee Abuse
Reports of abuse of detainees in U.S. custody in Afghanistan, Iraq,
Guantanamo Bay, and at secret detention facilities continue to mount. Since
2002, over three hundred specific cases of serious detainee abuse have surfaced.
At least eighty-six detainees have died in U.S. custody since 2002, and
the U.S. government has admitted that at least twenty-seven of these cases
were criminal homicides.
The abuse did not end after Abu Ghraib became public; U.S. military personnel
have revealed new cases of abuse in 2004 at forward-operating bases
in Afghanistan and Iraq, where prisoners are kept temporarily. Detainees at the Guantanamo Bay detention center, scores of whom now have access to
legal counsel, have made new allegations of prisoner mistreatment.
The United States continues to hold incommunicado at least twenty-five—
and possibly as many as one hundred—“ghost detainees” at secret detention
facilities around the world, without any rights and without access to legal
counsel or to the International Committee of the Red Cross. New evidence
emerged in 2005 suggesting that some “ghost” facilities may have operated at
least through 2004 in Eastern Europe and in several Middle Eastern countries.
Additional evidence also emerged in 2005 about cases of “extraordinary rendition,”
in which the United States sent detainees to third countries for interrogation,
including countries with records of torture, such as Morocco,
Jordan, and Egypt. Several current and former prisoners in Guantanamo
claim they were taken to Jordan or Morocco for interrogation, and tortured,
before being sent to Guantanamo.
Despite the unequivocal international prohibition on return of people to situations
where there is a risk of torture, the Bush administration openly claims
the right to send counterterrorism detainees to countries where there is such
a risk so long as it obtains guarantees—so-called “diplomatic assurances”—
from the authorities in the country concerned that the detainee in question
will not be tortured. A growing number of cases—such as that of Mahar Arar,
a Canadian-Syrian citizen who was transiting through John F. Kennedy airport
on his way home to Canada when he was detained by U.S. authorities,
sent to Syria via Jordan, and allegedly tortured—suggest that such diplomatic
assurances are routinely violated.
The Bush administration has done little to address government policies or
actions that may have led to abuse of detainees, continues to deny that widespread
abuse has occurred, and resists calls for detention policy reforms.
Despite a number of investigations, the United States has not robustly prosecuted
cases of alleged detainee abuse or homicide. In the majority of cases
involving alleged abuse, military commanders have taken potential prosecutions
before administrative hearing boards for non-judicial punishments, such as “reprimands,” “admonishments,” rank reductions, and discharges, instead
of bringing them for criminal prosecutions before courts martial.
At this writing, the military had prosecuted only about forty cases of abuse or
prisoner mistreatment. Although a few tough sentences have been handed
down, most prosecutions have resulted in relatively light sentences—confinement
for less than one year. Virtually all of those prosecuted have been
lower-ranking military personnel, not officers. With civilians implicated in
prisoner abuse, the record is even worse: despite extensive evidence that CIA
personnel and civilian contractors were involved in several homicides, the
DOJ has not prosecuted a single agent in a federal court for abuse, except for
one CIA contractor, who was charged with assault in connection with a
homicide committed in Afghanistan in 2003.
Al-Marri and Padilla
For most of 2005, the United States continued to detain in a U.S. navy brig
two men whom President Bush has designated “enemy combatants” because
of alleged links to al Qaeda. Both men were arrested in the United States and
have been held for over three years, mostly in solitary confinement.
On November 22, one of the men, Jose Padilla, who is a U.S. citizen, was
indicted on criminal charges. The Bush administration decision to bring
Padilla into the civilian criminal justice system means that the Supreme
Court likely will no longer hear Padilla’s challenge to an appellate court ruling
that the president may subject American citizens to indefinite military
detention without criminal charge or trial.
The other suspect, Qatari student Ali Saleh Kahlah al-Marri, was denied a
writ of habeas corpus by a federal court in 2005 on grounds that President
Bush has the authority to detain as enemy combatants non-citizens residing
in the United States. Lawyers for al-Marri have also filed suit against U.S.
Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, challenging the harsh conditions,
including virtually complete isolation and denial of reading material, under
which he initially was held.
Material Witnesses
Another form of arbitrary detention used by the United States since
September 11, 2001, is the indefinite jailing of suspects without charges
under a federal “material witness” law. Although there were no known cases
at this writing, the Department of Justice has used this law to detain at least
seventy men living in the United States and suspected of links to terrorism.
The law was created to allow prosecutors to detain important witnesses to a
crime who might flee to avoid testifying in a criminal proceeding.
Many of those detained were held for two months or more, and almost half
were never brought to testify before any court or grand jury. Few proved to
have any information about, much less links to, terrorism. The U.S. government
has since apologized to thirteen for wrongly detaining them. It refuses
to reveal how many material witnesses it has detained in connection with its
post-September 11 efforts.
Incarceration
The United States incarcerates people at a greater rate than any other country,
724 per one hundred thousand residents. Seven million people—or one
in every thirty-one persons—is in prison, or on probation or parole. Black
men between the ages of twenty-five and twenty-nine are seven times more
likely than their white counterparts to be in prison or jail. More than six hundred
thousand people annually leave prison, most of them to return to distressed
minority neighborhoods, facing formidable barriers to successful
reentry, including laws that limit their access to education, housing, and jobs.
Prison overcrowding coupled with budget cuts leave prisoners without the
programs and services they need and without adequate correctional staff to
maintain safety and security. Adult and juvenile inmates confront sexual
assaults and violence—by each other as well as by staff. With poor supervision
and discipline, staff in many facilities can engage in excessive or malicious
use of force with near impunity.
According to a report by the federal Bureau of Justice Statistics, prison officials
reported they had received 8,210 allegations of staff or inmate sexual
violence in 2004; one-third of those allegations were substantiated following
investigations. The number of reported incidents is smaller than the actual
number, because distrust of staff, fear of reprisal from perpetrators, personal
embarrassment, and a sense of futility keep many prisoners from reporting
abuse to correctional authorities. The National Prison Rape Elimination
Commission established by Congress held three hearings in 2005, receiving
testimony of inmate and staff sexual violence from victims, officials, and
advocates.
Across the country, medical and mental health care in prisons ranges from
mediocre to terrible. Correctional systems lack adequate funds to hire and
retain qualified personnel and fail to institute procedures to ensure proper
treatment of inmates. In California, a federal judge placed the entire state
prison healthcare system under a receivership after determining that the state
killed one inmate per week through medical incompetence or neglect. Poor
mental health care can also be fatal. For example, a paranoid schizophrenic
jail inmate hanged himself in May 2005 after not having received any antipsychotic
or antidepressant medication for seven days.
The Death Penalty and Other Cruel Sentences
As of November 4, forty-eight people had been executed in 2005. Evidence
of the arbitrariness and procedural flaws in the imposition of the sentence
continue to grow. Since 1973, 121 people have been released from death row
with evidence of their innocence, including one in 2005.
In February, the Bush administration said it would comply with the 2004 ruling
of the International Court of Justice (ICJ) that the United States should
review and reconsider the cases of fifty-one Mexican citizens on death row
because it had failed to give the Mexicans access to diplomatic officials after
they were arrested. This victory was a Pyrrhic one. In March, Secretary of
State Condeleeza Rice sent a letter to the United Nations formally withdrawing
from the Optional Protocol to the Vienna Convention that the United
States had violated—a protocol under which the ICJ could hear disputes about consular rights in the Convention that the United States itself proposed
in 1963 and ratified in 1969.
In March, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the execution of child offenders,
i.e., those who were under age eighteen when they committed their
crimes, constituted unconstitutionally cruel and unusual punishment.
According to the Court, the immaturity and irresponsibility of children, their
susceptibility to negative influences and peer pressure, and their greater
capacity for change make them categorically less culpable than adults. The
Court acknowledged that its ruling was influenced by the overwhelming
international consensus against the sentence and the fact that it violates international
human rights law.
While U.S. child offenders no longer face the death penalty, they do face the
possibility of life without parole sentences. There are at least 2,225 child
offenders sentenced to spend the rest of their lives in prison in the United
States, an estimated 59 percent of whom received the sentence for their first
criminal conviction. The United States is one of fourteen countries in the
world known to permit such sentences and research suggests that there may
be no more than twelve child offenders outside the United States serving life
sentences without possibility of release. The Convention on the Rights of the
Child, ratified by every country in the world except the United States and
Somalia, forbids sentencing child offenders to life without parole.
HIV/AIDS
The California legislature introduced a bill permitting condom distribution
in state prisons, which passed the Assembly but died in the Senate. Prisons
in Mississippi and Vermont, and jails in New York, Philadelphia,
Washington, D.C., San Francisco, and Los Angeles have taken measures to
ensure the health and human rights of inmates by permitting condom distribution.
California also made some progress on the provision of needleexchange
services to injection drug users at risk of HIV infection from the
sharing of syringes. Los Angeles re-issued a directive ordering police officers
not to interfere with the activity of sanctioned needle-exchange programs, and the California Assembly passed legislation that would make it easier for
counties to legalize these programs.
Katrina
The Gulf Coast suffered the nation’s worst natural disaster in August, when
Hurricane Katrina killed over one thousand people, displaced millions, and
shut down public services for more than a month. When the mayor of New
Orleans called on residents to evacuate in anticipation of the storm, those
with automobiles or financial resources left. Those who were too poor to
leave stayed behind, most of them African American. Media coverage of the
hurricane tore away national blinders on the enormous class and racial divide
in the country: no one could ignore the significance of poor people of color
trapped on rooftops asking for help in the days following the storm.
The thousands of people incarcerated in local jails were among those most at
risk when the storm hit. Inmates locked in the New Orleans jail spent several
days in flooded buildings without light, food, water, or sanitation facilities
before they were evacuated. Four hundred of those inmates were taken to a
former prison facility in Jena, Louisiana that was hastily reopened to receive
them. Inmates at Jena allege they were kicked, beaten, and taunted with
racial and sexual slurs.
Hurricane Katrina also caused the collapse of the legal system, including the
courts, in the affected areas. One consequence was that an unknown number
of inmates, who should have been released in the days and weeks after the
hurricane because their sentences had ended, remained incarcerated. Other
inmates, who had been arrested before the storm for minor offenses, e.g.,
public intoxication, remained incarcerated because there were no courts to
hear the charges against them and to sentence or release them.
Immigration
A law passed this year amends U.S. asylum policy in ways that violate international
legal standards. Asylum seekers in the United States must now prove
their persecutor’s reasons for harming them, i.e. they must show what their persecutor was or would be thinking. Judges may now require asylum seekers
to obtain corroborating evidence (which is often difficult to obtain) for their
claims. Any inconsistency between asylum seekers’ statements is now a valid
reason to withhold protection, even if the inaccuracy is not relevant to the
claim. The legislation also severely restricts opportunities for non-citizens
ordered removed to have their cases reviewed by a federal judge.
Anti-immigrant hostility, and especially hostility to undocumented immigrants,
prompted two states, Virginia and Arizona, to require state and local
officials to verify an individual’s immigration status before providing certain
non-emergency public benefits. In several southwestern states, vigilante
groups are “patrolling” the borders for undocumented immigrants.
Immigrants’ rights groups believe vigilantes may be responsible for four
unsolved murders in the border region.
In late October, Congressional leaders announced their intentions to forge
compromise guest-worker legislation in early 2006. It remained unclear
whether the compromise would address the widespread human rights violations
suffered by low-wage immigrant workers across the country. For example,
immigrants in the meatpacking industry work in hazardous conditions
without basic protections for their rights to a safe workplace, to medical care
for workplace injuries, to organize labor unions, or to protection from
exploitation and discrimination based on their vulnerable status as immigrants.
International Treaty Obligations
The United States submitted two human rights reports this year, one to the
Committee against Torture (CAT) on its compliance with the Convention
against Torture and one (eight years overdue) to the Human Rights
Committee on its compliance with the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights. Unfortunately, the reports are little more than a compendium
of laws and selected federal legal proceedings. The Bush administration
says little in either report about its counter-terrorism detention and interrogation
policies or about other U.S. actions—whether by federal, state, or
local authorities—inconsistent with U.S. treaty obligations.