Taking Back the Initiative from the Human
Rights Spoilers
By Kenneth Roth
A governments respect for human rights must be measured not only by how it
treats its own people but also by how it protects rights in its relations with other
countries. As we commemorate the sixtieth anniversary of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the response of governments to the plight of people
abroad is often anemic. Indeed, it is a sad fact that when it comes to this international
protection of rights, the governments with the clearest vision and strategy
are often those that seek to undermine enforcement. The days are past when one
would look to Washington, Brussels, or other Western capitals for the initiative in
intergovernmental discussions of human rights. Today, those conducting the
most energetic diplomacy on human rights are likely to reside in such places as
Algiers, Cairo, or Islamabad, with backing from Beijing and Moscow. The problem
is that they are pushing in the wrong direction.
These human rights opponents defend the prerogative of governments to do what
they want to their people. They hide behind the principles of sovereignty, noninterference,
and Southern solidarity, but their real aim is to curb criticism of their
own human rights abuses or those of their allies and friends. The activities of
these spoilers have come to dominate intergovernmental discussions of human
rights. For example, they have ended United Nations scrutiny of severe repression
in Uzbekistan, Iran, and the Democratic Republic of Congo. They have mounted
intense challenges to criticism of the Burmese military and possible prosecution
of Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir. And they have deeply compromised the
new UN Human Rights Council.
The reason for their success lies less in the attractiveness of their vision than in
the often weak and inconsistent commitment of governments that traditionally
stood for the defense of human rights. It is not as if the people of the world are
suddenly enamored of dictatorship and repression. Their desire for basic rights
remains unchanged, whether in the displaced persons camps of Darfur, the tribal
areas of Pakistan, or the prisons of Egypt. Rather, the vigor of the anti-human
rights campaign is, ironically, a testament to the power of the human rights ideal.
The spoilers would hardly bother if the stigma of being labeled a human rights
violator did not carry such sting.
Shifts in global power have emboldened spoiler governments in international
forums to challenge human rights as a Western or imperialist imposition. The
force of Chinas authoritarian example and the oil-fueled muscle of Russia have
made it easier to reject human rights principles. The moral standing of a country
like South Africa by virtue of its own dark past means that its challenge to the
international human rights agenda is influential.
Nevertheless, governments that care about human rights worldwide retain
enough clout to build a broad coalition to fight repressionif they are willing to
use it. Instead, these governments have largely abandoned the field. Succumbing
to competing interests and credibility problems of their own making, they have let
themselves be outmaneuvered and sidelined in UN venues such as the Security
Council and the Human Rights Council, and in the policy debates that shape multilateral
diplomacy toward Burma, Darfur, Sri Lanka, Zimbabwe, and other trouble
spots.
For the United States, that withdrawal is the logical consequence of the Bush
administrations decision to combat terrorism without regard to the basic rights
not to be subjected to torture, disappearance, or detention without trial.
Against that backdrop, Washingtons periodic efforts to discuss rights have been
undercut by justifiable accusations of hypocrisy. Reversing that ugly record must
be a first priority for the new administration of Barack Obama if the US government
is to assume a credible leadership role on human rights.
Washingtons frequent abdication has often forced the European Union to act on
its own. Sometimes it has done so admirably, such as after the Russia-Georgia
conflict, when its deployment of monitors eased tensions and helped protect
civilians, or in eastern Chad, where it sent 3,300 troops as part of a UN civilian
protection mission. But the EU did a poor job of projecting its influence more
broadly, to places like Burma, Somalia, or the Democratic Republic of Congo. It
often sought to avoid the political fallout of doing nothing by hiding behind a
cumbersome EU decision-making process that favors inaction. Moreover, its frequent
reluctance to stand up to the Bush administration in protest against abusive counterterrorism policies opened the EU to charges of double standards that
poisoned the global debate on human rights and made it easier for spoilers to
prevail.
The US and the EU are not the only ones promoting human rights abroad.
Increasingly, some governments in Latin America, Africa, and Asia can be looked
to for support on international rights initiatives. Those that stand out include
Argentina, Chile, Costa Rica, Mexico, and Uruguay in Latin America, and
Botswana, Ghana, Liberia, and Zambia in Africa. In Asia, Japan and South Korea
tend to be sympathetic to rights but are generally reluctant to take strong public
positions.
Yet forced to act without the firm and consistent backing of the major Western
democracies, these important voices are rarely able to mount on their own a
major international diplomatic effort to address serious human rights abuses.
Even the best-intentioned middle-sized powers cannot forge a solution to the
worlds most repressive situations without the partnership of the larger Western
powers that still dominate the United Nations, have large and active diplomatic
corps, and can deploy substantial military and economic resources.
So by default, those often setting the human rights agenda in international
forums are opponents of human rights enforcementgovernments of nations
such as Algeria, China, Egypt, India, Pakistan, and Russia. They want to return to
an era when the defense of human rights was left to the discretion of each government,
and violations carried little international cost.
To resist that aspiration will take a determination that too often has been lacking.
First, because the most effective human rights advocacy is by example, governments
hoping to defend human rights elsewhere must commit themselves to
respect those rights in their own conduct. As described in more detail below, that
means, in the counterterrorism realm, a definitive end to such abuses as the use
of torture and other coercive interrogation techniques, the disappearance of
suspects in secret detention facilities, and the long-term detention of suspects
without trialas well as a willingness to speak out immediately if any government,
including a close ally, resumes these practices. It also means addressing such persistent abuses as racism in the criminal justice system, mistreatment of
migrants, or use of the death penalty.
Second, as in the case of any serious human rights violation, offenders must be
held to account. For example, only by investigating, acknowledging, and repudiating
the wrongdoing that has occurred, prosecuting serious crimes, and taking
remedial steps to ensure that these abuses never recur, will Washington begin to
build credibility as a government that practices what it preaches in the human
rights realm.
Third, serious efforts must be undertaken to build a broad global coalition in support
of human rights. In the case of the United States, it should seek to rejoin
multilateral institutions such as the UN Human Rights Council and ratify key
treaties such as those on womens and childrens rights, enforced disappearances,
cluster munitions, and antipersonnel landmines. It should adopt a policy
of embracing the rule of law by re-signing the International Criminal Court treaty,
actively supporting the court, and initiating a process for ultimate ratification.
And it should actively supportpolitically, financially, and militarilymultilateral
efforts to protect civilians from mass atrocities.
In the case of both the European Union and the United States, vigorous efforts
should be made to reach out to governments of the global South, especially
those that largely respect human rights at home but continue to resist the
defense of human rights in their foreign policy. That requires addressing issues of
particular concern to Southern governments, such as economic and social rights,
racism, and the rights of migrants. It also requires avoiding double standards and
remaining open to dialogue and appropriate political compromise.
Governments of the global South, in turn, must reconsider their reflexive stand
shoulder to shoulder with the oppressors of the world rather than their victims.
This misguided solidarity is particularly disappointing in the case of governments
such as India and South Africa, which today are democracies that on balance
respect the rights of their own people but pursue a foreign policy suggesting that
others do not deserve similar rights. Bloc solidarity should not become a substitute
for embracing the more fundamental values of human rights.
Finally, the new Obama administration must abandon the Bush administrations
policy of hyper-sovereignty. It is music to the ears of the governments of China,
Russia, and India to hear Washington deflect human rights criticism on sovereignty
grounds. That approach effectively pushes back the clock to an era before the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the many legal and institutional mechanisms
it has spawned. A radical reappraisal of US policy is urgently needed.
President Obama has promised such changes, and none too soon. The test will
be whether he can resist pressures to sustain the Bush-led status quo.
A Callous Solidarity
Today, 60 years after the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, it is not tenable
simply to deny the worthiness of the human rights ideal. As a result, the spoilers
that are intent on undermining the international human rights regime rarely
describe their intentions in those terms. Instead, these governments tend to say
that they support human rights in principle, but oppose only the way that rights
are allegedly twisted, used, or perverted by more powerful nations. They mimic
the language of anti-imperialism, anti-colonialism, or solidarity with the downtrodden,
but in fact, the spoilers are no friends of the persecuted. They find common
cause with the dictators and tyrants of the world, not with the ordinary people
facing oppression. They invoke Southern solidarity, but behind the lofty rhetoric,
the solidarity they have in mind is with repressive governments, not their
Southern victims.
There are many different reasons why some governments choose to play negative
or indifferent roles with respect to human rights. Certain serious offenders, such
as Belarus, Sudan, and Zimbabwe, push back against any human rights scrutiny
to forestall international consideration of their own abuses. They are not leaders
in international forums but they do speak up and vote. They seek to avoid any
external constraint on how they treat their people. Sovereignty, not rights, is their
watchword.
Other states play more of a leadership role in trying to limit human rights scrutiny.
They include the governments of nations with poor human rights records, such as
Algeria, China, Egypt, Pakistan, and Russia. They also include certain democracies from the developing world, such as India and South Africa, which boast
strong institutional guarantees protecting rights despite committing some ongoing
violations. Some of these governments also want to avoid scrutiny of their
domestic rights practices, but they are motivated as well by a rejection of what
they see as a US-led imperialist vision of international politics and development.
In addition, some members of the Organization of the Islamic Conference resist
what they perceive as a war against Islam waged by the United States and other
Western powers.
The governments seeking to subvert human rights articulate a litany of excuses
for their actions. They cite Western double standards in promoting rightsa
deplorable reality, but irrelevant to the plight of the victim. There is no question
that Western governments are at times responsible for committing, supporting, or
ignoring serious human rights violations, and they deserve criticism for those
transgressions. But few people facing slaughter, rape, or arbitrary detention
would forsake rescue simply because someone elses suffering is being ignored.
Nor should they be forced to by the spoilers ideology of convenience.
The same is true of the spoilers invocation of the colonialist heritage of some
nations that want to end human rights abuses. Yes, the West has a history, often
ruthless, of colonial exploitation. But few people facing repression today would
reject help simply because those who might lend a hand had ancestors who
themselves were repressive. The spoilers should not block that help for these victims.
A disappointing illustration of this hostility to the international protection of
human rights is the South African governments response to the crisis in
Zimbabwe. The African National Congress built a broad international coalition in
its struggle against apartheid. Where Western governments failed them, they
found willing allies in the global human rights movement. During Nelson
Mandelas presidency, South Africa seemed to embrace the human rights cause,
establishing a model constitutional democracy with strong legal guarantees of
individual rights. But under President Thabo Mbeki, rather than join a global
movement to apply pressure on the Zimbabwean government to stop its repression,
Pretoria refused to speak out. It justified that softer approach to itself by
interpreting the anti-apartheid struggle as primarily a fight against imperialism, and by casting Robert Mugabe as the legitimate heir to that mantle. As a result,
the South African government was seen as backing a repressive leader rather
than his suffering victims.
Indulging a short memory of its own struggle, the South African government also
turned its back on the people of Burma. International pressure helped to end the
apartheid regime. But today, Pretoria opposes action by the UN Security Council
on behalf of the people of Burma because severe military repression supposedly
falls outside the Security Councils mandate. South Africa says it prefers more
democratic UN institutions, such as the General Assembly or the Human Rights
Council, but it has hardly been a vigorous promoter of human rights for Burma
there, either.
The new government in Pakistan also has yet to translate its own struggle against
dictatorship into support for similar efforts elsewhere. The elected, civilian government
of President Asif Ali Zardari is a direct beneficiary of interventions by the
international human rights community. Over the past two years, human rights
groups placed enormous pressure on Gen. Pervez Musharraf and his military to
release pro-democracy jurists from detention, restore ousted judges, and permit
free and fair parliamentary elections. Now that Musharraf has resigned under
threat of impeachment, there are some signs that the Zardari government is
reconsidering Pakistans traditional hostility to international human rights initiatives.
It signed the Convention Against Torture and the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, and its ambassador to the Human Rights Council has
toned down Pakistans usual attacks on the UN high commissioner for human
rights and graciously accepted comments by nongovernmental organizations on
Pakistans human rights record. But Pakistani diplomats at the UN still often push
an anti-human rights agenda, as if Musharraf were still in power. For example,
they have been at the forefront of efforts to limit NGO comments on the rights
records of governments undergoing the new universal periodic review at the
Human Rights Council.
The spoilers should not be equated with the global South as a whole. Many
Southern governments today are at the forefront of efforts to enforce human
rights. In Latin America, for example, the governments of Argentina, Chile, Costa
Rica, and Uruguay have consistently supported human rights initiatives, from the International Criminal Court to the Human Rights Council. Mexico has played an
important role at the Human Rights Council (actively engaging in the examination
of all countries undergoing universal periodic review), the UN General Assembly
(defending the independence of the high commissioner for human rights and her
program) and as a prospective member of the UN Security Council (stating its
belief that major human rights issues should be on the agenda). Unfortunately,
Mexico has been slow to address severe and persistent human rights problems at
home, resisting human rights conditionality on US assistance to fight drug trafficking
known as the Merida Initiative, and pressing for removal of the representative
of the UN high commissioner for his critical comments about Mexicos
domestic human rights record. Brazil in recent years has actively supported the
human rights mechanisms of the Organization of American States, but at other
times it has shown sympathy for the sovereignty-trumps-human-rights views of
the spoilers, such as in the negotiations for a treaty banning cluster munitions.
Meanwhile, Cubastill the one closed society in the Americas after the transfer of
power from Fidel Castro to his brother Ralhas toned down its leadership role
among the spoilers, though with the tacit understanding that the Human Rights
Council not revive critical resolutions on Havana.
In Africa, a number of governments have bucked the unhelpful lead of Algeria,
Egypt, and South Africa. For example, Botswana, Liberia, Nigeria, Sierra Leone,
and Zambia tried to press the African Union to stand up to Robert Mugabe in
Zimbabwe. Nigeria is also well represented in Geneva by its ambassador who presides
over the Human Rights Council and has shown a commitment to depolarizing
it. Numerous African governments have provided troops to peacekeeping
efforts in Burundi, Darfur, Somalia, and the Democratic Republic of Congo, where
the main task is to protect civilians. Morocco played a constructive role at negotiations
for a new treaty against enforced disappearances. Even South Africa, after
failing to support a special session of the Human Rights Council on Burma, finally
spoke out against Burmese repression once the session took place. But these
positive examples are often overshadowed by the aggressively destructive efforts
of the spoilers. 
Resisting International Justice
The spoilers were recently roused to action by the request of the prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) for an arrest warrant for Sudanese President
Omar al-Bashir, on charges of genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanity
in Darfur. Sudan sought to convince the Security Council to suspend the prosecution.
The ensuing political battle pitted a government that is responsible for mass
murder, rape, and displacement against the victims and their quest for justice.
One would have hoped that African governments would join hands with the victims.
But in the name of African solidarity, South Africa, along with Algeria, Egypt,
and Libya, backed a campaign to stop the prosecution of the accused mass murderer
Bashir. Clearly these governments did not have the suffering of ordinary
African people in mind. To their disgrace, the African Union, the Arab League, the
Non-Aligned Movement, and the Organization of Islamic Conference joined the
campaign.
Some African governments complain that the ICC has unfairly singled out Africa.
Although the four countries where the ICC has initiated prosecutions are indeed
African, none was selected solely by the ICC. Three African governments (Uganda,
the Central African Republic, and the Democratic Republic of Congo) petitioned
the court to take cases in their countries, and the Security Council referred the
fourth (Sudan) to the court for its atrocities in Darfur. The criticism also ignores
the larger international justice effort. For example, the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia has prosecuted far more suspects than the ICC.
This past year, it took custody of former Bosnian Serb political leader Radovan
Karadzic to try him for genocide.
Some of those who denounce international justice most vigorously are leaders
who fear that they or those whom they have commanded might be held to
account for criminal conduct. Rwandan President Paul Kagame, for example,
seeks to prevent independent prosecution of soldiers of the Rwanda Patriotic
Front (RPF), a rebel group he once headed, for war crimes committed during and
after the Rwandan genocide, including the killing of at least 30,000 people. The
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) is mandated to prosecute such
crimes, but rather than see it try RPF soldiers, the Rwandan government arranged to have the one remaining case under ICTR investigation transferred to its own
court where it could more easily determine, and limit, the outcome.
When the families of French and Spanish victims killed by RPF soldiers sought
justice through their national courts, the judges charged with investigating these
crimes issued arrest warrants for Rwandan officials whom they wished to interrogate.
Rwanda retaliated by whipping up African sentiment against this supposed
clear violation of sovereignty and territorial integrity. Taking up the mantle of
anti-colonialism, Rwanda also denounced universal jurisdiction (the power of any
government to prosecute the most heinous crimes wherever they occurred) as an
affront to Africa. But that claim ignored the fact that Rwanda itself has benefited
more than any other country from universal jurisdictionin holding to account
many of those responsible for the genocide. The claim also overlooks the long
history of universal jurisdiction being used against non-African perpetrators, such
as the agents of the dirty wars of the 1970s and 1980s in Latin America including
former Chilean President Augusto Pinochet as well as individuals involved in
genocide in Bosnia and war crimes in Afghanistan.
The UN Human Rights Council
Showing far more initiative and clarity of vision than traditional supporters of
human rights, the spoilers have taken numerous steps to defang the new Human
Rights Council, the UNs leading governmental body on human rights, because of
its potential to hold them or their allies to account. Most notably, and tellingly,
they resist critical resolutions about particular countriesunless the resolution
could be watered down so much that the country in question would actually consent
to it.
The spoilers in Geneva have included, at various times, Algeria, China, Egypt,
India, Pakistan, Russia, and South Africa. Algeria and Egypt have played formal
roles at the Human Rights Council as leaders of the African group. In the past year
or two, a loose version of this coalition has:
 successfully sponsored a resolution ending the mandate of the independent
expert for the Democratic Republic of Congo despite ongoing mass
atrocities there. Egypt, claiming to act on behalf of the African Union, led
the charge.
 ended the review of the human rights records of Iran and Uzbekistan.
 opposed or abstained on a critical resolution on North Korea, although it
was adopted anyway.
 generally failed to support a special session on Darfur and thoroughly
failed to sponsor one on Burma.
The only exception to this campaign against country resolutions has been the
spoilers enthusiastic support for criticism of Israel for its conduct in the West
Bank and Gaza and its war in Lebanon. Israel deserves criticism, but these condemnations
lose much of their punch because of the spoilers, and hence the
councils, reluctance to criticize anyone else.
The spoilers justify their opposition to most country resolutions by asserting that
the council should seek only to cooperate and engage in dialogue with governments,
never to pressure them. But that falsely assumes that all governments
have a good-faith desire to respect human rights, and commit abuses only
because of a lack of technical capacity which cooperative assistance might remedy.
In fact, governments often commit abuses deliberately. The only appropriate
response in such cases is to ratchet up pressure, through such responses as critical
UN resolutions, until they stop.
As the spoilers have been able to cobble together majorities among the 47 governmental
members of the Human Rights Council, they have sought to cement
control by limiting the influence of independent voices. These voicesthe UN
high commissioner for human rights and her staff, the special rapporteurs and
independent experts, as well as NGOsserve as an important antidote to the
politicized debates among governments that tend to dominate the council. The
spoilers have tried to silence them.
For example, the biggest problem facing the experts, rapporteurs, and other independent
observers from the UN system is a lack of cooperation from governments.
Illustrative of the problem, Angolaa country with growing influence within
the Africa groupclosed the local office of the UN high commissioner for
human rights only one year after pledging to increase cooperation with the office
as part of its campaign to be elected to the Human Rights Council. But the spoilers
promote the fiction that the problem is misconduct by these observers themselves,
and that the solution lies in more state control of them. So the spoilers,
led by Algeria, have increased governments role in selecting the experts and rapporteurs,
and restrained them with a new, intrusive code of conduct.
The spoilers have also tried to tame the universal periodic review of governments
human rights record by insisting that it be based primarily on information provided
by the government under review rather than by experts and human rights
groups. Furthermore, they are now arguing for increased council oversight of the
high commissioner for human rights.
At the UN General Assembly
Most of the spoilers UN activity has been at the Human Rights Council, but they
have also sought to undermine human rights initiatives in the General Assembly.
There, however, they tended to have less success. For example:
 Claiming to be speaking on behalf of the African group, South Africa
opposed a General Assembly resolution condemning rape as a war crime.
Its rationale: the resolution would be an imposition on African nations.
Fortunately, a majority of governments rejected that cold-hearted excuse.
 Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Sudan, and Zimbabwe opposed a General Assembly
resolution criticizing Burma for detaining and using violence against
peaceful demonstrators. That was too much even for the majority of states,
including most African ones, which either abstained or voted in favor of
the resolution, leading to its adoption.
China: A Spoiler May Be Evolving
Having long rejected any international criticism of its own rights record, China traditionally
has been reluctant to criticize abuses by others. It thus frequently joins
with the spoilers. In recent years, however, there have been exceptions. In Darfur,
for example, China at times has used its influence as Sudans largest oil purchaser
and arms provider to nudge Khartoum toward accepting in principle the
deployment of international peacekeepers. For the most part, however, the
Chinese government remains hostile to human rights enforcement. It especially
resists imposing sanctions, making its aid relationships more transparent, or acting
upon the responsibility to protect doctrine that was adopted at a global
summit in 2005. In some of the worst situations, its insistence that international
intervention is unlikely to succeed masks an actual indifference to the welfare of
the victims.
For example, China, along with Russia, vetoed a Security Council resolution that
would have tightened sanctions on Zimbabwe in response to President Mugabes
violent refusal to accept the electoral victory of his opponent, Morgan Tsvangirai.
In addition, at the height of Mugabes repression, including widespread violence
against peaceful opposition supporters, China sent a boatload of arms to the
Zimbabwean military. The South African government would have delivered the
arms to Harare but for a protest by South African dock workers.
Similarly, Beijing may have exerted some behind-the-scenes pressure on the
Burmese military to allow humanitarian aid into the country following the devastating
Cyclone Nargis, but it blocked Security Council action to address the problem.
It also tried to prevent the Security Council from even discussing Burmas
use of child soldiers, let alone imposing a wider arms embargo for that pervasive
abuse, even though China had just ratified the child soldiers treaty ban.
Despite its endless rhetoric about being a good citizen at the United Nations,
China snubbed not only the UN high commissioner for human rights but also five
UN special rapporteurs who wanted to visit Tibet following violence there in
March 2008. China also put pressure on Nepal to crack down on Tibetans who
were demonstrating in Kathmandu against Chinese repression in their homeland.
Russia
While formally endorsing respect for human rights, Russia often joins with the
spoilers in UN forums to protect its allies and ward off potential scrutiny of its
increasingly repressive practices at home. It affirms that national sovereignty
should override action on human rights, and stresses the importance of avoiding
double standards and the imposition of borrowed value systems. At the
Security Council, for example, it tends to oppose consideration of human rights. It
has deployed its veto or the threat of its use to block critical resolutions on Burma
and Zimbabwe. Russia eventually supported the deployment of international
peacekeepers in Darfur, but resisted moves for increased pressure on the
Sudanese government.
Russia also uses its membership in various European human rights bodies to
undermine them. For example, Russia is alone among Council of Europe states in
blocking reform of the European Court of Human Rights that would enable the
court to reduce its huge backlog. One of the apparent reasons is that the court
has repeatedly ruled against Russia in cases of extrajudicial executions and disappearances
in Chechnya. Russia also has failed to implement structural reforms
ordered by the court.
In addition, Russia has successfully curtailed scrutiny of its own conduct, especially
in Chechnya, and bullied other European governments to largely refrain
from protest. For more than a year it prevented the Council of Europes
Parliamentary Assembly from carrying out on-site monitoring of human rights in
Chechnya and holding public debates on the topic. It also continues to block publication
of reports on Chechnya by the Council of Europes Committee for the
Prevention of Torture.
Russia also plays a negative role in the Organization for Security and Co-operation
in Europe (OSCE). It has threatened, so far unsuccessfully, to reform the
OSCEs Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR). Moscow
sought to subject the ODIHRs election observation reports to consensus approval
by all OSCE states, thereby enabling every state (including Russia) to veto criticisms
and greatly weakening the ODIHRs work. Russia also tried to limit participation
at OSCE meetings to those NGOs that were registered in their home country and approved by their country delegationproviding another way for abusive
governments to silence their critics.
India
As the worlds most populous democracy, India might be expected to be at the
forefront of global efforts to promote human rights. In the past, India sometimes
took a leadership role in defending rights, such as by opposing apartheid in
South Africa and supporting the 1988 democracy movement in Burma. However,
its current foreign policy often would make a confirmed dictator proud.
There are several reasons for this disappointing performance. First, despite strong
legal protections and an independent justice system, the Indian government still
commits serious abusesfor example, in Kashmir and in Manipur, in its repression
of Naxalite insurgents and their alleged supporters, and in its treatment of
Dalitsso it tends to oppose international action on rights, fearing a precedent
that might be used against it. Second, as an emerging and globalizing economy,
India increasingly prioritizes its economic and strategic interests over the promotion
of human rights, particularly as it tries (often unsuccessfully) to minimize
Chinese influence in South Asia and to compete with China in countries like
Burma.
Finally, like South Africa, the Indian government subscribes to a misplaced
Southern solidarity. Both the government and the bureaucracy, which has significant
sway over policy-making, harbor a deeply ingrained world view that conflates
international rights protection with colonialism. India has every right to remind
Western powers of their earlier sins, but it is wrong to subordinate the needs of
people suffering abuses today to a policy that is fixated on the past. Sadly, too
many Indian officials seem to feel no responsibility for seeing that the people of
other countries enjoy the same rights as most Indians.
There have been exceptions. At an important moment in Nepal, for example, India
helped ease the way for the establishment of an office of the UN high commissioner
for human rights (in part because of fears over a common Maoist movement),
although it is now trying to ease out the UNs political mission. With
respect to Burma, India appears to have suspended military aid in response to Burmas 2007 crackdown against peaceful demonstrators and the restrictions on
international assistance to the survivors of Cyclone Nargis in 2008, but its private
diplomacy achieved at best uncertain results.
More typically, however, India is hostile to the international protection of human
rights, usually voting against country-specific resolutions at the Human Rights
Council. For example, it voted in favor of blocking any debate on Sudan,
abstained on a resolution criticizing North Korea, voted against a resolution on
Cuba, and endorsed a no action motion on Belarus. To justify this hostility to
the defense of human rights, India typically parrots the rationale about believing
in private engagement on human rights rather than public pressure. Privately,
officials say that such enforcement is almost always targeted at poorer countries
while powerful nations get away with egregious abusesan injustice but, as
noted, not a legitimate excuse for inaction on behalf of poorer victims.
India also remains sensitive to any public discussion of its own rights record. It
often opposes visits to India by UN human rights investigators, permitting visits
only by special rapporteurs on the right to food in 2005, on violence against
women in 2000, and on freedom of religion or belief in 1996. Meanwhile, it has
ignored requests to visit by the special rapporteurs on torture and extrajudicial
execution since 1993, as well as more recent requests by UN investigators on
racism, toxic waste, human rights defenders, and arbitrary detentions.
The Disastrous Bush Years
As noted, the rise of the spoilers would have had less impact without an abdication
of leadership by governments that traditionally hold themselves forth as
defenders of human rights. No government bears greater blame for this abdication
than the United States under President George W. Bush. As is widely known,
the Bush administration chose to respond to the serious security challenge of terrorism
by ignoring the most basic requirements of international human rights law.
Its decision, made not by low-level bad apples but at the highest levels of government,
was to disappear suspects into secret detention facilities run by the
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) where their detention was unacknowledged,
subject them to torture and other abusive interrogation including waterboarding
(mock execution by drowning) and various stress techniques, and detain them for years on end without charge or trial at Guantanamo. The consequences
have been disastrous. This flouting of international human rights law generated
resentment that was a boon to terrorist recruiters, and discouraged international
cooperation with law-enforcement efforts, particularly in countries that are most
likely to identify with the victims and to learn of suspicious activity.
The Bush administrations misconduct profoundly undermined US influence on
human rights. Sometimes Washington could still productively promote human
rights: when the issue was the right to free speech or association, which is still
widely respected in the United States; when the US government enjoyed the
added leverage of a major funding relationship with the government in question;
or when the atrocities were so massive, such as widespread ethnic or political
slaughter, that the United States could oppose them without facing accusations
of hypocrisy.
More typically, however, when the issue was human rights abuses that the Bush
administration practiced itself, the United States was forced to cede the field.
Nowhere was this more visible than at the Human Rights Council. Washington
rightly criticized the many shortcomings of this new institution, but as explained
in more detail below, it is far from a lost cause. Rather than work to realize its
considerable potential, the Bush administration abandoned it from the start.
In part that may have been a concession to reality, since given the Bush administrations
human rights record, the United States would have had a hard time getting
elected. But a good part of the motivation seems to have been the Bush
administrations arrogant approach to multilateral institutions. Instead of undertaking
the difficult but essential task of building a broad global coalition for
human rights, Washington tended to throw rhetorical grenades from the sidelines
when it did not get its way. With one of the human rights movements most powerful
traditional allies having given up without a fight, it is no surprise that those
allies who remain on the council face an uphill struggle.
The Failure to Seize the Initiative
As noted, the spoilers have taken center stage on global policy debates about
human rights in part because the major rights-respecting democracies have chosen to hide in the wings. Of course, many of those democracies have never been
consistent defenders of human rights, with their long history of closing their eyes
to, and sometimes sponsoring, abuses by allies and strategic partners. But the
hopes that the new century would usher in foreign policies built on a consistent
and principled defense of human rights have been dashed by compromises made
in the fight against terrorism and by a disappointing lack of commitment. Recent
years have seen a particularly feeble performance. Increasingly, these governments
seem to consign the promotion of human rights to relations with pariahs
and adversaries.
In some cases of bilateral ineffectiveness, the United States bore principal
responsibility. For example:
 Washington provided massive assistance to the Pakistani military while
doing little to rein in its Inter-Services Intelligences use of torture and the
disappearance of suspects. Indeed, the CIA worked closely with
Pakistani intelligence forces, taking custody of suspected terrorists and
interrogating them in secret prisons. The Pakistani judiciarys principled
insistence on probing into these enforced disappearances, as well as its
apparent unwillingness to bless General Musharrafs election as president
while still a member of the army, is what led Musharraf to depose the chief
justice, Iftikhar Chaudhry, and other high court judges. Washington did little
to press for their restoration or to call on Musharraf to subject himself
to the rule of law. Musharraf ultimately resigned under domestic pressure,
but efforts to hold him accountable for his lawlessness were stymied by
Washingtons paramount concern that its close ally not be humiliated.
 Ethiopia has among the worst human rights records in Africa. Its troops
have used scorched-earth counterinsurgency policies, including strangling
people and burning villages, to displace rural villagers in the ethnic Somali
Ogaden region. In Somalia, Ethiopian forces have indiscriminately shelled
densely populated urban areas and tortured and executed alleged supporters
of insurgent groups. Meanwhile, the Ethiopian government has
used violence and arbitrary detention to suppress peaceful dissent at
home. Yet as an important regional ally in the fight against terrorism,
Ethiopia is the beneficiary of some US$700 million annually from the US governmentand of a notable public silence from Washington about these
atrocities.
 Washington in 2005 briefly demonstrated its ability to gain human rights
concessions from the Egyptian government, but it backed off its push for
reform when parliamentary elections gave the Muslim Brotherhood big
wins. With the restoration of unconditional supportEgypt remains the
worlds second largest recipient of US aidthe government has reverted to
arresting and beating democracy activists, including thousands of members
of the Muslim Brotherhood; prosecuting journalists, publishers, and
writers who have called for free elections or even commented on President
Hosni Mubaraks health; committing widespread torture; mistreating
refugees by forcibly returning many to Eritrea and Sudan; and murdering
since 2007 at least 32 migrants trying to cross into Israel.
In other cases, the European Union or its member states were most at fault for a
weak response to serious human rights abuses:
 The EU imposed sanctionsan arms embargo and visa restrictions for
select senior officialson Uzbekistan following the 2005 massacre of
demonstrators in the town of Andijan. Since then, the EUs Uzbekistan policy
has been a case study in capitulation. Initially EU sanctions were conditioned
on Tashkents agreement to an independent international investigation
of the slaughter. The Uzbek government refused and, instead, arrested
witnesses to the killings and forced them to exculpate the government.
Nevertheless, the EU gradually weakened the sanctions, justifying its
moves as constructive gestures to encourage the Uzbek government to
undertake necessary reforms. To its credit, the EU tied the sanctions to the
release of all imprisoned human rights defenders. But when Tashkent
refused, the EU shrugged its shoulders and lifted the sanctions anyway.
Among the examples of progress cited to justify this surrender was that
Tashkent had released some political prisoners even as it imprisoned others,
and had held a seminar on media freedom despite the lack of any
actual media freedom in Uzbekistan.
 When the International Criminal Courts prosecutor sought an arrest warrant
for Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir, Bashir tacitly threatened all
manner of harm to civilians, humanitarian workers, and international
peacekeepers unless the Security Council suspended the prosecution.
Instead of condemning and rejecting this blackmail, Britain and France
began negotiating terms (all the while denying that they were negotiating,
as opposed to suggesting ways in which the issue could be resolved). The
conditions they set were rigorous, and Bashir quickly showed he had no
intention of meeting them, but the dangerous message implicitly delivered
was that there might be a reward for following mass atrocities with a threat
of more mass atrocities.
 As the forces of rebel leader Laurent Nkunda attacked and threatened civilians
in the eastern region of the Democratic Republic of Congo, the British
and French governments took the lead, dispatching their foreign ministers
to the area, but their declarations of concern were not matched by substantially
reinforced protection for the civilians of eastern Congo. Instead
of urgently sending a modest European peacekeeping force, the EU dawdled
during critical weeks. The Security Council authorized a slight expansion
of the UN peacekeeping force in eastern Congo but without committing,
as of late November 2008, to the improvements in the quality and
capacity of the force needed to protect civilians. Notably, the EU expressed
reluctance to deploy the two 1,500-troop battle groups that it had created
in 2007 just for such situations, making one wonder when, if ever,
these protective forces would be used.
 The EU lifted a travel ban on Belarus President Alexander Lukashenka
despite a lack of discernible improvement in Minsks dismal human rights
record. The decision was motivated by the EUs worsening relations with
Russia, and European governments hope to bring Belarus closer to the
West.
Quite apart from responding to abuses by others, Britain threatened to itself
become complicit in abuse by continuing to insist on the right to send terrorist
suspects to governments that torture. To do so, it would rely on flimsy diplomatic
assurances of humane treatment from governments that routinely flout their treaty obligations not to torture. Britains efforts to develop a common EU position
endorsing this practice have so far been unsuccessful, but its bad example
has helped to inspire other governments including Denmark, Italy, Kyrgyzstan,
Russia, Spain, and Switzerland  thereby weakening the global torture ban.
Britain also sought to hollow out an exception to the prohibition of sending people
to places where they risk ill-treatment short of torture by promoting a new rule
that would allow such deportation if the suspects continued presence in the
sending country posed too much of a security threat. The European Court of
Human Rights unanimously rejected that proposal.
Especially in the Middle East, all Western governments seemed to share equally
in the failure to promote human rights:
 Because of Saudi Arabias oil production and its position as a counterterrorism
ally, no Western government mounted any serious challenge to its
virtual lack of political freedoms and civil society, or its severe restrictions
on the rights of women and migrants. Indeed, the United States and
Britain praised and promised to study and learn from a Saudi program that
keeps thousands of terrorism suspects detained without charge or trial,
offering reeducation instead.
 The West actively sought improved relations with Libya with little criticism
of its deplorable human rights records. In return for Libya giving up plans
for weapons of mass destruction and compensating the victims of the
Lockerbie bombing, the West has rewarded it handsomely with the
resumption of diplomatic visits and renewed economic activity. But
Western governments have had little to say about the virtual absence of
any civil and political freedom in the country.
 Israel repeatedly closed off Gaza, blocking the import of fuel, food, medicine,
and essential supplies. It sought to justify this collective punishment
against the civilian population as retaliation for indiscriminate rocket
attacks by Gazan armed groups into civilian areas of Israel. Western governments
offered occasional public condemnations, but did not condition
their massive economic assistance to Israel on change. Nor did Israel suffer consequences for its illegal settlement expansion and construction of
the wall/barrier within the West Bank.
Elsewhere, Australia, Britain, Canada, France, Germany, and the Netherlands
sought, at least at first, to undermine an absolute ban on cluster munitions by
seeking exceptions for certain types that they tended to have stockpiled in their
arsenals. An absolute ban was important because, as in the case of the landmines
treaty, certain major powers such as the United States, Russia, and China
could be expected to reject the treaty, but an absolute ban, by stigmatizing the
weapon system, would make it politically difficult for them to use it anyway. A
coalition led by Austria, Ireland, Mexico, Norway, and New Zealand overcame this
resistance and achieved a total ban.
Similarly, the 1990 Convention on the Rights of Migrant Workers and Members of
their Families has not been ratified by any EU member state, or by Australia,
Canada, Japan, or the United States. To date, only governments that send migrant
workers have embraced the treaty, greatly undermining its capacity to protect a
large and vulnerable population.
Some of the major democracies did occasionally show positive leadership on
human rights:
 British Prime Minister Gordon Brown refused to attend a summit between
the European Union and the African Union because of the presence of
Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe.
 Douglas Alexander, the British international development secretary, suggested
he would link aid to Ethiopia to an end to its abuses in the Ogaden
region. This marked a possible shift from Britains traditional silence on
Ethiopian abuses while providing substantial financial support to the government.
 To protest Rwandas support for the abusive forces of its ally, rebel leader
Laurent Nkunda, in eastern Congo, the Netherlands redirected its development
aid from Rwanda to eastern Congo.
 The United States, Australia, and the European Union imposed sanctions
against Burma for its brutal crackdown against peaceful demonstrators
despite countervailing pressure from China and the governments of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
 German Chancellor Angela Merkel boycotted the opening ceremonies of
the Beijing Olympics to protest Chinas crackdown in Tibet.
 The Bush administration, despite its opposition to the International
Criminal Court, took the lead in fending off efforts to suspend the ICCs
efforts to prosecute Sudanese President Bashir.
However, these positive examples were not repeated regularly enough to build
momentum for the defense of human rights and thus to effectively deflect
destructive pressure from the spoilers.
The EU and the UN Human Rights Council
The weakness of the EUs support for human rights was especially evident in multilateral
settings such as the Human Rights Council. As noted, the Bush administration
did not even try to make the council work, leaving the task to others. The
EU has made some effort to assume the leadership mantle in Geneva, but talking
to EU diplomats there is often a depressing lesson in defeatism.
Much of the reason lies in the influence-sapping procedures that the EU follows
for building a consensus around a common policy. The council is divided roughly
evenly among governments that tend to support human rights initiatives, governments
that tend to oppose them, and swing votesgovernments that have tended
to join the spoilers but could be moved in a more pro-human rights direction.
By giving broad strategic direction, the EU might have empowered its diplomats
to act creatively and boldly to forge a multi-regional, pro-human rights majority
from among the swing votes.
Instead, the EU let the process of building an internal consensus become an exercise
in micromanagement. EU diplomats spend so much time negotiating a
minutely detailed consensus among themselves, typically consisting of word-forword approval of any proposed resolution, that by the time they reach agreement
among all 27 member states, they are exhausted, with no energy or flexibility to
fashion a consensus among other potential allies. To avoid restarting the
painstaking process of building a new EU consensus, European diplomats must
avoid genuine give-and-take and instead try to convince others to accept the
agreed-upon EU position without amendment. Needless to say, that is not an
effective negotiating posture.
This approach tends to worsen the already-poisonous West-versus-rest atmosphere
that frequently prevails at the UN. This polarization and bloc mentality
makes it more difficult for moderate states to separate themselves from the spoilers
such as Algeria, Egypt, and South Africa that tend to dominate African Union
deliberations, and thus harder to build a cross-regional, pro-human rights
majority.
Even when the EU has wanted to act, its reluctance to criticize Washington for
abusive counterterrorism policies has left it open to charges of selectivity and
double standards. For example, by refusing to endorse a Cuba-backed effort at
the Human Rights Council to criticize Guantanamo (even though the proposed
resolution was deliberately written in the exact same language as the Council of
Europe had previously used in its own resolution), the EU contributed to the protect-
your-own mentality that now plagues the Human Rights Council. Similarly, by
agreeing to end UN scrutiny of Iraq and Afghanistan after the US invasions, the
EU made it easier for others to oppose country resolutions aimed at their own
friends.
Unable for these reasons to build a pro-human rights majority at the council, the
EU tends to resign itself to watered-down consensus resolutions, such as on
Sudan, or to outright defeat, such as on the decisions to end the work of an
expert group on Darfur or to terminate scrutiny of Belarus and Cuba. Similarly,
despite ongoing massive atrocities in the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo,
the EU acquiesced in a compromise resolution sponsored by Egypt ending the
mandate of the UN independent expert on Congo; the EU accepted the fig-leaf of
scheduling another discussion of Congo a year later.
Taking Back the Initiative
That the initiative on human rights has been captured by governments that do not
wish international protection well should generate not despair but resolve. The
new Obama administration in Washington offers the hope of a US government
that can assume a place of leadership in promoting human rights. If the European
Union can generate the political will and surmount its self-imposed procedural
paralysis, it will be in a position to help build a genuine global coalition for
human rights that can seize the initiative from the spoilers.
Governments that purport to promote human rights should abide by certain basic
rules to be effective. First, they should ensure their own scrupulous respect for
human rightsbecause international law obliges them to do so, because it will
set a positive example, and because compliance will help silence charges of
hypocrisy. They should also abandon efforts to undermine human rights standards,
such as the prohibition of torture in the context of fighting terrorism, or
refugee protection in the rush to develop a common asylum policy. When these
governments face criticism for violating human rights, they should accept it as
legitimate discourse rather than an affront to be reflexively rejected.
In their foreign policy, these governments should promote human rights as evenhandedly
as possible. That means criticizing not only pariah states but also
friends when they commit serious rights violations. They should also elevate the
importance of human rights in their relations with other governments, assigning
the issue to senior officials, insisting on human rights occupying a prominent
place on the agenda during bilateral discussions, and establishing clear benchmarks
for change with specific consequences for indifference or retrenchment.
In multilateral settings, these governments should make it a major priority to
build a pro-human rights majority by encouraging rights-respecting states from all
regions to speak out on human rights. With respect to the Human Rights Council,
for example, rights-respecting states should be encouraged to offer their candidacy,
while the candidacies of the spoilers and their allies should be actively
opposed. The defeat in recent years of the candidacies of Belarus and Sri Lanka
illustrates what must be done more regularly.
Efforts should also be made to ensure that governments obstructing the defense
of human rights pay a political price at home. Democratic governments with
vibrant civil societies such as India and South Africa are able to get away with
negative positions on human rights because few people in those countries track
their voting records in intergovernmental forums and their national media rarely
report on their conduct there. So when they vote to protect Burma, Sudan, or
Zimbabwe, they do not face the criticism that they surely would encounter were
they to adopt similarly regressive domestic policies. Helping journalists and civil
society representatives visit New York, Geneva, and regional capitals to monitor
and lobby their governments would be a useful first step.
It is also important to recognize that many governments from the South have
legitimate grievances about the behavior of Western governments. These grievances
do not justify their hostility to human rights, but they clearly affect their
perspective. Expanding the number of Southern governments willing to promote
human rights will require addressing their sense that Western concern for human
rights varies with the level of strategic interest, that powerful countries are
allowed to get away with bad behavior, and that richer parts of the world are
insufficiently concerned with economic and social rights in the global South, such
as the right to food in the context of rising prices or the right to basic health care
in the midst of a declining economy. A genuine commitment to recognizing these
concerns would help to engage with states such as Ghana, Zambia, Mexico, Peru,
Indonesia, and the Philippines that ought to be exerting greater human rights
leadership in international and regional forums.
Finally, there is a need to break the bloc mentality that leads so many governments
to votealmost by defaultwith their regional groups even when their own
views are more progressive. Moderate states need encouragement to distance
themselves from the spoilers that tend to dominate bloc voting. Thus in Africa,
Ghana and Zambia should be encouraged to part company with Algeria and
Egypt. In Asia, the Philippines and Thailand should be weaned from Burma and
Vietnam. Success will require a strategy and vision, engagement and diplomacy
all designed to reach out to moderate states, take their concerns seriously, and
bring them into the pro-human rights fold.
A New Direction in Washington
The success of any effort to retake the initiative from the spoilers will depend to a
large degree on Washington. The Obama administration must undo the enormous
damage caused by the Bush administration and begin to restore the US governments
reputation and effectiveness as a human rights defender. Changing US
policy on how to fight terrorism is an essential place to start. Among the steps
that President Obama should take would be to:
 Close the CIAs secret detention centers permanently. Bush suggested he
had emptied them only temporarily.
 Apply to the CIA the US militarys new rules (revised in the wake of the Abu
Ghraib scandal) prohibiting coercive interrogation. Congress had tried to
legislate that step, but Bush vetoed the bill, and Congress lacked the votes
to override the veto.
 Close the Guantanamo detention center without effectively moving it onshore
by permitting detention without trial in the United States. That
means repatriating or prosecuting all detainees, and ensuring that prosecutions
are conducted in regular courts, not the substandard military commissions,
which allow criminal convictions based on coerced confessions,
or any other special tribunal that compromises basic due process. It also
means abandoning the radical theory that terrorist suspects arrested anywhere
in the world, even far from any recognizable battlefield, can be
detained as enemy combatants without regard to the protections of human
rights law.
 Launch a nonpartisan, professionally staffed investigative commission,
with subpoena power, to examine who authorized these serious abuses,
how they should be held accountable, and what steps should be taken to
ensure that this ugly episode in US history never recurs. That process of
exposure, acknowledgment, and repudiation is important so that the Bush
administrations abuses do not stand as a precedent to be followed in
future periods of security threat.
The Obama administration should also signal that, from now on, the US government
will submit to the requirements of international human rights law and reengage
with international institutions for the enforcement of that law. President
Obama should:
 Offer the United States as a candidate for the UN Human Rights Council
with the purpose of making it an effective institution for promoting human
rights. While a candidacy under Bush might well have failed, a candidacy
under Obama is likely to prevail.
 Signal an intention to reengage constructively with the International
Criminal Court by re-signing the ICC treaty, repealing the American Service-
Members Protection Act (which cuts aid to governments that will not
foreswear ever surrendering a US citizen for trial and authorizes invading
The Hague to liberate any imprisoned American), and supporting the ICC
politically and practically. The new administration should also begin the
domestic political work needed for the United States to ratify the ICC
treaty.
 Ratify other key human rights treaties, such as the new convention against
enforced disappearances (as a sign of commitment never to resort to this
despicable practice again), the long-ignored treaties on womens and childrens
rights (which the United States stands virtually alone in not having
ratified), the treaty on economic, social, and cultural rights (to secure a
safety net at home while helping to build a broader, cross-regional alliance
for human rights abroad), the First Additional Protocol to the Geneva
Conventions (setting forth standards for the conduct of warfare that the US
already largely accepts as a matter of customary law), and the more recent,
life-saving treaties banning cluster munitions and antipersonnel landmines
(weapons that, because they have become so stigmatized, the US
military would have a hard time using anyway).
Finally, President Obama should reassess US bilateral relations with certain governments
whose significance as strategic or counterterrorism allies led the Bush
administration to overlook their abuses. The United States should use its substantial
economic leverage to push for an end to abuses by close allies, such as Ethiopian atrocities in the Ogaden and Somalia, the Pakistani militarys use of
torture and disappearances, Egypts stifling of political opposition, Israels use
of collective punishment to respond to Palestinian rocket attacks on civilians, and
Colombias obstruction of investigations into links between senior government
officials and murderous paramilitary forces.
Conclusion
Like other global endeavors, the effective promotion of human rights cannot
ignore shifts in global power. The traditional role of the West in promoting human
rights is not enough. New coalitions must be built by reaching out to other
democracies that largely respect human rights at home and could be convinced
to join efforts to promote human rights around the world. But such coalitions cannot
be built without significant shifts in the policy and approach of the worlds
leading democracies.
Today, the effective defense of human rights requires new commitmentsto studiously
respect human rights in ones own conduct, to insist on accountability for
serious abuses regardless of the perpetrator, to promote human rights consistently
without favoritism for allies or strategic partners, and to reach out to potential
new allies with an openness to addressing their human rights concerns. None of
this is impossible. Those who believe that global shifts in power will sound the
death knell of human rights enforcement are confusing the leading democracies
current poor performance with immutable reality.
But the successful defense of human rights will require serious self-examination
on the part of these democracies and a willingness to change course. The arrival
of the Obama administration in Washington with its seeming determination to
end the disastrous abuses of the Bush years provides an ideal opportunity. The
task facing the human rights community is to convince the supporters of human
rightsboth traditional allies and potentially new onesto seize this opportunity.
That would truly be something to celebrate in this sixtieth anniversary year of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
This Report
This report is Human Rights Watchs nineteenth annual review of human rights
practices around the globe. It summarizes key human rights issues in more than
90 countries and territories worldwide, drawing on events through November
2008.
Each country entry identifies significant human rights issues, examines the freedom
of local human rights defenders to conduct their work, and surveys the
response of key international actors, such as the United Nations, European
Union, Japan, the United States, and various regional and international organizations
and institutions.
This report reflects extensive investigative work undertaken in 2008 by the
Human Rights Watch research staff, usually in close partnership with human
rights activists in the country in question. It also reflects the work of our advocacy
team, which monitors policy developments and strives to persuade governments
and international institutions to curb abuses and promote human rights. Human
Rights Watch publications, issued throughout the year, contain more detailed
accounts of many of the issues addressed in the brief summaries collected in this
volume. They can be found on the Human Rights Watch website, www.hrw.org.
As in past years, this report does not include a chapter on every country where
Human Rights Watch works, nor does it discuss every issue of importance. The
failure to include a particular country or issue often reflects no more than staffing
limitations and should not be taken as commentary on the significance of the
problem. There are many serious human rights violations that Human Rights
Watch simply lacks the capacity to address.
The factors we considered in determining the focus of our work in 2008 (and
hence the content of this volume) include the number of people affected and the
severity of abuse, access to the country and the availability of information about
it, the susceptibility of abusive actors to influence, and the importance of
addressing certain thematic concerns and of reinforcing the work of local rights
organizations.
The World Report does not have separate chapters addressing our thematic work
but instead incorporates such material directly into the country entries. Please
consult the Human Rights Watch website for more detailed treatment of our work
on childrens rights, womens rights, arms and military issues, business and
human rights, HIV/AIDS and human rights, international justice, terrorism and
counterterrorism, refugees and displaced people, and lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender peoples rights, and for information about our international film festivals.
Kenneth Roth is executive director of Human Rights Watch.
Angola
Angola held legislative elections in September 2008, the first since 1992. The ruling
party, the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA)in power
since 1975substantially increased its majority, winning 191 out of 220 parliamentary
seats. The main opposition party, the National Union for the
Independence of Angola (UNITA), had held 70 seats but retained only 16.
The elections were generally peaceful during the campaign and on polling day,
yet fell short of international and regional standards. The playing field for political
parties was uneven, with unequal access to state resources and the media, and
the MPLA dominating state institutions and the election oversight body. The landslide
victory gives the MPLA the opportunity to reinforce its grip on the state, the
economy, the media, and civil society; it can now revise the constitution without
opposition support. Presidential elections are scheduled to take place during
2009.
Elections
In the months before the elections, intimidation and sporadic incidents of violence
in rural areas restricted campaigning by opposition parties. During the official
electoral campaign period and on polling day, the police provided even-handed
security.
The National Electoral Commission (CNE), with a majority of members MPLAaligned,
was not able or willing to fulfill its role as an oversight body. A governmental
body, the Inter-ministerial Commission for the Electoral Process (CIPE)
retained almost exclusive control of voter registration. The CNE failed to address
major violations of electoral laws, including unequal access of parties to the public
media and ruling-party abuse of state resources and facilities. Moreover, the
CNE obstructed accreditation of more than half of the independent national civil
society election observers for polling day, giving preference to government-funded
observers.
Polling day was marred by numerous logistical and procedural problems and
irregularities, forcing the extension of voting by another day in Luanda, home to one-third of the electorate. Observers were not allowed to monitor the tabulation
process. UNITA challenged electoral results in Luanda, and four other parties
challenged the distribution of seats, but the recently inaugurated Constitutional
Court rejected complaints for lack of evidence. The commission set up by CNE to
investigate alleged irregularities lacked credibility, as it was totally made up of
CNE members.
Cabinda
Since 1975 rebels in the oil-rich enclave of Cabinda have been fighting for independence.
A 2006 peace agreement was meant to end the conflict. However,
many local people reject it as they felt excluded from peace talks. Sporadic armed
clashes continue in the interior. During the elections, international electoral
observers remained near the provincial capital for security reasons. European
Parliament observers publicly reported massive irregularities during the vote.
Freedom of association and expression in Cabinda continues to be particularly
restrictive. The police regularly and arbitrarily arrest members of catholic groups
critical of the terms of the peace agreement and of the new bishop appointed in
2005. In 2008, at least 14 civilians were accused of crimes against the security
of the state, and some have reportedly been mistreated in military detention. On
September 16, the Military Court in Cabinda sentenced former Voice of America
reporter Fernando Lelo to 12 years in imprison for armed rebellion and crimes
against the security of the state. Though a civilian, he was arrested in November
2007 and tried before a Military Court in a hearing at which no evidence was produced
to sustain the accusations against him. According to defense lawyers, the
Angolan Armed Forces (FAA) soldiers convicted with Lelo were tortured while in
military detention. The arbitrary nature of these detentions, the alleged torture,
and lack of a fair trial suggest the convictions were intended to intimidate people
and discourage criticism of the peace agreement.
Freedom of Expression
Since late 2007 the media environment has deteriorated in Angola. Legislation
required to implement crucial parts of a press law enacted in May 2006, which
would bring improvements to the legal protection of freedom of expression and access to information, was not passed. Private radio stations cannot broadcast
nationwide and there is no independent scrutiny of the public media, which
remains biased in favor of the ruling party. During 2008 several state media journalists
were suspended because they had criticized the government in public
debates.
Defamation remains a criminal offence. Many of the legal provisions to protect
media freedom and access to information are vaguely formulated, which can
intimidate journalists and hamper their ability to criticize the government.
Since late 2007 courts accelerated legal proceedings in pending criminal prosecutions
against private media journalists. For example, in June 2008 a court sentenced
the editor of the private weekly Semnario Angolense, Felisberto Graa
Campos, to six months in jail and ordered him to pay US$ 90,000 in damages,
following conviction in three separate libel cases filed by government officials,
years ago. At this writing, Graa Campos is awaiting the outcome of his appeal.
Housing Rights and Forced Evictions
The government has announced plans to allocate more resources for social housing
over the next five years. However, the legal framework for housing rights in
Angolaincluding the Land Law and the Law on Urban Managementdoes not
protect from forced evictions and fulfill the right to adequate housing. Despite the
fact that many people forcibly evicted in recent years continue to await compensation
and alternative housing, UN Habitat chose Luanda to hold celebrations for
UN Habitat Day on October 6, 2008.
Human Rights Defenders
The environment in Angola for civil society organizations has worsened since
2007. In July 2007, the head of the governments Technical Unit for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Aid (UTCAH), Pedro Walipi Kalenga, accused several
national and international civil society organizations of illegal activities. In previous
statements, he had threatened some active human rights organizations with
closure. Such statements amounted to harassment and intimidation of human
rights groups ahead of the elections.On September 4, 2008the eve of pollingthe Constitutional Court told the
human rights organization Association Justice Peace and Democracy (AJPD) that it
had 15 days to challenge proceedings banning it. A legal complaint against AJPD
had been lodged by the attorney general in 2003 on the grounds that the organizations
statutes did not conform to the law. Article 8 of the Law on Associations
limits the possibility for civil society organizations to influence policy making.
Members of the AJPD regularly criticized the government in the course of the electoral
process for bias in the public media and violations of electoral laws. AJPD is
awaiting the outcome of its appeal.
The Constitutional Law grants freedom of association, but the Law on
Associations enacted in 1991 and a decree-law on NGOs enacted in 2003, which
regulate the activity of civil society organizations, include a number of provisions
that limit freedom of association. Ever since the end of the humanitarian emergency
in 2004, the government has pursued a policy of controlling and restricting
space for civil society organizations. The government has been revising the legal
framework for civil society organizations since 2007, but the process was stalled
before the elections.
Key International Actors
Angolas increasingly important strategic role as the biggest Sub-Saharan oil producer
(due to assume the chair of OPEC in 2009), one of the fastest-growing
world economies, and a regional military power has greatly reduced leverage of
partners and international organizations that have pushed for good governance
and human rights. Commercial partners remain reluctant to criticize the government,
in order to protect economic interests.
The European Union has in the past approached the government regarding
harassment of human rights defenders, but has not done so publicly. However,
the EU sent an important election observer missionthe only one with long-term
observersand reported critically on the elections.
Most international observer missions to Septembers elections, including the
Southern African Development Community (SADC), the Pan-African Parliament,
the African Union, and the Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries, came shortly before the polls and left shortly afterwards. SADC, in which Angola plays
an important role as a member of the Troika, declared the elections free and
fair, even though the elections did not comply with its own Guidelines and
Principles Governing Democratic Elections.
The government retains an uneasy relationship with the United Nations, which
was not invited to observe the elections. In March 2008 the government ordered
the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) to leave the
county by the end of Maythree months before the elections. The government
alleged that the Office had never acquired legal status in the country and its role
to promote human rights had been fulfilled. This decision was a rejection of international
human rights scrutiny in the run-up to the elections, and of a commitment
to increase cooperation with the OHCHR that Angola made at the UN
General Assembly before its May 2007 election to the Human Rights Council.
Burundi
Efforts to resolve conflict between the government and the last active rebel group,
the Party for the Liberation of the Hutu People-National Liberation Forces
(Palipehutu-FNL), made halting progress. Preliminary talks in early 2008 on
renewed negotiations soon deadlocked. In April, FNL forces attacked the capital,
Bujumbura. Tanzania, longtime host of the Palipehutu-FNL leadership, expelled
them in May. Combined with combat losses, this brought the group back to the
table, signing a new ceasefire on May 25. However, as of November, Palipehutu-
FNL refused to enter the political process unless it could retain its name, although
the constitution prohibits ethnically based political parties.
Rebels, security forces, and armed civilians linked to the ruling party carried out
extrajudicial executions of opponents. Meanwhile, President Pierre Nkurunzizas
National Council for the Defense of DemocracyForces for the Defense of
Democracy (CNDD-FDD) intimidated rival parties and civil society.
Progress in Peace Negotiations and Demobilization
Progress toward resuming peace talks deadlocked in April over Palipehutu-FNL
demands for provisional immunity from prosecution, leading to combat that
displaced thousands of civilians. Once talks resumed in May, FNL combatants
refused to enter assembly sites, recruited new members, and continued pillaging
civilians. Police killed an FNL member in August, raising fear of renewed violence.
Talks continued under strong international pressure.
In addition to the matter of Palipehutu-FNLs name, the fate of a group claiming to
be former FNL combatants was a sticking point. The Palipehutu-FNL charged the
group was created by the government as an alternative negotiating partner, and
the World Bank refused to fund its demobilization.
Some 230 children from this group were demobilized in May, but UN observers
reported difficulties in reintegration. Human rights groups estimate that hundreds
of children remain in the ranks of Palipehutu-FNL.
Political Violence
In early 2008 killings on both sides of the political divide raised concerns about
violence as politicians began preparing for the 2010 elections. At least five persons
linked to the FNL and three persons linked to the Front for Burundian
Democracy (Frodebu), a political party, were murdered. Witnesses accused police,
National Intelligence Service (SNR) agents, local officials, and members of the
CNDD-FDD youth league. In March grenades were thrown at the homes of five
politicians opposed to the CNDD-FDD, recalling similar attacks in mid-2007.
Five CNDD-FDD officials and a police informant linked to the CNDD-FDD were
killed in early 2008, and attempts were made on the lives of two intelligence
agents and two other CNDD-FDD officials. In at least three cases, witnesses attributed
attacks to Palipehutu-FNL, while two other victims had been repeatedly
threatened by FNL members.
Police arrested three suspects for the grenade attacks, but a magistrate released
them due to lack of evidence. As of November, there had been no trials for any of
these attacks.
Following the resumption of combat in April, police, soldiers, and intelligence
agents arrested hundreds of suspected Palipehutu-FNL members, detaining many
for weeks without charge, beating some. Police and intelligence agents frequently
used former FDD combatants to harass, assault, and illegally arrest Palipehutu-
FNL members and others.
Repression of Political Opposition
In April former CNDD-FDD president Hussein Radjabu was sentenced to 13 years
in prison after being convicted with five others of threatening state security.
Radjabu was arrested in April 2007 after he lost his post in political in-fighting.
He had been detained for months in conditions that violated Burundian law. The
convictions are under appeal.
Twenty-one CNDD-FDD deputies including 19 loyal to Radjabu left the party in
2007. Another was expelled in early 2008, leading to deadlock in the National
Assembly. In June the CNDD-FDD president of the assembly asked the Constitutional Court to declare the seats empty. He did not seek a ruling on the
situation of deputies who had left the opposition Frodebu party. In a much-criticized,
hastily issued decision, the court held that the seats of the CNDD-FDD
defectors were occupied unconstitutionally, allowing the party to fill them with
loyalists. The decision did not enable Frodebu also to replace defectors. Three
defecting CNDD-FDD deputies were subsequently arrested; as of November two
remained in pre-trial detention on charges of threatening state security.
In late 2007, at least 71 members of opposition parties and movements, mostly
from the Union for Peace and Democracy (UPD-Zigamibanga) and the Movement
for Security and Democracy (MSD), were arrested. MSD chairperson Alexis
Sinduhije was arrested in November on charges of insulting the president,
based on documents seized in an illegal search at his headquarters.
Addressing Impunity
On October 23, a military tribunal convicted 15 soldiers for the killing of 31 civilians
in Muyinga in 2006; a year after the Nkurunziza government took power.
Although this was an important blow against impunity, no civilian officials implicated
in the case, including local administrators and intelligence agents, were
prosecuted. The primary Muyinga suspect, Colonel Vital Bangirinama, sentenced
to death in absentia, had fled Burundi in January after learning he was to be
arrested. A new criminal code before the National Assembly would eliminate the
death penalty.
Impunity continued for crimes from the war years and other more recent human
rights violations. Progress was slow in the trials of intelligence officers responsible
for killing four civilians in Kinama in 2006 and of police officers accused of
beating at least 20 civilians in Muramvya in 2007. Officers accused of abuses
failed to appear in court in September because the court failed to send them subpoenas,
and unknown individuals attempted to bribe and intimidate witnesses
not to testify.
Transitional Justice
A committee including representatives of government, the United Nations, and
civil society was formed in November 2007 to guide popular consultations on the
establishment of a truth and reconciliation commission and a special tribunal.
Although the UN Peacebuilding Fund, established by the UN Peacebuilding
Commission, contributed US$1 million, the committee did not organize consultations,
now scheduled for 2009. President Nkurunziza wrested control of the
process from the first vice president, contravening an agreement with the UN, and
was rebuked by the UN secretary-general. The government continued to urge
amnesty for war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide, despite UN
opposition.
Human Rights Defenders and Journalists
After three journalists held for allegedly threatening state security were freed in
2007, several months of relative press freedom followed. In August 2008, however,
judicial authorities interrogated representatives from the Burundian human
rights organization Ligue Iteka and a Burundian consultant for International Crisis
Group about sources of information critical of the government they had allegedly
passed to journalists. Gabriel Rufyiri, head of LObservatoire de Lutte contre la
Corruption et les Malversations Economiques (OLUCOME), detained for four
months in 2006 for criticizing official corruption, was interrogated twice in 2008,
once after criticizing the state budget.
In August, Jean Claude Kavumbagu, editor of the web-based Net Press, was
imprisoned on defamation charges after publishing a report that the president
had spent US$100,000 on a trip to China. Union activist Juvenal Rududura was
imprisoned for false declarations after he accused the minister of justice of corruption.
In September the director of Radio Publique Africaine (RPA) was interrogated
after the station criticized officials. Pressured by the National
Communications Council to apologize, the station expressed regret for some
journalistic errors, but otherwise stood by its reporting.
Violence against Women
In January the UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women
expressed concern over domestic and sexual violence in Burundi. The government
took some measures to combat violence against women. A proposed new
criminal code, currently before the National Assembly, explicitly defines the
crimes of rape and sexual violence, and provides stiffer penalties.
Key International Actors
The UN Human Rights Council renewed the mandate for the independent expert
on the situation of human rights in Burundi after the Burundian government,
encouraged by local human rights groups and EU diplomats dropped its opposition.
The government agreed to extend the mandate until a proposed national
human rights commission begins operating.
Human rights officers of the United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB),
successor to the ONUB peacekeeping mission, monitored and denounced human
rights abuses, although other sections of BINUB hesitated to criticize governmental
actions.
The UN Peacebuilding Fund began disbursing US$35 million pledged to Burundi,
including US$500,000 for the intelligence agency known for many abuses.
International donors supported police training and renovation of courts and prisons,
projects important to assuring human rights. The EU defended press freedom,
and the EU, UK, and US issued statements condemning the arrest of
Sinduhije. But they were silent on the expulsion of the 22 deputies, and failed to
send a proposed joint letter to the government expressing concerns about
impunity.
A new political directorate including South Africa and the EU facilitated peace
talks between the government and Palipehutu-FNL. An African Union force of
South African troops provided security to Palipehutu-FNL leaders upon their
return to Burundi, but planned to pull out after a December 31 deadline for a
peace agreement.
Burundi is due to be reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism of
the UN Human Rights Council in December 2008.
Central African Republic (CAR)
Civilians continue to suffer serious human rights abuses at the hands of multiple
armed groups active in the north of Central African Republic, which has been an
area of antigovernment insurgency since 2004. Loosely organized criminal gangs
known as zaraguinas that are not party to the conflict in CAR have also been
responsible for criminal abuse.
The CAR government and the major rebel groups signed a peace agreement in
June, but disagreements between rebels and the government over an amnesty
law passed by parliament in September threatened to derail the peace process.
Rebel leaders contended that the amnesty insulated government officials from
responsibility for war crimes.
Abuses in the North
Government security forces were responsible for the majority of human rights violations
in the northwest of CAR from 2005 to 2007. Abuses by government forces,
however, have diminished since most of the elite Presidential Guard (GP) forces,
which committed the most serious abuses, were withdrawn from the region in
mid-2007, in response to international concern. Taking the place of the GP in the
north were Central African Armed Forces (FACA) units, with well-trained commanders
installed in a deliberate effort to address indiscipline.
Although FACA soldiers were responsible for thefts and harassment of civilians in
2008, particularly at roadblocks and checkpoints along roads in the northwest,
violent abuses against civilians by FACA elements appeared to be isolated incidents
rather than systematic. In September the CAR government established an
office for international humanitarian law within the FACA that is responsible for
conveying the laws of war to members of the army.
However, civilians in the north continue to face violence and harassment at the
hands of multiple armed groups, and the government is failing to provide them
with protection. The FACA has yet to plug a security vacuum created by the withdrawal
of the GP, and rebel factions and criminal gangs have taken advantage of
this to commit abuses with complete impunity. In the northwest, rebel fighters from the Popular Army for the Restoration of the Republic and Democracy (APRD)
were responsible for unlawful killings, rapes and property thefts. APRD abuses
increased in 2008, with a high incidence of abuses in areas where none had
been reported one year earlier, thanks to the relative absence of government
security forces. Since January the Chadian National Army (ANT) has launched
cross-border raids on villages in northwestern CAR, killing civilians, burning villages,
and stealing cattle.
Lawlessness and the Zaraguinas
The past year has seen a sharp increase in the number, scope, and frequency of
attacks perpetrated by loosely organized criminal gangs known as zaraguinas,
which have come to constitute the single greatest threat to civilians in the north
of CAR. Zaraguinas are not parties to conflict in CAR but have goals that are purely
criminal and engage in tactics that include hostage-taking. Zaraguinas have
killed hostages when ransom demands were not met.
In July the United Nations estimated that 197,200 people in the north of the country
had been displaced due to insecurity, in many cases zaraguina attacks.
Zaraguina activities have had a deleterious impact on humanitarian operations in
the north of the country, with private transporters contracted by the UN to deliver
aid supplies frequently fired upon.
Lack of Accountability
The government has taken some steps to counter impunity in CAR by prosecuting
individual members of the CAR security forces found to be responsible for crimes
such as theft and assault, but for the most part the CAR government turned a
blind eye to abuses committed by its forces. Senior GP commanders responsible
for abuses in 2006-2007 that may have been at the level of war crimes have
never been brought to trial or even disciplined. Diplomats in Bangui urged CAR
President Francois Boziz to institute judicial proceedings against Eugne
Ngakosset, the commander of a GP unit that has been implicated in widespread
atrocities in the northwest. Instead, Ngakosset was promoted to the rank of captain
and placed in charge of a GP security brigade. 
Activities of the International Criminal Court
On May 24, 2008, Belgian authorities arrested Jean-Pierre Bemba, leader of the
Movement for the Liberation of Congo (MLC). He was transferred to The Hague,
where the International Criminal Court (ICC) charged him with four counts of war
crimes and two counts of crimes against humanity, all allegedly committed in the
south of CAR between October 2002 and March 2003. In June 2008 the office of
the prosecutor was permitted to include two additional counts, one of war crimes
and one of crimes against humanity. In May 2007 the office of the prosecutor had
announced that it would monitor more recent events to determine whether an
investigation into crimes committed in the north of the country would warrant
investigation. On June 10, 2008, ICC Prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo addressed
a letter to President Boziz noting that acts of violence committed in the north of
the country would require sustained attention.
Ocampos letter resulted in a letter from President Boziz to UN Secretary-General
Ban-Ki Moon in August, wherein Boziz asked the United Nations to intercede in
any possible ICC investigations of crimes in the north of the country pursuant to
article 16 of the Rome Statute of the ICC, which empowers the Security Council to
suspend court proceedings for up to 12 months renewable if required to maintain
international peace and security. Security Council intercession is highly unlikely
given that the only ongoing ICC proceedings in CAR pertain to crimes committed
in the south of the country in the 2002-2003 period, and there are no ICC investigations
concerning northern CAR at this point.
Key International Actors
The United Nations Peace Building Support Office in the Central African Republic
(BONUCA) has been present in Bangui since 2000 with a mandate to support
peace efforts. BONUCA raises human rights cases with CAR government officials.
In September 2007 the UN Security Council approved a resolution to dispatch a
European Union-United Nations hybrid civilian protection mission to Chad and
the Central African Republic. The UN humanitarian component of the mission, the
United Nations Mission in Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT), and the EU military component, the European Union Force (EUFOR Tchad/RCA), established
a base in Birao in northeast CAR in 2008.
In 2008, the Economic and Monetary Union of Central Africa (CEMAC) established
the Mission for the Consolidation of Peace in Central Africa (MICOPAX), a peacebuilding
mission incorporating combat troops, police, gendarmes and a civilian
element mandated to help revive political dialogue in CAR. MICOPAX assumed
operational responsibility in CAR from a predecessor force, the Multinational
Force of the Central African Economic and Monetary Community (FOMUC), which
was deployed by CEMAC in 2002 to support the regime of then-president Ange-
Flix Patass.
Although MINURCAT personnel have yet to deploy to Birao, the presence of EUFOR
patrols has helped stabilize the fragile tri-border zone where CAR, Chad, and
Sudan meet, and is reported by the UN to have deterred attacks against civilians.
EUFOR troops airlifted nine humanitarian aid workers out of Ouandja, 120 kilometers
south of Birao, following an exchange of gunfire between unidentified armed
groups in November 2008.
The government of Chad wields a great deal of influence in CAR, especially since
President Bozizs ascension to the presidency in 2003. A significant number of
the soldiers who helped Boziz seize power in 2003 were Chadian nationals,
many of them placed at Bozizs disposal with the consent of Chadian President
Idriss Dby Itno. The Chadian government maintains military forces in the north of
CAR, and provides the 100 commandos that make up President Bozizs personal
security detail. President Boziz cancelled a planned trip to Sudan in 2006 after
Chad, which is engaged in a bitter proxy war with Sudan, threatened to withdraw
military assistance.
French military intervention in December 2006 helped quash rebellion by the
Union of Democratic Forces for Unity, allowing the government to regain control of
the northeast. Both France and South Africa maintain defense cooperation agreements
with Bangui.
CAR is due to be reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism of the
UN Human Rights Council in May 2009.
Chad
Political violence continues to destabilize Chad and the human rights climate
remains poor. More than 400,000 civilians live in refugee and displaced persons
camps along Chads eastern border with Sudan, at risk of rights abuses, including
child recruitment and gender-based violence. Many conflict-affected civilians are
situated in rural and remote parts of eastern Chad that insecurity puts off limits to
humanitarian actors, including some areas under the control of Chadian rebel
groups.
The past year saw a dramatic escalation in the three-year-old proxy conflict
between Chad and Sudan. A February coup attempt by Chadian rebels backed by
Sudan nearly toppled the government of Chadian President Idriss Deby Itno, and
a raid in May by Sudanese rebels backed by Chad brought fighting to the streets
of a suburb of Khartoum. Efforts by the African Union to mend relations between
NDjamena and Khartoum have proved fruitless.
February 2008 Coup Attempt
Chadian rebels backed by Sudan invaded Chad from bases in Darfur in January.
By February 2, rebels and government forces were fighting gun battles in
NDjamena, Chads capital. Government tanks and helicopters caused serious
destruction to civilian installations, including the central market. More than 400
civilians were killed and over 1,000 wounded before the rebels retreated back to
Darfur the next day. Spillover from the fighting left Chadian rebels in northern
Cameroon, along with 30,000 Chadian refugees.
In the immediate aftermath of the attempted coup detat, three prominent opposition
leaders were arrested. Two were subsequently released, but Ibni Oumar
Mahamat Saleh, the spokesman for a coalition of opposition parties, disappeared.
Suspected rebel sympathizers were subject to arbitrary arrest by security
forces, as were members of ethnic groups associated with rebel movements.
While in detention, many civilians were tortured and most were denied due
process.
In March the government convened a Commission of Inquiry to investigate crimes
committed in the wake of the February coup attempt. The Commission issued a
report in September that implicated President Debys Presidential Guard in the
disappearance of Ibni Oumar Mahamat Saleh and found that members of the
Chadian security forces were responsible for crimes including arbitrary arrests,
unlawful killings, torture, and rape. Chadian government helicopters were
charged with indiscriminate attacks against civilians. The Commissions report
represents an important step toward accountability, but did not identify specific
perpetrators of abuses. A follow-up body established by the government to continue
the work of the Commission is composed of 10 ministers and the prime minister
a lack of independence that suggests limited political willingness to push
investigations forward.
EU-UN Civilian Protection Force
In September 2007 the UN Security Council approved a European Union-United
Nations hybrid operation for the protection of refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs) in eastern Chad. Deployment of the UN humanitarian component,
the United Nations Mission in Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT), was
subject to extensive delays, and its protection activities in refugee camps and
displacement sites were negligible in 2008.
Deployment of the military component, the European Union Force (EUFOR
Tchad/RCA), began in February 2008, and EUFORs 3,300 troops have been successful
in fostering a sense of security in some areas of eastern Chad, particularly
in large towns, refugee camps, and IDP sites. However, IDPs and other conflictaffected
civilians outside large towns received little protection from EUFOR, and
attacks against humanitarian actors in eastern Chad increased despite EUFORs
presence in the field.
In December the UN Security Council is expected to expand the operation by
adding up to 3,000 personnel and substituting European Union soldiers with UN
peacekeeping troops.
Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons
Eastern Chad is host to over 220,000 refugees from Darfur and more than
180,000 IDPs. Most of the population is concentrated in official camps in the
Chad-Sudan border zone, but thousands of IDPs live in remote unofficial sites.
Despite ongoing violence and insecurity, aid agencies reduced IDP food rations.
Coupled with rising commodity prices, this put pressure on IDPs to return to their
villages to cultivate. Camps for IDPs and refugees have become militarized. There
is a high incidence of gender-based abuses in camps, including domestic violence,
rape, early marriage, forced marriage, and child trafficking. Tasks, such as
collecting firewood, expose women and girls to sexual violence. Threats and
attacks against humanitarian aid workers have prompted many organizations to
pull out of the region, leaving many civilians without access to aid.
The Use and Recruitment of Child Soldiers
The use and recruitment of child soldiers by government forces and allied paramilitary
groups is ongoing. The recruitment of children into the Chadian National
Army (ANT) is routine in internally displaced persons sites in the Goz Beida area
of eastern Chad. Children in Sudanese refugee camps in eastern Chad are also
subject to recruitment, primarily by the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM), a
Sudanese rebel group that receives backing from the Chadian government.
The government reached a formal agreement with the United Nations Childrens
Fund to demobilize all children from the ANT in May 2007, but more than 93 percent
of the 512 children released from the government army to date were former
members of rebel factions that joined the ANT under the auspices of peace
accords. Demobilization of child soldiers from the ANT itself has been negligible.
In August 2008 the UN Security Council working group on children in armed conflict
confirmed the continued use and recruitment of child soldiers by all parties.
The working group noted that its recommendations issued in a September 2007
report had not been acted upon by the government.
World Bank Pipeline Project
In 1998 the World Bank loaned US$1.2 billion for a pipeline between oil fields in
southern Chad and an offloading terminal in Cameroon, kick-starting Chads
petroleum industry. The World Banks controversial Revenue Management
Program obligated the government to devote the bulk of its oil revenues to priority
sectors, such as health and education. In September, amid charges that government
officials were unwilling to meet these terms, the Revenue Management
Program was terminated. Citing the governments non-compliance with the loan
terms, the World Bank secured the early repayment of the outstanding balance,
ending the Banks involvement in the pipeline project and freeing the government
of its obligation to earmark revenues to poverty reduction. Government revenue
over the lifetime of the World Bank project totaled at least US$2.5 billion.
Hissne Habr Trial
Senegals parliament passed a constitutional amendment in July removing the
final legal obstacle to judicial proceedings against former Chadian president
Hissne Habr, who stands accused of crimes against humanity and torture during
his 1982-1990 rule. The new legislation amended a 2007 law that permitted
the prosecution of cases of genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and
torture, including crimes committed outside of Senegal. The new law encompasses
crimes committed prior to the enactment of the 2007 law.
Prosecutors are conducting interviews with victims and former officials of the
Habr regime and are examining fourteen complaints filed in September, alongside
documentary evidence from the files of the Bureau of Documentation and
Security, Chads former political police. Based on a review of the evidence, the
prosecution will decide whether to file formal charges.
In August prosecutors in Chad accused Habr of providing support to rebel
groups involved in the failed assault on NDjamena in February, and sentenced
him to death in absentia. Senegals Justice Minister expressed concerns that the
decision would interfere with Senegals proceedings against Habr, but Chadian
authorities insisted that the ruling pertained only to the events of February 2008.
Key International Actors
France has more than 1,000 troops permanently stationed in Chad and has provided
military intelligence, logistical assistance, medical services, and ammunition
to the Chadian military. During the attempted coup detat in February, French
military advisors provided intelligence to their Chadian counterparts, and France
arranged for the delivery of tank ammunition to the beleaguered government
forces on the night of February 2. In the aftermath of the February events, pressure
from France was instrumental in compelling the government to establish the
Commission of Inquiry to investigate possible war crimes. France, with other international
actors, will be pivotal in ensuring the follow-up commission is more
appropriately composed than at the time of writing, and works rigorously and
effectively.
The United States continues to train Chadian commandos in counterterrorism
under the Trans-Saharan Counter-Terrorism Initiative. However, in 2008 security
assistance to Chad came under scrutiny in the US Congressin September
Senator Richard J. Durbin wrote to US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice questioning
the provision of military assistance despite Chads poor human rights
record. The US Child Soldiers Accountability Act, which was signed into law in
October, provides for the prosecution of any individual on US soil for the use and
recruitment of child soldiers, even if the children were recruited or served as soldiers
outside the US. Given the widespread use of child soldiers in Chadian government
forces, the new US law could potentially be applied to Chadian government
officials.
Chad is due to be reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism of
the UN Human Rights Council in May 2009.
Cte dIvoire
At the end of 2008, hopes that a March 2007 peace accord would end the six-year
political and military stalemate between government forces and northern-based
rebels were dampened by insufficient progress in disarmament, elections preparations,
and restoration of state authority in the north; an increase in criminal and
political violence; and yet another postponement of the presidential election that
was planned for November 2008.
Government forces and New Forces rebels continue to engage in predatory and
abusive behavior, including widespread extortion at checkpoints and sexual violence
against girls and women, with near-complete impunity. The increasingly
entrenched culture of impunity led to serious concerns about prospects for peaceful
elections and long-term stability.
Cte dIvoires key partners, notably the United Nations, the European Union,
France, and the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), were
reluctant to bring public pressure to bear on either the government or the rebels
for the slow pace of election preparations, much less for the countrys worrying
human rights situation.
Efforts to End the Political-Military Stalemate
Since the crisis erupted, the UN, France, ECOWAS, and the African Union have all
spearheaded initiatives to end the political-military stalemate in Cte dIvoire.
Following a series of unfulfilled peace agreements and the October 2005 expiry of
the five-year constitutional mandate of President Laurent Gbagbo, the UN Security
Council postponed elections for one year under resolution 1633 (2005). Thenprime
minister Charles Konan Bannys efforts to implement a roadmap to elections
soon deadlocked. In response, the Security Council adopted resolution 1721
(2006) extending the mandates of both Gbagbo and Banny for 12 more months,
and granting sweeping powers to the prime minister. Soon after its adoption,
however, President Gbagbo made clear that he would not accept key provisions of
the resolution.
In March 2007 Gbagbo and rebel leader Guillaume Soro signed a peace accord
negotiated with the help of Burkina Faso President Blaise Compaor. The
Ouagadougou Agreement, the first to have been directly negotiated by the countrys
belligerents, resulted in the appointment of Soro as prime minister in a unity
government and set forth an ambitious 10-month timetable, which, if followed,
would have led to a presidential election by early 2008.
Implementation of the Ouagadougou Agreement
Throughout the year target dates for completion of key provisions of the
Ouagadougou Agreementdisarmament and reintegration of combatants, reunification
of defense and security forces, restoration of state authority in the north,
and voter registrationwere missed and pushed further and further back.
At this writing, only 11,364 of some 35,000 rebels and 1,000 of approximately
24,000 militiamen have disarmed. Shockingly, only 10 serviceable weapons have
been collected during the exercise. Observers blamed the delay on the lack of
political will by both sides, disagreement over the number of high-ranking rebels
to be integrated into the national army, and inadequate funding for reintegration
programs. Meanwhile, violent demonstrations by disgruntled ex-combatants and
militiamen caused instability in the north and west. Inadequate progress in disarmament
in turn effectively stalled plans to reintegrate several thousand rebels
into the national army and police force.
Attempts by the government to restore its authority throughout the north were
largely unsuccessful. While some mayors and health and education workers managed
to return, the redeployment of police, judicial, and corrections personnel
was effectively blocked by rebel authorities.
The citizen identification process that ended in September 2008 resulted in the
delivery of approximately 750,000 substitute birth certificates. However, the voter
registration process that commenced on September 15 was interrupted several
times due to attacks on registration offices by pro-government youth groups.
Politically Motivated Violence
There were several incidents of politically motivated violence by pro-government
groups against real or perceived members of the political opposition. In western
Cte dIvoire several citizens were prevented from attending citizenship hearings
due to the presence of armed militiamen. In August 2008 pro-government youths
stormed the hotel in which the secretary-general of the opposition Rally of
Republicans (RDR) party was staying. And in October and November there were
numerous attacks on voter registration centers in the commercial capital Abidjan
and in the west during which youths harassed and threatened election workers
and those standing in line, and stole computers and other registration materials.
The attacks disrupted the process and, on one occasion, provoked a temporary
suspension of voter registration.
However, with few exceptions, political leaders from all parties travelled the country
unimpeded. In May President Gbagbo publicly called on a notorious pro-government
student group implicated in committing violent acts in favor of the ruling
party to refrain from such acts.
There were few instances of the vitriolic and xenophobic rhetoric that prevailed at
the height of the crisis in 2002-2003. In August the National Assembly passed a
law criminalizing racism, xenophobia, and tribalism, providing for sentences of
up to 20 years if the infraction is committed in the media, during a political gathering,
or by a government functionary. Critics noted that certain provisions of the
law are written so broadly that they threaten freedom of expression.
Extortion and Racketeering
Countrywide, both rebels and members of the police, gendarmerie, army, and
customs engaged in frequent acts of extortion, racketeering, intimidation, and
physical assault at roadside checkpoints. Government effortsincluding an open
acknowledgment of and a parliamentary inquiry into the problem, sting operations,
and limited efforts to prosecute alleged perpetratorshad at years end
failed to considerably reduce the level of these crimes. Racketeering was blamed
for elevating already high food prices. UN efforts to dismantle numerous checkpoints
were usually followed by the mounting of fresh barricades.
Criminality and the Rule of Law
Throughout the year, ordinary Ivorians were subjected to frequent acts of violent
crime, including armed robbery, highway banditry, murder, torture, and sexual
abuse, for which the perpetrators enjoyed near-total impunity. These incidents
most frequently occurred in the west, in the rebel-held north, and within a buffer
zone formerly occupied by international peacekeepers. Throughout 2008 neither
the government nor the rebel leadership took significant steps to investigate or
hold accountable those responsible.
In the government-controlled south, deficiencies in the judicial system, such as
widespread corruption and lack of independence from the executive branch, pose
a significant impediment to victims seeking justice and to rebuilding respect for
the rule of law. Those unable to bribe judges and other officials are routinely
denied justice.
Rebel leaders in the north appear to lack both capacity and will to hold accountable
members of their increasingly fractured forces. Internecine struggles
between commanders led to numerous acts of arbitrary detention, torture, forced
disappearance, and murder by feuding rebel bands. Limited efforts at justice are
meted out arbitrarily by zone commanders in complete disregard for even most
basic due process. Extended pretrial detention is commonplace, including for
those accused of petty crimes, and there are credible reports that members of the
New Forces use beatings and torture to extract confessions.
The UN conducted numerous training sessions with police, judicial, and corrections
personnel, and together with the EU rehabilitated court buildings and corrections
facilities in the north that were destroyed during the 2002-2003 hostilities.
Inter-communal clashes over land rights in the west resulted in numerous deaths
and other abuses and slowed the return of tens of thousands of people displaced
during the 2002-2003 armed conflict.
Sexual Violence
There were frequent incidents of sexual violence against women and girls, including
those committed during assaults by armed robbers on public transportation
vehicles, and to a lesser extent at checkpoints manned by New Forces rebels and
government security forces. In some cases, particularly in western Cte dIvoire,
victims of sexual violence are targeted on the basis of their nationality or ethnic
group. Survivors access to health and legal services is extremely limited. Efforts
to prosecute cases are hampered by deficiencies in the judicial system, particularly
in the north, and the regular dismissal of cases due to out-of-court settlements
between families of the victims and perpetrators.
Accountability for Past Abuses
The UN Security Council has still not made public the findings of the UN
Commission of Inquiry into serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law since September 2002, which was handed to the UN secretarygeneral
in November 2004. In September 2003 the Ivorian government accepted
the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court (ICC) over serious crimes.
However, as in previous years, the government consistently undermined a
planned ICC mission to assess the possibility of opening an investigation into
such crimes.
Key International Actors
Since 2004 the ruling party has effectively employed intimidation and political
pressure to neutralize the criticism and minimize the influence of the UN, EU, and
France. Throughout 2008 these key partners and ECOWAS remained reluctant to
publicly criticize Ivorian actors for the slow implementation of the Ouagadougou
Agreement, much less for their role in perpetuating serious human rights problems.
Since 2004 the UN has maintained a peacekeeping mission, the UN Operation in
Cte dIvoire (UNOCI), which at years end had 8,000 peacekeepers deployed
countrywide, supported by some 1,800 French troops. In 2008 the UN Peacebuilding Fund and Support Office approved $5 million to support reintegration
programs for ex-combatants and other programs.
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC)
Violence, impunity, and horrific human rights abuses continue in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, two years after historic elections were expected to bring stability.
Early in 2008 a peace agreement brought hope to eastern Congo, but combat
between government and rebel forces resumed in August. During the year, hundreds
of civilians were killed, thousands of women and girls were raped, and a
further 400,000 people fled their homes, pushing the total number of displaced
persons in North and South Kivu to over 1.2 million.
In western Congo, state authorities used violence and intimidation against political
opponents, killing over 200 protestors and others in Bas Congo and arresting
scores of supposed opponents, many of them from Equateur province, on charges
of plotting against the government. Officials harassed press and civil society critical
of the government.
Violence in Eastern Congo
Hopes for peace soared in January when the government and 22 armed groups
signed a ceasefire agreement and the government launched the Amani Program
to coordinate peace efforts. But slow progress in implementing the agreement,
plus frequent violations of the ceasefire, gave way in late August to serious fighting
in North Kivu between the forces of rebel commander Laurent Nkundas
National Congress for the Defense of the People (CNDP) and the Congolese
national army. In October the CNDP stopped just short of taking Goma and unilaterally
declared a ceasefire, demanding talks with the government. The CNDP,
claiming to protect people of Rwandan descent and particularly Tutsi, also fought
the Coalition of Congolese Patriotic Resistance (PARECO), made up of other
Congolese ethnic groups and the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda
(FDLR), a group including Congolese and Rwandan Hutu, some of whom had participated
in the 1994 genocide in Rwanda.
All parties to the combat committed grave human rights abuses, including killing
hundreds of civilians, forcibly recruiting children and adults for military service,
and widespread looting. Sexual violence against women and girls continued at its
previously horrifying rate with more than 2,200 cases of rape recorded from January to June in North Kivu province alone, likely representing only a small portion
of the total. Dozens of other women and girls were reported to have been
raped following resumption of combat in August.
Violence in Bas Congo
In March police and other state agents used excessive force in quelling protests
by the Bundu Dia Kongo (BDK), a political-religious group that promotes greater
autonomy for Bas Congo province. Some protestors, armed with sticks and
stones, used violence against police or officials. Police used disproportionate
force, including grenades and machine guns against the protestors. As in operations
in 2007, the police deliberately killed persons who were wounded, running
away, or otherwise in no position to threaten them. Some 200 BDK supporters
and others were killed, and BDK meeting places were destroyed. The police
attempted to hide the extent of the carnage by dumping dozens of bodies in the
Congo River and hastily burying others in mass graves. Police arrested over 150
persons suspected of supporting the BDK and tortured or ill-treated some of
them. On March 21, the government revoked the authorization of the BDK to operate
as a social and cultural organization, effectively making it illegal.
Political Repression
Security forces targeted political opponents, particularly those from Equateur
province, the home region of former presidential candidate Jean-Pierre Bemba.
They killed at least five and illegally detained scores of others, many of whom
were tortured or ill-treated. At least a dozen detainees remain unaccounted for at
this writing. Detainees were frequently accused of plotting a coup, but as of
October 2008, no cases had been brought to trial.
On July 6, Republican Guards killed Daniel Boteti, the vice-president of the
Kinshasa provincial assembly and a member of Bembas Congolese Liberation
Movement (MLC). In May and June security agents arrested at least 15 persons
from Equateur. They were held incommunicado for several months before 12 of
them were transferred to Makala central prison, some of them showing visible
signs of torture. In July another eight people from Equateur were arrested, illegally detained, and brutally beaten. Government officials refused to answer questions
from United Nations human rights monitors about the location of other detainees.
In July the government released 258 prisoners from Makala central prison, including
many who had been illegally detained since March 2007. The decision was
taken to resolve problems of overcrowding in the jail and did not appear to have
been based on a judicial review of the cases. At this writing, at least 200 other
political prisoners remain in detention without trial.
Threats to Journalists and Human Rights Defenders
On March 7, Nsimba Embete Ponte, editor of LInterprte, was illegally detained at
the National Intelligence Agency (ANR) prison in Kinshasa for writings critical of
President Kabila. His colleague, Davin Ntondo Nzovuangu, was arrested several
days later. After the private television station Global TV broadcast coverage of a
press conference by opposition parliamentarian Ne Muanda Nsemi, the spiritual
leader of the BDK, state agents raided its offices on September 12. They then
arrested Global TV journalist Daudet Lukombo, charged him with inciting rebellion
for his role in the broadcast, and confiscated essential broadcasting equipment.
Two other journalists who covered the same press conference also reported
receiving death threats.
In Ituri, northeastern Congo, activists working for the local human rights organization
Justice Plus were threatened and fled the country after they called for justice
for crimes committed in the district. In North Kivu a womens rights activist was
threatened when she sought justice for an attack against her family by Congolese
soldiers.
Justice and Accountability
Near total impunity for grave violations of international humanitarian law continues,
with very few perpetrators arrested and prosecuted by national authorities.
In a February 2008 report, the UN special rapporteur on violence against women
concluded that due to political interference and corruption, perpetrators, especially
those who belong to the State security forces, go unpunished. In one
exceptional case, a military court in Katanga continued proceedings against Gedeon Kyungu Mutanga and 25 others accused of committing war crimes and
crimes against humanity between 2004 and 2006, one of the largest war crimes
trials in Congos history.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) provided some hope for victims seeking justice.
On February 6, the ICC took custody of Ituri warlord Mathieu Ngudjolo Chui,
who was charged with war crimes and crimes against humanity. On September
26, the court confirmed the charges against Ngudjolo and Germain Katanga,
another Ituri warlord arrested in 2007. The case is expected to go to trial in 2009.
On April 28, the court unsealed an arrest warrant for Jean-Bosco Ntaganda, military
chief of staff for Nkundas CNDP, for crimes allegedly committed in Ituri.
Procedural errors in the prosecution of Thomas Lubanga Dyilo, the first Congolese
arrested by the court, delayed the proceedings and raised questions about the
efficacy of ICC justice in the minds of some victims.
At the request of the ICC, Belgian authorities arrested Bemba in May to face
charges of responsibility for war crimes and crimes allegedly carried out by his
forces during the 2002-2003 conflict in the Central African Republic. The ICC was
also investigating the conduct of Bembas troops in Congo, but has not filed
charges in that case.
Key International Actors
The escalating crisis in eastern Congo spurred diplomats from the European
Union, African Union, United States, and UN to intervene to facilitate the January
peace agreement and to assist in its implementation. After serious combat
resumed and Nkundas troops approached Goma in October, international leaders
flocked to Congo and Rwanda, seeking an end to the fighting and the ensuing
humanitarian crisis.
MONUC, the UN peacekeeping force, fulfilled its mandate of protecting civilians in
some places, but its limited numbers and capacities prevented the force from
providing effective protection in many situations. When confronted by violations
to the ceasefire, MONUC troops attempted to halt advances by Nkundas CNDP
but not those of Congolese army soldiers, leading some Congolese to question the neutrality of MONUC. In some cases, angry civilians stoned UN troops whom
they believed had taken sides in the conflict.
Human rights violations in western Congo received less attention than combatrelated
abuses in the east. Few international actors publicly criticized the excessive
force used by the police in Bas Congo, or the illegal detention and torture of
political opponents. In April the Belgian government raised some of these concerns.
In protest, Congo recalled its ambassador from Belgium.
In March the UN Human Rights Council failed to renew the mandate of the independent
expert on the human rights situation in the Congo despite the evident
need for continued monitoring. Once the Congolese government made clear its
opposition to a continued mandate, EU states failed to honor pledges to support
the post. In September key donor nations agreed to establish the post of independent
special advisor on human rights linked to the peace process in eastern
Congo, but by November they had not named a person to the position.
Congo is due to be reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism of
the UN Human Rights Council in December 2009.
Eritrea
In less than two decades of independence, the government of President Isayas
Afewerki has established a totalitarian grip on Eritrea. Increasing numbers of citizens
are fleeing oppression and seeking refuge in neighboring countries and
beyond.
President Isayass government controls all levers of power: political, economic,
social, journalistic, and religious. A constitution approved by referendum in 1997
remains unimplemented. No national election has ever been held, and an interim
parliament has not met since 2002. The judiciary exists only as an instrument of
control. The press is entirely government-owned. No private civil society organizations
are sanctioned; all are arms of the government or the sole political party,
the Peoples Front for Democracy and Justice (PFDJ). International human rights
organizations are denied entry.
Isayas uses Ethiopias failure to permit demarcation of the border with Eritrea as
the excuse to justify his repressive rule, claiming that the country must remain on
a war footing. In 2008 he said that elections will not be held for decades because
they polarize society vertically. He declared he will remain in full control until
Eritrea is secure, as long as it takes.
Suppression of Free Expression
Dissent in any form has been ruthlessly suppressed since 11 PFDJ leaders were
arrested in September 2001 for questioning the presidents leadership. They
remain detained without charge or trial in a remote maximum-security prison in
solitary confinement. The independent press was destroyed in 2001 and its editors
and publishers, except those who managed to flee, remain detained. In 2008
Reporters Without Borders ranked Eritrea last of 173 countries on its Press
Freedom Index. An Asmara-based British reporter was expelled in 2008 after he
refused a demand from the Ministry of Information for the names of sources for
his report that veterans of the war of independence complained about life in
Eritrea. More than 40 community leaders were detained in September 2008 for no
apparent reason other than that they had complained about Isayass economic
policies at public meetings.
Prison Conditions and Torture
Detention conditions are harsh. There are generally no trials or terms of confinement;
detention lasts as long as the government chooses. No independent monitoring
organization has access to Eritrean prisons. Former detainees and guards
report that prisoners are packed into unventilated cargo containers under extreme
temperatures or are held in dark and cramped underground cells. Torture is common,
as are indefinite solitary confinement, starvation rations, lack of sanitation
and medical care, and hard labor. Of 31 political leaders and journalists arrested
in 2001, nine are reported to have died. Other deaths in captivity have also been
reported. For example, the family of a founder of the Eritrean Liberation Frontan
armed pre-independence groupwho was arrested in 2005, learned of his death
in jail in 2008 only when called to collect his body.
Military Conscription and Arrests
Under a 1995 decree, all men between ages 18 and 50, and women between 18
and 27, must serve 18 months of military service. In fact, men serve indefinitely
and boys under 18 years of age increasingly report being conscripted. In 2008 the
World Bank estimated that 320,000 Eritreans are in the military. Conscripts are
used as labor on infrastructure and projects benefitting military commanders.
Working conditions are severe. Dozens of conscripts have died from intense heat,
malnutrition, and lack of medical care; female conscripts are often victims of
rape.
Eritreans flee the country by the thousands despite shoot-to-kill orders for anyone
caught crossing the border. When Eritrea deployed troops to the border and
clashed with Djiboutian forces in early 2008, at least 40 soldiers deserted. A
refugee camp in northern Ethiopia became so cramped in 2008 that the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees opened two new camps to accommodate
new arrivals. Thousands of Eritreans escape through Sudan to Egypt and
Libya despite efforts by Sudanese officials and Eritrean intelligence agents to
return truckloads of people. Over 2,500 Eritreans arrived in Israel, mostly by way
of Egypt, in the first nine months of 2008. In June 2008 Egypt forcibly returned
about 1,200 refugees to Eritrea. Although women with children were soon released, single women and most men were incarcerated at Wia, a notorious military
camp near the Red Sea.
In 2008, President Isayas claimed that international reports of increasing Eritrean
refugees are deliberate distortions and that defections are caused by an orchestrated,
organized operation financed by the CIA.
Unable to staunch the flow of escapees, the government uses collective punishment
to extort money. Once the government identifies those who have evaded or
fled service, it fines their families at least 50,000 nakfa (US$3,300); if the family
cannot pay, it imprisons family members or seizes their land. No law authorizes
either practice.
Religious Persecution
The government permits members of only Orthodox Christian, Catholic, and
Lutheran churches and traditional Islam to worship in Eritrea. Although four other
denominations applied for registration in 2002, none has been registered.
Members of unregistered churches, especially Protestant sects, are persecuted.
Over 3,000 members of unregistered churches are incarcerated. Many are beaten
and otherwise abused to compel them to renounce their faiths. Some are
released after a month or two, but others are held indefinitely. Youths who
protested confiscation of religious books at a military training school in 2008
were locked into shipping containers.
Recognized religious groups have not been spared. In 2006 the government
removed the 81-year-old patriarch of the Eritrean Orthodox Church after he
refused to interfere with a renewal movement within the church. He has been in
solitary confinement since May 2007. Members of the renewal movement have
been arrested and abused in the same fashion as members of non-recognized
churches. In 2008 the regime revoked the exemption from military service of most
Orthodox priests.
The government has also interfered with the Roman Catholic Church. It has taken
over church schools, health clinics, and other social service facilities. Since
November 2007 it expelled at least 14 foreign Catholic missionaries by refusing to
extend their residency permits.
Relations with Neighboring Countries
Tensions with Ethiopia remain high. Ethiopia has not implemented the 2002 border
demarcation recommended by the Border Commission established under an
armistice agreement that Ethiopia and Eritrea signed at the end of their 1998-
2000 war. The commissions decision was supposed to be binding, but Ethiopia
refuses to permit demarcation to the extent that the demarcation awards the village
of Badme, the flashpoint of the war, to Eritrea.
In July 2008 the United Nations disbanded a peacekeeping force that had been
patrolling the border. Eritrea had heavily restricted the forces activities by denying
it access to fuel and to large sections of the border, and the opportunity to
engage in aerial observation. Heavily armed Ethiopian and Eritrean troops are
now within meters of each other.
As in previous years, in 2008 a UN team monitoring an arms embargo on Somalia
accused Eritrea of smuggling weapons to insurgents fighting the Somali transitional
government and Ethiopian troops in Somalia. Eritrea hosts a faction of the
Somali armed opposition led by Hassan Dahir Aweys, as well as several Ethiopian
armed opposition groups, consistent with Eritreas policy of supporting armed
groups fighting the Ethiopian government.
In early 2008 Eritrea launched border incursions against Djibouti. On June 10, the
Eritrean military opened fire on Djiboutian troops after Djibouti ignored an ultimatum
to return Eritrean troops, including officers, who had deserted. The clash
resulted in 35 deaths and dozens of wounded, according to a UN investigation.
Although the UN did not receive access to Eritrea to investigate the incursions, it
concluded that Eritrea was the aggressor.
Key International Actors
Eritrea depends heavily on remittances from Eritreans living abroad, including a 2
percent tax on foreign incomes. Because of Eritreas repressive policies, remittances
have fallen, from 41 percent of GDP in 2005, to 23 percent in 2007.
As a result, Eritrea still depends on substantial foreign aid despite Isayass policy
of self-sufficiency. In 2008, the European Union announced it will provide 115 million between 2008 and 2013. The World Bank announced US$29.5 million in
grants for electrification and for early childhood health and education.
The United States provides no direct assistance partly because Isayas, angered by
US support of Ethiopia, refuses its aid. Nevertheless, the US contributed US$3.1
million through UNICEF and other channels. The US did not in 2008 declare
Eritrea a state sponsor of terrorism as it had earlier threatened to do because of
Eritreas support of Somali groups the US regards as terrorists. However, in
October the US government did ban arms sales to Eritrea on the basis that it is
not fully cooperating with anti-terrorism efforts.
Despite Eritreas efforts to encourage financial assistance from Iran, China, and
Middle Eastern countries, funding from those sources remains modest.
A 60 percent Canadian and 40 percent Eritrean government-owned gold-mining
venture in Bisha, western Eritrea, is scheduled to begin in 2010.
Eritreas human rights record is due to be reviewed under the Universal Periodic
Review mechanism of the UN Human Rights Council in December 2009.
Ethiopia
The Ethiopian governments human rights record remains poor, marked by an
ever-hardening intolerance towards meaningful political dissent or independent
criticism. Ethiopian military forces have continued to commit war crimes and
other serious abuses with impunity in the course of counterinsurgency campaigns
in Ethiopias eastern Somali Region and in neighboring Somalia.
Local-level elections in April 2008 provided a stark illustration of the extent to
which the government has successfully crippled organized opposition of any
kindthe ruling party and its affiliates won more than 99 percent of all constituencies,
and the vast majority of seats were uncontested. In 2008 the government
launched a direct assault on civil society by introducing legislation that
would criminalize most independent human rights work and subject NGOs to pervasive
interference and control.
Political Repression
The limited opening of political space that preceded Ethiopias 2005 elections
has been entirely reversed. Government opponents and ordinary citizens alike
face repression that discourages and punishes free expression and political activity.
Ethiopian government officials regularly subject government critics or perceived
opponents to harassment, arrest, and even torture, often reflexively accusing
them of membership in anti-peace or anti-people organizations. Farmers
who criticize local leaders face threats of losing vital agricultural inputs such as
fertilizer or the selective enforcement of debts owed to the state. The net result is
that in most of Ethiopia, and especially in the rural areas where the overwhelming
majority of the population lives, there is no organized opposition to the ruling
Ethiopian Peoples Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF).
The local-level elections in April 2008 were for kebele and wereda administrations,
which provide essential government services and humanitarian assistance,
and are often the institutions used to directly implement repressive government
policies. In the vast majority of constituencies there were no opposition candidates
at all, and candidates aligned with the EPRDF won more than 99 percent of
all available seats.
Where opposition candidates did contest they faced abuse and improper procedural
obstacles to registration. Candidates in Ethiopias Oromia region were
detained, threatened with violence by local officials, and accused of affiliation to
the rebel Oromo Liberation Front (OLF). Oromia, Ethiopias most populous region,
has long suffered from heavy-handed government repression, with students,
activists, or critics of rural administrations regularly accused of being OLF operatives.
Such allegations often lead to arbitrary imprisonment and torture.
War Crimes and Other Abuses by Ethiopian Military Forces
Ethiopian National Defense Force (ENDF) personnel stationed in Mogadishu continued
in 2008 to use mortars, artillery, and Katyusha rockets indiscriminately
in response to insurgent attacks, devastating entire neighborhoods of the city.
Insurgent attacks often originate in populated areas, prompting Ethiopian bombardment
of civilian homes and public spaces, sometimes wiping out entire families.
Many of these attacks constitute war crimes. In July ENDF forces bombarded
part of the strategic town of Beletweyne after coming under attack by insurgent
forces based there, displacing as many as 75,000 people.
2008 was also marked by the proliferation of other violations of the laws of war
by ENDF personnel in Somalia. Until late 2007, Ethiopian forces were reportedly
reasonably disciplined and restrained in their day-to-day interactions with Somali
civilians in Mogadishu. However, throughout 2008 ENDF forces in Mogadishu participated
in widespread acts of murder, rape, assault, and looting targeting ordinary
residents of the city, often alongside forces allied to the Somali Transitional
Federal Government. In an April raid on a Mogadishu mosque ENDF soldiers
reportedly killed 21 people; seven of the dead had their throats cut.
ENDF forces have also increasingly fired indiscriminately on crowds of civilians
when they come under attack. In August ENDF soldiers were hit by a roadside
bomb near the town of Afgooye and responded by firing wildly; in the resulting
bloodbath as many as 60 civilians were shot and killed, including the passengers
of two crowded minibuses.
In Ethiopia itself, the ENDF continues to wage a counterinsurgency campaign
against the rebel Ogaden National Liberation Front (ONLF) in the countrys restive Somali region. The scale and intensity of military operations seems to have
declined from a peak in mid-2007, but arbitrary detentions, torture, and other
abuses continue. Credible reports indicate that vital food aid to the droughtaffected
region has been diverted and misused as a weapon to starve out rebelheld
areas. The military continues to severely restrict access to conflict-affected
regions and the Ethiopian government has not reversed its decision to evict the
International Committee of the Red Cross from the region in July 2007.
The Ethiopian government denies all allegations of abuses by its military and
refuses to facilitate independent investigations. There have been no serious
efforts to investigate or ensure accountability for war crimes and crimes against
humanity committed in Somali Region and in neighboring Somalia in 2007 and
2008. Nor have ENDF officers or civilian officials been held accountable for crimes
against humanity that ENDF forces carried out against ethnic Anuak communities
during a counterinsurgency campaign in Gambella region in late 2003 and 2004.
Regional Renditions
In early 2007 at least 90 men, women, and children from 18 different countries
fleeing conflict in Somalia were arrested in Kenya and subsequently deported to
Somalia and then Ethiopia, where many were interrogated by US intelligence
agents. An unknown number of people arrested by Ethiopian forces in Somalia
were also directly transferred to Ethiopia. Many of the victims of these regional
renditions were released in mid-2007 and early 2008, but at least two men,
including a Kenyan and a Canadian national, remain in Ethiopian detention
almost two years after their deportation from Kenya. The whereabouts and fate of
at least 22 others rendered to Ethiopia, including Eritreans, Somalis, and
Ethiopian Ogadeni and Oromo, is unknown.
Civil Society and Free Expression
The environment for civil society continues to deteriorate. In 2008 the government
announced new legislationthe Charities and Societies Proclamation
which purports to provide greater oversight and transparency on civil society
activities. In fact, the law would undermine the independence of civil society and criminalizes the work of many human rights organizations. At this writing, the law
looked set to be introduced to parliament.
Alongside a complex and onerous system of government surveillance and control,
the law would place sharp restrictions on the kinds of work permissible to foreign
organizations and Ethiopian civil society groups that receive some foreign funding
barring such organizations from any kind of work touching on human rights
issues. Individuals who fail to comply with the laws Byzantine provisions could
face criminal prosecution.
A new media law passed in July promises to reform some of the most repressive
aspects of the previous legal framework. Most notably, the law eliminates the
practice of pretrial detention for journalistsalthough in August, the prominent
editor of the Addis Ababa-based Reporter newspaper was imprisoned without
charge for several days in connection with a story printed in the paper. In spite of
its positive aspects, the law remains flawedit grants the government significant
leeway to restrain free speech, including by summarily impounding publications
on grounds of national security or public order. The law also retains criminal
penalties including prison terms for journalists found guilty of libel or defamation.
In March 2008 civil society activists Daniel Bekele and Netsanet Demissie were
released from more than two years of incarceration, but only after the Ethiopian
Federal High Court convicted them of incitement related to the 2005 elections.
Key International Actors
The United States and European donor states provide the Ethiopian government
with large sums of bilateral assistance, including direct budgetary support from
the United Kingdom and military assistance from the US. The US is Ethiopias
largest bilateral donor and has also provided logistical and political support for
Ethiopias protracted intervention in Somalia, and provides bilateral assistance to
the Ethiopian military. Donor governments view Ethiopia as an important ally in
an unstable region and, in the case of the US, in the global war on terror.
The US, UK, and other key donors and political allies have consistently refused to
publicly criticize widespread abuses or to demand meaningful improvements in Ethiopias human rights record. The sole exception in 2008 lay in donor government
efforts to lobby against the repressive civil society legislation introduced by
the government. No major donor made any significant effort to raise serious concerns
about or demand a concrete response to war crimes and crimes against
humanity in Ethiopia or ENDF atrocities in Somalia.
Ethiopia remains deadlocked over a boundary dispute with Eritrea dating from the
two countries 1998-2000 war. The war in Somalia is another source of tension
between the two countries, with Eritrea backing and hosting one faction of the
insurgency Ethiopian troops are fighting against in Somalia. Eritrea also plays
host to other Ethiopian rebel movements, notably the OLF and ONLF, with the aim
of destabilizing the Ethiopian government.
Chinas importance as a trading partner to Ethiopia grows year by year. According
to official figures Chinese investment in Ethiopia totals more than US$350 million
annually, up from just US$10 million in 2003.
Ethiopia is due to be reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism of
the UN Human Rights Council in December 2009.
Guinea
By the end of 2008, hope that nationwide protests in 2007 would improve governance
and respect for human rights was replaced by growing concern over the
human rights fall-out from Guineas emergence as a major drug-trafficking hub.
The chronic problems of endemic corruption, a fractious and abusive military, the
rise of drug trafficking and the involvement of state agents in it, threaten to further
erode the rule of law and the governments ability to meet the basic needs of
its citizens.
Meanwhile, chronic state-sponsored violence by members of the security services,
including torture, assault, and extortion, continues. Ordinary Guineans have
scant hope for redress, as the government has taken no steps to tackle impunity
for abuses committed by security forces. The National Commission of Inquiry, created
to investigate the killings and abuses by security forces during the January
and February 2007 strikes, is not yet operational due to inadequate government
support. However, the newly appointed prime minister supported the creation of
a National Observatory for Human Rights, which shows some promise if allowed
to function independently.
International actors, most notably France and the European Union, are reluctant
to bring public pressure to bear on the government, pinning their hopes for
change on the legislative elections. However, in a further blow to good governance,
in October these were postponed for a third time.
Insecurity and Abuses in Law Enforcement
In May grievances over pay and decreased rice subsidies within Guineas military
escalated to mutiny. Soldiers recklessly fired in the air killing or wounding dozens
of civilians with stray bullets, kidnapped a senior officer, occupied the airport,
and looted shops. Some weeks later, police and customs agents attempting a
similar strike were violently put down by the military, resulting in the deaths of
at least eight policemen. Meanwhile, several protests against spiraling food and
fuel prices, electricity blackouts and water shortages were violently suppressed
by security forces. In October soldiers responding to protests against mining companies
killed two, including a thirteen-year-old boy, and raped three women. In November at least four were killed and forty wounded when security forces in the
capital Conakry opened fire on protesters demanding lower fuel prices.
Governance and Legislative Elections
The 2007 mass protests against widespread corruption, poor governance, and
deteriorating economic conditions resulted in concessions by autocratic President
Lansana Cont. Most notable was the appointment in February 2007 of a consensus
prime minister, Lansana Kouyat, who during his tenure managed to mitigate
Guineas spiraling inflation and restore the confidence of international donors. In
May 2008 President Cont removed Kouyat and replaced him with Ahmed
Tidiane Souar, dealing a serious blow to hopes that mass protest and people
power could bring reform. However, since taking office, Prime Minister Souar
has appointed several reform-minded ministers to his cabinet. Nevertheless,
given obstruction by President Cont and his highly influential family and inner
circle, it remains unclear whether reforms proposed by Souar will be implemented.
Legislative elections originally scheduled for June 2007 were postponed in
October 2008 for a third time. They are now scheduled for the first quarter of
2009 at the earliest. The postponement is due to phenomenal shortcomings in
preparations, a long delay in establishing the national electoral commission, and
inadequate governmental support for the process. President Cont, age 74, is
rumored to be gravely ill, and observers fear a military takeover should he die
before his term ends in 2010.
Drug Trafficking
Reports about the involvement in drug trafficking of Guinean politicians, highlevel
members of the military, police, and presidential guard, and members of the
presidents family, generate considerable concern among Guineas international
partners. Efforts to combat the growing problem are undermined by widespread
corruption within the judiciary and by rivalries between different security forces
for control of the drug trade. In June the military ransacked the offices of Guineas
counter-narcotics unit, destroying records and office equipment. Prime Minister
Souar took some steps to address the scourge of drug trafficking, and following a visit by the executive director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
in July, declared a war against it.
Commission of Inquiry for 2007 Strike-Related Abuses
The government showed limited interest in establishing a functioning commission
of inquiry into the 2007 strike-related violence that left at least 137 dead and over
1,700 wounded. During the crackdown, security forcesparticularly the presidential
guardfired directly into crowds of unarmed demonstrators. In May 2007 the
National Assembly adopted legislation creating a national commission of inquiry
into the violence and in September 2007, 19 commission members were sworn in.
However, at this writing the commission has yet to receive funding or logistical
support from the government. Although both France and the European Union
promised financial support, they have conditioned disbursement on the government
successfully establishing and supporting the commission.
National Observatory for Democracy and Human Rights
In late July Prime Minister Souar supported the creation of a National
Observatory for Human Rights to investigate human rights abuses and conduct
human rights education, primarily within the security forces. At years end, the
Observatory has yet to become fully operational, and it is unclear to what extent
the government would fund, support, and allow it to function independently.
Rule of Law
The judiciary in Guinea is plagued with deficiencies, including lack of independence
from the executive branch, inadequate resources, corruption, poorly trained
magistrates and other personnel, and insufficient numbers of attorneys. Many
people are denied justice because they cannot afford to bribe judges, magistrates,
and other officials.
In October the government for the first time acknowledged responsibility for the
political violence committed during the 1958-1984 presidency of Ahmed Sekou
Tour, but failed to reiterate an earlier commitment by Prime Minister Kouyat to
establish a truth commission into the thousands of Guineansincluding ministers, ambassadors, judges, businessmen, and army officerskilled during Tours
regime.
Police Conduct
Guinean police continue to engage in unprofessional and often criminal conduct,
including routine torture and mistreatment of criminal suspects, widespread
extortion from citizens, involvement in drug trafficking and, in a few cases, sexual
abuse of female detainees. During interrogation, suspects are frequently bound
with cords, beaten, burned with cigarettes, and otherwise physically abused until
they confess to the crime of which they are accused. Failure to prosecute perpetrators
remains the largest single obstacle to ending these abuses.
Detention-Related Abuses
Prison and detention centers remain severely overcrowded and operate far below
international standards. In 2008 the largest prison in Guinea housed nearly 900
prisoners in a facility designed for 300. Malnutrition and inadequate healthcare
and sanitation led to the deaths of tens of detainees. Prison officials consistently
fail to separate convicted and untried prisoners, and in some centers, children
from adults. Unpaid prison guards regularly extort money from prisoners and
their families, exacerbating problems of hunger and malnutrition.
Prolonged pretrial detention remains a serious human rights issue, although in
2008 local human rights organizations continued efforts to secure trials for prisoners
and to free some who had spent more time awaiting trial than the maximum
sentence for the crime of which they were accused. Nevertheless, over 80
percent of those held in Guineas main prison in Conakry have not been brought
to trial; some have been awaiting trial for more than five years.
Child Labor
Significant numbers of children continue to labor in gold and diamond mines and
quarries where they perform dangerous work for little pay. Tens of thousands of
girlssome trafficked from neighboring countrieswork as domestic laborers,
often in conditions akin to slavery. They are routinely denied education and healthcare and are forced to work up to 18 hours a day. Beatings, sexual harassment,
and rape at the hands of employers are frequent. The government took
some steps to combat the problems of child labor and trafficking. In May parliament
passed The Child Code that contains several enhanced protections for children,
and throughout the year government and international organizations
engaged in a public awareness campaign to combat trafficking. A special police
unit to investigate child prostitution, trafficking, and other abuses resulted in a
few arrests; however, there have been few prosecutions.
Key International Actors
Guinea remains averse to diplomatic efforts to improve human rights. Meanwhile,
Guineas key partnersFrance, the European Union, the United Nations, and the
United Statesare largely reluctant to publicly criticize the government on pressing
human rights and governance issues.
In 2002, the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and the African
Development Bank suspended economic assistance to Guinea because of poor
economic and political governance. In 2005, the EU invoked article 96 of the
Cotonou Agreement to suspend all but humanitarian assistance due to concerns
over governance and human rights. While 86 million from the 9th European
Development Fund was released in December 2006, renewed concerns about
governance led to the postponement of funds due to be disbursed under the 10th
EDF. The holding of free and fair parliamentary elections is widely viewed by
Guineas partners as the key strategy for improving governance and respect for
human rights.
Kenya
Controversial presidential elections in December 2007 dominated events in 2008,
exposing the longstanding lack of accountability in Kenyan political culture.
Politicians on both sides of the political fence organized violence in the Rift Valley
and western Kenya in January and February 2008, killing at least 1,133 people and
displacing at least 300,000. International mediation produced a coalition government
in March, returning a fragile stability to the country. Commissions established
to investigate electoral fraud and post-election violence concluded that
profound electoral reforms and a special tribunal to prosecute those most
responsible for the violence were urgently needed.
Patterns of impunity by state security forces persist, with allegations of excessive
use of force and extrajudicial killings shadowing the police. Military deployment
in March to suppress a brutal insurgency in Mt. Elgon was characterized by mass
arrests, detentions, disappearances, and systematic torture. Officials denied the
militarys responsibility for abuses.
Electoral Violence
Kenya is still reeling from the widespread violence following the presidential elections
that saw President Mwai Kibaki returned to office. After the results were
announced, youths allied to the opposition Orange Democratic Movement (ODM)
began attacking Kikuyu and other tribes perceived to be supporters of the incumbent
Party of National Unity (PNU) across the Rift Valley and in urban slums.
Kikuyu gangs struck back, targeting Luo and other perceived opposition supporters,
first in the Nairobi slums, and later, at the end of January, in the Rift Valley.
Some violence was prompted by spontaneous anger at the results, leading to the
burning of cars and street protests. Police dispelled the crowds with live ammunition,
killing over 400 people. However, the majority of the attacks on both sides
were premeditated and coordinated by local leaders and politicians seeking to
gain from the forced displacement of certain ethnic groups. According to the Waki
Commission (see below), at least 1,133 people died and over 300,000 were displaced.
After several months of unrest, Kenyans pulled back from the brink when former
UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan brokered a National Dialogue and Reconciliation
Accord. The negotiations resulted in a government of national unity, agreement
on the need for constitutional and land reforms, and the creation of commissions
to investigate the crisis.
In September, the Independent Review Committee, chaired by South African
judge Justice Kriegler to investigate electoral fraud, concluded that the electoral
process had been so disrupted that it was impossible to tell who won the presidential
poll. It recommended a series of reforms to the electoral law and procedures,
including the replacement of the Electoral Commission.
In October, the Commission to Investigate the Post-Election Violence, chaired by
Kenyan judge Justice Waki, published a damning report implicating senior politicians
from both parties in organizing and encouraging the violence. The report
also accused the police of excessive force. The commission recommended the
creation of a special tribunal to investigate and prosecute those most responsible,
along a strict timeline. In the event of non-compliance by the coalition government,
the commission recommended that the Panel of Eminent African
Personalities, headed by Kofi Annan, should forward a confidential list of individuals
implicated in the violence, including ten senior politicians, to the
International Criminal Court. The press and civil society strongly support the recommendations
but the government, including both the president and the prime
minister, has given mixed feedback.
Tens of thousands of people remain displaced. The government claimed at the
end of October that 3,170 households remained in displaced persons camps.
However, many have simply returned to transit camps, with no reliable services
and no government support to rebuild their homes. In November the UN estimated
113,761 people still to be in such camps. The UN, NGOs, and the Kenyan
National Commission for Human Rights criticized the government for violating the
UN Guiding Principles on Internally Displaced Persons, mismanaging resettlement
programs and forcibly returning displaced people.
Atrocities in Mt. Elgon
The Kenyan government refuses to investigate and prosecute members of the
police and army accused of committing systematic torture in Mt. Elgon. Security
forces deployed in March 2008 in a joint operation to combat a two-year insurgency
by the Sabaot Land Defence Force (SLDF), a militia allied to the local
Member of Parliament, which had been terrorizing the district. Following the operation,
the SLDF were much diminished and the extent of their crimes emerged:
over 600 people killed since 2006; hundreds tortured, mutilated, and raped; and
houses looted and destroyed.
However, members of the security forces also committed serious crimes, including
extrajudicial killings and torture, in the course of counterinsurgency. Much of
the male population was rounded up and beaten to force disclosure of the whereabouts
of militia. Over 4,000 people were taken to military camps for screening
where victims describe beatings, torture, and some deaths. More than 40 people
are missing, last seen in military detention, and at least one grave containing
seven bodies of people taken into military custody has been identified.
The United Kingdom and the United States have trained units of the 20th
Parachute Regiment which was deployed in Mt. Elgon. Due to allegations of abuses,
the UK announced in July 2008 that it was suspending training of 20 Para but
resumed its military engagement two months later.
Police Impunity
Police were responsible for hundreds of deaths during the post-election violence
and serious questions remain about the chain of command who ordered the
use of live rounds, and under what circumstances. The reluctance of the police to
investigate its own conduct follows a well established pattern of impunity.
Extrajudicial killings of members of the Mungiki criminal gang in Nairobi continued,
adding to the more than 450 Mungiki linked killings last year. The Waki
Commission recommended extensive reform of the police force, including the setting
up of an independent agency to investigate police conduct.
Regional Renditions
In October, eight Kenyan nationals were repatriated from Ethiopia, some 21
months after they were first arrested in Kenya in 2007 and deported to Somalia
and then Ethiopia, along with at least 90 other men, women, and children.
Another KenyanAbdikadir Mohammed Adanremains in incommunicado detention
in Addis Ababa, some 15 months after he was first arrested, and the whereabouts
of others who have claimed Kenyan citizenship remains
unknown. Altogether in 2006 and 2007, the Kenyan government detained approximately
150 individuals fleeing Somalia, including women and children. The government
did not take any steps to secure the release of its citizens until August
2008, and still disputes the Kenyan citizenship of Adan. Another Kenyan citizen,
Mohammed Abdulmalik, disappeared for a month after he was arrested by
Kenyan officials in February 2007, before ultimately ending up in Guantanamo
Bay.
Womens, Childrens, and LGBT Rights
The Kenyan government scaled up HIV/AIDS services across the country, though
the drugs still did not reach an estimated 250,000 HIV-infected people in urgent
need of antiretroviral treatment. Only about nine percent of those receiving treatment
are children. Barriers for children include a reluctance of caregivers to test
children, food insecurity, transport costs, unavailability of child treatment at local
health facilities, and the neglect and abuse of AIDS orphans.
Following violent school strikes in June, there was debate in government whether
to reintroduce corporal punishment in schools. Child rights groups protested vigorously.
Kenyas current abortion law criminalizes abortion except to save a womans life.
As a result, many women resort to clandestine, unsafe abortions that cause up to
40 percent of maternal deaths. The proposed Reproductive Health and Rights Bill
2008 would legalize abortion in some cases.
Article 162 of Kenyas criminal code, an inheritance from British colonialism, punishes
consensual homosexual conduct with up to 14 years imprisonment.
Human Rights Defenders and Journalists
During the violence in January and February, human rights defenders and journalists
were threatened by individuals and groups affiliated with the incumbent PNU
party. Journalists and human rights activists who criticized security force abuses
in Mt. Elgon are still being threatened by the military and the police. Two were
forced to leave the country for a short period after publishing a press release
detailing abuses by the SLDF and the military in April 2008.
Key International Actors
Following the electoral violence, a spectrum of international actors including the
United Nations, African Union, and the US secretary of state applied significant
pressure on the government of Mwai Kibaki to compromise and share power with
the opposition. The cooperation between Kenyas neighbors and donors in bringing
Kenya back from the brink was unprecedented and demonstrated the potential
of sustained diplomatic engagement in a crisis.
All Kenyas foreign partners and Kenyan civil society at large agree on the need for
far-reaching reform of the justice sector, the constitution, land distribution and
ownership, and major measures to stem corruption and impunity. Without major
changes, including the prosecutions recommended by the Waki Commission, the
risk of violence recurring remains high. The government will need significant sustained
pressure from all sides to set up the special tribunal recommended by
Waki and bring those responsible for political violence to justice. The
International Criminal Court indicated that crimes committed in Kenya are under
analysis by its prosecutor.
Due to their close relationship with the Kenyan military, the UK and the US have a
particular responsibility and an opportunity to encourage an independent investigation
into atrocities committed in Mt. Elgon.
Liberia
Throughout 2008 the government of President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf made tangible
progress in addressing endemic corruption, creating the legislative framework
for respect for human rights, and facilitating economic growth, but little headway
in strengthening the rule of law. Numerous incidents of violent crime, mob and
vigilante justice, and bloody land disputes claimed tens of lives and exposed the
systemic and persistent weaknesses within the police, judiciary, and corrections
sectors. The disappointing progress in these sectors, five years after the end of
armed conflict, highlighted the fragility of the security situation and prompted
calls for urgent action.
Disturbing witness accounts of atrocities at hearings of Liberias Truth and
Reconciliation Commission did more to generate controversy than to promote reconciliation,
largely due to the lack of remorse or responsibility expressed by perpetrators
who testified. Meanwhile, there have been few efforts to pursue justice
for the egregious human rights violations committed during Liberias 14 years of
armed conflict that ended in 2003.
Ongoing Insecurity and Abuses in Law Enforcement
The internal security situation in Liberia worsened in 2008, characterized by frequent
violent criminal acts, including armed robbery and rape, violent protests on
rubber plantations, and deadly land disputes. Lack of public confidence in the
police and judicial system led to mob attacks on police stations and courthouses
to free or attack suspects; incidents of vigilante justice resulted in at least 10
deaths. United Nations peacekeepers deployed to Liberia since 2003 were, on
several occasions, called in to restore calm.
Since 2004 the UN Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) has vetted and trained over 3,500
police officers, and together with donors, set up numerous police stations and
barracks. Nonetheless, Liberian police continued to engage in unprofessional and
sometimes criminal behavior, including extortion, bribery, and armed robbery;
frequent absenteeism; and failing to adequately investigate and later freeing
alleged criminals. Few of these infractions resulted in investigation, suspension,
or arrest. Lack of funding for transportation, communications, and forensic equipment further undermined the effectiveness of the national police, especially in
rural areas. These continued problems prompted an increase by 250 of UN police
officers and generated concern about the need for a thorough re-vetting of the
police force.
Performance of the Judiciary
Persistent deficiencies within the judiciary led to widespread abuses of the right
to due process, undermined efforts to address impunity, and prompted calls for
more leadership within the Justice Ministry and international support to strengthen
the sector.
Weaknesses were attributable to insufficient judicial personnel, including prosecutors
and public defenders, limited court infrastructure and logistics, archaic
rules of procedure, and poor case management. Unprofessional, corrupt, and, in
a few cases, criminal practices by judicial staff continued to lead to rights abuses
and undermine progress.
Prisons and detention centers remain overcrowded and lack basic sanitation and
healthcare for detainees. In 2008 hundreds of people were held in prolonged pretrial
detention; only ten percent of the some 1,000 individuals detained in
Liberias prisons had been convicted of a crime.
Some improvements were evident, including the continued renovation of courthouses
and detention facilities, construction of separate blocks for female and
juvenile detainees, revival of the Case File Management Committee, establishment
of the Judicial Training Institute, and slight increases in the numbers of public
prosecutions.
Legislative Developments
During 2008 the Liberian government made strides in creating the legislative
framework for respect for human rights and good governance, with two important
exceptions. Progress included the passage of the Freedom of Information Act, creation
of the Anti-Corruption Commission and Governance Commission [mandated
to conduct a much-needed constitutional review], and elaboration of the Poverty Reduction Strategy. Disappointing was the failure to establish either the Law
Reform Commission or the Independent National Commission on Human Rights,
and the passage in July of a law that allowed for the death penalty for certain
offenses. The legislation, passed in response to high rates of violent crime, contravened
Liberias obligations under the Second Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
Harmful Traditional Practices
Serious abuses resulting from harmful traditional practices continued to occur in
2008, due in part to the absence or distrust of judicial authorities. These included
the killing of alleged witches and trials by ordeal, in which suspects are
forced to swallow the poisonous sap of a tree or endure burningtheir alleged
guilt or innocence is determined by whether they survive. At least 16 people were
tried, convicted and sentenced for administering the practice, but were months
later granted clemency. Their release, conditional on community service, was part
of a wider public education campaign by the government and UN to discourage
the practice.
Sexual Violence
The incidence of rape of women and girls continued to be alarmingly high in
2008, despite positive efforts by the government and UNMIL, including a sustained
nationwide anti-rape campaign and the establishment of a dedicated court
for sexual violence. While police response to reports of rape improved somewhat,
efforts to prosecute these cases are hampered by deficiencies in the justice system
and the regular dismissal of cases due to out-of-court settlements between
families of the victims and the perpetrators.
Corruption
The potential for corruption to undermine recent gains in establishing the rule of
law and in providing the most vulnerable with basic services such as education,
water, and healthcare received considerable attention by the government and
Liberias international partners. Concrete steps to reduce corruption included the creation in September of
Liberias first Anti-Corruption Commission, the dismissal and arrest of a number
of corrupt officials, the nullifying of contracts awarded without due adherence to
the legal bidding process, and the continued trials of some 10 public officials
from the 2003-2005 transitional government for the embezzlement of over US$5
million.
The Truth and Reconciliation Commission and Accountability
The Liberian Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC), which had since its creation
in 2006 been plagued with leadership, transparency, and operational problems,
showed significant improvement in 2008. Throughout 2008 the TRC conducted
well-attended, countrywide hearings in which over 500 victims and some
35 former faction leaders testified. The victims recounted horrific accounts of war
crimes committed by all sides, while perpetrators often failed to admit violations
or ask forgiveness, and appeared to use the hearings to absolve perceptions of
their guilt. TRC commissioners were praised for having brought the perpetrators to
testify, but criticized for a lack of rigorous questioning to ensure a more accurate
historical account.
In September, Charles Chuckie Taylor, Jr., the son of former Liberian president
Charles Taylor, went on trial in the United States accused of torture while he
headed Liberias Anti-Terrorist Unit (ATU). On October 30, the jury found the
defendant guilty on all counts. The case against Taylor, an American citizen, is the
first brought under a US federal law that allows charges against a person accused
of torture abroad if the accused is in the United States or is an American citizen. It
is also the first prosecution for war crimes committed in Liberia.
The TRC hearings and the trial of Chuckie Taylor generated considerable public
debate about the ongoing need to hold accountable perpetrators of war crimes
and crimes against humanity committed during Liberias wars. Questions remain
about whether TRC commissioners would act on their power to recommend individuals
for prosecution, as included in the commissions mandate; and whether
the Liberian judicial system would be able and willing to try these cases.
Liberian Army
Since 2004 the US has led the recruitment and training of 2,100 soldiers for a
new Liberian army, which, in contrast to the police, has been involved in few
reports of abuse and indiscipline by its members. Recruits were vetted for past
abuses by the American contractor DynCorp.
Disarmament of Former Combatants
Since the end of the war in 2003, 101,000 former combatants have been disarmed.
During 2008 the final group of some 7,250 former combatants received
vocational training or education, but most remain unemployed. A joint program
by the World Bank, UN, and Liberian government to offer short-term employment
to some 60,000 was a welcome initiative. However, increases in global food
prices and continuing high unemployment remain a serious concern for sustained
peace.
Key International Actors
Liberias post-war reconstruction needs remained high on the international agenda
in 2008, evidenced by visits by UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and US
President George Bush, and the receipt of considerable bi-lateral and multi-sectoral
aid.
The United States is Liberias largest donor, and in fiscal year 2007-2008 contributed
more than US$141 million to support democratization, security and
reconstruction efforts. In January the US infused the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission with $500,000, nearly doubling total US support for the TRC since its
establishment.
From a high of US$4.7 billion in debt in June 2007, Liberia has set itself towards
debt relief by clearing its arrears and securing an agreement in April 2008 with
donor nations for 97 percent of Liberias debt to be canceled.
In December 2007, the UN Security Council renewed for one year the arms and
travel bans on associates of former President Charles Taylor. In 2008, Liberia was declared eligible for US$15 million in funds administered by the UN Peacebuilding
Commission.
Nigeria
The government of President Umaru YarAduanow in its second yearhas done
little to address deeply-entrenched human rights problems. Despite record oil
revenues in 2008, government corruption and mismanagement robbed Nigerians
of their right to health and education. State security forces continued to commit
extrajudicial killings, torture, and extortion. Intercommunal and political violence,
often fomented by powerful politicians, claimed hundreds of lives.
Although many of these problems were inherited from the previous administration,
the YarAdua administration has undermined fledgling anti-corruption
efforts, taken inadequate steps to address poverty and violence in the Niger
Delta, and failed to investigate or hold to account government officials and security
forces responsible for serious human rights abuses. The National Assembly
held public hearings into allegations of corruption but failed to pass progressive
legislation including the Freedom of Information Bill.
Nonetheless, free speech in Nigeria remains robust and the judiciary continues to
exercise a degree of independence. Nigerias election tribunals annulled several
of the 2007 state gubernatorial elections, but in February 2008 upheld the election
of President YarAdua. Opposition candidates appealed the tribunals decision
in the presidential election petition, but at this writing, the Supreme Court
had not yet ruled on the case.
Rising oil prices and disruptions in Nigerias oil flow by militant violence focused
the attention of Nigerias international partners on the restive Niger Delta.
However, foreign partners remained reluctant to publicly criticize those responsible
for Nigerias poor human rights record.
Violence and Poverty in the Niger Delta
In September 2008, the Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta
(MEND)a loose umbrella network of armed groupsdeclared an oil war on
government forces and the oil industry, resulting in the heaviest fighting in two
years. MEND and other Niger Delta militant groups claim to be fighting for greater
local control of the regions oil wealth, while simultaneously engaging in various forms of violent criminal activity, including attacks on oil facilities, kidnapping foreign
and Nigerian oil workers, and the lucrative theft of crude oil.
In 2008 several dozen ordinary Nigerians were killed in clashes between security
forces and gangs, and at least 130 Nigerians and oil-sector workers were kidnapped
by militant groups. However, the security forces appear to have been
more careful to avoid inflicting civilian casualties than in previous periods of
Delta violence. In January 2008, seven ordinary citizens were reportedly killed in
crossfire during an attack on a Port Harcourt police station. In July thousands of
residents fled Bonny Island after gunmen killed several residents and allegedly
threatened to behead anyone not originally from the area. In August the Nigerian
military reportedly opened fire on a boat in Bayelsa State, killing three villagers.
Meanwhile, the government failed to address the poverty, embezzlement of revenues,
and environmental degradation that underlie political discontent in the
Delta. The government also failed to end impunity that fuels the violence.
Government Corruption
Efforts to fight corruption and graft suffered setbacks in 2008. In December 2007,
Nuhu Ribadu, then-head of Nigerias Economic and Financial Crimes Commission
(EFCC), took the bold step of indicting the powerful former Delta State Governor
James Ibori. Two weeks later, the inspector general of police ordered Mr. Ribadu
to resign and attend a year-long training course. In February 2008 another senior
EFCC official was attacked by armed thugs.
Following the controversial appointment of Farida Waziri as the new EFCC chair in
May, the EFCC fired many of its top investigators. In August the former head of the
EFCC unit investigating Mr. Ibori was arrested and held without charge for several
weeks. Although Ms. Waziri has indicted several senior-level politicians on corruption
charges, the high-profile cases initiated under Mr. Ribadu, including that
of Mr. Ibori, have been effectively stalled.
Since 2004 Nigeria has taken significant steps towards complying with the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI), including conducting comprehensive
audits of the petroleum sector. However, efforts at improving transparency
in federal government revenues have done little to reduce corruption and mismanagement, especially at state and local government levels; government budgets
and expenditures remain shrouded in secrecy.
Intercommunal and Political Violence
More than 12,000 Nigerians have lost their lives in ethnic, religious, and political
clashes since the end of military rule in 1999. In November, some 400 were killed
in Plateau State when Christians and Muslims clashed over the result of a local
election. This was the most serious episode of intercommunal violence since
2004. Meanwhile, clashes in Ebonyi, Enugu, and Benue states left at least 42
dead and hundreds displaced.
Nigerias politicians have, for years, actively manipulated ethnic and religious
tensions by sponsoring violence for personal political gain. The government has
failed to investigate, much less criminally prosecute, those responsible for sponsoring
or carrying out the election-related violence linked to the 2007 elections,
which left 300 people dead. However, after taking up office, President YarAdua
established an electoral reform committee that shows some promise.
Torture and Policing
Nigerias poorly trained and under-resourced police force was in 2008 responsible
for serious and persistent abuses, including extrajudicial killings of criminal
suspects, torture, and extortion. In January 2006 the UN Special Rapporteur on
Extrajudicial, Summary or Arbitrary Executions found that the practice of summarily
executing suspected criminals by the Nigerian Police is widespread and
systematic. More than 10,000 Nigerians have been killed by the police since
2000.
The police routinely use torture as a tactic of interrogation and as a tool of extortion.
Woefully under-equipped to carry out criminal investigations, the police
often rely on confessions extracted by torture as the sole method of gathering evidence.
Police also routinely extort bribes from ordinary Nigerians through the
threat of arrest or violence, most commonly at checkpoints set up along Nigerias
roads. Meanwhile, thousands of people accused of common crimes continue to
be detained without trial for months or even years in sub-standard conditions. Lack of political will to hold the police to account remains the single biggest
obstacle to ending abuses by the Nigerian police force.
Human Rights Concerns in the Context of Sharia
Twelve state governments in northern Nigeria have extended Sharia (Islamic law)
to their criminal justice systems, including sentencing provisions that amount to
cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatmentdeath sentences, amputations, and
floggings. Sharia law as practiced in the north also includes the death penalty for
consensual homosexual conduct between men. Although capital sentences have
been thrown out on appeal or simply not carried out, Sharia courts continue to
hand them down.
Serious due process concerns also exist in Sharia proceedings in Nigeria. Most
defendants are sentenced without legal representation. Judges are inadequately
trained and often rely on statements extracted under torture by police as the
basis for convictions. The manner in which Sharia is applied also discriminates
against women, particularly in adultery cases where standards of evidence differ
based on the sex of the accused.
Sexual Orientation
Section 214 of the federal criminal code punishes homosexual conduct between
men or between women with up to 14 years in prison. After a press campaign in
September 2008 vilifying a Lagos church supportive of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender people, police harassed several church members, detaining one for
three days.
Freedom of Expression
Nigerian civil society and the countrys independent press are generally free to
criticize the government and its policies, allowing for vibrant public debate.
However, journalists in Nigeria are at times subjected to arrest and detention. In
September 2008 state security agents shut down Channels Televisionone of
Nigerias largest private broadcastersand arrested six journalists, including
media executives, after the station reported that President YarAdua might resign from office due to health reasons. In October Nigerian security agents arrested
and held without charge two US-based Nigerian online journalists who had published
stories critical of the government. Local media outlets generally enjoy considerably
less freedom than their national counterparts and are more often subjected
to harassment and intimidation by government authorities. Government
security forces continued to restrict journalists access to the Niger Delta.
Sexual and Reproductive Rights
Nigeria continues to have some of the worst indicators for womens reproductive
health worldwide. Maternal mortality rates and the number of pregnant women
living with HIV are among the highest worldwide; in 2007 only seven percent of
these women, and two percent of the children born to them, received antiretroviral
therapy to prevent mother-to-child HIV transmission.
Key International Actors
Because of Nigerias significance as a regional power and leading oil exporter,
key governmentsincluding the United Kingdom and the United Statesand
organizations such as the African Union were unwilling to publicly exert pressure
on Nigeria over its human rights record. Private demarches by Nigerias foreign
partners were largely ignored by the government.
In fiscal year 2008, the UK increased development aid to Nigeria to 100 million
and in July 2008, extended a controversial offer to train Nigerias military forces
operating in the Niger Delta.
As in past years, multinational oil companies operating in the Niger Delta did little
to curb environmentally harmful gas flaring and oil spills caused by ageing and
poorly-maintained infrastructure.
Nigeria is due to be reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism of
the UN Human Rights Council in February 2009.
Rwanda
Fourteen years after the genocide that killed three-quarters of the Tutsi population
in Rwanda, the government is moving towards ending genocide trials and
redirecting attention to economic development. Conventional courts are operating
more efficiently under reforms begun in 2004, but still lack independence and
fair trial guarantees. In 2008 the government shifted thousands of the most serious
genocide cases from conventional courts to community-based gacaca courts,
while it stepped up efforts to persuade jurisdictions abroad to send Rwandans
accused of genocide home for trial. Meanwhile, a Spanish judge issued arrest
warrants for 40 officers of the current Rwandan armythe Rwandan Defense Force
(RDF)spurring Rwanda to mobilize other African governments against international
justice.
Rwandan authorities exercise tight control over political space, civil society, and
the media, often accusing dissenters of genocide ideology. Legislative elections
in September 2008 were peaceful, but marred by serious irregularities, and further
strengthened the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF), the dominant political party
since 1994. International donors, generally satisfied by the prospect of economic
development, said little about election irregularities or human rights abuses.
Conventional Courts
Since reforms in 2004 Rwandan courts have operated with greater administrative
autonomy. Judges, except those on the Supreme Court, once enjoyed life tenure.
In June 2008, however, the legislature amended the constitution to limit judicial
terms to four years, increasing the vulnerability of judges to pressure. The death
penalty was abolished in 2007a noteworthy achievementbut was replaced by
life imprisonment in solitary confinement, a penalty that constitutes torture and
violates international standards. In August 2008 the Rwandan Supreme Court
found the penalty constitutional. In a more positive vein, the Supreme Court held
that heavier penalties for women than for men convicted of adultery were unconstitutional.
Courts continued to be burdened by a backlog of thousands of ordinary criminal
and civil cases, even after most genocide cases were transferred to gacaca jurisdictions. Former minister of justice Agns Ntamabyaliro, the only minister from
the previous government in Rwandan custody, incarcerated since 1997, was still
being tried two years after her trial had begun.
In June 2008 Rwanda charged four Rwandan military officers with war crimes for
the 1994 killing of 15 civilians, 13 of them clergy. Two of the officers confessed to
the killing and were sentenced to eight years in prison. Two more senior officers
were acquitted after a brief trial. The RPF had acknowledged the crime committed
by its soldiers 14 years ago, but brought the accused to trial only after the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) prepared a case against them.
Neither the Rwandan prosecutors office nor the ICTR anticipate further such prosecutions,
despite United Nations estimates that between 25,000 and 45,000 persons
were killed by RPF soldiers in 1994.
Gacaca Jurisdictions
In June 2008 the legislature transferred the most serious genocide cases (category
I) from conventional courts to community-based gacaca jurisdictions, created
in 2001 in an effort to combine restorative and punitive justice. Nearly 90 percent
of these 9,300 cases involve sexual violence and will be heard behind closed
doors, a policy meant to protect victims but which also prevents monitoring the
performance of judges, who are minimally trained and who can impose penalties
up to life imprisonment in solitary confinement. Originally scheduled to end in
2007, gacaca jurisdictions will continue hearing cases until 2010.
Instances of faulty procedure, judicial corruption, and false accusations undermine
trust in gacaca jurisdictions among victims as well as the accused. In
February a gacaca appeals court sentenced former presidential candidate Dr.
Thoneste Niyitegeka to 15 years in prison for genocide. Dr. Niyitegeka, who had
cared for Tutsis in 1994, had been acquitted by a lower court because of the
scanty, vague, and contradictory testimony against him. The appeals court gave
no explanation for overturning the previous acquittal. In another case marred by
grave procedural errors, an appeals court overturned the acquittal by a lower
court of Jean Npomuscne Munyangabe, a Rwandan working for the UN in Chad,
who voluntarily returned to Rwanda to contest charges against him. The safety of witnesses in judicial proceedings continued to be a concern, with 17
genocide survivors killed in the first nine months of 2008, some in connection
with testimony in gacaca proceedings.
International Justice
Rwanda intensified efforts to have persons accused of genocide sent back to
Rwanda for trial, generally unsuccessfully. At the ICTR, where officials hoped to
speed closure of the court by sending genocide cases to national jurisdictions,
judges refused transfers to Rwanda, citing among other reasons difficulty in
obtaining defense witness testimony and the possible imposition of a sentence
of life in solitary confinement. The Rwandan legislature sought to remove one
obstacle to transfers by adopting a law excluding imposition of this penalty on
persons transferred from the ICTR.
The United Kingdom agreed to the extradition of four Rwandans, a decision being
appealed. A French appeals court refused to extradite two Rwandans, as did a
German court. More than a dozen requests are pending in other European countries
and Belgium is pursuing further domestic prosecutions.
In February 2008 a Spanish judge issued arrest warrants for 40 Rwandan Defense
Force officers for war crimes and crimes against humanity committed against
Spanish, Rwandan, and Congolese citizens in the 1990s. The prosecution is
based on both domestic law and universal jurisdiction, a doctrine which permits
national courts to prosecute the most heinous crimes committed abroad.
Rwandan authorities mobilized African governments against such judicial action,
labeling it neo-colonialist.
In a similar situation in 2006, Rwanda broke relations with France after a judge
issued warrants against nine RDF officers. In August 2008 Rwanda published a
report charging French involvement in the genocide and announced possible
prosecutions of French citizens. In November Germany arrested Rose Kabuye, one
of the nine, on a French warrant. Rwanda immediately expelled the German
ambassador and organized protest demonstrations in Rwanda and abroad.
Genocide Ideology
Authorities use prosecution, or the threat of prosecution, for genocide ideology
to silence dissent of many kinds, including calls for justice for RPF war crimes.
Prosecutors brought hundreds of cases involving this accusation before the
charge was finally defined by law in June 2008. The current definition is vague,
requires no link to any genocidal act, and prohibits speech protected by international
conventions.
Elections
In the September legislative elections, RPF candidates won 79 percent of the vote
in polling that was peaceful, but marred by numerous irregularities. While
acknowledging some progress since the 2003 election, European Union
observers faulted procedural irregularities in over half the polling stations, RPF
dominance of the media, and the absence of political plurality, in due part to the
fear of genocide ideology accusations. Women took 44 seats in the 80-seat
assembly, making the Rwandan parliament the first in the world with a female
majority. The Rwandan constitution provides that women must hold at least 30
percent of parliamentary seats.
Human Rights Defenders and Journalists
In late 2007 two activists from the Rwandan League for the Promotion and
Defense of Human Rights (LIPRODHOR) were threatened and fled Rwanda following
publication of a LIPRODHOR report documenting official abuses. LIPRODHOR
as an organization was not allowed to monitor the 2008 elections and its members
were excluded from joining other observer teams.
The Human Rights League of the Great Lakes (LDGL)an umbrella group that
includes Burundian, Congolese, and Rwandan organizationsmonitored the elections,
and in a balanced report identified many of the faults also noted by the EU
observers. The chair of the National Election Commission attacked LDGL for the
report, wrongly asserting that its Congolese president had changed an earlier version
to make the report more critical.
Throughout the year, officials sought to limit reporting by critical journalists.
Beginning in 2007 officials criticized the Voice of America and the BBC for favoring
genocide ideology and in 2008 excluded their journalists from official
events. In May 2008 reporters for three independent newspapers were excluded
from an official celebration of World Press Day and were thereafter excluded from
all government press conferences.
Journalist Dominique Makeli, jailed for 14 years on genocide charges, was acquitted
in a gacaca trial, but the verdict has been appealed.
Key International Actors
Donors, including multilateral institutions, like the World Bank and the European
Union, and bilateral donors, like the United Kingdom, the United States, Belgium,
the Netherlands, Germany, and Sweden, provide generous support to Rwanda,
citing its ambitious plans for economic growth and its achievement of internal
stability. International actors rarely criticize the Rwandan human rights performance
publicly, although some on occasion discreetly, and occasionally successfully,
recommend changes in proposed legislation.
Even such generally supportive donors as the US criticized Rwanda for permitting
the Congolese rebel commander Laurent Nkunda to obtain recruits and financial
support from within Rwanda (see DRC chapter). Dutch parliamentarians, who
attributed some responsibility to Rwanda for the Congolese crisis, proposed
transferring Dutch general budget support from Rwanda to a Congolese emergency
fund.
Sierra Leone
The government of President Ernest Bai Koroma, elected in 2007, made concerted
efforts to address the issues which gave rise to the brutal 11-year armed conflict
that ended in 2002rampant corruption, gross public financial mismanagement,
inadequate distribution of the countrys natural resources, and weak rule of law.
However, resistance to the reform agenda from some influential members of government
threatened these efforts. Meanwhile, serious deficiencies in the police
and judiciary continue to undermine fundamental human rights.
The discovery in July of a plane loaded with cocaine, and the subsequent arrest of
several Latin Americans and Sierra Leonean officials allegedly involved in drug
trafficking, focused Sierra Leones key partners on the urgency of improving the
rule of law, addressing extremely high rates of unemployment, and strengthening
the security sector. Meanwhile, through the efforts of the UN-mandated Special
Court for Sierra Leone, significant progress continues in achieving accountability
for war crimes.
In 2007 and 2008 Sierra Leone ranked last in the UNs Human Development
Index. At 1,800 deaths per 100,000 live births, the country has the highest maternal
mortality rate in the world, largely due to lack of human resources and corruption
in the healthcare sector.
Corruption
The government put the struggle against corruption at the top of the national
agenda and took several meaningful steps to address a scourge that has for
decades posed a major obstacle to human rights and development. In August
parliament passed a bill expanding the powers of the existing Anti-Corruption
Commission (ACC), granting it independent powers to investigate and prosecute
matters on its own, rather than through the president-appointed attorney general.
During the year President Koroma warned government officials to desist from corrupt
practices, ordered a temporary ban on logging and exploitation of timber,
took steps to address the lack of competitive bidding for contracts, and in
September became the first Sierra Leonean head of state to declare his assets to
the ACC. During 2008 the ACC indicted a former ombudsman and several low-and mid-level officials from ministries and parastatals. Several other investigations,
including those involving a serving minister and two magistrates, were ongoing.
Efforts to Establish the Rule of Law
Deficiencies in the judicial system persist, including extortion and bribe-taking by
officials; insufficient numbers of judges, magistrates, and prosecuting attorneys;
absenteeism by court personnel; inadequate remuneration for judiciary personnel;
and extended periods of pretrial detention. In 2008 some 90 percent of prisoners
lacked any legal representation. Hundreds of peopleover 40 percent of
the countrys detaineeswere held in prolonged pretrial detention.
The only legal system accessible to some 70 percent of the population is one
based on customary courts controlled by traditional leaders and applying customary
law, which is often discriminatory, particularly against women. Local court officials
frequently abuse their powers by illegally detaining persons, charging high
fines for minor offenses, and adjudicating criminal cases beyond their jurisdiction.
Prisons were severely overcrowded, in violation of international standards. Some
20 people reportedly died in detention, a consequence of overcrowding and the
lack of adequate food, clothing, medicine, hygiene, and sanitation in Sierra
Leones prisons. The population of the countrys largest detention facility
designed for 350 detaineesstands at over 1,100.
A concerted effort by the government, UN, and UK-funded Justice Sector
Development Programme (JSDP) to improve the rule of law led to some improvements
in the sector, including a decrease in the number of prisoners held in pretrial
detention, slight improvements in healthcare and access to water for
detainees, and the opening of a separate detention facility for juvenile offenders.
In November, 11 death row prisoners were released after an appellate court overturned
a December 2004 conviction for treason in connection with a 2003 coup
attempt. At this writing, 12 individuals remain on death row.
Police and Army Conduct
On several occasions police were accused of using excessive force against the
media and alleged criminals, or while executing a court order. There were also
persistent reports of bribe-taking, extortion at checkpoints, and requiring victims
of crimes to pay the police to file reports or conduct investigations. However, the
police were notably professional and non-partisan during episodes of ethnic and
politically-motivated violence and in their response to serious crimes, including
Sierra Leones largest drug bust. Police leadership is also increasingly more willing
to investigate, discipline, and dismiss officers engaging in unprofessional or
corrupt practices. In June, 94 police officers were fired after having been found
guilty of professional misconduct.
Since 1999 the UK-led International Military Advisory and Training Team (IMATT)
has been working to reform and advise the Republic of Sierra Leone Armed Forces
(RSLAF). In 2008 there were a few reports of abuses and indiscipline by members
of the army, but the RSLAF leadership demonstrated its commitment to penalize
and sanction soldiers for offenses committed.
Truth and Reconciliation Commission
The 2005 report of Sierra Leones Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC)
attributed the civil war largely to decades of corrupt rule by the political elite and
recommended abolishing the death penalty, repealing laws that criminalize seditious
libel, increasing the transparency of the mining industry, improving good
governance, and establishing a reparations fund for war victims. The government
has been slow to implement the recommendations and openly rejected some of
them, including the abolition of the death penalty. However, after a long delay,
one of the commissions recommendationsthe establishment of a reparations
fund for war victimswas established and funded by the UN Peacebuilding Fund.
National Human Rights Commission
Increased financial support in 2008 allowed the National Human Rights
Commission to more fully carry out its mandate to investigate and report on
human rights abuses and push for the implementation of the TRC recommendations. During the year the commission became fully operational, establishing
offices in Bo, Kenema, and Makeni, and launching a five-year strategic plan. By
years end, it had received and investigated over 100 complaints. The commission
generally operated without government interference.
Accountability for Past Abuses
The trial of former Liberian president Charles Taylorcharged with 11 counts of
war crimes and crimes against humanity for supporting Sierra Leonean rebel
groupsresumed before the Special Court for Sierra Leone in January 2008. This
followed a six-month delay due to an overhaul in Taylors legal team after he
sought to fire his lawyers over concerns that he was receiving inadequate
resources to prepare his defense. The prosecution, which as of this writing has
presented more than 80 witnesses, is due to complete their case in January
2009. Taylor is the first former African head of state to stand trial in front of any
international or hybrid international-national war crimes tribunal. For security reasons
his trial is taking place in The Hague instead of Freetown, Sierra Leones
capital.
After issuing verdicts in the cases of its first five defendants in 2007, the court in
February 2008 upheld convictions on appeal by three members of the rebel
Armed Forces Revolutionary Council (AFRC)Alex Tamba Brima, Brima Bazzy
Kamara, and Santigie Borbor Kanuwhom the judges noted were responsible for
some of the most heinous, brutal, and atrocious crimes ever recorded in human
history. Convictions on appeal for members of the government-sponsored Civil
Defense Forces (CDF) Moinina Fofana and Allieu Kondewawere largely upheld,
although the appeals chamber rejected the trial chambers finding that the CDFs
purposes in fighting could be a basis for reducing sentences, and instead lengthened
the prison terms imposed. The cases of three members of the rebel
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) were concluded in June 2008, and judgment is
expected in late 2008.
While states, including the UK, the US, the Netherlands, Canada, France, and
Germany, continue to make important contributions to the Special Court for Sierra
Leone, which relies primarily on voluntary funding, the court continued to suffer
from financial shortfalls.
Key International Actors
The UN and UK government continued to take the lead in supporting Sierra
Leones transition to democracy and the rule of law.
To address the ongoing political, economic, security, and rule of law challenges,
the UN Security Council in October 2008 established its fourth UN mission in
Sierra Leone in 10 yearsthe 70-strong UN Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL). The mission will have a largely advisory role aimed at promoting
human rights and strengthening democratic institutions and the rule of
law, including efforts to address organized crime and drug trafficking. UNIPSIL will
coordinate closely with the UN Peacebuilding Commission and Fund, which support
projects dedicated to improving reform in the justice and security sectors.
UNIPSIL follows the 300-strong UN Integrated Office for Sierra Leone (UNIOSL),
whose mandate expired in September 2008.
More than one-third of Sierra Leones national income of US$365 million is provided
by donors. The United Kingdom, Sierra Leones largest donor, gave 50 million
in the last fiscal year, primarily through its international aid agency.
Somalia
An increasingly brutal conflict pits a deeply fragmented insurgency against
Somalias weak Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and Ethiopian military
forces that are in Somalia to support it. All sides to this conflict have regularly
committed serious violations of international humanitarian law amounting to war
crimes with complete impunity and with devastating impact on Somalias civilian
population. The human rights and humanitarian situation in Somalia deteriorated
to levels perhaps unseen since the collapse of the countrys last unified central
government in 1991.
Since the beginning of 2007 more than 870,000 civilians have fled war-torn
Mogadishu alone and more than 6,000 civilians have been killed in the fighting.
Untold numbers of Somalis bear the scars of seeing family members killed or
raped. Several key international playersmost notably Ethiopia, Eritrea, and the
United Stateshave exacerbated the crisis through their policies and actions.
In 2008 violence escalated in scale and brutality while internationally supported
peace talks struggled to get traction. Even traditional systems of clan protection
have broken down in many areas. Key civil society activists whose talents are
essential to hopes of rebuilding were killed or driven out of the country. The number
of Somalis in need of humanitarian assistance surpassed 3 million, even as
criminal violence, rampant piracy off the northern coasts, and targeted attacks on
humanitarian workers impeded the flow of aid. Somalis attempting to flee this
chaos faced brutal attacks by freelance militias along the roads.
Abuses by TFG Security Forces and Militias
TFG police, military personnel, and militias linked to leading TFG figures such as
former Mogadishu mayor Mohammed Dheere are implicated in widespread abuses
against Somali civilians. Throughout 2008 these forces carried out killings,
murder, rape, and looting during operations across many Mogadishu neighborhoods.
Following an insurgent mortar attack launched from near the Al-Mathal
school in Mogadishu in June, TFG police sacked the school, smashing and burning
educational materials, and shooting one child in the leg.
TFG forces repeatedly killed and wounded civilians during fighting against insurgent
forces. In March, following an insurgent ambush, TFG police forces indiscriminately
fired their weapons, killing four passengers in a passing minibus and
injuring its driver.
TFG police and intelligence officials carried out widespread arbitrary arrests, often
for the purpose of extracting ransom payments from detainees and their families.
Intelligence operatives under the command of TFG National Security Agency head
Mohammed Warsame Darwish maintain a dungeon-like detention facility in
southern Mogadishu. Conditions in this facility are appalling and intelligence personnel
subject many detainees to torture during interrogation.
Abuses by Ethiopian Military Forces (see also Ethiopia chapter)
Ethiopian National Defense Force (ENDF) personnel in Mogadishu have continued
to use mortars, artillery, and Katyusha rockets indiscriminately in response to
insurgent attacks, devastating entire neighborhoods of the city. Ethiopian bombardments
regularly fall on civilian homes and public spaces, sometimes killing
entire families. In July ENDF forces bombarded part of the strategic town of
Beletweyne after coming under attack by insurgent forces based there, displacing
75,000 people.
In 2008 ENDF personnel were implicated in numerous acts of murder, rape, and
looting of Somali civilians, often alongside TFG forces. In an April raid on a
Mogadishu mosque, ENDF soldiers reportedly killed 21 people; seven of the dead
had their throats cut.
Since late 2007 ENDF discipline has eroded. Ethiopian soldiers frequently react to
insurgent attacks by firing indiscriminately into crowds of civilians. In August a
group of ENDF soldiers hit by a roadside bomb near the town of Afgooye responded
by firing wildly and killing up to 60 civilians, including the passengers of two
minibuses.
Abuses by Insurgent Forces
Insurgent forces have kept TFG and Ethiopian forces pinned down in heavy fighting
in Mogadishu for nearly two years, gaining ground in 2008. The insurgents are deeply fragmented, but many of the worst abuses have been committed by
groups linked to Al-Shabaab (Youth in Arabic), a militant Islamist group.
Insurgents in Mogadishu routinely fire mortar shells from populated areas
towards TFG and Ethiopian installations without adequate spotting, indiscriminately
killing and wounding civilians, and placing civilians under their control at
risk from Ethiopian and TFG counter-battery fire. Insurgent groups, some of which
are illegally recruitingsometimes by forceunder 18-year-olds, also use landmines
and remote-detonated explosive devices along roads in populated areas.
In August a roadside bomb in southern Mogadishu killed 21 women working as
street-cleaners and wounded more than 40 other civilians.
Insurgent forces have also carried out targeted killings of civilian TFG officials,
perceived TFG collaborators, and individuals the insurgents view as un-Islamic. In
January a man working as a messenger among different TFG offices was shot outside
of his home in Mogadishu after receiving several death threats ordering him
to stop his work. In April Al-Shabaab fighters killed four foreign national teachers
in the town of Beletweyne.
In October a simultaneous wave of bomb attacks struck a government office in
Puntland as well as government, UN, and Ethiopian consular offices in Hargeisa.
At least 28 people died in the attacks.
Attacks against Humanitarian Workers, Civil Society Activists,
and Journalists
Humanitarian workers and civil society activists became the targets of an
unprecedented wave of attacks in 2008. Between January and November, 25
humanitarian workers were killed in Somalia and at least 24 NGO staff were kidnapped.
In January a roadside bomb in Kismayo killed three Mdecins Sans
Frontires staff and a journalist. In June armed men assassinated civil society
activist Mohamed Hassan Kulmiye in his office in Beletweyne. In July unknown
men shot dead Osman Ali Mohamed, the head of the United Nations
Development Program (UNDP) office in Somalia, as he left a mosque. The head of
the Somalia office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees was kidnapped
in June and held for more than two months.
Al-Shabaab and its more militant splinter groups are believed to have carried out
many of these attacks. But many Somali activists believe that elements within the
TFG are also profiting from the current environment of confusion and impunity to
threaten and murder critics in civil society. Prominent activists who fled into exile
in 2008 cite their inability to identify the origin of threats as the primary reason
they had no choice but to leave.
At least two Somali journalists were killed in 2008, bringing the total number of
journalists killed since early 2007 to 10. In June gunmen shot and killed BBC
stringer Nasteh Dahir Farah outside of his home in Kismayo. TFG police and intelligence
personnel have imprisoned several other journalists. In 2008 TFG security
services detained the directors of two independent radio stations, Radio
Somaliweyn and Radio Shabelle. A reporter from Radio Somaliweyn was also
jailed, for covering an opposition meeting in Asmara. In general, however, TFG
Prime Minister Nur Hassan Hussein has made efforts to reduce the level of
harassment TFG security forces mete out to Somali journalists.
Key International Actors
The US, the United Kingdom, the European Commission and other key donors
have failed to condemn ENDF or TFG abuses or address the scale of the Somali
crisis. Instead, they have sought to support the TFG even where this risks empowering
abusive TFG actors and institutions. In 2008 several donors, including the
European Commission, pressured UNDP to pay the salaries of 4,000 Ethiopiantrained
TFG security personnel without adequate monitoring.
US policy on Somalia is dominated by counterterrorism concerns and tends
towards unwavering support for the TFG and for Ethiopian policy in Somalia. The
US military has continued its practice of targeted air strikes on alleged terrorist
suspects, launching two attacks on Somali soil in 2008. One attack in March
injured six civilians but did not hit any suspected terrorist targets, while another
in April killed Al-Shabaabs commander, Aden Hashi Ayrow, as well as several
civilians.
Somalias neighbors have played mixed roles in the ongoing crisis. Eritrea uses
Somalia as a convenient theater in its proxy war against Ethiopia. Eritrea hosts a
breakaway faction of the opposition Alliance for the Re-Liberation of Somalia (ARS) and actively stokes the violence. Kenya closed its border with Somalia in
January 2007, but continues to accommodate nearly 7,000 new Somali refugees
each month in the sprawling refugee camps around the northern town of Dadaab.
The African Union has authorized a force of 8,000 peacekeepers for Somalia, but
thus far only 2,450 Ugandan and Burundian troops have been deployed. Those
troops are largely limited to protecting a few key installations in Mogadishu.
The United Nations Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah, has successfully brought together the Djibouti-based
ARS with TFG representatives for peace talks. The talks, hosted by the government
of Djibouti, currently represent the best hope for a negotiated end to the armed
conflict in Somalia. However, thus far there has been a lack of concrete progress
and they have been hobbled by the fact that some factions within the TFG, along
with Al-Shabaab and other powerful opposition groups, have rejected the process
altogether.
South Africa
Poverty, unemployment, gender-based and xenophobic violence, and crime
remain significant barriers to the enjoyment of human rights; the governments
commitment to address them is inadequate. Vulnerable groups and NGOs are
increasingly using the courts to establish the principle of progressive realization
of socioeconomic rights as stipulated in the constitution.
In September 2008 leadership battles within the ruling African National Congress
(ANC) resulted in the early resignation of President Thabo Mbeki after a court
finding of judicial interference. ANC Deputy President Kgalema Motlanthe took
over until the 2009 elections. Judicial independence has been re-emphasized by
the courts, the government, and civil society in the face of public attacks, disparaging
judges, and scandals involving the conduct of individual judges.
Incidents of police violence are reported to be increasing.
South Africa failed to utilize its non-permanent membership of the United Nations
Security Council to support resolutions or initiatives that would help protect the
rights of people in various countries, most notably Sudan and Zimbabwe.
Xenophobic Attacks on Foreign Nationals
In May 2008 xenophobic violence broke out in Alexandra, Johannesburg, and rapidly
spread to seven of South Africas nine provinces, resulting in 62 deaths,
including 21 South Africans, 11 Mozambicans, five Zimbabweans and three
Somalis; thousands were injured. Some 40,000 foreign nationals left the country
and a further 50,000 remain internally displaced.
The attacks are indicative of growing xenophobia in South Africa, where isolated
incidents of violence against foreign nationals have been documented since the
mid-1990s. Intolerance of migrants partly provoked by competition for resources
and by increasing numbers of migrants, particularly from Zimbabwe, has created
a volatile situation in poor communities, with foreign nationals becoming easy
targets. Although over 1,000 people were arrested after the violence, there were
fewer convictions. The climate of impunity for those responsible allowed the situation
to escalate. Humanitarian measures were also inadequate. Temporary shelters constructed in June 2008 did not meet international standards, and there
was insufficient clean water, food, and sanitation, and inadequate healthcare.
Lack of protection for women and children resulted in incidents of sexual violence.
Despite a pending Constitutional Court judgment, the Gauteng provincial
government dismantled temporary shelters, leaving hundreds of people without
shelter, water, food, and sanitation.
The government has yet to address longer-term issues of reintegration, resettlement,
or xenophobic intolerance in local communities. While many victims of the
May attacks have returned to communities from which they fled, some have experienced
new attacks, with over 30 deaths being reported between June and
November 2008. As a result, many are seeking greater assurances for their own
safety before leaving government shelters.
Refugees and Migrants
The government opened a reception centre in Musina, near the Zimbabwean border,
in response to increased migration from Zimbabwe and growing criticism
from civil society organizations. However, deportation and status determination
processes conducted by immigration officials and police who are insufficiently
trained in basic refugee law and related procedures continue to thwart refugees
efforts to seek asylum. Tens of thousands of Zimbabwean nationals with valid
refugee claims on the basis of fleeing Operation Murambatsvina or other wellfounded
fears of political persecution were refouled.
South Africas reform of the Department of Home Affairs has yet to have impact
on the procedural obstacles and administrative delays that plague refugee status
determination. Asylum seekers remain subject to long queues in filthy conditions,
face status determination officers ill-equipped to make fair decisions, and struggle
to access assistance for appeals because of limited resources within the Legal
Aid Board.
Excessive Use of Force by the Police
In 2008 South Africa saw a 13 percent increase in the number of deaths as a
result of police action and an eight percent increase in complaints against police.
A January police raid on the Johannesburg Central Methodist Church saw the use
of pepper spray and batons against 1,200 sleeping foreign nationals, including
women and children seeking shelter. Some were refugees and asylum seekers.
The police said they were looking for drugs, firearms, and illegal immigrants.
The indiscriminate use of rubber bullets and other non-lethal weapons during
public protestsfrom student protests to service delivery protestsand the number
of resulting injuries call into question policing methods used during public
demonstrations. During an authorized service delivery protest in Sydenham,
Durban, in September 2007, police used water cannon, stun grenades and fired
rubber bullets without adequate warning; six protesters required hospitalization.
Rubber bullets and assaults using batons during protests injured eight people in
Orange Farm in May 2008, 16 refugees in the Western Cape in July and another 18
people in Orange Farm in September. South African law clearly limits the use of
weapons likely to cause bodily injury or death to situations where other methods
have failed, and requires the use of proportionate force. In many reported incidents,
the police failed to give adequate warning and did not try other methods
to disperse demonstrations.
Socioeconomic Rights
Delivery on health rights remains inadequate, with progress being won through
civil society litigation. In May 2008 the High Court ruled that the health classification
policy of the South African Defence Forces was unconstitutional, ordering it
to halt discrimination on the grounds of HIV status and to change policy that precluded
members from external deployment because of HIV status. The increasing
incidence of drug-resistant and multi-drug-resistant tuberculosis has raised concerns
about the delivery of effective TB therapy and infection-control practices in
South African hospitals, the confinement of patients, the conditions of confinement,
and patient access to treatment.
Despite the South African governments Breaking New Ground housing policy,
which includes development of socially inclusive housing projects, an informal
settlement upgrading program, and provision of infrastructure and services for
low-income communities, more than 14 percent of South Africans continue to live
in inadequate housing; while over 20 percent do not have access to basic services. During his visit to South Africa in February 2008, the UN special rapporteur on
adequate housing commented that living conditions in South Africas informal
settlements fall short of safe and sustainable conditions.
In April the Phiri community affirmed the right to adequate water for poor communities
when it won its High Court case against the City of Johannesburg. The landmark
ruling ordered the City to provide residents of Phiri with 50 liters of free
water per person per day, noting that the current daily allocation of 25 liters of
free water per person was insufficient, particularly for people suffering from
HIV/AIDS. The City of Johannesburg halted installations of pre-paid water meters
while it appealed the High Court decision.
Womens Rights
Violence against women, including rape and domestic violence, remained unacceptably
high. The so-called Sexual Offences Actofficially titled the Criminal Law
(Sexual Offences and Related Matters) Amendment Act, No. 32 of 2007finally
came into effect on December 16, 2007. It amends the common law definition of
rape to include men and boys and no longer focuses only on penetrative offenses.
It provides additional protective measures for child victims of sexual offenses
and adults with mental disabilities.
Childrens Rights
The Childrens Act became law in April 2008 and offers increased protection for
children and the promotion of childrens rights. The Child Justice Act passed in
June established a separate criminal justice procedural system for child offenders.
It also increased the minimum age of criminal capacity from seven to 10
years, but allows for mandatory minimum sentencesincluding life sentences for
offenses such as murder and the rape of a minorto be applicable to children
ages 16 and 17 years. This is despite constitutional provisions that children
should be detained only as a last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of
time, and despite the call by the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child for life
imprisonment of child offenders to be abolished. Around 122,000 children live in child-headed households, making them particularly
vulnerable to discrimination, ostracism, social exclusion, and sexual
exploitation. Unaccompanied refugee and asylum-seeking children face obstacles
and delays in accessing the courts to formalize their status, resulting in informal
foster placements and delays in accessing social welfare.
International Role
South Africa ended its two-year period as a non-permanent member of the UN
Security Council in December 2008. South Africa opposed or declined to support
resolutions for victims of human rights violations in Sudan, Belarus, Uzbekistan,
Burma, Iran, Zimbabwe, and North Korea. Together with Libya, South Africa
played a leading role in seeking to make renewal of the United Nations-African
Union Mission in Darfur, conditional on a Security Council intervention to rein in
the International Criminal Court, by ordering it not to proceed with the requested
arrest warrant for Sudans President Omar al-Bashir. The South African move,
which would have been damaging to the court, was ultimately defeated. South
Africa was a strong supporter of the court when it was founded. South Africa was
reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism of the UN Human
Rights Council in April, but did not make clear its commitments during the
process.
South Africas former president Mbeki continued as the Southern African
Development Community mediator in Zimbabwe throughout the year but failed to
confront the major election-related human rights violations committed by the
Zimbabwean government.
Sudan
With war continuing in the west and a fragile peace in the south, the dynamics of
respect for human rights remain complex and the challenges severe. In Darfur
hundreds of thousands remain internally displaced as the Sudanese government
uses indiscriminate bombings and attacks on civilians by ground forces and
allied Janjaweed militias in counterinsurgency. Throughout Sudan delay in implementing
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), signed in 2005 by the
National Congress Party (NCP) government and the Sudan Peoples Liberation
Movement (SPLM), is straining relations between the parties, threatening the CPA
itself.
On January 1, 2008, the hybrid United Nations-African Union Mission in Darfur,
(UNAMID), formally took over peacekeeping in Darfur. However, in large part due
to obstruction by the government, by late 2008 barely 10,000 of the authorized
26,000 peacekeepers were on the ground, and UNAMID was unable to provide
effective protection for civilians or humanitarian operations.
In May 2008 rebels from the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) attacked
Khartoum. Government security forces arbitrarily detained hundreds of suspected
rebels, severely mistreating many.
In July the International Criminal Court (ICC) prosecutor requested an arrest warrant
for President Omar al-Bashir on 10 counts of war crimes, crimes against
humanity, and genocide relating to Darfur. Khartoum threatened that this would
lead to violence in Darfur; and, according to many observers, aiming to secure
diplomatic support for suspension of the ICC investigation, Khartoum made minor
concessions to UNAMID and ostensible overtures towards peace. Meanwhile,
Sudan continued to refuse to hand over Ahmed Haroun, minister of state for
humanitarian affairs, and Ali Kosheib, who have been subject to ICC warrants
since 2007.
A national census, an important milestone in the CPA, was conducted in April, but
not in much of Darfur, and it was marred by violence in parts of the south where
in the weeks beforehand armed militias affiliated with the central government
attacked civilians near the north-south boundary.
Also in the border area, the inability of northern and southern leaders to resolve
differences over the status of oil-rich Abyei led to violent clashes between northern
and southern forces in May. National elections are scheduled for 2009, but
the Government of National Unity (GNU)created under the terms of the CPA
has yet to establish an elections commission or enact critical reforms, including
revised national security and press acts that would facilitate free and fair elections.
Sudan continues to sentence children to death. Sudans 2005 Interim
Constitution allows for persons under age 18 at the time of the crime to be executed
for hadd and qisas (categories of crimes under Sharia law). One child was
sentenced to death in 2008 and at least two other child cases are under appeal.
Darfur
Government and government-backed militias continue to attack civilian populations
ethnically associated with rebel movements, both deliberately and in the
course of indiscriminate bombings. Rebel factions have proliferated and criminal
banditry has increased. The 2006 Darfur Peace Agreement is now widely acknowledged
to be defunct.
In February, following an offensive by JEM in West Darfur, the government conducted
some of the worst attacks on civilians since 2003-2005. Government
forces and Janjaweed carried out a series of attacks on villages, killing and injuring
hundreds of civilians, and carrying out widespread looting in violation of international
humanitarian law. An estimated 40,000 people fled, 13,000 of them to
Chad.
The ICC prosecutors request for an arrest warrant for President Bashir did not,
despite Khartoums threats, appear to increase violence on the ground, but neither
did it decrease. Continuing its pattern of attacks on rebel-held areas, in July
government forces bombed 21 civilian locations, killing at least two civilians. In
August and September government forces and militia attacked rebel positions
and villages in North and West Darfur, killing an unknown number of civilians,
looting property, and displacing thousands. In October militia supported by government forces attacked villages in South Darfur, killing scores of civilians,
destroying homes, and looting animals.
In other incidents it was not clear who was responsible. Armed elements targeted
both peacekeepers and humanitarian operations, usually to steal vehicles, supplies,
and weapons. On July 8, armed men attacked a UNAMID convoy in North
Darfur, killing five peacekeepers and two police. In September gunmen shot at
UNAMID helicopters on three occasions, killing four passengers in one incident in
South Darfur. A Nigerian peacekeeper was killed in an ambush in October. From
January to August 2008, armed assailants hijacked 224 vehicles, attacked 139
humanitarian facilities, and killed 11 humanitarian workers. The continued insecurity
has limited humanitarian operations in many areas and prompted UNAMID to
tighten security restrictions.
Internally displaced populations were vulnerable to violence and attacks by a
host of actors, including rebels, former rebels, and government forces. In South
Darfur, government security forces conducted a raid on Kalma camp, reportedly to
disarm civilians, killing 33 civilians including women and children. In September
government forces entered Zamzam camp and shot indiscriminately at civilians,
and looted buildings and structures, causing civilians to flee. Internally displaced
women and girls were victims of sexual violence by government forces, allied militia,
rebels, and criminals. The majority of victims did not seek redress or were prevented
from doing so by legal and practical obstacles in the justice system.
The Darfur conflict reached the capital for the first time on May 10-12 when JEM
forces attacked Omdurman, a western suburb of Khartoum. Following the attack,
Sudanese National Intelligence and Security Services (NISS) arrested at least 300
individuals, including children, in public places and house-to-house searches targeting
those who appeared Darfuri. Released detainees reported torture, mistreatment,
and inhumane conditions in prisons and secret detention centers.
Many of those arrested remain unaccounted for.
In June the government established special courts under Sudans 2001 Anti-
Terrorism Law to try those accused of participating in the attack. In trials that fell
below international standards, the courts tried and sentenced to death 50 people
in July and August. Their appeal is pending.
Following the ICC prosecutors request for an arrest warrant for President Bashir in
July, Khartoum responded with a dual strategy of threats of further violence and
promises of progress on the ground. The government made a series of minor concessions
to UNAMID and ostensible overtures towards peace, aimed at securing
diplomatic support for suspension of the investigation. In August President
Bashir announced a Sudan Peoples Initiative to draw up a proposal for resolving
the conflict, and in October expressed willingness to attend talks slated to
take place in Qatar at the end of the year. On November 12, Khartoum also
announced a unilateral ceasefire in advance of those talks. However, rebels
refused to engage in either the Peoples Initiative or the Qatar talks, arguing that
the government is not serious about either the peace process or the ceasefire,
but only interested in securing a deferral of the ICC investigation.
Also in response to the threat of a warrant, Khartoum appointed another special
prosecutor to try crimes committed in Darfur. However, at the time of writing,
Sudan has made no significant progress toward domestic accountability for serious
crimes.
Press Freedom
The government resumed pre-print censorship on newspapers in 2008, in the
wake of a Chadian rebel coup attempt at NDjamena on February 2-3which the
Chad government said was supported by Khartoumand again after the JEM
attack on Omdurman. Between May and September, NISS media censors removed
or partly removed more than 150 articles, 50 of which covered the Darfur conflict.
Southern Sudan
Delays in implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement continued to
strain relations between the NCP and the SPLM. In October 2007, the SPLM temporarily
suspended participation in the Government of National Unity, accusing
the NCP of failing to share oil revenues, not withdrawing its troops from the
south, failing to take steps to demarcate the North-South border, and, crucially,
failing to implement the Abyei Protocol, an accord to resolve the status of oil-rich
Abyei.
The SPLM rejoined the GNU in late 2007, but the parties did not resolve the dispute
over Abyei, which led to fighting in May 2008, in which scores of civilians
were killed and at least 60,000 fled their homes. The parties reached agreement
to restore security to Abyei, enabling displaced residents to return. However, the
underlying dispute over Abyei and other issues, including withdrawal of troops
and border demarcation, continued to threaten the CPA.
In southern Sudan, the proliferation of small arms among the civilians contributed
to violent communal disputes over land, cattle and resources. The semiautonomous
Government of Southern Sudan (GOSS) conducted civilian disarmament,
involving human rights violations by poorly trained and sometimes undisciplined
soldiers. Weak rule of law institutions were not able to provide civilian
security and contributed to an environment of impunity. Human rights violations
in the administration of justicethe responsibility of GOSS in the southincluded
arbitrary arrests and detentions, prolonged pretrial detention, and poor conditions
in detention facilities.
Key International Actors
In 2008 international attention mainly focused on two issues: the deployment of
UNAMID and the ICC arrest warrant request for President Bashir.
Diplomatic support for UNAMID, including at the UN Security Council, did not
translate into effective pressure on Khartoum to facilitate deployment, nor the
provision of critical equipment, including helicopters that the force still seeks. In
early 2008 a group of governments, including the United States and Canada,
formed Friends of UNAMID, which provided additional resources to troop-contributing
countries, but by late 2008 the force remained severely understaffed
and ill-equipped.
In July international focus shifted when the ICC prosecutor applied for a warrant
for the arrest of President Bashir, and Khartoum and its allies launched their
diplomatic campaign to secure the suspension of the investigation, (which the
UN Security Council can order under article 16 of the Rome Statute.)
Although both the African Union and the League of Arab States supported calls
for suspending the warrant, the Security Council remains divided. Several countries, including the US, United Kingdom and France, have rejected suspension.
The ICC pretrial chamber is expected to consider the prosecutors request in early
2009.
Uganda
In 2008 the government of President Yoweri Museveni and the Lords Resistance
Army (LRA) concluded peace talks to end the long-running war in northern
Uganda, but LRA leader Joseph Kony did not sign the final peace accord. Sought
by the International Criminal Court (ICC) on war crimes charges, the LRA leadership
continued to commit serious abuses, preying on civilians in the Democratic
Republic of Congo (DRC), to which the LRA relocated in 2006, as well as in Sudan
and the Central African Republic (CAR).
In Karamoja, where the availability of firearms has aggravated cattle-raiding, the
Ugandan army continued a campaign to disarm residents, but in the process
committed human rights violations.
Military and security agencies illegally detained scores of persons seen as government
opponents, held many of them incommunicado, and tortured some of those
suspected of terrorism and treason. Police harassed opposition politicians and
journalists critical of the government, charging some with sedition and defamation.
War in Northern Uganda
At the start of 2008, the government and the LRA appeared to be moving significantly
closer to peace, concluding agreement in February on accountability, reconciliation,
demobilization, disarmament, and reintegration. However, by the end
of the year hopes of a final settlement were fading in the face of the repeated failure
of Joseph Kony to show up to sign the final peace agreement. Meanwhile, LRA
forces continued to commit abuses against civilians outside Uganda.
In an annex to the June 29, 2007 agreement, in February the parties agreed to the
creation of a special division of the Ugandan High Court to try serious crimes
committed during the conflict and broader accountability measures such as a
truth commission, reparations, and traditional justice practices. Judges were
appointed to the special division in May, but little else has been done since then.
As the International Criminal Courts statute permits national trials of its cases
where certain requirements are satisfied, LRA leaders for whom ICC arrest warrants have been issued could potentially be prosecuted by the Ugandan special
division, although only if the ICC judges determine that the national trials provide
an adequate alternative.
Meanwhile the LRA attacked civilians in the DRC, the CAR, and Sudan. In February
they reportedly abducted at least 100 persons in these three countries. After LRA
combatants killed 26 civilians and abducted 95 in March in Equatoria, Sudan, the
UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) ended repatriation of Sudanese
refugees from Uganda. From bases in Garamba National Park, DRC, the LRA in
September, October, and November reportedly abducted at least another 100
children, killed several civilians, and looted and burned Congolese villages.
Shortly after, three LRA defectors trying to turn themselves in were killed by the
local community.
Disarmament in Karamoja
As part of a law enforcement campaign initiated in 2006, the army continued
efforts to disarm the population in the impoverished region of Karamoja. Soldiers
reportedly used excessive force, firing on civilians, killing at least six, and on several
occasions torturing and arbitrarily detaining men to compel them to reveal
the location of weapons, though there were fewer incidents than in previous
years. In October the courts martial sentenced four soldiers to 12 years in prison
for the torture and killing of a local village chief in Kotido.
In April the government launched the Karamoja Integrated Disarmament and
Development Programme (KIDDP); its success will depend on more effective
access to justice and protection of civilians during disarmament operations.
Extrajudicial Killings, Illegal Detention, and Torture
In 2008 Human Rights Watch documented more than two dozen cases in which
treason and terrorism suspects were allegedly tortured by agents of the Joint Anti-
Terrorism Taskforce (JATT) and the Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence. Victims
described being arrested by agents in civilian dress and unmarked cars, especially
at the time of the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting in Kampala in
November 2007. They said they were beaten and tortured with electricity, and had pepper rubbed in their eyes. Some were illegally detained for many months in the
basement of JATT offices or in other irregular places of detention. Most were never
brought before judicial authorities, as required by law.
Judicial Independence and Freedom of Expression
Some officials failed to implement judicial decisions, especially those involving
politically sensitive issues, and used harassment and excessive force to silent
opponents. On May 27, 2008, the Constitutional Court nullified a section in the
Police Act that required police permission to hold a public rally, saying that it
unduly limited the rights to freedom of assembly and association. When the
Democratic Party organized a celebratory public rally in the capital, police officers,
deployed in large numbers, used tear gas and water cannons on the assembled
crowd. After party activists addressed the crowd through loud speakers from
their offices, police officers stormed the building, arresting four people who they
charged with environmental pollution for having used the speakers. Police prevented
the party from using its offices for almost a month. The police asserted
that they retain the right to determine where public rallies take place.
In February, Betty Kamya, a parliamentarian from the Forum for Democratic
Change, (FDC) was questioned by the police and charged with sedition, promoting
sectarianism, inciting violence, and promoting war on the person of the president
for saying that Ugandans should fight to extricate [themselves] from
Musevenis paw. In June, while Conservative Party Parliamentarian Suzan
Nampijja was addressing a rally in her constituency, police used tear gas to disperse
the crowd, giving no reason for their action. A few days later FDC
Parliamentarian Nabillah Naggayi Sempala was accosted while addressing a
crowd at a Kampala market. According to her account, police officers humiliated
her, stripped her of her clothing, and detained her temporarily.
Government officials also harassed opponents of a controversial land bill amendment
presented to parliament in 2008. In July, Medadi Lubega, Peter Mayiga, and
Betty Nambooze Bakireke, officials of the Buganda cultural institution and outspoken
critics of the bill, were arrested and detained for one week, well beyond
the constitutional limit of 48 hours. The three were subsequently re-arrested and
eventually charged with sedition and released on bail. The case was suspended in August because a 2005 challenge to the Sedition Law, brought by journalists,
was still pending in the Constitutional Court.
Government officials continue to threaten media freedom and use charges such
as sedition, defamation, and inciting violence against critics. In January the
Political and Media Offences Department of the Police charged Andrew Mwenda
and two others with sedition. A group of journalists from The Monitor newspaper
were charged with defaming the inspector general of government, Ugandas anticorruption
watchdog, for articles written about corruption in her office. Over 20
journalists have pending cases with the police or in the judicial system.
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Activists
Police and government officials continue to harass or restrict free expression by
activists supporting lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender rights. Police arrested
three LGBT activists on June 4 at the 2008 HIV/AIDS Implementers meeting in
Kampala after they peacefully protested the lack of official response to HIV/AIDS
among LGBT communities. They were charged with criminal trespass. Later, one
was mistreated by police officers during 24 hours of detention. In August the
three were acquitted of all charges.
In September two other members of the LGBT community were arrested by police
and held without charge for six days. In October Ethics and Integrity Minister
James Nsaba Buturo reaffirmed continued police operations to arrest LGBT individuals.
He said, the state of moral health in our nation is challenging and we
are concerned about the mushrooming of lesbianism and homosexuality.
HIV/AIDS
The proposed HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Bill 2008 criminalizes the intentional
transmission of HIV & AIDS. It also establishes compulsory HIV testing for
pregnant women and their partners. In its overall HIV/AIDS strategy, the government
has not made enough effort or provided sufficient resources for prevention
and care services to prevent HIV transmission.
Key International Actors
International donors focused on corruption, but generally shied away from pressing
the government to halt and punish human rights violations perpetrated by
security forces, even those generally known among diplomats such as illegal
detention and torture.
Warrants issued by the ICC for LRA leaders in 2005 remain outstanding. No major
playersincluding the United States, United Kingdom, the European Union, and
the United Nationstook steps to ensure the apprehension of the suspects,
although the European Parliament adopted a resolution calling on EU and African
Union member states and regional countries to help implement the warrants.
The mandate of the special envoy of the UN secretary-general for the LRA-affected
areas, Joaquim Chissano, was renewed for 2008. Throughout his tenure, he has
generally failed to stress the importance of justice for past crimes as a basis for
any durable peace. After his June briefing, UN Security Council members could not
agree on language concerning the ICC and so said nothing, providing one more
example of indecision in promoting justice for the victims of abuses.
Zambia
Zambia is at a political crossroads after President Levy Mwanawasa died in
August 2008. Largely credited with Zambias economic recovery, including growth
of more than five percent per year since 2002, Mwanawasa had also undertaken
several positive steps to address the AIDS crisis in the country.
Presidential elections in October 2008 to choose Mwanawasas successor resulted
in a narrow victory for his former vice president, Rupiah Banda of the
Movement for Multi-Party Democracy (MMD). In his inaugural speech, Banda
announced that Zambia would continue its pro-market economic policies and
anti-corruption programs, work to attract foreign investment, and strive to
become a middle-income country by 2030.
Presidential Elections
Voter turnout was markedly low, with only 45 percent of registered voters going to
the polls. The Electoral Commission of Zambia (ECZ) announced that Banda won
40 percent of the contested vote against 38 percent for his closest rival, opposition
Patriotic Front (PF) leader Michael Sata. The bulk of support for Banda and
the MMD came from rural areas, where the MMD subsidized fertilizer supplies to
enhance food security prior to the elections. Support for Sata, who ran on an antipoverty
ticket and led the polls during the first two days of counting, came from
urban voters, particularly in the capital Lusaka and the Copperbelt.
The Southern African Development Community (SADC) electoral observer mission
declared the elections free and fair, and the Foundation for Democratic Process
(FODEP), a local electoral watchdogdescribed the results as consistent with the
findings of their observers at polling stations. However, Sata accused the MMD of
rigging the vote, citing irregularities such as late voting in two constituencies in
Western Province. The Electoral Commission said this was the result of the late
arrival of electoral staff and ballot papers due to transportation problems. Sata
also alleged that the MMD had inflated the figures in its favor in the partys
stronghold areas, citing inconsistencies between vote tallies and the number of
registered voters. Refusing to accept the result, the Patriotic Front launched a
legal challenge and demanded a recount in 78 of the 180 constituencies.
There was heavy police presence, especially in Lusaka, to pre-empt violence,
given that the 2006 general elections saw violent clashes involving police and PF
supporters in Lusaka and the Copperbelt after results from rural constituencies
indicated that Mwanawasa would win those elections.
Minor riots erupted in the Copperbelt and in a couple of townships in Lusaka,
after an ECZ update on the evening of November 1 indicated that Banda was likely
to win the presidential race. In Lusaka, opposition protestors reportedly looted
and burned makeshift shops and stoned motor vehicles. The police used teargas
to disperse the protestors and arrested 14 opposition party members who have
since been charged with riotous behavior and conduct likely to breach peace.
Constitutional Reform
Zambia is undergoing a constitutional review process, initiated in 2002, to
address serious gaps in its 1996 constitution, such as the absence of protections
for economic, social, childrens and womens rights in its associated Bill of
Rights. The new draft constitution rectifies these shortcomings but there has been
much controversy on the review process.
The MMD government has opposed holding a constitutional conference, arguing
that it would be too costly, given that a national referendum would be expected
to follow. The government has insisted that Parliament is the most appropriate
body to adopt the new constitution. While, the oppositionmainly PF and the
Oasis Forum, an alliance of NGOs and churcheshas demanded that the new
constitution be adopted by a conference to avoid any possible manipulation by
the party in power, and to ensure the widest possible popular support.
In response, the MMD government pushed through the controversial
Constitutional Conference Act in August 2007, which set up a standing National
Constitutional Conference, (NCC) but which also expanded presidential powers
and bypasses a constitutional requirement for a national referendum at the end
of the consultative process. However, the Oasis Forum has dismissed the NCC as
unconstitutional. Opposition leader Michael Sata instructed PF members of parliament
not to participate in the NCC and subsequently dismissed 26 Patriotic
Front MPs who joined it.
Civil and Political Rights
Zambias Human Rights Commission reported in 2007 that unlawful deprivation
of life; unlawful detentions, poor and life-threatening prison conditions, police
brutality, and torture continue to be everyday occurrences in Zambias police cells
and prisons. The chair of the Commission, Pixie Yangailo, also said people are
generally subjected to unacceptable delays in receiving justice due to lack of
resources and capacity.
The Zambian government has restricted the right to freedom of expression, especially
in relation to the NCC. This has included threats against journalists critical
of the NCC, such as in 2007 when Mwanawasa warned critics that challenging the
National Constitutional Conference Act amounted to treason.
Sexual and Gender-Based Violence
Sexual and gender-based violence (SGBV) against women and children is a major
endemic problem in Zambia, especially in Lusaka and the Copperbelt, fueling the
countrys HIV pandemic and impeding womens access to HIV treatment.
According to both a June report by Zambias chapter of Women in Law and
Development in Africa (WILDAF) and the Victim Support Unit (VSU)the police
unit that addresses abuses against women and childrenthe true national extent
of sexual and gender-based violence in Zambia is unclear due to lack of reporting
by victims and survivors. Despite this, the VSU received reports between January
and August 2008 of 65 rape and 626 child rape cases in Lusaka alone.
While a 2005 amendment to Zambias penal code made child rape punishable by
a maximum penalty of life imprisonment, the country currently has no specific
SGBV legislation, and provisions in the penal code do not criminalize marital rape
and psychological abuse, among other shortcomings. In a positive development,
the Ministry of Justice, in collaboration with a number of NGOs, is working on a
draft SGBV bill, which is expected to be presented to Parliament during its
January 2009 session.
In 2008 Zambia established six new one-stop centers to provide comprehensive
legal, medical, and counselling services to victims and survivors of SGBV, with funding from the United States Agency for International Development. The centers
were expected to be fully operational in November. The Young Womens Christian
Association, in collaboration with other NGOs and the government, has also
scaled-up the operations of the existing one-stop SGBV center in Lusaka.
While chair of the Southern African Development Community in 2007, Zambia,
along with several other countries, opted to defer for further national consultation
adoption of the SADC Gender and Development Protocol due to apparent controversy
over criminalizing marital rape, among other matters. In August 2008 SADC
finally adopted the Protocol.
HIV/AIDS
The AIDS pandemic continues to devastate Zambias population. According to
United Nations estimates, HIV prevalence in Zambia was 13.1 percent in 2007.
Although this represents a reduction in prevalence from one year to the next, in
real terms an estimated extra 182,228 people were living with HIV in 2007
because of population growth. Prevalence of HIV among pregnant women in 2007
was estimated to be 19.3 percent. Meanwhile, access to antiretroviral treatment in
Zambia has improved, according to the UN, from 82,030 in 2006 to 151,000 in
December 2007.
Key International Actors
Under Zambias SADC chair tenure between August 2007 and August 2008, the
situation in Zimbabwe was the most prominent regional issue. Mwanawasa was
one of a small number of regional leaders prepared to criticize the conduct of
Robert Mugabes government, unlike several other SADC leaders who remained
silent.
In May the UN Human Rights Council examined the human rights situation in
Zambia under its Universal Periodic Review mechanism. While commending
Zambias high-level representation and the quality of its presentation and national
report, the Council noted a series of violations, particularly concerning the
rights of women and children.
Zimbabwe
The brutal response of President Robert Mugabe and the ruling Zimbabwe African
National Union-Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF) to their loss in general elections in
March 2008 plunged Zimbabwe deep into political turmoil. After a months delay
in releasing the results of the presidential poll, the Zimbabwe Electoral
Commission declared that opposition Movement for Democratic Change (MDC)
leader Morgan Tsvangirai had failed to win by a 50-percent-plus-one vote majority,
necessitating a run-off on June 27.
ZANU-PF launched a campaign of violence against MDC activists and supporters,
mobilizing a system of repression and violent intimidation that remained in place,
if less overtly active, at the end of the year. The months leading up to the run-off
were marked by widespread abuses, including killings, torture, beatings, looting,
and burning of property. Perpetrators, including the police, military, and local
ZANU-PF officials, as well as government-backed militia and war veterans, committed
abuses with almost absolute impunity. At least 163 people were killed and
some 5,000 were tortured or beaten. Tens of thousands more were displaced by
the violence, which eventually forced Tsvangirai to withdraw from the poll, leaving
Mugabe to declare himself the winner.
In September, in the face of international pressure and a severely weakened
economy, Mugabe signed a power-sharing agreement with Tsvangirai under the
mediation of then-president Thabo Mbeki of South Africa. However, the frailty of
the deal was soon apparent as the parties rapidly reached a deadlock on the distribution
of ministries, with violence and intimidation against the MDC still taking
place. Zimbabwes political situation remains precarious, and the future looks
bleak if the political leadership does not end abuses and address accountability
for both past and present abuses.
Post-Election Violence and Repression
The build up to the March elections was generally peaceful, despite some flaws in
the electoral process. However, the months afterwards were marked by a well
planned and systematic campaign of violence by ZANU-PF and its allies. In an
attempt to overturn the vote in the presidential run-off, government-backed militia and war veterans, ZANU-PF officials and supporters, and senior military officers
waged a vicious campaign of intimidation against MDC activists and suspected
supporters. Entire villages were cordoned off and those suspected of having
voted for the MDC were brutally beaten and tortured. The militia and war veterans
beat, tortured, and mutilated suspected MDC activists, supporters, and their family
members in hundreds of base campsmany of them army basesestablished
across the provinces as local operation centers. Thousands of people were forced
to attend abusive re-education meetings. Suspected ZANU-PF supporters and
militia targeted and killed up to 163 MDC activists.
In an effort to subvert the run-off electoral process and instill fear in election officials
and observers, police arrested more than 100 presiding officers and election
officials on politically motivated charges of electoral fraud. Police also arrested
hundreds of MDC supporters and officials on spurious charges of inciting violence,
while ZANU-PF supporters, who were responsible for the majority of the violence,
were allowed to carry out abuses with almost absolute impunity.
Impunity and the Rule of Law
Zimbabwes long history of impunity for politically motivated crimes has worsened
the political crisis. Those who committed past abuses have remained free to
carry out further violence and other crimes. Since 2000 the government has led
an onslaught on the judiciary that has included physical and verbal attacks
against judges and bribes intended to compromise the impartiality and undermine
the work of the judiciary.
Law enforcement agencies have subverted the rule of law. The police are responsible
for widespread violations, including harassment, threats, and violence
against opposition supporters and human rights activists, as well as torture and
other mistreatment. Police have routinely refused to take action against ZANU-PF
supporters and militia implicated in political violence.
Public confidence in the judiciary and policeespecially regarding independence
and impartialityis eroded. There have been no investigations into the role of
senior government, military, and ruling party officials implicated in mobilizing
and inciting militia forces responsible for election-related violence.
Human Rights Defenders
The violence in the aftermath of the general elections created an even more challenging
environment for human rights defenders. Many NGOs are perceived by
the government of Zimbabwe as being aligned to the MDC. In the capital Harare,
the government clampdown forced several NGOs to shut down. In the months
after March elections, police raided the offices of NGOs such as the Crisis in
Zimbabwe Coalition and the Zimbabwe Election Support Network (ZESN). ZANUPF
supporters attacked hundreds of ZESN election observers, forcing many to flee
their homes. Human rights defenders were intimidated and threatened by police
and security agents, who in May and June arrested a number of activists, including
a prominent human rights lawyer and 13 members of the NGO Women of
Zimbabwe Arise.
Humanitarian Crisis
Zimabwes humanitarian crisis shows no signs of ending, with more than 1.3 million
Zimbabweans living with HIV, and millions of people facing ever more severe
food shortages. According to the United Nations, nearly half the population will
need food aid in 2009 and the contamination of water sources has resulted in
cholera outbreaks. In June 2008 the government exacerbated the humanitarian
situation by banning the operations of all local and international humanitarian
agencies throughout the country. Despite lifting the ban in September, the government
has tightened control over agency operations. To operate in a specific
area, NGOs must obtain permission and a memorandum of understanding from
the relevant government ministry. Restrictive government controls have left the
delivery of humanitarian assistance open to manipulation by government agents
and ZANU-PF officials. In the past, the government has used food aid as a political
weapon against opposition supporters. The new government will face the
challenge of addressing the humanitarian crisis in the context of an extraordinarily
weakened economy, in which inflation has soared to over 200 million percent.
Key International Actors
Previous inaction to address Zimbabwes political crisis by regional bodies such
as the Southern African Development Community (SADC) and the African Union (AU) emboldened the government of Zimbabwe to turn the institutions of state
even more aggressively against Zimbabweans seeking democratic change.
Instead, African leaders put their faith in the mediation of Thabo Mbeki, initiated
on behalf of SADC in 2007 following a widely reported incident of police brutality
against Morgan Tsvangirai and other MDC officials. While this led to some
improvements in the electoral process leading up to the March elections, it failed
to address the root causes of Zimbabwes political crisisthe governments systematic
violation of international human rights standards.
The serious violence after the March elections finally compelled several African
leaders to publicly condemn abuses, although other countries, including South
Africa, initially refused to acknowledge the serious nature of the situation.
Differing positions within SADC prevented it from taking concerted and decisive
action. At an emergency SADC summit on April 12, leaders expressed concern
about the delay in the release of the presidential results, but did little to address
spiraling violence and other abuses.
As the violence intensified before the June presidential run-off, SADC and AU election
observers declared that it would not be free and fair. Once again African
leaders failed to take a robust approach. In June at the AU heads of state summit
in Sharm-el-Sheikh, Egypt, leaders not only ignored ZANU-PFs responsibility for
the widespread violence, but failed to recognize the illegitimacy of Mugabes
presidency. The summit participants issued a weak resolution calling for negotiations
between the two political parties, but not mentioning the violence. To their
credit, several African leaders spoke publicly in condemnation of the run-off and
Mugabes brutal actions. The leaders of Botswana and Nigeria made it clear that
they did not recognize Mugabe as Zimbabwes president.
In September Mbekis mediation led to the MDC and ZANU-PF signing a powersharing
agreement meant to bring an end to the political crisis. However, both
parties remain deadlocked over the division of ministerial positions, and there
have been few efforts to address abuses or accountability. The role of SADC and
the AU remains crucial in ensuring a peaceful return to the rule of law and respect
for human rights, but the ongoing situation is a blot on the credibility of their
commitment to an effective regional solution. 
The European Union, United States, and United Kingdom have each consistently
condemned the governments abusive record, and maintained travel sanctions
and asset freezes against senior government and ZANU-PF officials. Despite the
power-sharing agreement, EU officials have indicated that sanctions and asset
freezes will remain until there is a return to democracy and marked improvement
in human rights conditions. International aid to reconstruct the country is also
likely to remain on hold until human rights conditions improve and democracy is
restored.
The ability of the UN Security Council to address the crisis was largely nullified by
China, Russia, and South Africa refusing to determine that the situation was a
threat to international peace and security. Nonetheless, UN Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon on numerous occasions expressed concern and appointed UN
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs Haile Menkerios as a special envoy
for Zimbabwe.
Argentina
Argentina has taken important steps to bring to justice former military and police
personnel accused of having committed grave human rights violations during the
countrys dirty war. Since the Supreme Court struck down the Full Stop and
Due Obedience laws in 2005, several police and military officials have been
convicted.
Continuing human rights problems in Argentina include a juvenile justice system
that provides judges broad discretion to detain children, deplorable prison conditions,
and arbitrary restrictions on womens reproductive rights.
Confronting Past Abuses
Since 2003 Argentina has made significant progress in prosecuting military and
police personnel responsible for disappearances, killings, and torture during its
last military dictatorship (1976-1983). The executive branch actively encouraged
these prosecutions, reinforcing what began as a legal challenge to impunity in the
courts. At this writing, there are more than 400 people facing charges for these
crimes, the vast majority of whom are in pretrial detention.
Several important cases were reopened in 2003 after Congress annulled the 1986
Full Stop law, which forced a halt to the prosecution of all such cases, and the
1987 Due Obedience law, which granted automatic immunity in such cases to
all members of the military, except those in positions of command. In June 2005
the Supreme Court declared the laws unconstitutional.
According to the Center for Legal and Social Studies, 28 people have been convicted
for abuses committed during the dictatorship. For example, in June 2008
two retired federal police officers were sentenced to life imprisonment without
parole for kidnapping and killing 30 detainees in the 1976 Fatima massacre. In
July 2008 a civilian intelligence agent and seven military officials, including
retired General Luciano Benjamin Menendez, were convicted for kidnapping, torturing,
and executing four members of the Workers Revolutionary Party in 1977:
Menendez and three others were sentenced to life imprisonment, while the rest
were sentenced to 18 or 22 years in prison. In September 2008 Menendez was also sentenced, together with Antonio Domingo Bussi, to life without parole for
kidnapping, torturing, and disappearing a legislator in 1976.
Since 2005 several federal judges have struck down pardons decreed by thenpresident
Carlos Menem in 1989 and 1990 of former officials convicted or facing
trial for human rights violations. In April 2008, for instance, a federal appeals
court upheld the unconstitutionality of pardons in favor of Jorge Rafael Videla, former
de facto president, Albano Eduardo Harguindeguy, former de facto interior
minister, and Jos Alfredo Martinez de Hoz, former de facto economy minister, in
a case regarding the disappearance of two businessmen.
The security of witnesses in human rights trials has become a serious concern
since the disappearance in September 2006 of a torture victim who had testified
in one of the cases that concluded that year. Jorge Julio Lpez, age 77, who
vanished from his home in La Plata the day before he was due to attend one of
the final days of the trial, remains missing.
Criminal Justice System
Children in conflict with the law who are under age 16 are subject to a procedure
that provides judges broad discretion to authorize their detention. In cases in
which they are accused of having committed a crime, as well as when they are
subjected to a custodial or protective measure because of their personal or
social situation, judges routinely order children to be institutionalized. The
process through which custodial sentences are handed down lacks basic due
process safeguards. At this writing, a case challenging the constitutionality of the
juvenile justice system is pending before the Supreme Court.
In August 2008 Congress annulled the Code of Military Justice and created a new
disciplinary process for military officials. The Congress established that crimes
committed by military officials would be tried by federal civilian courts.
In detention facilities, overcrowding, abuses by guards, and inmate violence continue
to be serious problems. In a landmark ruling in May 2005, the Supreme
Court declared that all prisons in the country must abide by the United Nations
Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. Although there have
been slight improvements in the province of Buenos Aires, the situation remains critical. For instance, during 2006-07 there was a small reduction in the number
of detainees held in police lockups, which for years have absorbed the overflow
from the prison system. Yet, according to research by the Center for Legal and
Social Studies, the number of detainees held in police installations in July 2008
exceeded the number in 2007. The high proportion of criminal suspects sent to
prison to await trial, one of the causes of overcrowding, also increased in 2008,
reaching nearly 77 percent of the prison population.
Freedom of Expression and Information
Defamation of public officials remains punishable by criminal penalties. At this
writing, several bills to decriminalize defamation remain pending before
Congress.
In June 2008 the Supreme Court ruled that public officials should be held to a
high level of scrutiny, and overturned a civil judgment against a newspaper that
had criticized the Judiciarys Forensic Medical Corps, an agency that carries out
medical forensic testing. The court held that an opinion regarding issues of general
interest, in particular related to the government, may not in and of itself lead to
civil or criminal responsibility. According to the court, public officials reputation
can only be adversely affected by knowingly disseminating false information.
Some provincial governments discriminate in the distribution of official advertising
by rewarding local media that provide favorable coverage and punishing
those with a critical editorial line. In September 2007 the Supreme Court ruled
against the provincial government of Neuquen, stating it had failed to justify why
it had abruptly limited official advertising in a local newspaper that had covered a
bribery scandal indirectly implicating the governor. According to the court,
although there is no right to receive official advertising, a government that grants
it may not apply discriminatory criteria in granting or withdrawing it. Several bills
to regulate the matter have been presented since then but remain pending. In
February 2008 the governor of Tierra del Fuego issued a decree establishing
objective criteria to grant official advertising.
An executive decree allows Argentine citizens to obtain information held by the
federal executive branch. However, bills giving Argentine citizens the right to information held by all federal offices have been pending before Congress for
years. (Some provinces have access to information laws that allow individuals to
obtain information from provincial governments.)
Reproductive Rights
Women and girls in Argentina face arbitrary and discriminatory restrictions on
their reproductive decisions and access to contraceptives, especially emergency
contraceptive pills. Therapeutic abortions and abortions for mentally disabled
rape victims are legal, but women continue to face obstacles even when their
right to an abortion is protected by law. For example, in October 2008 a judge
ordered doctors in Bahia Blanca to delay the abortion requested by the legal representative
of an 18-year-old mentally disabled woman who was raped by a family
member, allegedly after a couple expressed interest in adopting her child after
birth. The woman ended up having an abortion after a second judicial decision
reversed the judges initial one.
Key International Actors
In proceedings before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights in 2005,
the Argentine government formally accepted partial responsibility for failing to
prevent the 1994 bombing of the Jewish Argentine Mutual Association, and for
subsequently failing to properly investigate the crime, in which 85 people died. In
October 2006 an Argentine special prosecutor accused Iran of planning the
attack, and Hezbollah of carrying it out. The following month, a federal judge
issued an international warrant for the arrest of former Iranian president Ali Akbar
Hashemi-Rafsanjani and eight other Iranian former officials. In November 2007
the Interpol General Assembly voted to issue six arrest notices, and in September
2008 President Cristina Fernndez de Kirchner reiterated before the UN General
Assembly the Argentine governments request that Iran collaborate with the
Argentine justice system.
In May 2008 the Inter-American Court of Human Rights ordered the Argentine government
to modify its criminal defamation laws. The court ruled Argentina had
violated Eduardo Kimels right to free expression when a court sentenced him in
1995 to one year in prison (the sentence was suspended) and ordered him to pay 20,000 pesos (US$20,000 at that time) in damages for defamation. (Kimel had
criticized the work of a judge investigating a massacre committed during the last
military government.)
In September 2008 the Argentine government recognized that denying a womans
right to legal abortion violates womens human rights after a notorious 2006
casein which a mentally disabled woman who had been raped and impregnated
by her uncle had to request a private doctor to perform an abortion despite having
obtained a judicial authorization to carry it outreached the United Nations
Human Rights Committee.
WORLD REPORT 2009
Bolivia
Bolivias deep political, ethnic, and regional divisions and the fragility of its democratic
institutions contribute to a precarious human rights situation. Almost twothirds
of the population lives below the national poverty line, and over a third
mostly indigenous peopleslives in extreme poverty.
Since his landslide electoral victory in December 2005, President Evo Morales has
sought to introduce a new constitution and other far-reaching reforms. The reform
process has contributed to dramatic political polarization within the country,
which has led to numerous episodes of political violence. The governments supporters
and its opponents, as well as the police and military, have been accused
of killings during violent clashes between rival demonstrators. Investigations into
these unlawful killings are often politicized and generally fail to establish criminal
responsibility. Despite judicial rulings that civilian courts should have jurisdiction,
military courts usually investigate alleged abuses by army troops, further
contributing to impunity.
Although Bolivia enjoys diverse media and a vibrant public debate, political
polarization has brought violent attacks on journalists and media outlets by both
pro-government and opposition demonstrators.
Political Violence, Accountability, and Impunity
Since 2006 there have been deep disagreements over procedures to approve a
new draft constitution, and over demands for autonomy by five lowland departments.
In August 2008, 67 percent of Bolivians voted in a recall referendum that
Morales should remain as president, while prefects were ratified in four of the
five opposition-dominated departments (there was no vote in the fifth as the prefect
had assumed office recently). The tense standoff between Moraless largely
indigenous supporters and the departmental prefects and their supporters in the
breakaway departments led to violent clashes in 2007 and 2008 in the cities of
Santa Cruz, Sucre, Tarija, and Cobija, with deaths and injuries on both sides.
Responsible officials, such as departmental prefects, failed to take firm action to
curb the violence committed by their supporters in 2008. In an incident in Sucre in May, students and townspeople who had surrounded the city stadium to prevent
Morales from addressing his supporters threw stones, firecrackers, and
dynamite to force back police and troops who were trying to secure the area. The
soldiers fled in disarray, many on foot, after using up their supplies of tear gas.
The protesters captured about 18 of Moraless peasant supporters, reportedly
punching, kicking, and racially insulting them, and then marched them to the city
square where, according to accounts, they made them strip to the waist, kneel,
and burn their red (pro-Morales) ponchos.
The most serious outbreak of political violence involved a massacre of pro-
Morales protesters by regional government supporters in September 2008 at the
town of Porvenir, Pando department. Hundreds of indigenous peasants travelling
in trucks for a demonstration in Cobija, Pandos capital, met roadblocks near
Porvenir, and in violent clashes a departmental government employee and a supporter
were killed. Continuing into Porvenir, the demonstrators took hostages,
some of whom they beat, but they released them to police. Armed supporters of
the departmental government then reportedly opened fire indiscriminately on the
demonstrators, most of whom fled the town. Sixteen demonstrators were killed in
Porvenir and during the ensuing chase. Some of the dozens of wounded were
allegedly beaten while being taken in ambulances to hospital.
Due to the police and armed forces failure to stop the violence, the government
declared a state of siege to restore order in the department. Later, the prefect of
Pando, Leopoldo Fernndez, was arrested on government orders under emergency
powers. As of October 2008 he was in detention facing charges of terrorism,
murder, and criminal association for his alleged responsibility for the Pando
killings. A multiparty congressional committee was investigating the incidents in
parallel with prosecutors from the Attorney Generals Office.
As of October 2008, nine shooting deaths had been attributed to the army or
police in the context of crowd control since 2004. To our knowledge, no member
of the armed forces has yet been convicted of an unlawful killing during law
enforcement operations. Prosecutorial investigations into shootings by the army
are obstructed by military courts, which insist on investigating these cases
despite rulings of the Constitutional Court in favor of civilian jurisdiction. The military
typically refuse to cooperate with investigations conducted by civilian prosecutors. By contrast, on more than one occasion government ministers, prefects, or
top police officials have been charged with serious crimes like genocide or terrorism
without prosecutors having previously identified and charged those materially
responsible for shootings. In November 2007, for example, two civilians died
from gunshot wounds, and a third civilian died after being hit by a tear gas shell,
after students and townspeople armed with stones and firebombs confronted
police and army troops in Sucre. Ballistic findings suggested that the shots were
fired from guns similar to those in police use. As of October 2008 prosecutors
had not identified or charged any police for the shootings, even though the attorney
general had initiated impeachment proceedings for genocide against the minister
of the interior and three senior police officials.
Bolivian courts still seek to establish criminal responsibility for the killing of more
than 60 people in anti-government protests in September and October 2003,
when the army used lethal force to quell violent protests in the highland city of El
Alto. Former President Gonzalo Snchez de Lozada resigned and left the country
following the events, known in Bolivia as Black October. In October 2007 the
attorney general accused Snchez de Lozada, 11 of his ministers, and five former
military chiefs of genocide and torture in connection with the armys actions. The
former president, his defense minister Carlos Snchez Berzan, and the former
energy minister Jorge Berinduague currently reside in the United States, where
Snchez Berzan has obtained political asylum. In November 2008 Bolivia formally
requested that the US extradite the three men to face trial in Bolivia. Snchez
de Lozada and Snchez Berzan also face a civil lawsuit in the US for damages
under the Alien Tort Claims Act and the Torture Victim Protection Act, alleging
their responsibility for 10 of the Black October deaths.
Freedom of Expression
Bolivia enjoys a vibrant public debate with a variety of critical and pro-government
media outlets. As political polarization has deepened, many among the
media have openly taken sides. Morales often lambasts the private media for
backing the opposition agenda. Government supporters sometimes physically
attack journalists working for critical outlets. There have also been attacks by
opposition demonstrators against state and community radio outlets and The inclusion of a norm in the draft constitution requiring that information and
opinions disseminated by the media respect the principles of truthfulness and
responsibility could lead to arbitrary restrictions of press freedom if enacted in
law.
Human Rights Defenders
Supporters of regional autonomy in Santa Cruz have firebombed and ransacked
offices of nongovernmental organizations defending land rights of indigenous
and peasant communities. In September 2008 pro-autonomy demonstrators
allegedly belonging to the Santa Cruz Youth Union broke into the office of the
Center for Legal Studies and Social Research (CEJIS). The attackers smashed and
set fire to furniture and documents.
Key International Actors
A United States Agency for International Development (USAID)-funded justice center
in the Chapare region played a key role in investigating rights abuses during
protests against US-backed eradication of coca plantations. The justice center
carried out autopsies and collected valuable testimony about the circumstances
of deaths in clashes between coca growers and antinarcotics police. The number
of police abuses has declined significantly since the Morales government adopted
a voluntary eradication policy in 2006. While there were 35 deaths from 1997
to 2003, since 2006 there have been only two, according to the Andean
Information Network, an NGO which monitors US antinarcotics policy in Bolivia. In
June 2008, amid mounting Bolivian criticism of USAIDs activities in Bolivia,
municipal authorities and coca growers unions announced that USAIDs programs
in the Chapare would not be renewed. However, the justice center was still
operating in October 2008, providing legal services to communities with very limited
access to justice.
The Union of South American Nations (UNASUR), which was established in May
2008, helped to promote accountability following the violence in Pando. At a
meeting convened by Chilean President Bachelet to discuss the Bolivian crisis,
UNASUR heads of state decided to form a multinational commission to investigate
the killings and disappearances. The commission began its investigation in Pando department in late September. In a newspaper interview published in
November 2008, prior to the release of the commissions findings, its president,
Rodolfo Mattarollo, described the killings as a planned massacre.
In 2008 the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights established an
office in Bolivia to strengthen human rights protection. Its mandate includes
assisting the Attorney Generals Office to improve the criminal prosecution system.
reporters working for them.
Brazil
Faced with a public security crisis involving high levels of violent crime, some
Brazilian police forces engage in abusive practices instead of pursuing sound
policing policies. Detention conditions in the country are inhumane. Torture
remains a serious problem. Forced labor persists in some states despite federal
efforts to eradicate it. Indigenous peoples and landless peasants face threats and
violence in rural conflicts over land distribution.
Police Violence
Brazils metropolitan areas are plagued by widespread violence perpetrated by
criminal gangs and abusive police. Violence especially impacts low-income communities.
Nearly 50,000 homicides occur each year in Brazil.
In Rio de Janeiro, hundreds of low-income communities are occupied and controlled
by gangs, which routinely engage in illegal drug trafficking, acts of extortion,
and violent crime.
Police violence, including extrajudicial executions, is a chronic problem. For
example, in the state of Rio de Janeiro, police were responsible for approximately
one out of every five intentional killings in the first six months of 2008, according
to official statistics. Police allege that such killings occur in confrontations with
criminals, and register them as acts of resistance757 police killings were registered
as such in Rio de Janeiro state (an average of four per day) in the period
January-June 2008. There are also reports of indiscriminate shootings by the Rio
de Janeiro police, particularly during so-called mega-operations in low-income
neighborhoods. In August 2008, United Nations Special Rapporteur on
Extrajudicial, Summary, or Arbitrary Executions Philip Alston called the megaoperations
in Rio de Janeiro murderous and self-defeating.
Abuses by off-duty police also occur. For example, of all homicides in the state of
Pernambuco, prosecutors estimated 70 percent are committed by death squads,
which are believed to include police officers among their members. Militias controlling
several dozen of metropolitan Rio de Janeiros low-income communities
include off-duty police officers among their members. In one such community, Favela Batan, a resident and three employees of the newspaper O Dia conducting
an undercover investigation into militia activities were reportedly kidnapped and
tortured by militia members in May 2008. The captives endured beatings, suffocation,
electric shocks, Russian roulette, threats of sexual assault, and death
threats. Following a media outcry, at least two militia members have been arrested
including their alleged leader Odnei Fernando da Silva, a Civil Police inspector
and are awaiting trial.
Detention Conditions, Torture, and Ill-Treatment
Torture remains a serious problem in Brazil. The official report of the 10-month
multiparty National Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry on the Penitentiary
System, finalized in July 2008 and based on evidence collected from all 26 states
plus Braslia, concluded that the national detention system is plagued by physical
and psychological torture. In one case from Gois, the commission received
evidence that the National Security Force subjected female detainees to kicks and
electric shocks, stepped on the abdomen of a pregnant woman, and forced
another woman to strip naked. The commission further noted that it received
reports of torture at every single center it inspected. In six statesRondnia,
Piau, Mato Grosso, Cear, Maranho, and Goisas well as in many others,
the commission documented the presence of torture scars on prisoners. The
report also found beatings to be routine in Brazilian jails. There are also abuses
in juvenile centers. In Rio de Janeiro in January 2008, 17-year-old Andreu Lus da
Silva de Carvalho was reportedly tortured to death by guards of the juvenile
detention system, the General Department of Socio-Educational Actions.
The inhumane conditions, violence, and overcrowding that have historically characterized
Brazilian detention centers remain one of the countrys main human
rights problems. Delays in the justice system contribute to overcrowding.
According to official statistics, the inmate population has grown to 440,000 (a
growth of over 40 percent in five years), approximately 43 percent of whom are
pretrial detainees. There is credible evidence that some judges and prosecutors
are deficient in fulfilling their inspection mandates.
In January 2008, 119 female prisoners were reportedly being held in a partially
roofless jail cell built for 12 in Monte Mor jail in Sao Paulo, with less than one square meter per person. Reportedly, four of the women were pregnant, and one
remained in the jail post-partum with her newborn for two days. Dozens of the
women were transferred after the media broke the story. There have been reports
of women and girls being incarcerated with men in violation of international standards.
For example, in November 2007 in the state of Par, an adolescent girl was
repeatedly raped at a police station in Abaetetuba while locked in a cell with
roughly 20 men for at least 15 days.
In the state of Rondnia, despite six provisional measures issued by the Inter-
American Court of Human Rights mandating that Brazil protect inmates at Urso
Branco prison, more than 100 inmates have been murdered there since the first
such measures were issued by the Court in 2002. In October 2008 the attorney
general moved to have Urso Branco subjected to a federal takeover due to the
chronic problems there.
Forced Labor
Since 1995 the federal government has taken steps to eradicate forced labor,
including creating mobile investigation units to monitor labor conditions in rural
areas. However, the Pastoral Land Commission collected reports of 8,653 persons
in conditions of forced labor in 2007. Of these, 5,974 were reported as having
been freed. The federal government has made positive strides in its efforts to
combat forced labor, but criminal accountability for offending employers remains
relatively rare.
Rural Violence and Land Conflicts
Indigenous peoples and landless peasants face threats and violence as a result
of land disputes in rural areas. According to the Pastoral Land Commission, 28
people were killed and 428 arrested in rural conflicts throughout the country in
2007. In March 2008, Welinton da Silva, a leader of the Landless Rural Workers
Movement, was reportedly shot at and wounded in the leg while protesting at a
quarry in the state of Maranho.
Impunity
Ensuring accountability for human rights violations remains a major challenge. In
a widely followed case, Vitalmiro Bastos de Moura (Bida), the farmer alleged to
have ordered the 2005 killing of Dorothy Stang, a missionary who advocated for
agrarian reform, was acquitted in May 2008. The decision was questioned by two
Supreme Federal Court justices and others in the federal government, including
President Luiz Incio Lula da Silva. In another case, in January 2008, the criminal
investigation into the 1998 killing of Paran land reform activist Stimo Garibaldi
was formally shelved, without anyone having been found responsible.
Brazil has never prosecuted those responsible for atrocities committed during its
period of military dictatorship (1964-1985). The 1979 amnesty law has thus far
been interpreted to bar prosecutions of state agents. However, at this writing, the
Supreme Federal Court is considering a challenge to this interpretation of the
amnesty law presented by the Brazilian Bar Association, which maintains that the
amnesty does not cover crimes such as torture committed by government agents.
In addition, federal prosecutors have made formal requests that criminal investigations
against some individuals suspected of dictatorship-era abuses be commenced
in Rio Grande do Sul, Rio de Janeiro, and Sao Paulo. In a landmark ruling
in October 2008, a civil court in Sao Paulo found Col. Carlos Alberto Brilhante
Ustra civilly responsible for acts of kidnapping and torture during his time as
director of a dictatorship intelligence agency in Sao Paulo in the 1970s.
Human Rights Defenders
Some human rights defenders, particularly those working on issues of police violence
and land conflicts, suffer intimidation and violence. Human rights lawyer
Joo Tancredo survived an attempt on his life by two unidentified gunmen in Rio
de Janeiro in January 2008. State legislator Marcelo Freixo has received death
threats for his work as president of the Rio de Janeiro Legislative Assemblys
Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry into militias. Joinville Frota, a trade unionist
in Amap, reported receiving death threats in May 2008 in connection with strike
activities.
Reproductive Rights
In Brazil, abortion is legal only when performed by a medical doctor in order to
save the life of the pregnant woman or when the pregnancy is the result of rape.
Criminal investigations into womens health clinics in Mato Grosso do Sul, Sao
Paulo, and Rio Grande do Sul have raised serious privacy concerns. In an ongoing
2007 criminal case from Mato Grosso do Sul, for months private medical records
of thousands of women were reportedly made accessible to members of the public
upon request to judicial authorities.
Key International Actors
The Inter-American Court of Human Rights ruled in May 2008 that Brazil had not
fully complied with the 2006 judgment in the Damio Ximenes Lopes case.
Though reparations were paid to the Ximenes family, no one has been convicted
for the 1998 torture and killing of Damio, a psychiatric patient in Cear. The
court further ordered the government to undertake reform measures aimed at preventing
future cases like this one.
In December 2007 an Italian court requested the extradition of 11 Brazilians in
connection with the enforced disappearance of Italians carried out as part of the
dictatorship-era Operation Condor. In response, the Lula government has stated
that the constitution bars the extradition of native-born Brazilians.
In a positive development, in August 2008 Brazil ratified the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. During its Universal
Periodic Review before the UN Human Rights Council in April 2008, Brazil pledged
to implement recommendations made by the UN Committee Against Torture and
the UN Human Rights Committee.
Chile
Since the death of former dictator Gen. Augusto Pinochet in December 2006,
Chilean judges have continued to prosecute and convict former military personnel
accused of committing grave human rights violations under the military government.
However, the Supreme Courts criminal chamber has reduced sentences in
several recent cases, with the result that convicted perpetrators eventually do not
serve time in prison.
Overcrowding and ill-treatment in Chiles prisons remain serious problems. Police
abuses continue to be reported in the Araucana region, where indigenous
Mapuche communities engage in sometimes violent protests in defense of land
claims.
Prosecutions for Past Human Rights Violations
In the pursuit of accountability for human rights abuses under military rule, as of
July 2008, 482 former military personnel and civilian collaborators were facing
charges for enforced disappearances, extrajudicial executions, and torture; 256
had been convicted (of whom 83 had had their conviction confirmed on appeal),
and 38 were serving prison sentences.
At the time of his death from a heart attack in December 2006, Pinochet was
under house arrest, facing prosecution for torture, enforced disappearances, tax
evasion, and forgery. The Supreme Court had closed three previous cases against
him on medical grounds, but judges came to doubt that his mild dementia disqualified
him from trial. In June 2008 Pinochets former secret police chief,
Manuel Contreras, was sentenced to life imprisonment for the car bomb murder
of Gen. Carlos Prats and his wife Sofa Cuthbert in Buenos Aires in 1974.
Pinochet, who had succeeded Prats as army commander just before the 1973
coup, escaped prosecution for the crime.
A majority of the five judges in the Supreme Courts criminal chamber now rule
that an amnesty decreed by the military government in 1978 is inapplicable to war
crimes or crimes against humanity, and that these crimes are not subject to a
statute of limitations. However, not all of the judges agree that the amnesty is inapplicable. Given that court rulings in Chile are not binding in cases other than
the one under review, and that the composition of the Supreme Court panel may
change from case to case, the legal obstacles to convictions have not been entirely
overcome. A bill promoted by the government to amend the criminal code so
that crimes against humanity are not subject to amnesties or statutes of limitation
remained deadlocked in Congress in 2008.
During 2007 and increasingly in 2008, the court has applied a law allowing those
convicted for human rights violations to benefit from a sentence reduction in
recognition of the time elapsed since the criminal act (more than 30 years in
some cases). This has meant that several former military personnel sentenced to
prison by lower courts have been exempted from serving time.
Prison Conditions
Chile has more prisoners per capita than any other country in South America. The
prison population has grown by 28 percent since 2003. Despite the opening of six
new privately contracted prisons, overcrowding remains a serious problem. For
example, in 2008 the Southern Santiago Center for Preventive Detention, with a
planned capacity of 3,170 places, had 6,256 inmates. In many of these older prisons
sanitation and hygiene are abysmal. Inmates are sometimes crowded into
dark and unventilated punishment cells without sanitary provision for up to 10
days. In August 2008 a Supreme Court official told a Senate committee that she
considered this practice to be cruel and degrading.
Military Justice
Even though Chile has completely overhauled its criminal justice procedure in
recent years and reinforced due process guarantees, military courts still have
wide jurisdiction over civilians and also over human rights abuses committed by
the Carabineros (uniformed police), which is part of the armed forces. At this writing,
a civil-military commission is in the process of developing a new code of military
justice, and has identified as a guiding principle that no civilians should be
tried by military courts.
Police Abuses
Carabineros often use excessive force during operations in indigenous Mapuche
communities in southern Chile. The abuses typically occur when police intervene
to control Mapuche protests and prevent land occupations, or when they enter
communities in pursuit of Mapuches suspected of crimes (such as theft, damage
to property, and arson) allegedly committed during ongoing land disputes with
farmers and logging companies.
Mapuche agronomy student Matas Catrileo, age 22, was killed on January 3,
2008, when a police officer opened fire with a submachine gun on protesters during
a land occupation near the city of Temuco. The officer was reported to have
said on his radio just before the shooting that the protesters were throwing
stones. According to a report by the criminal investigations police, the bullet fired
by the officer struck Catrileo in the back. A military prosecutor charged the police
officer with unnecessary violence resulting in death. The case remained open
at this writing.
In June 2008, Citizens Watch, a Temuco-based human rights NGO, reported the
case of two Mapuche teenagers, Jorge Mariman (18) and Luis Marileo (16), who
were mistreated by police when they raided the home of Jos Cariqueo, leader of
a Mapuche community near Ercilla, while searching for a missing horse.
According to Citizens Watch, which interviewed Cariqueo, Jorge Marimns leg
was broken by a police bullet, and Luis Marileos jaw was fractured by a blow
from a riot control shotgun butt. The police, who did not show a search warrant,
reportedly left the two injured without providing assistance. Citizens Watch,
which reported the case to the minister of the interior, received no substantive
reply to its concern.
Reproductive Rights
Chile is one of a handful of countries in the world that prohibits abortion for any
reason, even in cases of rape or incest or to save the life of the mother. Despite
the comprehensive ban, an estimated 60,000 to 200,000 clandestine abortions
are practiced each year. In April 2008 the Constitutional Court ruled against a
legal provision that allows free distribution of emergency contraception, including the morning after pill. The World Health Organization recognizes that emergency
contraceptive pills can prevent pregnancy and does not consider them to
induce abortion. However, Chiles court ruled that such methods violate the constitutional
protection of the right to life of the unborn. It thus ignored the rights of
living womenparticularly the poor and adolescentsto health, information,
autonomy, non-discrimination, freedom of conscience, and freedom to enjoy the
benefits of scientific progress.
Freedom of Expression and Information
Chile has removed many of the legal norms inherited from the military dictatorship
that constricted the press. In August 2008 President Michelle Bachelet
enacted a law that creates an independent Council for Transparency. The four-person
council will be empowered to order officials to make information available to
the public, as well as to impose sanctions if they fail to do so. The law is due to
enter into force in April 2009.
Key International Actors
Several rulings against Chile by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights since
the return to democracy in 1990 have given impetus to reforms to strengthen the
right to justice, free expression, and fair trial. However, many of the reforms
demanded by the court are still outstanding.
In July 2008 the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights declared admissible
a complaint against Chile filed by Karen Atala, a judge whose appeal for custody
of her three children was denied by the Supreme Court on the grounds that
her lesbian relationship would harm their upbringing. The commission held that
the decision could violate Atalas right to equal treatment, to privacy, and to due
process, as well as the rights of her children. As of October 2008 the commission
had yet to rule on the merits of the case.
In August 2008 the Organization of American States rapporteur on the rights of
persons deprived of their liberty, Florentn Melndez, visited prisons in Chile.
While the rapporteur praised conditions in privately contracted prisons, he
expressed concern about excessive and unnecessary force in punishment, and a systematic practice of physical mistreatment by guards in all the prisons he
visited. He also described as especially alarming the deficiency of education
and healthcare provision, as well as of recreational and sports programs, in the
two juvenile prisons he visited.
Colombia
Colombias internal armed conflict continues to result in widespread abuses by
irregular armed groups and government forces. The Colombian government dealt
serious blows to the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerrillas in
2008. But guerrillas continued to engage in kidnappings, use of antipersonnel
landmines, recruitment of child combatants, and other abuses. Successor groups
to paramilitaries, which never fully demobilized, appeared increasingly active,
threatening and killing civilians, including trade unionists and human rights
defenders. Reports of extrajudicial executions of civilians by the military remain
frequent. Internal displacement of civilians has been steadily rising in recent
years in 2008 the number of people affected may have reached its highest level
in decades.
Colombias justice institutions have in recent years begun to make some progress
in uncovering the truth about paramilitary abuses and accomplices. But in 2008
the administration of President lvaro Uribe repeatedly took steps that could
hamper the investigations.
Progress and Threats to Accountability for Paramilitaries
Accomplices
Colombias paramilitaries are responsible for crimes against humanity and thousands
of other atrocities. They have also amassed enormous wealth and influence,
in part through mafia-style alliances with members of the military, politicians,
and businesspeople.
Colombias institutions of justice have recently started to uncover some of the
truth about paramilitaries abuses and accomplices. The Supreme Court has
made unprecedented progress in investigating accusations against members of
the Colombian Congress for collaborating with the paramilitaries. More than 60
membersnearly all from President Uribes coalitionhave come under investigation.
And, in confessions to prosecutors from the Attorney Generals Office pursuant
to the Justice and Peace Law, which offers them reduced sentences subject
to full and truthful confessions and other conditions, paramilitary commanders have started to disclose details of some of their atrocities and to name
accomplices.
However, the Uribe administration has repeatedly taken actions that could sabotage
the investigations. Administration officials have issued public personal
attacks on the Supreme Court and its members, in some cases making accusations
that have turned out to be baseless, in what increasingly looks like a campaign
to discredit the court. In mid-2008 the administration proposed a series of
constitutional amendments that would have removed what are known as the
parapolitics investigations from the Supreme Courts jurisdiction, but it withdrew
the proposal in November. The administration also blocked what is known
as the empty chair bill, which would have reformed the Congress to sanction
parties that had backed politicians linked to paramilitaries.
Extraditions of Paramilitary Leaders
In May 2008 Colombia extradited most of the paramilitary leadership to the
United States. The extraditions are positive in that they may help to break the
groups chains of command, and increase the likelihood that these commanders
will serve lengthy prison terms for their drug crimes.
Yet the extraditions may prove fatal to obtaining justice for paramilitaries human
rights crimes. The extraditions happened at a time when several of the commanders
were coming under pressure from Colombian prosecutors and courts to
answer difficult questions about their abuses and accomplices. The sudden extraditions
have interrupted the process of confessions and interrogation in Colombia
and eliminated commanders incentives to cooperate with the Colombian investigations.
In October two of the extradited individuals, known as Cuco Vanoy and
Gordolindo, received prison sentences of over 20 years each for their drug trafficking
crimes, pursuant to plea bargains. They have ceased providing information
to Colombian authorities about their human rights crimes, and it is unclear
whether their plea bargains require that they cooperate in that regard.
New Armed Groups
The Uribe administration claims that paramilitaries no longer exist. While more
than 30,000 individuals supposedly demobilized, Colombian prosecutors have
turned up evidence that many of them were not paramilitaries at all, but rather,
civilians recruited to pose as paramilitaries. Law enforcement authorities never
investigated most of them.
Meanwhile, new armed groups often led by mid-level paramilitary commanders
have cropped up all over the country. The Organization of American States (OAS)
Mission verifying the demobilizations has identified 22 such groups, totaling
thousands of members. The groups are actively recruiting new troops, and are
committing widespread abuses, including extortion, threats, killings, and forced
displacement. In Medelln, for example, after a steady decline in official indicators
of violence, there has been a surge in homicides, apparently committed by
these groups.
Guerrilla Abuses
Both the FARC and the National Liberation Army (ELN) continue to engage in
abuses against civilians.
Government forces dealt serious blows to the FARC, including through the arrest
or killing of several commanders. In June security forces rescued 15 hostages held
by the FARC, including three US citizens and former Colombian presidential candidate
Ingrid Betancourt. No lives were lost in the operation, but it was later
revealed that members of the military who participated in the operation displayed
the emblem of the International Committee of the Red Cross, in violation of the
Geneva Conventions, jeopardizing the ability of humanitarian workers to fulfill
their role of protecting civilians. The FARC continue to regularly engage in kidnappings,
and still hold hundreds of hostages.
In August government authorities accused the FARC of planting a bomb on a
crowded street in the town of Ituango that resulted in the deaths of seven people
and injured more than 50 others.
The FARC and ELN continue to frequently use antipersonnel landmines. The Vice-
Presidents Observatory for Human Rights reported 153 civilian victims of antipersonnel
mines from January through September 2008.
Internal Displacement
Colombia is estimated to have more than 3 million internally displaced persons,
according to the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees. Displacement
has steadily increased in Colombia in recent years. According to the Committee
on Human Rights and Displacement (CODHES), a nongovernmental organization
monitoring displacement, the first half of 2008 marked the highest rate of displacement
in Colombia in 23 years, with more than 270,000 people displaced in
six months (a 41 percent increase compared to the first six months of 2007).
Official numbers for this period are lower, but are increasing as the period the victims
have to report their displacement to the government is still open.
A 2004 Constitutional Court decision found that women are particularly vulnerable
in situations of internal displacement and ruled that the governments failure
to protect womens vulnerability constituted a violation of their rights. In 2008
the government began to comply with the Courts ruling by establishing programs
to protect internally displaced women.
Military Abuses and Impunity
In recent years there has been a substantial rise in the number of extrajudicial
killings of civilians attributed to the Colombian Army. Under pressure to demonstrate
results, army members apparently take civilians from their homes or workplaces,
kill them, and then dress them up to claim they were combatants killed in
action.
The Attorney Generals Office is currently investigating cases involving more than
a thousand victims dating back to mid-2003. The Defense Ministry has issued
directives indicating that such killings are impermissible. But such directives
have been regularly undermined by statements from high government officials,
including President Uribe, who for years publicly denied the problem existed, and accused human rights defenders reporting these killings of colluding with the
guerrillas in an orchestrated campaign to discredit the military.
In September 2008 a scandal broke over the disappearance of 11 young men from
Soacha, a low-income neighborhood of Bogota. Their bodies were found in the
distant northeastern state of Norte de Santander, and the militaryinitially
backed by President Uribeclaimed they were combat deaths. Attorney General
Mario Iguaran disputed that claim. In October the Uribe government announced it
was dismissing 27 soldiers, including three generals, in connection with the
killings.
Army commander Mario Montoya, who had been the subject of allegations linking
him to abuses and paramilitaries, resigned in November 2008.
Violence against Trade Unionists
For years, Colombia has led the world in killings of trade unionists, with more
than 2,600 reported killings since 1986, according to the National Labor School,
Colombias leading NGO monitoring labor rights. The bulk of the killings are
attributed to paramilitary groups, which have deliberately targeted unionists.
Though the number of killings annually has dropped from its peak in the 1990s,
when the paramilitaries were in the midst of their violent expansion, more than
400 trade unionists have been killed during the Uribe government. In 2008 the
number of killings went up again, to 41 as of October, according to the National
Labor School. Unionists working in the education sector comprise a high proportion
of the victims.
Impunity in the killing of trade unionists is widespread: in about 97 percent of
cases there has been no conviction and the killers remain free. The rate of convictions
for unionist killings under the Uribe administration was consistently low
until 2007, when the number of convictions jumped to 43. As of October the
Attorney Generals Office reported there had been 53 convictions in 2008. This
sudden increase is primarily due to pressure from the US Congress.
Threats against Human Rights Defenders, Journalists, and
Victims of Paramilitaries
Human rights defenders, journalists, local community leaders, and victims of
paramilitary groups, as well as trade unionists, are frequently the targets of
threats.
A March 6 demonstration against paramilitary violence drew public accusations
against the organizers from presidential advisor Jos Obdulio Gaviria, and shortly
before and after the march, scores of human rights defenders and trade unionists
reported being threatened and attacked. Some demonstration organizers and
participants were killed. In addition to national human rights groups, the threats
targeted the international organization, Peace Brigades Internationals Colombia
Project, the news magazine Semana, the Workers Central Union, indigenous
organizations, and opposition politicians. In most cases, the threats were issued
in the name of a group calling itself the Black Eagles.
The Ministry of Interior has a protection program for journalists and trade unionists,
and during 2008 it established a separate program for victims presenting
claims in the context of the paramilitary demobilization process. In May the
Constitutional Court demanded a thorough review of this program, which many
victims groups consider ineffective.
High-ranking government officials continued to make public statements accusing
human rights groups and defenders of collaborating with guerrillas. Such statements
create an environment of intimidation that makes it difficult for human
rights defenders to carry out their legitimate work.
Key International Actors
The United States remains the most influential foreign actor in Colombia. In 2008
it provided approximately US$650 million to the Colombian government, somewhat
less than in past years. The bulk of the assistance continues to consist of
military and police aid, though in 2008 a larger share of aid was directed toward
social and economic assistance. Thirty percent of US military assistance is formally
subject to human rights conditions, though the US Department of State has not consistently enforced these conditions. The United States also provides financial
support for the paramilitary demobilization process, subject to Colombias compliance
with related conditions in US law.
The Democratic leadership in the US Congress has pledged to delay consideration
of the US-Colombia Free Trade Agreement until there is concrete evidence of sustained
results on the ground with regard to impunity for violence against trade
unionists and the role of paramilitaries.
The United Kingdom provides military assistance to Colombia, though the full
amount is publicly unknown. The European Union provides social and economic
assistance, and has provided some aid to the governments paramilitary demobilization
programs.
The OAS Mission to Support the Peace Process in Colombia, which is charged
with verifying the paramilitary demobilizations, issued reports in 2008 that continued
to express concern over the activities of new, rearmed, or never demobilized
groups.
The Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights is active in Colombia,
with a presence in Bogot, Medelln, and Cali. Colombia was reviewed under the
Universal Periodic Review mechanism of the UN Human Rights Council in
December 2008.
Cuba
Cuba remains the one country in Latin American that represses nearly all forms of
political dissent. The government continues to enforce political conformity using
criminal prosecutions, long- and short-term detentions, mob harassment, surveillance,
police warnings, and travel restrictions.
Since Fidel Castro relinquished direct control of the government to his brother,
Raul Castro, in August 2006and finally stepped down in February 2008Cuba
has at times signaled a willingness to reconsider its long-standing disregard for
human rights norms. In 2008 the country signed the two fundamental international
human rights treaties and commuted the death sentences of several prisoners.
Yet these measures have led to no significant policy changes in Cuba. The
repressive machinery built over almost five decades of Fidel Castros rule remains
intact and continues to systematically deny people their basic rights.
Legal and Institutional Failings
Cubas legal and institutional structures are at the root of rights violations.
Although in theory the different branches of government have separate areas of
authority, in practice the executive retains clear control over all levers of power.
The courts, which lack independence, undermine the right to fair trial by severely
restricting the right to a defense.
Cubas Criminal Code provides the legal basis for repression of dissent. Laws
criminalizing enemy propaganda, the spreading of unauthorized news, and
insult to patriotic symbols are used to restrict freedom of speech under the guise
of protecting state security. The government also imprisons or orders the surveillance
of individuals who have committed no illegal act, relying upon provisions
that penalize dangerousness (estado peligroso) and allow for official warning
(advertencia oficial).
Political Imprisonment
The Cuban Commission for Human Rights and National Reconciliation (CCDHRN),
a respected local human rights group, in July 2008 issued a list of 219 prisoners whom it said were incarcerated for political reasons. The list included 11 peaceful
dissidents arrested so far in 2008. Of 75 political dissidents, independent journalists,
and human rights advocates who were summarily tried and sentenced in
2003, 55 remained imprisoned as of September 2008. Four others were released
in February 2008 on health grounds, having been forced to choose between staying
in prison, where they were denied medical treatment, and being exiled to
Spain.
Family members of political prisoners are frequently harassed and blacklisted
from jobs.
Travel Restrictions and Family Separations
The Cuban government forbids the countrys citizens from leaving or returning to
Cuba without first obtaining official permission, which is often denied.
Unauthorized travel can result in criminal prosecution. In May 2008 Cuban blogger
Yoani Sanchez was awarded a Spanish journalism prize. The government initially
issued an exit visa to Sanchez, but the day before she was scheduled to
leave the visa was put on hold without explanation, and she was unable to accept
the award in person. On August 15, after repeatedly being denied exit visas, eight
dissidents tried to escape Cuba aboard a primitive boat. They have not been
heard from since and are presumed dead at sea.
The government frequently bars citizens engaged in authorized travel from taking
their children with them overseas, essentially holding the children hostage to
guarantee the parents return. Given the widespread fear of forced family separation,
these travel restrictions provide the Cuban government with a powerful tool
for punishing defectors and silencing critics.
The government is also clamping down on the movement of citizens within Cuba
by more aggressively enforcing a 1997 law known as Decree 217. Designed to limit
migration to Havana, the decree requires Cubans to obtain government permission
before moving to the countrys capital. According to one Cuban official, the
police have forcibly removed people from Havana in approximately 20,000
instances since 2006. In a representative case, a migrant from Granma province
who had been living in Havana for seven years was stopped in the street by a police officer and told to present her papers. When she could not produce them,
the police immediately sent her back to Granma.
Freedom of Expression and Assembly
The government maintains a media monopoly on the island, ensuring that freedom
of expression is virtually nonexistent. Although a small number of independent
journalists manage to write articles for foreign websites or publish underground
newsletters, the risks associated with these activities are considerable.
Access to information via the internet is also highly restricted. The only internet
caf in Havana charges US$5 per hourone-third of the average Cuban monthly
salary; two other cafes may be used only to send emails on a closed Cuban network.
According to the Committee to Protect Journalists, 22 journalists were serving
prison terms in Cuba as of October 2008, making the country second only to
China for the number of journalists in prison. Independent journalist, Oscar
Snchez Madan, was arrested in April 2007 after reporting on local corruption in
Matanzas. He is now serving a four-year prison sentence for social dangerousness.
In 2008 the Cuban government significantly increased the use of arbitrary detention
to harass and intimidate dissidents, and restrict freedom of assembly. In all
of 2007, the CCDHRN documented 325 arbitrary detentions by security forces; in
the first half of 2008 it reported 640 arbitrary detentions. The detentions are
often used to prevent dissidents from participating in a scheduled meeting or
event. Security officers often offer no charge to justify the detentionsa clear violation
of due process rightsbut warn detainees of longer arrests if they continue
to participate in activities considered critical of the government. In September
2007, for example, police detained more than 40 dissidents in several cities who
were traveling to a protest in Havana at the Ministry of Justice. All were released
after the protest. In April 2008, wives of political prisoners, known as the Ladies
in White, were arrested when they tried to stage a peaceful sit-in in Havanas
Revolution Plaza.
Prison Conditions
Prisoners are generally kept in poor and abusive conditions, often in overcrowded
cells. Political prisoners who denounce poor conditions or who otherwise fail to
observe prison rules are frequently punished with long periods in punitive isolation
cells, restrictions on visits, or denial of medical treatment.
Death Penalty
In February 2008 the government commuted the death sentences of all prisoners
except three individuals charged with terrorism. The Cuban government does not
make public information about how many people are on death row, but it is estimated
that between 20 and 30 sentences were commuted. Nevertheless, Cuban
law continues to prescribe the death penalty for a broad range of crimes.
Human Rights Defenders
Refusing to recognize human rights monitoring as a legitimate activity, the government
denies legal status to local human rights groups. Individuals who belong
to these groups face systematic harassment, with the government impeding their
efforts to document human rights conditions. In one 2008 case, four members of
the Cuban Human Rights Foundation were arrested and sentenced to four years in
prison in a summary judgment that was hidden from public view, according to the
Council of Human Rights Reporters. Cuba remains one of the few countries in the
world to deny the International Committee of the Red Cross access to its prisons.
Key International Actors
In February 2008 the Cuban government recognized core international human
rights principles by signing the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(ICCPR) and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
(ICESCR), although as of November it had not ratified them. At the time of signing,
the government indicated it was considering making several reservations to the
treaties.
In response to this and economic reforms under Raul Castro, in June the European
Union lifted sanctions on Cuba, which it had originally imposed after the 2003
crackdown on dissidents. The EU publicly called on Cuba to release all political
prisoners and honor the rights protected in the signed treaties. In mid-2009 the
EU is due to investigate what progress Cuba has made toward fulfilling ICCPR and
ICESCR commitments, and will weigh whether to maintain diplomatic relations.
The US economic embargo on Cuba, in effect for more than four decades, continues
to impose indiscriminate hardship on the Cuban people and to block travel to
the island. In an effort to deprive the Cuban government of funding, the US government
enacted new restrictions on family-related travel to Cuba in June 2004.
Under these rules, individuals are allowed to visit relatives in Cuba only once
every three years, and only if the relatives fit the US governments narrow definition
of familya definition that excludes aunts, uncles, cousins, and other kin
who are often integral members of Cuban families. Justified as a means of promoting
freedom in Cuba, these travel policies undermine the freedom of movement
of hundreds of thousands of Cubans and Cuban-Americans, and inflict profound
harm on Cuban families.
Guatemala
A dozen years after the end of Guatemalas brutal civil war, impunity remains the
norm when it comes to human rights violations. Ongoing violence and intimidation
threaten to reverse the little progress that has been made toward promoting
accountability. Guatemalas weak and corrupt law enforcement institutions have
proved incapable of containing the powerful organized crime groups that, among
other things, are believed to be responsible for attacks on human rights defenders,
judges, prosecutors, and others.
Impunity for Civil War Crimes
Guatemala continues to suffer the effects of an internal armed conflict that ended
in 1996. A United Nations-sponsored truth commission estimated that as many as
200,000 people were killed during the 36-year war, and attributed the vast majority
of the killings to government forces.
Guatemalans seeking accountability for these abuses face daunting obstacles.
Prosecutors and investigators receive grossly inadequate training and resources.
The courts routinely fail to resolve judicial appeals and motions in a timely manner,
allowing defense attorneys to engage in dilatory legal maneuvering. The army
and other state institutions resist cooperating fully with investigations into abuses
committed by current or former members. And the police regularly fail to provide
adequate protection to judges, prosecutors, and witnesses involved in politically
sensitive cases.
Of the 626 massacres documented by the truth commission, only three cases
have been successfully prosecuted in the Guatemalan courts. The third conviction
came in May 2008, when five former members of a paramilitary civil patrol were
convicted for the murders of 26 of the 177 civilians massacred in Rio Negro in
1982.
The July 2005 discovery of approximately 80 million documents of the disbanded
National Police, including files on Guatemalans who were murdered and disappeared
during the armed conflict, could play a key role in the prosecution of
those who committed human rights abuses during the conflict. By October 2008 the countrys Human Rights Ombudsmans Office had processed seven million of
those documents, primarily related to cases presently under active investigation.
The office plans to open the first part of the archive in 2009.
In February 2008 President lvaro Colom announced that he would open the military
archives spanning Guatemalas civil war. However, the minister of defense
has since delayed handing over the files, arguing that the constitution protects
the confidentiality of documents related to national security. A new law passed in
September 2008 challenges this argument: article 24 of the Law of Access to
Public Information orders that in no circumstances can information related to
investigations of violations of fundamental human rights or crimes against
humanity be classified as confidential or reserved. The military archives remain
closed, however.
Impunity for Present-Day Crimes Including Attacks on Civil
Society
Impunity is not only the norm for crimes committed during the war, but also a
problem that persists for present-day crimes. In 2007 an average of 16 people
were killed each day in Guatemala, yet less than 3 percent of murder cases were
resolved, according to a study of police data by a respected think tank. No recent
case better illustrates the corrosive spread of violence and impunity in Guatemala
than the murder of three Salvadorean representatives from the Central American
Parliament and their driver in February 2007. Days after the crime, four
Guatemalan policemen were arrested as suspects and moved to prison, but all
four suspects were murdered while awaiting legal proceedings. In July 2008 the
chief prosecutor in the case, Juan Carlos Martinez, was assassinated. A former
mayor was arrested in August in connection with the killings, but at this writing,
no one has been found guilty of any of the murders.
Attacks and threats against human rights defenders are commonplace, and pose
a significant obstacle to their work. Others involved in human rights prosecutions
are also routinely threatened or attacked, including forensic experts, plaintiffs,
and witnesses. The Human Rights Ombudsmans Office documented nearly 200
attacks and threats against human rights defenders in 2007.
The case of Amilcar de Jesus Pop Ac, a lawyer who has been assisting an indigenous
community in a dispute with a cement company, is representative. In August
2008 two armed men threatened to kill Pop, asking him why he continued to help
the community. Prior to this, Pop had received multiple death threats, which he
reported to the police and the public prosecutor, but neither had taken steps to
protect him.
The Protection Unit of Human Rights Defenders, an NGO, reported 37 attacks on
workers advocates in the first half of 2008, an alarming increase from the previous
years total of 13 such attacks. In March, Miguel ngel Ramrez Enrquezcofounder
of a trade union that represents banana pickerswas murdered in his
home. A month earlier, Ramrezs daughter had been abducted and gang-raped
by four men who asked questions about her fathers organizing work. No one has
been prosecuted for either crime.
Journalists, especially those covering corruption, drug trafficking, and accountability
for abuses committed during the civil war, face threats and attacks for their
work. Five journalists have been killed in Guatemala since 2006. In May 2008 a
reporter who had been investigating government ties to drug traffickers died after
being shot four times in the head, a crime for which no one has been prosecuted.
From January to June 2008 four public prosecutors, a judge, and a magistrate
were assassinated, and dozens more were threatened. Most of the victims were
involved in trying cases of corruption or organized crime.
There is widespread consensus among local and international observers that the
people responsible for many of these acts of violence and intimidation are affiliated
with private, secretive, and illegally armed networks or organizations, commonly
referred to in Guatemala as clandestine groups. These groups appear to
have links to both government officials and organized crime, which give them
access to considerable political and economic resources. The Guatemalan justice
system has so far proved no match for this powerful threat to the rule of law.
Excessive Use of Force
Members of the national police sometimes employ excessive force against suspected
criminals and others. In September 2007 police officers arrested five men suspected of being members of a violent drug gang in Guatemala City. The bodies
of the men showed up on a ranch several days later, and two police officers are
currently standing trail for their murders.
Death Penalty
Guatemalan law allows for the death penalty, but it has not been applied since
2000. In February 2008 Congress passed a decree that would have restored the
practice, but the following month President Colom vetoed the decree. At this writing,
Guatemalas moratorium on the death penalty continues.
Key International Actors
In September 2007 the UN secretary-general appointed a Spanish former prosecutor
and judge to lead the newly-created Commission Against Impunity in
Guatemala (CICIG). The commissions mandate is to work with the Guatemalan
Attorney Generals Office to investigate, prosecute, and dismantle the clandestine
groups responsible for ongoing violence against human rights defenders. In
its first year, the commission has taken on 15 cases, which are seen as representative
of the most entrenched problems of impunity. Yet as the CICIG acknowledged
in its 2008 annual report, it has also been systematically obstructed at
times by the very corruption it seeks to root out.
In a landmark ruling, Spains Constitutional Court held in September 2005 that, in
accordance with the principal of universal jurisdiction, cases of alleged genocide
committed during Guatemalas civil war could be prosecuted in the Spanish
courts. In July 2006 a Spanish judge issued international arrest warrants for eight
Guatemalans and the Spanish government requested their extradition in late
2006. However, in December 2007 the Guatemalan Constitutional Court ruled that
two of the accused could not be extradited to Spain. Nevertheless, the Spanish
court has pushed ahead with the case: in February, May, and October 2008 it collected
testimony from witnesses, victims, and experts on the conflict. Meanwhile,
in Guatemala, the case continues to be held up by defense motions, while witnesses
and experts are subjected to harassment and threats.
Guatemala was reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism of the
UN Human Rights Council in May 2008. At that time, Guatemala pledged to ratify
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and the International
Convention on the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, and to
accept article 14 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination (which allows individual petition to the ICERD committee).
In June Guatemala ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and in
September it ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
The UN High Commissioner for Human Rights has maintained an office in
Guatemala since 2005 that provides observation and technical assistance on
human rights practices in the country. The Inter-American human rights system
provides an important venue for human rights advocates seeking to press
Guatemala to address past and ongoing abuses.
Guatemala is a member of the Dominican Republic-Central America Free Trade
Agreement (DR-CAFTA) between the United States and several countries in Central
America. In April 2008 six Guatemalan unions and the US trade union federation
AFL-CIO filed a complaint with the US Department of Labors Office of Trade and
Labor Affairs alleging violations of national and international labor laws. The complaint
the first of its kind under DR-CAFTAwas accepted by the US in June and
is currently being investigated.
Haiti
Despite some initial progress toward stabilization after the presidential election
of 2006 and the local elections that followed, Haiti continues to suffer from high
crime rates and chronic human rights problems, including inhumane prison conditions
and threats to human rights defenders.
The challenges facing Haiti were compounded by food riots in spring 2008 and an
exceptionally destructive hurricane season. At least five people were reportedly
killed in food riots in Port-au-Prince and Les Cayes in April. The unrest led to
Prime Minister Jacques Edouard Alexiss dismissal that month, leaving the post of
prime minister vacant until Michle Pierre-Louis took office in September. Haiti
was hit by four hurricanes in August and September, which left hundreds dead
and an estimated one million homeless or displaced and in dire need of humanitarian
assistance.
Violence and Weak State Institutions
Despite some improvements in the security situation, high levels of violent crime
persisted in 2008. In June United Nations police reported that 157 people had
been abducted in Haiti in the first six months of the year (a rate of about one person
per day). In the context of the overall high rate of kidnappings, the number of
child abductions has continued to rise at an alarming rate in urban areas. Most
girls who were abducted reported having been raped or sexually abused by their
captors. In one highly publicized kidnapping case, despite a ransom being paid,
a 16-year-old kidnapping victim was killed and his body was found on the streets
of Port-au-Prince bearing signs of torture.
Police lawlessness contributes to overall insecurity. The Haitian National Police is
largely ineffective in preventing and investigating crime. Reports of arbitrary
arrests as well as excessive and indiscriminate use of force by police continue.
There are also allegations of involvement of some police officers in criminal activity.
Although some police units have received training on human rights and arrest
procedures, the police continue to experience severe shortages of personnel,
equipment, and training.
Haiti also continues to suffer from an ineffective justice system plagued by politicization,
corruption, and a lack of personnel, training, and resources. In 2008
Haiti was ranked 177 out of 180 on Transparency Internationals Corruption
Perceptions Index, which serves as a recognized standard for international corruption
comparisons. Perpetrators of abuses are rarely held accountable. Sexual
abuse of women and girls remains a serious problem, and those responsible are
typically not held to account.
Accountability for Past Abuses
Accountability for past abuses remains out of reach. For example, in February
2004 in La Scierie, Saint Marc, armed anti-government gangs took over a police
station, and government-linked forces responded with excessive force. There were
also reports of abuses by the anti-government gangs. Several killings, including
of civilians, resulted from clashes between the groups, but no one has been held
responsible for the deaths. Accountability also remains lacking in regard to the
1994 case involving the killing of civilians in Raboteau by soldiers and paramilitaries
during the time of the military government. In 2005 the Haitian Supreme
Court overturned the convictions of 15 former soldiers and paramilitaries in the
Raboteau case, basing its decision on extremely weak grounds.
Detention Conditions
The dysfunctional and politicized judicial system contributes to the severe overcrowding
that plagues Haitis prison system. Arbitrary long-term pretrial detention
of suspects is commonplace. Conditions in detention facilities are dire, with prisoners
held in dirty, crammed cells often lacking sanitary facilities. In September
2008 nearly 300 pretrial detainees were behind bars at a police station in
Gonaives, held in small cells with a total capacity of 75 people. Detainees in
some facilities take turns sleeping and standing due to a lack of space and beds,
and some complain that they do not receive daily meals. Reports of untreated
tuberculosis, malaria, scabies, and malnutrition are common in Haitian detention
centers.
Child Labor and Access to Education
Only about half of primary-school-age children attend school and less than 2 percent
of children finish secondary school, according to the United Nations
Childrens Fund. Although enrollment in public schools is supposed to be free,
the costs of uniforms, books and other school supplies are often too high for
many parents to meet.
The UN estimates there are at least 170,000 child domestic workers in Haiti.
Known in Haitian Creole as restavksfrom the French rester avec (to stay
with)they form part of a long standing system by which parents from mostly
low-income rural areas send their children to live with other families, typically in
urban areas, in the hope that the receiving families will care for their children and
provide them with food, clothing, shelter, and schooling in exchange for the children
performing light chores. These children are often unpaid for their work,
denied an education, and physically and sexually abused.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders remain the targets of threats and attacks. Lovinsky
Pierre-Antoine, a well-known human rights advocate and former coordinator of
Fondasyon Trant Septanman organization that worked on behalf of victims of
the 1991 and 2004 coup dtatswas abducted on August 12, 2007, while serving
as an adviser to a delegation of human rights advocates from Canada and the
United States who were traveling in Haiti. His whereabouts remain unknown at
this writing. Wilson Mesilien, a Fondasyon Trant Septanm co-founder who was
serving as interim coordinator following Pierre-Antoines disappearance, reportedly
received threats and has gone into hiding with his wife and four children.
Frantzo Joseph, coordinator of the Grand Ravine Community Human Rights
Council (CCDH-GR), a community group working in the Grand Ravine neighborhood
of Port-au-Prince, reportedly received repeated threats and has also gone
into hiding with his family. The previous CCDH-GR coordinator, Bruner Esterne,
was shot dead by three unknown individuals in September 2006.
Investigations into these three human rights defender cases have not progressed.
On March 7, 2008, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights heard the case of
Fleury v. Haiti. Lysias Fleury is a human rights activist who was arbitrarily arrested,
beaten, and tortured by members of the Haitian National Police in 2002.
Key International Actors
In the wake of the 2008 hurricanes, Haiti received promises of humanitarian aid,
particularly from countries throughout the region and in Europe. The delivery of
humanitarian aid to areas most affected by the storms has been delayed, in part
due to the damage caused to the countrys infrastructure by the storms.
The UN Security Council voted in October 2008 to extend the mandate of the UN
stabilization mission in Haiti (known by its French acronym, MINUSTAH) to
October 15, 2009. The UN force, present in Haiti since 2004 and currently under
Brazilian command, contains 6,854 troops and 1,858 police officers. There have
been reports of serious abuses over the course of MINUSTAHs mandate, including
by personnel from Brazil, Jordan, and Sri Lanka. In February 2008 the UN
Office of Internal Oversight Services issued conclusions from its investigation into
allegations of violations against children by the personnel of the 950-member Sri
Lankan troop contingent, finding that acts of sexual exploitation and abuse were
frequent and occurred at virtually every location where the contingent personnel
were deployed. Though reports of MINUSTAH abuses appear to have
decreased over the past year, problems remain. For example, in August 2008 witnesses
reported seeing MINUSTAH forces beating two plainclothes Haitian police
officers during a security operation in Cit Soleil.
In 2008, in its first ever judgment in a case against Haiti, the Inter-American Court
of Human Rights sharply criticized Haitis current and former governments for
their detention and mistreatment of former Prime Minister Yvon Neptune. It found
Haiti responsible for violating 11 different provisions of the American Convention
on Human Rights, including the right to physical integrity, the right to personal
liberty, and the right to a fair trial and judicial protection. Haiti was ordered to
adopt judicial reforms, improve prison conditions, quickly resolve Neptunes criminal
case, and pay Neptune US$95,000 in damages and costs.
Mexico
Mexicos criminal justice system continues to be plagued by human rights problems.
Persons under arrest or imprisonment face torture and ill-treatment. Law
enforcement officials often neglect to investigate and prosecute those responsible
for human rights violations, including abuses perpetrated during law enforcement
operations, those committed during Mexicos dirty war, and sexual and
domestic violence against women and girls.
The human rights requirements included in the Merida Initiative, an aid package
that the United States government signed into law in June 2008 to help Mexico
address the increasing violence and corruption of heavily armed drug cartels, provide
a unique opportunity to increase international scrutiny of Mexican security
forces poor human rights records. Other developments in 2008 include a constitutional
reform to overhaul the criminal justice system and a Supreme Court ruling
upholding a Mexico City law that legalized abortion in the first 12 weeks of
pregnancy.
Criminal Justice System
The criminal justice system routinely fails to provide justice to victims of violent
crime and human rights violations. The causes of this failure are varied and
include corruption, inadequate training and resources, and abusive policing practices
without accountability.
Torture remains a widespread problem within the Mexican criminal justice system.
One perpetuating factor is the acceptance by some judges of evidence
obtained through torture and other mistreatment. Another is the failure to investigate
and prosecute most cases of torture.
Over 40 percent of prisoners in Mexico have never been convicted of a crime.
Rather, they are held in pretrial detention, often waiting years for trial. The excessive
use of pretrial detention contributes to prison overcrowding. Prison inmates
are also subject to abuses including extortion by guards and the imposition of
solitary confinement for indefinite periods. Children are often detained in poor conditions in police stations and other institutions, and many juvenile detainees
do not have access to educational programs.
In June 2008 Mexico passed a constitutional reform that is, in some respects, an
historic step forward. It creates the basis for an adversarial criminal justice system
with oral trials and contains measures that are critical for promoting greater
respect for fundamental rights, such as including presumption of innocence in
the constitution. However, two new provisions violate Mexicos obligations under
international law. The first allows prosecutors, with judicial authorization, to
detain individuals suspected of participating in organized crime for up to 80 days
before they are charged with a crime. The second denies judges the power to
decide, in cases involving offenses on a prescribed list, whether a defendant
should be provisionally released pending and during trial.
Impunity for Military Abuses
Mexican soldiers continue to commit egregious abuses while engaged in law
enforcement activities. For instance, in February 2008 soldiers in Tamaulipas
used excessive force when they opened fire at a car, killing one man and injuring
another. In April soldiers in Chihuahua allegedly arbitrarily detained four policewomen,
two of whom were blindfolded and held naked in front of soldiers.
With army abuses routinely charged to military authorities to investigate and
prosecute, impunity ensues. The military justice system lacks the independence
necessary to carry out reliable investigations and its operations suffer from a general
absence of transparency. The ability of military prosecutors to investigate
army abuses is further undermined by a fear of the army, which is widespread in
rural communities and inhibits civilian victims and witnesses from providing
information to military authorities.
Impunity for Dirty War Crimes
During its five-year existence, the Special Prosecutors Office that former
President Vicente Fox established in 2001 to address abuses committed during
the countrys dirty war in the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s made very limited
progress in investigating and prosecuting these crimes. It did not obtain a single criminal conviction. Of the more than 600 disappearance cases, it filed charges
in 16 cases and obtained indictments in nine. The office determined the whereabouts
of only six disappeared individuals, finding that four were sent to psychiatric
institutions and two were killed while in detention.
After President Felipe Calderon officially closed the Special Prosecutors Office,
the cases were transferred to another, non-specialized office within the federal
Attorney Generals Office, which has not made significant advances in the investigations.
Reproductive Rights, Domestic Violence, and Sexual Abuse
Mexican laws do not adequately protect women and girls against domestic violence
and sexual abuse. Some laws on violence against women run directly
counter to international standards, including provisions of Mexican law that
define sanctions for some sexual offenses with reference to the chastity of the
victim, and penalize domestic violence only when the victim has been battered
repeatedly. Legal protections that do exist are often not enforced vigorously. Girls
and women who report rape or violence to the authorities are generally met with
suspicion, apathy, and disrespect. As a result, victims are often reluctant to
report crimes and such underreporting in turn undercuts pressure for necessary
legal reforms. The net effect is that sexual and domestic violence against women
and girls continues to be rampant and shrouded in impunity.
In a landmark decision, the Mexican Supreme Court affirmed in August 2008 the
constitutionality of a Mexico City law of April 2007, which legalized abortion in the
first 12 weeks of pregnancy and established the responsibility of public healthcare
providers to offer first trimester abortions without restriction and with no residency
requirements. However, abortion continues to be criminalized in the rest
of Mexico, though every federal state in the country allows abortion in certain
specific circumstances, including after rape. Yet pregnant rape victims who seek
to terminate their imposed pregnancy are often thwarted from doing so by the
dismissive and even hostile treatment they receive from authorities.
Freedom of Expression and Information
Journalists, particularly those who have investigated drug trafficking or have been
critical of state governments, have faced harassment and attacks. In June 2008,
for example, two days after the severed head of a man was found in front of a
newspaper in Tabasco, a note saying youre next, director was left nearby.
Seven Mexican journalists have gone missing since 2005, including five who had
investigated links between local officials and organized crime. Such cases have
generated a climate of self-censorship in parts of the country.
Since 2007, defamation, libel, and slander are no longer federal criminal offenses.
However, at the state level, criminal defamation laws continue to be excessively
restrictive and tend to undermine freedom of expression.
A 2002 federal law on transparency and access to information and a 2007 constitutional
reform increased avenues for public scrutiny of the Mexican government.
However, progress made in promoting transparency within the federal executive
branch has not yet been entirely matched in other branches of government, in
autonomous institutions, or at the state level.
Labor Rights
Legitimate labor-organizing activity continues to be obstructed by collective bargaining
agreements negotiated between management and pro-management
unions. These agreements often fail to provide worker benefits beyond the minimums
mandated by Mexican legislation. Workers who seek to form independent
unions risk losing their jobs, as inadequate laws and poor enforcement generally
fail to protect them from retaliatory dismissals.
The National Human Rights Commission
The National Human Rights Commission, Mexicos official human rights organ,
has had limited impact. The Commission has provided detailed and authoritative
information on specific human rights cases and usefully documented some systemic
obstacles to human rights progress. But, by falling short of making full use
of its broad mandate and immense resources, it has routinely failed to press government institutions to remedy the abuses it has documented and to promote
reforms needed to prevent them.
Key International Actors
The Merida Initiative, an aid package that US President George Bush signed into
law in June 2008, includes US$400 million for Mexico as part of a multi-year
regional partnership to address the increasing violence and corruption of heavily
armed drug cartels. The package also provides that most of the aid for Mexican
police and military forces can be made available immediately. However, 15 percent
will only be available after the US secretary of state reports to Congress that
the Mexican government has met four human rights requirements. These include
ensuring that civilian prosecutors and judicial authorities investigate and prosecute
federal police and military officials who violate basic rights; consulting regularly
with Mexican civil society organizations regarding the implementation of the
Merida Initiative; enforcing the prohibition on the use of testimony obtained
through torture or other ill-treatment; and improving the transparency and
accountability of police forces.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) maintains an
in-country office that provides valuable documentation of human rights problems
and recommendations for addressing them. In May 2008 the OHCHR removed the
head of its Mexico office amidst credible reports that the Calderon administration
had requested this due to the UN representatives high profile.
In August the Inter-American Court of Human Rights ruled that Mexico had violated
former Foreign Relations Minister Jorge Castaedas right to judicial review in a
case challenging electoral laws in Mexico. Castaeda had questioned the laws
that establish that presidential candidates must be nominated by political parties,
arguing that he should be allowed to run as an independent candidate. The
Court also ruled, however, that Mexico had not violated the articles of the
American Convention that guarantee political rights and the right to equality
before the law.
Peru
Justice for past abuses continues to be a leading human rights concern in Peru.
For the first time in its history, the country is currently trying a former president for
grave human rights violations. While authorities have made some progress in
holding accountable others responsible for abuses committed during Perus 20-
year internal armed conflict (19802000), most perpetrators continue to evade
justice. Investigations of massacres and enforced disappearances by government
forces have been delayed by lack of cooperation from the military.
Cases of torture and ill-treatment continue to occur. Journalists reporting on corruption
in Perus provincial cities face harassment and physical attacks.
Government officials have aggressively sought to discredit nongovernmental
organizations that advocate for human rights accountability.
Accountability and Impunity
According to Perus Truth and Reconciliation Commission, almost 70,000 people
died or were disappeared during the countrys internal armed conflict. Many
were victims of atrocities committed by the Shining Path and the Tupac Amaru
Revolutionary Movement (MRTA), and others of human rights violations by state
agents.
On December 10, 2007, the trial began in Lima of former President Alberto
Fujimori, who was extradited from Chile to face charges of human rights violations
and corruption. Fujimori is accused of the extrajudicial execution of 15 people in
the Barrios Altos district of Lima in November 1991, the enforced disappearance
and murder of nine students and a teacher from La Cantuta University in July
1992, and two abductions. He faces a sentence of up to 35 years imprisonment.
During 2008 the three judges of the Special Criminal Court heard evidence from
Fujimori and scores of witnesses, including victims relatives, members of the
Colina group (an army death squad responsible for the killings), high-ranking military
officers, journalists, and human rights experts.
In a separate trial, Gen Julio Salazar Monroe, former head of the National
Intelligence Service (SIN) during the Fujimori government, was sentenced in April
2008 to 35 years in prison for ordering the Cantuta killings.
Efforts to investigate and prosecute former officials and military officers implicated
in scores of other killings and disappearances dating from the beginning of
the armed conflict have had meager results. Lack of cooperation by the military
has hampered investigation of human rights cases. The excessive workload of
prosecutors, inefficiency, and inexperience in dealing with human rights cases
also contribute to the delays.
According to information published by the human rights Ombudsman in
December 2007, of 192 cases monitored by the institutionwhich include abuses
committed by insurgent groups only six had led to convictions, while 110 were
still under investigation by prosecutors several years since the investigations
were opened. In all, only 19 individuals had received prison sentences. In August
2008 the Ombudsman noted with concern that court proceedings were stagnating.
A decree law enacted in July 2007 to address the problem of organized crime contains
a provision that could undermine accountability for police abuses. The law
exempts from criminal responsibility members of the police or military who cause
death or injury using firearms in the line of duty. The Ombudsman has expressed
concern that this law could be invoked to halt ongoing human rights prosecutions
and has called for legislation to regulate the use of lethal force in accordance with
international standards.
Torture and Ill-Treatment
Torture and ill-treatment of criminal suspects continue to be problems in Peru. A
poor record of prosecuting state agents for abuses hinders eradication of these
practices. The human rights Ombudsman investigated 139 complaints of torture
or ill-treatment between August 2006 and September 2007. The nongovernmental
Human Rights Commission (COMISEDH) documented 19 cases from January to
September 2008.
The crime of torture was incorporated into the criminal code in 1998, but by the
end of 2007 courts had obtained only 11 convictions. Verdicts on torture have
been erratic. Although in 2008 the Supreme Court increased prison sentences in
one case, another Supreme Court panel annulled a conviction for torture on the
erroneous grounds that torture exists only at times of political conflict.
Media Freedom
Journalists who publicize abuses by local government officials are vulnerable to
intimidation, assault, and even murder by individuals acting in support of, or
working for, municipal authorities. Between January and August 2008 the Press
and Society Institute (IPYS), a nongovernmental press freedom monitoring group,
issued 20 alerts on behalf of provincial journalists who alleged they had been
physically attacked, threatened, or intimidated by mayors and regional authorities
or their employees.
Reproductive Rights
In Peru, interrupting a pregnancy is legal only in order to save the life of the
woman or to avoid serious and permanent damage to her health, but there are
significant barriers to accessing lawful abortions. Human Rights Watch has documented
statements by women and adolescent girls who were clearly eligible for
legal abortions but who were refused or were unable to access the service, with
serious consequences for their mental and physical health.
Major obstacles to accessing therapeutic abortion in Peru include; vague and
restrictive laws and policies on therapeutic abortion, the absence of a national
protocol on eligibility and administrative procedures, ad hoc approval and referral
procedures for legal abortions, and lack of accountability for non-service. These
problems are compounded by healthcare providers fear of prosecution or malpractice
lawsuits, and low levels of awareness among women and healthcare
providers about exceptions to the criminalization of abortion.
Human Rights Defenders
Former president Fujimoris supporters in Congress, as well as some top government
officials, have aggressively sought to discredit NGOs who advocate for
human rights accountability. Such NGOs have been falsely accused of sympathy
with terrorist groups.
In April 2008, for example, President Alan Garca accused the Association for
Human Rights (APRODEH), of treason, after two of its leading members sent a
letter to the European Parliament pointing out that the MRTA, one of the armed
groups responsible for widespread abuses during the armed conflict, was no
longer active, and arguing that to include it in a list of current terrorist groups
would be to exaggerate its importance. Vice-President and congressman Luis
Giampetri accused APRODEHs director, Francisco Sobern, of justifying terrorism
(apologia del terrorismo), and called him a conspicuous agitator of the masses
whom the state will have to hold to account.
Soon after, the Peruvian Agency for International Cooperation (APCI), a state body
that monitors development aid, announced that it was investigating APRODEHs
accounts. In September 2008 APCI announced that the Legal Defense Institute
(IDL), a human rights NGO that has campaigned vigorously in Peru for accountability
for past human rights violations and on corruption issues, was also to be
subject to a full inspection. APCI audits a random sample of NGOs every year, but
it was the third time IDL had been selected in less than two years.
Key International Actors
Rulings against Peru in the Inter-American Court of Human Rights on cases involving
human rights violations during the armed conflict have provoked negative
reactions from the government. In November 2006 the Court ruled on a case
involving the indiscriminate killing in 1992 of 41 Shining Path prisoners at the
Miguel Castro Castro prison in Lima. It ordered the government to pay compensation
of about US$20 million to the families of the dead and to individuals tortured
during the operation. President Garca protested that he could not accept
paying compensation to terrorists, and, in a request for clarification filed with
the Court, Peru asked if the state or private creditors could demand that the victims pay damages mandated by Peruvian courts from their compensation payments.
In August 2008 the Court ruled that it was up to the Peruvian state to
resolve this issue in accordance with its domestic laws.
Peru was reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism of the UN
Human Rights Council in May 2008. During the review Peru pledged to report
back to the Human Rights Council on its efforts to implement the recommendations
of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, in particular with regard to victims
compensation and institutional reform, including bringing to justice those
responsible for human rights violations during the 20-year armed conflict.
Venezuela
Venezuela currently lacks a credible, independent judiciary that can serve as a
check on arbitrary state action and a guarantor of fundamental rights. In the
absence of judicial oversight, the government of President Hugo Chavz has
undermined journalists freedom of expression, workers freedom of association,
and the ability of civil society groups to promote human rights.
Police abuses remain a widespread problem. Prison conditions are among the
worst on the continent, with a high rate of fatalities from inmate violence.
Independence of the Judiciary
The Chvez government has effectively neutralized the judiciary as an independent
branch of government. In 2004 the president and his supporters in the
National Assembly launched a political takeover of the Supreme Court, filling the
court with government supporters and creating new measures that make it possible
to purge justices from the Court. Since then, the Court has largely abdicated
its role as a check on executive power. It has failed to uphold fundamental rights
enshrined in the Venezuelan constitution in key cases involving government
efforts to limit freedom of expression and association.
Freedom of Expression and the Media
Venezuela enjoys vibrant public debate in which anti-government and pro-government
media are equally vocal in their criticism and defense of Chvez. However,
in its efforts to influence the control and content of the media, the government
has engaged in discriminatory actions against media that air opposition viewpoints,
strengthened the states capacity to limit free speech, and created powerful
incentives for government critics to engage in self-censorship.
In March 2005, amendments to the Criminal Code came into force that extended
the scope of Venezuelas desacato (disrespect) laws, which criminalize expression
deemed to insult public officials or state institutions, and increased penalties
for criminal defamation and libel. A broadcasting law introduced in December
2004 has encouraged self-censorship by allowing the arbitrary suspension of channels for the vaguely defined offense of incitement. Should the government
choose to utilize the expanded speech offenses and incitement provisions more
aggressively to sanction public expression, the existing political debate could be
severely curtailed.
The government has abused its control of broadcasting frequencies to punish stations
with overtly critical programming. President Chvez has repeatedly responded
to critical coverage by threatening television stations that they would lose their
broadcasting rights as soon as their concessions expired. Radio Caracas
Television (RCTV) lost its concession in 2007, after Chvez announced at a nationally
broadcast military ceremony that RCTV would not have its concession
renewed because of its support for an April 2002 coup attempt. Neither this accusation
nor an alleged breach of broadcasting standards was ever proved in a proceeding
in which RCTV had an opportunity to present a defense. At the same
time, the government renewed the concession of Venevisin, a rival channel that
Chvez had also repeatedly accused of involvement in the coup but which had
since cut its overtly anti-Chvez programming.
Globovisin, the only remaining channel on public airwaves that continues to
overtly criticize Chvez, has been denied permission for additional broadcasting
frequencies and frequently warned about possible sanctions for critical programs.
By contrast, the government has quickly granted frequencies to pro-government
channels that it controls or finances.
On the positive side, the government has actively supported the creation of community
radio and TV stations, whose broadcasting contributes to media pluralism
and diversity in Venezuela. In May 2008 more than 450 such outlets were operating
across the country, according to a government official.
Labor Rights
The Chvez government has engaged in systematic violations of workers rights
aimed at undercutting established labor unions while favoring new, parallel
unions that support its political agenda.
The government requires that all union elections be organized and certified by the
National Electoral Council (CNE), a public authority. This mandatory oversight of union elections violates international standards, which guarantee workers the
right to elect their representatives in full freedom and according to the conditions
they determine. The government has been promising for several years to reform
the relevant labor and electoral laws to restrict state interference in union elections.
Yet at this writing these proposals remained under discussion by the
National Assembly and the CNE.
Established unions whose elections have not been certified by the CNE are barred
from participating in collective bargaining. In the public sector alone, more than
250 collective bargaining agreements are reported to have expired while unions
were waiting for the CNE to approve their requests to hold elections and certify
their election results.
In bypassing established unions on the grounds that they lack state certification
for their elections, the government has promoted and negotiated with new, progovernment
unions that are exempt from electoral restrictions when first formed.
This practice has created strong incentives for workers to switch labor organizations
and join the new organizations preferred by the government.
The government has also undermined the right to strike by banning some legitimate
strike activity and engaging in mass reprisals against striking oil workers.
Former state oil workers dismissed for participating in a strike in December 2002
are still barred from being rehired in either the public or private sector of the oil
industry.
Police Abuses
Violent crime is rampant in Venezuela and extrajudicial killings by security agents
remain a recurring problem. Thousands of extrajudicial executions have been
recorded in the past decade. Impunity for these crimes remains the norm.
Between January 2000 and February 2007 the attorney generals office registered
6,068 alleged killings by the police and the National Guard. Of 1,142 officials
charged, only 204 were convicted.
In April 2008 the Chvez government issued by decree an Organic Law of Police
Service and National Police, which includes measures aimed at improving police
accountability. It created a new office within the Ministry of Interior and Justice, called the Police Rector, to evaluate the performance of all police departments,
including their compliance with human rights standards. The law also requires all
police forces to establish internal affairs units and independent disciplinary units.
At this writing none of these reforms had been implemented.
Prison Conditions
Venezuelan prisons are among the most violent in Latin America. Weak security,
insufficient guards, and corruption allow armed gangs to effectively control prisons.
Overcrowding, deteriorating infrastructure, and the poor training of guards
contribute to the brutal conditions. Despite much fanfare, government plans to
humanize the penitentiary system have not resulted in any notable improvements.
Venezuelan Prison Watch, a Caracas-based group that monitors prison
conditions, reported 249 prison deaths as a result of violence and 381 injuries in
the first six months of 2008.
Human Rights Defenders
The Chvez government has aggressively sought to discredit local and international
human rights organizations. Officials, including the president, have repeatedly
made unsubstantiated allegations that human rights advocates were
engaged in efforts to destabilize the country. The government has sought to block
local rights advocates from participating in international human rights forums,
typically on grounds that their work is political or that they receive US or other foreign
funding. Rights advocates have also faced prosecutorial harassment and
unsubstantiated allegations aimed at discrediting their work. The Supreme Court
has ruled that nongovernmental organizations that receive funds from foreign
governments are not to be considered part of civil society.
Key International Actors
The Venezuelan government has increasingly rejected international monitoring of
its human rights record.
In September 2008 the Chvez government expelled two Human Rights Watch
representatives from the country hours after they had presented a critical report on human rights at a news conference in Caracas. The foreign minister falsely
accused Human Rights Watch of receiving funding from the US government and of
insulting the institutions of Venezuelan democracy. He also announced, Any
foreigner who comes to criticize our country will be immediately expelled.
In its report covering events in 2007, the Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights (IACHR) stated that the Venezuelan governments failure to invite the commission
to carry out a fact-finding mission since its last visit in 2002 hindered it
from carrying out its mandate in the country. The commission condemned Human
Rights Watchs expulsion from Venezuela in September 2008. The government of
Chile sent a diplomatic note to Venezuela in protest of the expulsion.
Afghanistan
Afghanistan is experiencing its worst violence since the fall of the Taliban government.
Widespread human rights abuses, warlordism, and impunity persist, with a
government that lacks the strength or will to institute necessary reforms.
Corruption and an escalating cost of living are affecting millions.
The Taliban and other militants have extended their control into parts of the country
previously considered relatively stable, such as Logar and Wardak which border
Kabul province, and parts of Herat province in the west. Kabul was a target of
several audacious militant attacks in 2008, with several major roads out of the
capital becoming dangerous to travel. Civilians continue to bear the brunt of militants
bomb attacks. Civilian deaths resulting from international military actions
also remain high, with hundreds of preventable deaths occurring in 2007 and
2008.
Violence and Insecurity
As the violence spirals, each year that passes is declared bloodier than the last.
2008 was no exception. Insurgent groups have been responsible for approximately
two-thirds of civilian deaths. In the first seven months of 2008, the UN estimates
that improvised explosive devices and suicide attacks killed almost 500
civilians. Antigovernment forces routinely violate the laws of war by launching
attacks from civilian areas or retreating to such areas, knowingly drawing return
fire.
The targeting of individuals associated with the government is also on the rise,
from school teachers to human rights defenders, with the United Nations recording
over a hundred assassinations in 2008. The Taliban claimed responsibility for
the September killing of Afghanistans highest-ranking female police officer,
Lieutenant-Colonel Malalai Kakar.
Despite operational improvements, significant numbers of civilians also continue
to be killed by US and NATO-led International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
airstrikes, inflaming public opinion and undermining the government. In July
2008, a mistaken US bombing of a wedding party in Deh Bala, Nangahar province, killed 47 civilians. Denials and lack of transparency have made the situation
worse. In August, US forces bombed the village of Azizabad; the UN, the
government, and the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission said more
than 90 civilians were killed. The US initially denied that any more than seven
civilians had been killed, but weeks later raised the figure to 33.
Increasingly under joint command, the US and ISAF have now agreed to hold joint
investigations with the Afghanistan government. Too often a faulty condolencepayment
system has not provided timely and adequate compensation to assist
civilians harmed by US and ISAF actions.
Outside the conflict areas, organized crime and warlords terrorize Afghans with
impunity. Kidnapping of Afghans for ransom is common, but the police seem
largely incapable or unwilling to tackle it.
Governance and Impunity
The Afghan government continues to lose public legitimacy because of widespread
corruption, failure to improve living standards, and lack of progress in
establishing the rule of law even in areas under its control. Afghans frequently
cite police corruption as a problem, with internationally funded police reform
efforts showing limited impact. The UN special rapporteur on extrajudicial
killings, Philip Alston, visited Afghanistan in May 2008 and drew attention to the
impunity police generally enjoy after they have been accused of killing civilians.
President Hamid Karzais government has done little to implement the Action
Plan for Peace, Reconciliation and Justice, a five-year plan for implementing transitional
justice in Afghanistan, part of the Afghanistan Compact which the government
officially initiated on December 12, 2006. The legal status of an amnesty for
war criminals, passed by parliament in 2007, is still unclear. But the tone of the
debate on transitional justice is still being dominated by the influential group of
parliamentarians that pushed the resolution through, including Abdul Rabb al
Rasul Sayyaf, Burhanuddin Rabbani, and Taj Mohammad, all of whom have been
implicated in war crimes and other serious human rights abuses. The Karzai
administration appears powerless to challenge them.
Women and Girls
Afghan women and girls rank among the worlds worst-off by most indicators,
including maternal mortality, life expectancy, and literacy.
Insecurity prevents the vast majority of girls from attending school in the south
and southeast. In Kandahar in November 2008, several schoolgirls had acid
thrown at their faces on their way to school. Even in conflict-free areas, Afghan
girls continue to face immense obstacles to education such as lack of girls
schools, sexual harassment en route to school, and early marriage which tends to
prematurely end schooling. According to Ministry of Education data, 46 percent of
primary school-aged girls were enrolled in primary school, compared with 74 percent
of boys. At the secondary level only 8 percent of girls and 18 percent of boys
were enrolled.
Women still confront widespread discrimination, significant barriers to working
outside the home, and restrictions on their mobility; many still cannot travel without
an accompanying male relative and a burqa.
Children
As part of their campaign of terrorizing the civilian population, the Taliban and
other insurgent groups continue to target schools, and in particular girls schools.
According to the Ministry of Education, over one hundred schools were attacked
between March and October 2008, with the Afghanistan NGO Security Office
recording more than 30 teachers and students killed in the first 10 months of
2008.
According to the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission, child labor is
prevalent throughout the country and is another reason children do not attend
school.
The UN special representative for children and armed conflict drew attention in
2008 to the largely taboo practice of bacha bazi (the keeping of boys as sex
slaves by wealthy or powerful patrons). The government of Afghanistan has done
little to tackle this abusive cultural tradition.
Women and Girls
Afghan women and girls rank among the worlds worst-off by most indicators,
including maternal mortality, life expectancy, and literacy.
Insecurity prevents the vast majority of girls from attending school in the south
and southeast. In Kandahar in November 2008, several schoolgirls had acid
thrown at their faces on their way to school. Even in conflict-free areas, Afghan
girls continue to face immense obstacles to education such as lack of girls
schools, sexual harassment en route to school, and early marriage which tends to
prematurely end schooling. According to Ministry of Education data, 46 percent of
primary school-aged girls were enrolled in primary school, compared with 74 percent
of boys. At the secondary level only 8 percent of girls and 18 percent of boys
were enrolled.
Women still confront widespread discrimination, significant barriers to working
outside the home, and restrictions on their mobility; many still cannot travel without
an accompanying male relative and a burqa.
Children
As part of their campaign of terrorizing the civilian population, the Taliban and
other insurgent groups continue to target schools, and in particular girls schools.
According to the Ministry of Education, over one hundred schools were attacked
between March and October 2008, with the Afghanistan NGO Security Office
recording more than 30 teachers and students killed in the first 10 months of
2008.
According to the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission, child labor is
prevalent throughout the country and is another reason children do not attend
school.
The UN special representative for children and armed conflict drew attention in
2008 to the largely taboo practice of bacha bazi (the keeping of boys as sex
slaves by wealthy or powerful patrons). The government of Afghanistan has done
little to tackle this abusive cultural tradition.
reporters in conflict areas who have legitimate journalistic contacts with insurgent
groups.
Key International Actors
In the immediate aftermath of the overthrow of the Taliban in 2002-2003, the
international communitys stated aim was to extend the reach of central government,
in order to avoid the vacuum of weak or absent government being exploited
by the insurgency. Foreign military powers, donors, and the UN have since
failed to prioritize governance and the rule of law, contributing to the growth of
insurgency in Afghanistan and the diminution of central government control.
The Paris donor conference in June 2008 offered donors a chance to address fundamental
problems of impunity, womens rights, freedom of expression, transitional
justice, and judicial reform. Instead, donors largely offered more of the
same, with few conditions attached to aid.
The UN operation in Afghanistan remains understaffed, with the human rights
and rule of law office well below capacity. The UN special representative for
Afghanistan, Kai Eide, who took charge in April 2008, has not prioritized human
rights.
International security forces, in particular US forces, have focused much of their
efforts on killing or capturing al Qaeda and Taliban leaders, rather than providing
a safer environment for Afghans to enjoy their basic rights.
The US military operates in Afghanistan without an adequate legal framework,
such as a status-of-forces agreement, and continues to detain hundreds of
Afghans without adequate legal process. The expanding US-run Bagram detention
facility holds over 600 prisoners, including children, who are given negligible
legal rights. Unlike at Guantanamo, prisoners at Bagram are not allowed to see
lawyers. Administrative review of detainees cases is cursory. The detainees have
no right to a personal advocate, no opportunity to review the evidence against
them, and very little means of contesting the grounds for their detention.
Bangladesh
A military-backed interim government ruled Bangladesh for the second year in a
row in 2008 under a state of emergency. This was despite the absence of any visible
internal or external threats justifying emergency rule. Fundamental rights were
suspended during most of the year, but were partially restored in the run-up to
parliamentary elections in December and the expected return to democratic rule.
In the second half of 2008, the government released dozens of senior politicians
and businesspersons arrested in an anti-corruption drive initiated in 2007.
Extrajudicial executions, custodial torture, arbitrary arrests, and impunity for
members of the security forces continue to characterize the human rights situation
in Bangladesh.
Political Developments
The military-backed government headed by Chief Advisor Fakhruddin Ahmed
claimed to be a non-party caretaker government constitutionally mandated to
undertake routine government functions and ensure that the Election Commission
can hold free and fair parliamentary elections. However, it interpreted its mandate
broadly, and throughout 2008 adopted dozens of ordinances with little or no
direct link to preparations for national elections. In December 2007 the President
issued an ordinance for the establishment of a National Human Rights
Commission. At this writing, the commission had not yet been made operational.
Many of the countrys political and business leaders were detained and charged
in an unprecedented and initially welcomed anti-corruption drive that began in
2007. The drive has been plagued by perceived political favoritism and has so far
had limited impact in reducing overall corruption.
In the course of negotiations between the government and political parties over
planned December 2008 elections, authorities released former prime ministers
Khaleda Zia, leader of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party, and Sheikh Hasina,
leader of the Awami League, together with dozens of other high profile prisoners
who had been held on corruption-related charges. 
Extrajudicial Killings
The police force and the Rapid Action Battalion(RAB)an elite anti-crime and
anti-terrorism forcecontinue to kill people in what the authorities refer to as
crossfire killings, encounters, and shootouts, but which in fact are thinly
disguised extrajudicial executions. After strong national and international criticism
the number of killings decreased in 2007 and early 2008.
According to the human rights organization Odhikar, law enforcement officials
killed 116 people between January 1 and September 30, 2008. Alleged members
of outlawed left wing political parties are often targeted. On July 26, the mother of
Dr. Mizanur Rahman Tutul, the head of the outlawed Purbo Banglar Communist
Party (Red Flag faction), informed the media that RAB officers had arrested her
son in Dhaka. She urged the government to save him from crossfire. According
to the police, Tutul was killed in a shootout between his group and the police on
July 27, the day after his mother talked to the press.
Torture
Torture remains widespread in Bangladesh and is frequently used by law enforcement
officials to coerce confessions in criminal investigations and to extort
money. It is also used for politically motivated purposes against perceived government
critics and alleged national security suspects. The bodies of those who
are killed by RAB and the police regularly have physical marks and injuries indicating
that they have been tortured.
After their release in 2008, businesspersons and politicians targeted in the governments
anti-corruption campaign alleged that the Directorate General of Forces
Intelligence (DGFI)Bangladeshs most important military intelligence agency
illegally detained them at its offices inside the military cantonment in Dhaka for
days or weeks and subjected them to physical torture, harsh interrogations methods,
and sleep deprivation. Former detainees also allege that the DGFI used
threats and extortion to force suspects to transfer arbitrary sums of money to
state coffers and individual accounts.
Freedom of Expression and Assembly
Emergency provisions limiting the rights of expression and assembly remained in
force during most of 2008, but the interim government lifted some restrictions in
advance of elections.
Military and civilian government agencies have regularly interfered in the day-today
work of the media. While direct intimidation and harassment of journalists
was less frequent during the second part of 2008, members of DGFI provided
friendly advice to journalists on editorial content and the media continued to
exercise a high degree of self censorship, especially when reporting on allegations
of corruption and other illegal acts by members of the armed forces.
Military figures and their associates continue to increase their ownership of both
electronic and print media.
2008 saw a sharp decrease in the number of criminal defamation cases filed
against journalists. At this writing, no journalist had been murdered and none
were known to be arbitrarily detained.
Law enforcement agencies continue to use excessive force to break up demonstrations.
On May 19, the Bangladesh Rifles, a paramilitary law enforcement
agency, reportedly injured at least 50 people demonstrating against an assault on
a sub-district commissioner by members of the Rifles.
In June 2008 security forces detained thousands of grassroots political activists
following the refusal of the major political parties to participate in a governmentinitiated
dialogue about the countrys political future until party leaders were
released from detention. Most of those arrested were released shortly afterwards.
Freedom of Association
Union activities remain banned under the state of emergency. But factory workers
continue to hold frequent, large-scale demonstrations protesting non-payment of
salaries, below-minimum wages, and the failure of employers to respect basic
labor standards. Several union and labor rights activists were arrested during
2008, while others went into hiding for fear of being subjected to harassment. In
January 2008, National Security Intelligence agents arrested Mehedi Hasan of the Dhaka branch of the Worker Rights Consortium, an organization that monitors
labor practices on behalf of US colleges and universities. Hasan was detained for
ten days.
Womens Rights
Discrimination against women is common in both public and private spheres.
There are few women in decision-making positions and women generally are paid
lower wages than men. Maternal mortality rates remain extremely high, despite
significant improvements over the past 20 years. Domestic violence is a daily
reality for many women and dowry-related crimes are reported to be increasing.
Following adoption of a new National Womens Development Policy in March
2008, a number of Islamist groups organized violent protests, arguing that provisions
calling for equality in acquisition and control of property violate Sharia
inheritance rules. In response to the protests, the government established a committee
of Islamic scholars which among other things recommended that references
to equal rights be taken out of the policy. At this writing, it remained
unclear whether the policy would be amended or its implementation shaped by
the recommendations.
Privacy
Section 377 of Bangladeshs criminal code, an inheritance of British colonialism,
punishes consensual homosexual conduct with up to life imprisonment.
Impunity
The interim governments efforts to hold people accountable for corruption stand
in sharp contrast to its complete inaction with regard to abuses committed by
members of the security forces. No progress has been made in recent years to
address the longstanding problem of impunity and at this writing not a single
member of the security forces had been sentenced to prison for extrajudicial
killings or torture.
Impunity for security forces and officials has been further entrenched by a constitutional
provision permitting authorities to suspend court enforcement of fundamental
rights during the state of emergency.
Despite considerable civil society pressure, there has been no move by the interim
government to prosecute individuals believed responsible for atrocities in the
1971 Bangladesh liberation war.
Human Rights Defenders
Bangladeshs NGO Affairs bureau, which approves projects and funding of NGOs,
has created obstacles for some human rights organizations seeking permission to
receive foreign donor funding. Organizations critical of the regime and outspoken
against human rights abuses appear to be particularly affected. There were some
reports of staff members of nongovernmental human rights organizations being
harassed by members of the security forces.
Key International Actors
Foreign governments and intergovernmental organizations, including the US, UK,
and EU, stressed the importance of parliamentary elections being held before the
end of 2008 and publicly urged the interim government to relax or lift the state of
emergency before the elections.
Several international donor agencies such as the Asia Development Bank, United
Nations Development Programme, and World Bank are providing support to the
governments anti-corruption efforts. They have rarely raised publicly any concerns
about abuses resulting from the campaign.
The United Kingdom conducted human rights training for selected RAB members
in 2008, apparently in hopes of future cooperation with RAB, on organized crime,
Islamic militancy, and terrorism. The US also has explored possibilities for future
cooperation. The EU and some foreign missions continue to raise concerns about
extrajudicial executions and other abuses.
Multinational companies buying garments from Bangladesh were slow in reacting
to the state of emergency ban on trade union activities even though their own codes of conduct stress the importance of freedom of association. In September
2008 some major brands asked the interim government to lift restrictions on such
activities
Bangladesh is due to be reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism
of the UN Human Rights Council in February 2009.
Burma
Burmas already dismal human rights record worsened following the devastation
of cyclone Nargis in early May 2008. The ruling State Peace and Development
Council (SPDC) blocked international assistance while pushing through a constitutional
referendum in which basic freedoms were denied.
The ruling junta systematically denies citizens basic freedoms, including freedom
of expression, association, and assembly. It regularly imprisons political activists
and human rights defenders; in 2008 the number of political prisoners nearly
doubled to more than 2,150. The Burmese military continues to violate the rights
of civilians in ethnic conflict areas and extrajudicial killings, forced labor, land
confiscation without due process and other violations continued in 2008.
Cyclone Nargis
Cyclone Nargis struck the Irrawaddy Delta and Burmas largest city Rangoon on
the night of May 2-3, 2008. The storm rendered 2.4 million people across 37
townships homeless or in need of food or medical assistance with an estimated
84,000 dead and 53,000 missing.
The SPDC tightly controlled emergency international assistance and in some
cases blocked aid in the crucial early stages following the cyclone. The government
denied visas to disaster relief experts and aid workers and prevented them
from travel inside Burma. More than 2 million people waited for weeks for relief
operations to reach them.
United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon visited Burma in late May, and the
UN, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), and the SPDC created a
Tripartite Core Group (TCG) as a multilateral mechanism to coordinate delivery
and distribution of emergency relief aid. The SPDC subsequently relaxed restrictions
on some agencies and enabled helicopters and boats to operate more
freely. But two months after the cyclone an estimated 700,000 people had
received no aid whatsoever because of SPDC obstruction. While some UN agencies and international NGOs have reported continuing travel
restrictions and obstructions, others say they have been permitted free travel and
unfettered operational space. Pro-government organizations such as the Myanmar
Red Cross and the Union Solidarity and Development Association operate extensively
in the Irrawaddy Delta, but some private civil society efforts have been
either discouraged or co-opted by the authorities.
In cyclone-affected areas, there have been reports of land confiscations, forced
labor, and forced evictions of displaced people by Burmese authorities.
Constitutional Referendum
The SPDC announced in February 2008 that its long awaited constitutional referendum
would take place on May 10. The constitution itself was publicly released
only in April, and then under limited distribution. A new law made any disruption
of the referendum process potentially punishable by three years imprisonment.
The new constitution entrenches military rule and limits the role of independent
political parties. It empowers the commander-in-chief to appoint military officers
to a quarter of all seats in both houses of parliament, and gives the military even
broader representation in the selection of the president and two vice-presidents.
Despite the devastation of the cyclone, the referendum took place throughout
Burma on May 10, with a delayed vote on May 24, for 47 townships affected by
the storm. The referendum was carried out in an environment of severe restrictions
on access to information, repressive media laws, an almost total ban on
freedom of expression, assembly, and association, and the continuing widespread
detention of political activists. There were no independent international
observers and Burmese and foreign media could only clandestinely cover it. The
referendum was marred by voter registration irregularities, coercion and intimidation
in communities and at polling stations, and widespread government corruption
including ballot stuffing.
In late May the SPDC announced a national voter turnout of 98.12 percent, of
which 92.48 voted in favor of the constitution. Widespread international condemnation
denounced the referendum as a sham. The referendum completed the fourth step of the SPDCs Seven Step Road Map to Democracy, with the SPDC
announcing multi-party elections for 2010.
Human Rights Defenders
Intimidation of political activists and human rights defenders increased in 2008.
The number of political prisoners rose from 1,100 in mid 2007 to over 2,150 in
late 2008. On September 23, the SPDC announced the release of 9,002 prisoners,
of which only seven were political activists, including 78 year old U Win Tin who
had been incarcerated since 1989. Days later, the SPDC arrested five members of
the National League for Democracy (NLD). On May 27, NLD leader Aung San Suu
Kyi had her house arrest order extended for another year, her sixth straight year of
confinement. Reports indicate her health is deteriorating, and the SPDC denies
her visitors or contact with the outside world.
In October and November, more than 70 political activists, monks, nuns, labor
activists, and journalists were tried in secret proceedings in prison or closed sessions
in court. Many received harsh sentences for offenses related to the 2007
demonstrations; 14 of them were sentenced to 65 years each. Members of the 88
Generation Students faced 22 charges, including contact with exiled political
groups and unlawfully publishing documents, and faced sentences of 150 years.
Four lawyers representing activists were als0 jailed for contempt of court after
they attempted to withdraw from legal representation to protest the unfair proceedings.
Journalists continued to be harassed and arrested in 2008, including Thet Zin and
Sein Wun Aung in February for their investigation into the SPDCs brutal crackdown
against peaceful protestors. Prominent blogger Nay Phone Latt received a
20-year prison sentence in November.
Authorities arrested several prominent former political prisoners for their role in
cyclone relief activities including, on June 4, 2008, prominent comedian and dissident
Zargana, who distributed aid through his activist networks to Nargis victims.
Zargana had criticized the SPDCs relief efforts in interviews with the foreign
media.
Child Soldiers
Burma continues widespread and systematic forced recruitment of child soldiers.
Non-state armed groups also recruit and deploy children in conflict areas.
The UN Security Council working group on children and armed conflict reviewed
Burmas record for the first time in 2008. Despite the SPDCs ongoing failure to
curtail use of child soldiers, it did not recommend concrete measures to spur the
SPDC to act. The Security Councils failurein large part due to efforts by China to
block a more principled responsewas particularly glaring given its previous
pledges to seriously consider arms embargoes and other targeted measures
against parties that repeatedly recruit and use child soldiers.
Continuing Violence against Ethnic Groups
The Burmese military continues to attack civilians in ethnic conflict areas, particularly
in Karen State and Shan State. Abuses such as forced labor, sexual violence
against women and girls, extrajudicial killings, torture and beatings, and confiscation
of land and property are widespread. In 2008 army counterinsurgency tactics
and security operations for infrastructure developments displaced more than
40,000 civilians in these two areas.
There are an estimated 450,000 to half a million internally displaced people in
eastern Burma. The Burmese army and non-state armed groups extensively use
landmines, including near civilian settlements and food production sites a clear
violation of international humanitarian law.
In Arakan State in western Burma, the Rohingya Muslim minority faces widespread
rights violations including religious persecution, forced relocation, land
seizures, and denial of citizenship and identity papers. Ethnic Chin people in
Chin State and Sagaing Division continue to face forced labor, beatings, sexual
violence, and land confiscation by the Burmese military; a famine in the region
affected over 100,000 civilians, with reports that relief efforts were hampered by
the Burmese army.
Refugees and Migrant Workers
Thousands of Burmese refugees and migrant workers continue to travel to
Bangladesh, India, Thailand, Malaysia, and Singapore where they face abuses
and harassment. Some 140,000 refugees remain in nine camps along the Thai-
Burma border. Over 50,000 refugees have been resettled in third countries such
as the United States, Canada, Australia, and Norway since 2004.
In July 2008, Thai military officials forcibly returned 52 ethnic Karen people,
including children, back to Burma, clearly violating the principle of non-refoulement,
and threatened further returns from other camps. In December 2007, Thai
security forces shot dead a man in Karenni Site 1 camp, and have since obstructed
the official Thai investigation into the killing. Sexual violence by Thai camp
guards against female refugees remains prevalent.
Key International Actors
The UN secretary-generals special advisor on Burma, Ibrahim Gambari, visited
Burma twice in 2008 but made no progress in engaging the SPDC on political
reform. In his March visit, Burmese officials lectured Gambari and criticized his
attempts at impartial mediation. The UN Security Council expressed its frustration
with the slow pace of dialogue with Burma and called on Gambari to show tangible
progress. In August, Aung San Suu Kyi and senior generals refused to meet
with Gambari.
The UN special rapporteur on human rights in Burma, Tomas Oje Quintana conducted
a five-day official visit to Burma in August 2008. Quintanas visit was
tightly managed by the SPDC; including a tour of the cyclone-affected Irrawaddy
delta, and meetings with government-screened political prisoners, Burmese officials,
pro-SPDC political parties, and civil society organizations. Quintana
expressed cautious optimism about engaging the SPDC on improving the human
rights situation.
ASEAN was a key diplomatic focal point after Cyclone Nargis, with ASEAN
Secretary General Surin Pitsuwan making frequent visits to Burma to organize
relief efforts. ASEANs early criticism of Burma following the 2007 crackdown was
muted as it focused on aid efforts. Indonesia lifted its ban on granting credentials to Burmese ambassadors, and Singapore continued to voice support for Burma in
international forums.
After Cyclone Nargis, the international community reacted with shock and anger
at the SPDCs reluctance to allow international aid and aid workers into affected
areas, with the French government raising the Responsibility to Protect principle
and arguing for international intervention to assist victims. A European
Parliament resolution strongly condemned the disruption of cyclone aid,
referred to the referendum as implausible, and directly warned that further
blockades by the SPDC should result in a charge of crimes against humanity and
Burmas referral to the International Criminal Court.
China, Russia, India, and Thailand continue to provide diplomatic support for the
SPDC and are major trade and investment partners. Foreign investment in
Burmas oil and natural gas sector increased in 2008, particularly in connection
with a major offshore gas project led by a Korean consortium and a planned overland
pipeline to the Burma-China border. Sales of natural gas account for the
largest share of the SPDCs revenue.
Countries including Australia, Canada, the European Union, Switzerland, and the
US continue to impose targeted sanctions on Burma. In July 2008 the US updated
its sanctions on Burmese leaders and close business allies by adding Burmese
military conglomerates and related companies. It also tightened its gem embargo,
making imports of Burmese rubies and jade illegal even if processed in other
countries. In August, President George Bush met with exiled Burmese dissidents
in Thailand.
Cambodia
Cambodia continued its drift toward authoritarianism in 2008 as Prime Minister
Hun Sen and his Cambodian Peoples Party (CPP) consolidated power through
flawed national elections in July. The elections were criticised by the European
Union and the United Nations special representative for human rights in
Cambodia for failing to meet international standards.
Authorities continue to use the criminal justice system to silence critics. Human
rights defenders, journalists, trade unionists, and opposition party members face
intimidation, violence, spurious legal action, imprisonment, and even death.
Endemic impunity, rampant corruption, and illegal plundering of natural resources
remain pressing issues.
National Elections
The CPP won National Assembly Elections on July 27 by a wide majority, taking 91
of 123 seats. While there was less political violence than in past elections, the
vote was marred by the CPPs near monopoly over the media, bias within the
electoral apparatus, and coerced defections of opposition Sam Rainsy Party (SRP)
members to the CPP. Lucrative offers of high-paying government positions and
threats of reprisals, including arrest or violence against those who refused, led
hundreds of opposition party members to join the CPP.
In March 2008 police arrested and detained SRP leader Tuot Saron in Kampong
Thom. He was charged with illegal confinement after assisting a distressed former
party colleague following her alleged defection to the CPP under controversial circumstances.
He remains in prison at this writing.
Freedoms of Expression, Association, and Assembly
The Cambodian government controls all television and most radio stations and
regularly suspends, threatens, or takes legal action against journalists or news
outlets that criticize the government. Freedom of speech is hampered by provisions
in Cambodian laws that allow individuals to be criminally prosecuted for peaceful expression of their views. Reporters risk dismissal, physical attack, or
even death for covering controversial issues.
In July gunmen shot and killed Khim Sambo, a journalist for Moneaksekar Khmer
(Khmer Conscience), an SRP-affiliated newspaper. In June, the newspapers editor,
Dam Sith, an SRP electoral candidate, was arrested after the paper reported
allegations that the foreign minister had served the Khmer Rouge regime. Sith
was released after one week, but still faces criminal defamation and disinformation
charges. In May, Radio Free Asia journalist Lem Piseth, who was covering
alleged involvement of government officials in a drug trafficking and murder case,
fled the country after receiving death threats.
The government confiscates, bans, or suspends controversial publications. In
May 2008 the government shut down an independent radio station in Kratie after
it sold air time to opposition parties. Cambodian authorities also threatened
Buddhist monks for circulating bulletins advocating for the rights of Khmer Krom
people (ethnic Khmer from southern Vietnam).
A 2007 law on demonstrations requires organizers to give local authorities five
days notice and holds organizers responsible for any misconduct that occurs.
Authorities reject requests or forcibly disperse many demonstrations. For example,
in May 2008 authorities in Ratanakiri province prohibited indigenous ethnic
minority villagers from conducting a peaceful march to protest land confiscation.
The government continues to fail to resolve cases involving violence against trade
union activists. Four years after the murder of labor leader Chea Vichea, the perpetrators
remain at large while two men unfairly convicted for the crime are serving
20-year prison sentences. In September 2008, judicial authorities closed the
investigation into the murder of labor leader Hy Vuthy in 2007, despite previous
police statements that warrants had been issued for two suspects.
Workers who organize or strike for better wages and working conditions are subject
to harassment, physical attacks, and unfair dismissal. In February 2008
police and military police forcefully dispersed a strike by garment factory workers
at the Kingsland factory in Phnom Penh who were demanding reinstatement of
fired union representatives. In March union activist Keo Sokun was attacked and
beaten by four men.
Land Confiscation
The rural and urban poor continue to lose their land to illegal concessions awarded
to foreign firms, government officials, and those with connections to government
officials. This has become one of the most critical economic and social
problems in Cambodia. In Phnom Penh, 85,000 people have been forcibly evicted
during the last 10 years, with another 70,000 currently facing eviction proceedings.
Authorities often provide insufficient notice of impending evictions and
inadequate housing and compensation to displaced people afterwards. For example,
more than two years after 1,000 families were forcibly evicted from Sambok
Chap village in Phnom Penh, the government had not yet provided adequate
health care, water, sanitation, schools, and other basic services to the evictees,
relocated to a remote site far from the city.
On numerous occasions police and soldiers have used excessive force in evictions.
In February 2008, 100 police and military police officers fired AK-47 rifles
into the air and used tear gas to forcibly evict 23 families from Russey Keo district
in Phnom Penh. In July villagers in Kampot were beaten and arrested when soldiers
dismantled their houses and evicted them for a land concession.
Khmer Rouge Tribunal
The Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia, a hybrid tribunal presided
over by both Cambodian and international judges to address Khmer Rouge era
crimes, continued in 2008 to make slow progress toward holding its first trials. At
this writing, five senior Khmer Rouge officials remain in detention, including
Kaing Khek Iev (Duch), the former chief of Tuol Sleng prison; Pol Pots deputy,
Nuon Chea; former Khmer Rouge Foreign Minister Ieng Sary, former Khmer Rouge
Social Affairs Minister Ieng Thirith, and former Khmer Rouge head of state Khieu
Samphan. All are charged with crimes against humanity and war crimes, except
for Ieng Thirith, who was charged only with crimes against humanity.
Serious concerns remain about political interference in the court from the
Cambodian government, corruption among Cambodian personnel, lack of sufficient
victim and witness protection, and the limited number of cases brought to
address the deaths of as many as 2 million people from 1975-1979. Criticism of the tribunal has mounted, with many in Cambodia saying they are losing interest
as the process drags on without tangible results.
Prisons and Arbitrary Detention
Prisons remain overcrowded, with inadequate food, water, health care, and sanitation.
Police routinely use torture to force confessions from detainees. In
February 2008 a police officer in Kep municipality involved in a land dispute with
Princess Marie Ranariddh was arrested, beaten, and detained for a monthpart
of the time in shackleswithout a court order. In June, Cambodian human rights
organization Licadho uncovered abusive conditionsincluding lack of food, medical
care, and physical mistreatmentat government-run social rehabilitation
centers where sex workers, homeless children and families, beggars, and drug
addicts are detained after arbitrary police round-ups.
Refugees and Asylum Seekers
Cambodia continues to violate its obligations under the UN Refugee Convention
by forcibly returning Vietnamese Montagnards before they are able to apply for
asylum with the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). During 2008
UNHCR provided shelter in Phnom Penh to approximately 500 Montagnard asylum
seekers, including about 200 new arrivals.
Cambodians who help Montagnard asylum seekers exercise their right to seek
asylum are subject to arrest. In June, the Phnom Penh Court sentenced two men
to four months imprisonment for sheltering Montagnards after they had entered
Cambodia to seek asylum.
In October UNHCR announced that Cambodian immigration police, and not
UNHCR, would begin screening all asylum seekers in Cambodia other than ethnic
minority Montagnards from Vietnam.
Rule of Law
No progress was made in 2008 on legal and judicial reform. The Supreme Council
of Magistracy, established to ensure judicial independence, remains politicized and ineffectual, while the Constitutional Council fails to safeguard the constitutionality
of legislation. Despite 15 years of commitments, the government and parliament
have still not passed a new criminal law, anti-corruption law, or other legislation
critical to the protection of human rights.
Key International Actors
Cambodias donors still have not seriously pressed Hun Sen and the Cambodian
government to keep their annual promises to promote and protect human rights
and establish the rule of law and judicial independence.
Instead of demanding that the Cambodian government allow the US Federal
Bureau of Investigation to complete its investigation into the March 30, 1997
grenade attack on a rally led by opposition party leader Sam Rainsyin which at
least 16 were killed and which the US branded a terrorist actthe US in 2008
worked with individuals implicated in that attack and other incidents of political
violence in counterterrorism programs with the Cambodian government. In June
the US raised Cambodias anti-trafficking ranking to Tier 2 to reflect its assessment
that the countrys practices had improved. The US continues to provide
funding and training to the Cambodian military.
In September the UN Human Rights Commission decided to create the post of a
special rapporteur on Cambodia to replace the former functions of the secretarygenerals
special representative. The last special representative, Yash Ghai,
resigned in September 2008, noting that Cambodia still faces serious human
rights challenges and deep-seated systematic deficiencies in the judiciary and
other key institutions charged with upholding the rule of law and protecting the
rights of individuals.
Cambodia is due to be reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism
of the HRC in December 2009.
China
The Chinese government broke its promise to improve human rights in conjunction
with its hosting of the 2008 Summer Olympic Games. The months prior to
the Olympics were marked by a significant tightening of restrictions on freedom of
association, expression, and religion.
Fundamental rights and freedoms are not guaranteed in China, particularly as the
government continues to control and direct judicial institutions and decisions.
Such control raises serious concerns about the integrity of legal proceedings in
controversial cases and has made courts a less attractive venue for citizens seeking
redress for official corruption, illegal land seizures, labor rights violations, and
other abuses. With nowhere else to turn, people increasingly are taking to the
streets, with tens of thousands of public protests, at times violent, now taking
place across China each year.
2008 Beijing Olympics
In the run-up to the Olympics, authorities tightened restrictions on human rights
defenders, obstructed the activities of civil society organizations, including
groups devoted to assisting Chinas population living with HIV/AIDS, and heightened
security controls on Tibetans and Uighurs. More stringent visa rules curtailed
business and tourist travel into China for the duration of the games.
Olympics-related temporary regulations for foreign media freedom in effect from
January 1, 2007, to October 17, 2008, gave foreign correspondents some
increased freedom but failed to prevent dozens of incidents of harassment,
detention, and physical assault by government officials and security forces. The
government obstructed foreign journalists from reporting on sensitive issues,
including instances of civil unrest, corruption, and detention facilities.
Despite pledges to allow foreign journalists unfettered access to the internet during
the games, the Chinese government only did so after coming under intense
international pressure in the days just prior to the games. It allowed access to
previously blocked websites, including those of international human rights organizations. However, websites of pro-Tibetan independence groups and the Falun
Gong remained blocked throughout the duration of the games.
The government targeted high-profile critics who linked human rights abuses to
preparations for the games. For example, land rights activist Yang Chunlin was
sentenced to five years in prison on March 24, 2008, on charges of inciting subversion
of state power, for initiating a petition titled We Want Human Rights,
Not the Olympics that protested officials illegal land seizures.
The government also backtracked on its promise to allow citizens to demonstrate
at designated protest zones in three Beijing parks. Instead, officials announced
on August 20 that that they had denied all 77 protest applications that had been
filed, claiming that they had successfully resolved the applicants concerns
through dialogue and communication. They also detained several people who
made such applications, including two elderly women, Wu Dianyuan, 79, and
Wang Xiuying, 77, who received a one-year sentence of Re-education through
Labor on August 17 for seeking more compensation for the demolition of their
homes. International condemnation prompted the government to rescind the sentence
two weeks later.
Freedom of Expression
The Chinese government continues to strictly control journalists, and sanctions
individuals and print and online media which fail to comply with extremely
restrictive but unpredictably enforced laws and regulations. Potential punishments
for journalists, webmasters, writers, bloggers, and editors who write or
post articles critical of the political system or send news outside China range
from instant dismissal to prosecution and lengthy imprisonment.
At this writing, at least 26 Chinese journalists remain in prison due to their work,
many on ambiguous charges including revealing state secrets and inciting
subversion. They include freelance reporter L Gengsong, who was sentenced to
four years in prison in February 2008 on charges of inciting subversion for stories
he had written for overseas websites on corruption and the trial of a Chinese
human rights activist.
Foreign media have been effectively barred from freely reporting in Tibetan areas
with the exception of five government-organized and controlled tours since
protest by monks and violence in the Tibetan capital Lhasa in March 2008. On
June 26, the Foreign Ministry announced that Tibet was officially reopened to foreign
media in line with previous procedure, a process which rarely resulted in
permission to freely visit Tibet.
Chinas censors temporarily loosened tight controls on freedom of expression in
the aftermath of the May 12, 2008, Sichuan earthquake. Within days, however,
domestic media were instructed to avoid reporting on topics including protests by
parents of some of the thousands of children who died in the collapse of public
schools during the quake. In mid-June, the Chinese government imposed tighter
restrictions on foreign correspondents in the area.
The global consequences of stifled expression in China dominated post-Olympics
coverage of the country. On September 10, the state media finally began to report
that milk powder tainted by melamine continued to be sold domestically and
internationally. Five weeks earlier, after being forced to admit the problem by an
international partner, the Sanlu dairy group appealed to the government to control
and coordinate media coverage of the issue rather than publicize it. 53,000
infants became sick and four died.
On October 17, 2008, the Chinese government permanently lifted certain restrictions
on foreign journalists. However, the new freedoms do not extend to Chinese
journalists and foreign journalists still have limited access to certain parts of the
country, including Tibet.
Legal Reform
Despite significant achievements over the past decade in strengthening legal
institutions, the Chinese Communist Partys domination of judicial institutions
and inconsistent enforcement of judicial decisions has meant that the legal system
remains vulnerable to arbitrary and often politically-motivated interference.
In 2008 the pace of legal reforms appeared to slow.
Police torture and coerced confessions remain important criminal justice concerns.
Such concerns are particularly acute in death penalty cases, though judicial authorities have announced a substantial decrease in the number of sentences
imposed since the Peoples Supreme Court regained the authority to vet
death penalty cases in 2007. The police also continue to make frequent use of the
Re-education through Labor system, including for political and religious dissidents,
which allows detention of minor offenders for up to four years without
trial.
In March 2008 revisions to the Law on Lawyers were promulgated. These included
some limited advances, such as affirmation of defense attorneys procedural
rights to meet their clients in detention, but failed to offer meaningful remedies
for when these rights are violated. A top official from the Supreme Peoples
Procuratorate (the public prosecution) announced in late April that defense attorneys
right to meet with criminal suspects in detention did not extend to cases
involving state secrets. The revisions also introduced a provision prohibiting
lawyers from making statements in court that harm national security.
Party and government authorities often associate lawyers with their clients causes,
rendering the lawyers vulnerable to official reprisals and undercutting efforts
to establish the rule of law. In late May the Ministry of Justice threatened not to
renew the professional licenses of a dozen Beijing lawyers who had publicly
offered to represent Tibetan protesters. The ministry also prohibited lawyers from
representing victims in two major national scandals that shook public opinion:
the shoddy construction of schools that collapsed in the Sichuan earthquake,
and dairy companies poisoning of baby formula.
On May 1, new regulations regarding the disclosure of government-held information
went into effect, allowing ordinary citizens to force government departments
to disclose information. But an important exception is made for information classified
as state secrets, a broad category not limited to matters of national security
but also to social, economic, and cultural information.
That tens of thousands of public protestsa fraction of them violent that erupt
each year highlight the inherent dangers of not providing meaningful avenues for
expression and redress for official misconduct. In one of several similar incidents
in 2008, up to 30,000 people rioted in WengAn county (Guizhou province), following
suspicions that the police had tried to cover up the murder of a 15-year-old girl. The crowds torched a police station, ransacked government buildings, and
overturned police cars. Chinese media disclosed shortly after the unrest that the
number of such mass incidents had reached 90,000 in 2006the highest number
ever reported.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders faced greater than usual difficulties in 2008 as the government
strove to present a picture of harmony to the world ahead of the
Olympics. Police warned defenders and dissidents not to talk to foreign media,
monitored their phone and internet communications, tracked their movements,
and subjected them to varying degrees of house arrest. Other independent
observersNGO leaders, intellectuals, civil rights lawyerswere also subjected to
unprecedented surveillance and monitoring.
In the months before the Olympics, petitioners trying to come to the capital to
seek redress for local abuses were systematically rounded up and sent back to
their home province by police and agents paid by provincial authorities, often
after having been fined or detained without legal process. As a result, many
activists chose to postpone or suspend their work until the games were over.
Several of those who did not were jailed.
Chinas leading human rights activist, Hu Jia, was sentenced on April 3, 2008, to
three-and-a-half years in prison after having been found guilty of inciting subversion
of state power. In August 2007, Hu was one of 42 Chinese intellectuals and
activists who co-signed an open letter calling for greater attention to human
rights in China. In September 2007, Hu and lawyer Teng Biao published another
open letter, The Real China and the Olympics, assessing specific human rights
concerns in China in the context of the Beijing Games. On December 27, 2007, Hu
was detained prior to being formally arrested on January 30, 2008. His wife, fellow
activist Zeng Jinyan, remains under police surveillance in Beijing. Zeng Jinyan
was detained in a hotel in Dalian in Liaoning province during the Olympics to prevent
her from speaking with journalists.
Huang Qi, a Chinese internet pioneer and founder of a website through which he
investigates and publicizes human rights abuses of the nameless and powerless was also arrested in 2008. After the May 12, 2008, earthquake in Sichuan
province, Huang published reports about the efforts of parents of schoolchildren
who had been killed to hold local authorities accountable for constructing substandard
schools. Huang was detained by authorities on June 10 and formally
arrested on July 18 for illegal possession of state secrets.
Labor Rights
On January 1, 2008, the Chinese government unveiled a new Labor Contract Law,
which aims to eliminate the widespread problem of employers denying workers
labor contracts or failing to provide workers with copies of contracts after they
have been signed. The success of the law will hinge on whether authorities
enforce relevant worker protection regulations and punish employers who flout
them.
A ban on independent trade unions leaves the Party-controlled All-China
Federation of Trade Unions (ACFTU) as the sole legal entity dedicated to workers
rights protection. Although the ACFTU plans to extend membership rights to the
estimated 150 million internal migrants who labor in Chinese towns and cities,
that status is unlikely to protect them all from rampant wage exploitation, dangerous
work environments, and lack of medical and accident insurance.
Chinas official household registration system, or hukou, continues to deny internal
migrants public benefits including medical care and childrens education. The
Chinese government has introduced temporary household registration certificates
specifically for such workers, but only a small percentage of migrants obtain the
documents.
Womens Rights
Chinese women, particularly in rural areas, continue to be victims of violence,
gender-based discrimination, and unequal access to services and employment. In
March, the official Xinhua News Agency called domestic violence the most serious
problem facing women in China. In July 2008 a Sichuan provincial court delivered
Chinas first-ever sexual harassment conviction, sentencing a man to five months
imprisonment for harassing a female colleague.
HIV/AIDS
Chinas HIV/AIDS policies continue to be both pragmatic and punitive. On January
1, 2008, the government took an important step in controlling the spread of
HIV/AIDS and other blood-borne disease by implementing compulsory screening
of all blood products. Yet overall prevention efforts were undercut by intensified
repression of HIV/AIDS activists and grassroots organizations as part of a wider
crackdown on embarrassing issues ahead of the Beijing Olympics and by abusive
policies towards injecting drug users.
While the government has increased some services to injecting drug users, antinarcotics
policies continue to emphasize detention without due process in detoxification
and Re-education through Labor centers. Drug users in such centers
often have minimal access to health care or drug dependency treatment, are subject
to forced labor, and are exposed to TB and HIV. In June 2008 a new anti-narcotics
law went into effect which gives police broader authority to conduct searches.
Freedom of Religion
Chinas constitution guarantees freedom of religion, but the government restricts
spiritual expression to government-registered temples, monasteries, mosques,
and churches. The government vets religious personnel, seminary applications,
and religious publications, and periodically audits religious institutions activities,
financial records, membership, and employees. The Chinese government
considers all unregistered religious organizations, including Protestant house
churches, illegal; members risk fines and criminal prosecution. It also continues
to designate certain groups as evil cults, including the Falun Gong, and regularly
cracks down on followers.
Official repression of religious activists continued during the Beijing Olympics. On
August 10, police detained veteran house church leader Hua Huiqi as he was en
route to a church in Beijing where US President George W. Bush was scheduled to
attend religious services. Hua was confined to a makeshift detention center for
several hours until he managed to escape.
Tibet
The situation in Tibetan areas sharply deteriorated in 2008. Against a backdrop of
ever-more intrusive controls over religious and cultural activities, accelerated
state-led economic development, and large-scale compulsory resettlement of
farmers and nomads, major protests against Chinese rule erupted on March 10 in
Lhasa and spread across the Tibetan plateau.
That date marked the anniversary of the failed 1959 uprising against Chinese
rule. Over the next four days, hundreds of monks from Drepung, Sera, and
Ganden temples peacefully protested in different locations and encountered varying
degrees of police obstruction, including arrest. On March 14 near Romoche
temple, members of the public started protesting police preventing monks from
leaving the compound; some protesters turned violent and burned several police
cars. The police retreated and then inexplicably disappeared from Lhasa for much
of the rest of the day. Rioters burned Chinese shops and government buildings
and attacked Chinese-looking passersby.
Chinese authorities claim that troops never opened fire but numerous witnesses
say there was widespread shooting by security forces over a 36-hour period.
Authorities say that 11 Chinese civilians and a Tibetan were burned to death after
hiding in shops set on fire by the rioters, and that a policeman and six other civilians
died from beatings of unknown causes. The Tibetan government-in-exile
claims that over 80 Tibetans were killed in the police crackdown.
As protests spread throughout Tibetan areas, the government blanketed the
entire plateau with military, armed police, and public security forces, and progressively
expelled all foreign media. It also launched an aggressive propaganda
offensive that covered only the March 14 violence and blamed the Dalai Lama for
conspiring to sabotage the Olympics Games. Several thousand alleged protesters
were arrested, and although the government has announced that it subsequently
released most of them, the whereabouts of several hundred remain
unknown. Police and Party authorities arbitrarily arrested, detained, or fined
Tibetans suspected of passing information abroad through relatives, friends, or
foreigners. Two groups of foreign journalists later permitted to visit Lhasa were told by monks of a massive patriotic education campaign launched by the government
in monasteries and places of worship.
In response to international condemnation, the government permitted 15 foreign
diplomats to visit Lhasa in late March, but severely restricted their ability to speak
freely to Tibetans, visit those in detention, or otherwise investigate aspects of the
protests. In early April, a request from Louise Arbour, the then-UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights, to visit Tibet was declined on grounds that it
was inconvenient. A separate appeal issued jointly by six UN Special
Rapporteurs was similarly declined. The Olympic Torch, however, passed through
Lhasa on June 21.
Xinjiang
Tensions worsened in 2008 in the Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region. Beijing
identified Uighur separatism as one of the top three security threats for the
games, and launched a year-long security campaign focusing on the three evil
forcesterrorism, religious extremism, and separatismwhich resulted in
even more drastic restrictions on religious, cultural, and political rights. Many
Uighurs feel increasingly marginalized by rapid economic development but the
government continues to prohibit domestic discussion of or reporting on human
rights issues concerning Xinjiang.
The government prohibited employees and students from fasting during
Ramadan, tightened control over religious personnel and mosques, reinforced
civil militias, and deployed army and police patrols to prevent protests. Police
also continued to confiscate Muslims passports in an apparent bid to prevent
them from making non-state-approved pilgrimages to Mecca. In February new regulations
were published prohibiting 23 types of illegal religious activities,
including praying in public or at wedding ceremonies. In March the authorities
put down a large, peaceful demonstration in the town of Khotan.
At several points in 2008 police authorities in Xinjiang and Beijing announced
that they had foiled terrorist plots and arrested terrorist gangs seeking to
carry attacks during the games, but without releasing information sufficient to dispel concerns that Beijing was using counterterrorism concerns, which were
legitimateas cover for a crackdown on peaceful political opposition.
The government alleged terrorist involvement in two serious incidents. On August
4 in Kashgar two men rammed a truck in a patrol of soldiers, killing 16, and on
August 10, attackers detonated a series of small home-made bombs against government
buildings and Chinese shops before dawn, killing one or two people.
These incidents, which the government says demonstrate that it is facing a serious
armed separatist threat in Xinjiang, have deepened the polarization between
Han Chinese and Uighurs.
Hong Kong
Following a December 2007 decision by Chinas National Peoples Congress
Standing Committee, Hong Kong authorities repeatedly stated that the government
had a clear timetable to move toward election by universal suffrage of the
chief executive in 2017 and of all members of the Legislative Council in 2020.
Immigration authorities refusal to allow several visitors critical of Chinas human
rights record into Hong Kong ahead of the Olympics raised concerns that the territorys
autonomy was being eroded.
Key International Actors
International criticism of Chinas rights record remained muted in 2008. Many of
the abuses taking place in conjunction with the Olympics were enabled by neartotal
silence from other governments, the International Olympic Committee, and
the corporate sponsors of the games, many of which had justified their support
for the games by claiming the event would improve human rights.
Formal human rights dialogues with the Chinese governmentconducted by the
United States and othersfailed to produce any measurable improvements. In
October 2008 the European Parliament awarded the Sakharov Prize to Chinese
activist Hu Jia. China is due to be reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism of
the UN Human Rights Council in February 2009.
India
Despite an overarching commitment to respecting citizens freedom to express
their views, peacefully protest, and form their own organizations, the Indian government
lacks the will and capacity to implement many laws and policies
designed to ensure the protection of rights. There is a pattern of denial of justice
and impunity, whether it is in cases of human rights violations by security forces,
or the failure to protect women, children, and marginalized groups such Dalits,
tribal groups, and religious minorities. The failure to properly investigate and
prosecute those responsible leads to continuing abuses.
While India claims that its national and state human rights commissions ensure
protection of human rights, these commissions are not fully independenttheir
members and chair are appointed by the governmentthey lack sufficient
resources to conduct their own investigations, and they are not empowered to
investigate violations by the army.
Violence continues in secessionist conflicts in northern Jammu and Kashmir and
in Manipur, low intensity insurgencies in other parts of the northeast, and the
Maoist conflict in several states of central India. In efforts to contain the armed
groups, Indian security forces are responsible for extrajudicial killings, arbitrary
detention, due process violations, and ill-treatment in custody. Laws such as the
Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act sanction impunity.
Armed groups are responsible for human rights abuses against civilians including
the use of explosive devices and landmines, forced recruitment including of children,
threats, extortion, and killings. Bomb blasts in Guwahati, Ahmedabad,
Jaipur, Delhi, and other Indian cities in 2008 claimed hundreds of lives. Police
attributed most of these attacks to Muslim extremists.
Protests in Jammu and Kashmir
While the level of violence has decreased, failure to investigate human rights violations
transparently and prosecute those responsible remains a strong reason
for public anger. Kashmiris believe that many of the thousands disappeared
over the last two decades were dumped into unmarked graves. The government has ignored calls for an independent investigation by human rights groups to
determine the fate of the victims.
Widespread protests erupted in Jammu and Kashmir after a state government
decision in May 2008 to transfer forest land to a Hindu trust to build temporary
shelters during an annual Hindu pilgrimage called Amarnath Yatra. Several people
were killed and many injured in the protests, and the issue fueled religious
tension. Security forces used tear gas and opened fire using live ammunition as
well as rubber bullets to control protesters who set fires, damaged government
property, hurled stones, and in some cases attacked policemen.
Separatist groups announced a boycott of state assembly elections in late 2008
and called for demonstrations.
Violence in Manipur and Other Northeastern States
Violence has continued in the northeast, particularly in Manipur, where over 300
people, including nearly a hundred civilians, were killed in the armed conflict in
2008. Caught between the armed groups and security forces, civilians also
remain victims of human rights abuses.
A series of bomb attacks in Guwahati and other cities in Assam on October 30,
2008, killed 84 people and injured hundreds. Police believe the bombings may
have been acts of revenge for earlier attacks on Bangladeshi Muslim settlers by
local tribes in which nearly 50 people were killed.
In Manipur, security forces have been responsible for extrajudicial killings and
torture. The impunity and free rein given to government forces has led to a culture
where many soldiers and police officers appear to believe it is easier to kill suspects
than gather evidence to secure convictions.
Despite the large deployment of government forces, armed groups claiming to
protect the rights of the various ethnic communities in Manipur have succeeded
in imposing their will on many communities. Manipuris are forced to build
alliances with one group to ensure protection from the rest. Armed groups are
responsible for extortion, killings, forced recruitmentincluding of childrenand
imposition of moral diktats, often by force.
Naxalite Conflict
Maoist armed groups, also called Naxalites, continue to carry out bombings,
abductions, beatings, and killings in several Indian states including Chhattisgarh.
Security forces have responded with arbitrary detention, torture, and extrajudicial
killings of suspected Naxalites or their alleged supporters.
The Naxalites claim to be fighting for the rights of the marginalized tribal groups,
Dalits, and the poor, but have been responsible for forced recruitment and severe
punishment of those who refuse to submit to demands for cash, shelter, and protection.
In Chhattisgarh, government security forces and state-government-backed vigilantes
called the Salwa Judum are responsible for attacking, killing, and forcibly
displacing tens of thousands of people in armed operations against Maoist
rebels. The Naxalite rebels retaliate in a brutal manner, abducting, assaulting,
and killing civilians perceived to be Salwa Judum supporters. The government has
chosen to view those who do not join the Salwa Judum as Naxalite supporters.
All parties to the Chhattisgarh conflict have used children in armed operations.
The Naxalites admit that it is standard practice to recruit children age 16 and
above in their forces; they have used children as young as 12 in some armed
operations. The Salwa Judum have included children in their violent attacks
against villages as part of their anti-Naxalite campaign. The Chhattisgarh state
police admit that in the past they recruited children under age 18 as special
police officers, but claim they did so due to the absence of age documentation
and that all children have now been removed from the ranks. Human Rights
Watch investigators in Chhattisgarh found that underage special police officers
continue to serve with the police and are used in counter-Naxalite combing operations.
Impunity
While law enforcement is needed to end the violence perpetrated by militants,
India continues to provide extraordinary powers to its troops and grants them
immunity from prosecution when they abuse those powers and commit human
rights violations.
The Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act was enacted on August 18, 1958, as a
short-term measure to allow deployment of the army in the northeast. The law
has remained in force in various parts of the country for five decades. It provides
the armed forces with sweeping powers to shoot to kill, arrest, and search in violation
of international human rights law. The law has led to widespread human
rights abuses and protects troops from prosecution for such crimes.
Protection of Vulnerable Communities
The government has failed to protect vulnerable communities including Dalits,
tribal groups, and religious minorities.
Since August 2008, supporters of the Hindu militant groups Vishwa Hinud
Parishad and Bajrang Dal in Orissa have attacked Christians, many of them tribal
minorities or Dalits. The militants have burned churches, beat priests and nuns,
and destroyed property. Several policemen were suspended for dereliction of
duty after a nun alleged that she was raped. At this writing, at least 40 persons
had died in the violence, with scores injured and thousands internally displaced.
Failure to secure justice for the 2002 Gujarat riotsin which more than 2,000
Muslims were killed following an attack on a train carrying Hindu pilgrimshas
fueled anger amongst Muslims. Police continue to arbitrarily round up and detain
Muslims nationwide after bomb blasts; many have alleged they were tortured
during interrogation and forced into signing false confessions. Muslims also face
discrimination in access to housing and jobs and the Indian government does little
to protect them.
Despite a scheme launched four years ago to provide universal education, millions
of children in India still have no access to education and work long hours,
many as bonded laborers. Many children continue to be trafficked for marriage,
sex work, or employment. Others languish in substandard orphanages or detention
centers.
A case is still pending before the Supreme Court seeks to strike down Section 377
of the Indian Penal Codea British colonial provisionso as to decriminalize consensual
homosexual conduct between adults. While some officials, including the
health minister, support repealing the law, others have vigorously defended it. In October 2008, police in Bangalore arrested five hijrastransgender womenand
then detained 37 human rights defenders and activists who came to assist them,
beating and sexually abusing some of them.
According to the National AIDS Control Organization, more than 2.5 million people
are living with HIV. Four southern states (Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Tamil
Nadu, and Karnataka) account for nearly two-thirds of those infected. Although
antiretroviral therapy is supposed to be freely available at public health facilities,
there are significant regional disparities in implementation of the policy.
Children and adults living with HIV/AIDS, as well as those whose marginalized
status puts them at highest riskinternal migrants, sex workers, injection drug
users, men who have sex with men, and transgender populationsface widespread
stigmatization and discrimination, including denial of employment,
access to education, orphan care, and healthcare.
Human Rights Defenders
The trial of Dr. Binayak Sen, a physician and human rights activist with the
Peoples Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL), began in May 2008 in Chhattisgarh. Sen
was detained in May 2007 under the Chhattisgarh Special Public Security Act and
accused of having links to the Naxalites. In May 2008 police arrested filmmaker
and PUCL member Ajay TG under the same act for alleged links to unlawful Maoist
organizations. He was granted bail in August after the government failed to file
charges within the mandatory 90 days stipulated in the act.
Key International Actors
As a strong emerging economy, India has built crucial trade links with the
European Union and United States. After signing a deal with the US to secure
nuclear supplies for civilian use, in 2008 India won a waiver from the 45-nation
Nuclear Suppliers Group to lift restrictions on nuclear commerce. The restrictions
were imposed after India carried out its first nuclear test in 1974.
In 2008 several key international partners were disappointed by Indias refusal to
take a strong public position against ongoing human rights violations in Burma and Sri Lanka. In response to the renewed crackdown on dissent in Burma, New
Delhi stopped the supply of lethal weapons to the Burmese military but otherwise
offered only a tepid response, saying it believed in private engagement with the
Burmese regime.
India initially refused to join the international community in demanding better
human rights protections during the ongoing war in Sri Lanka. In September 2008
India finally expressed concern amid unconfirmed reports that civilians were
increasingly being caught in the middle of the fighting, at risk from both government
forces and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam. In November India agreed to
ship relief materials for distribution by the International Committee for the Red
Cross.
India has routinely ignored recommendations from UN human rights bodies
including, UN committees on the elimination of racial discrimination and discrimination
against women. India is a member of the UN Human Rights Council (HRC)
and in 2008 came up for Universal Periodic Review by the HRC, agreeing to several
recommendations including that it sign and ratify UN treaties banning torture
and enforced disappearances.
Indonesia
Indonesia saw little human rights progress in 2008. Basic freedoms in the country
expanded dramatically following the resignation of President Suharto in 1998,
transforming Indonesia from an authoritarian state to a vibrant if chaotic democracy.
Today, there is a loss of momentum, with reforms in key areas bogged down
and backtracking in some areas.
Apart from halting progress in prosecutions for the murder of prominent activist
Munir Said Thalib, efforts to pursue accountability for past human rights crimes
remain at a complete standstill. Current abuses, including endemic police torture,
also routinely go unpunished.
In a major setback for religious freedom, the government in 2008 bowed to pressure
from hard-line Islamic groups and banned the Ahmadiyah sect from publicly
practicing their faith.
Indonesia has a diverse and lively media sector, but freedom of expression has
been undermined by powerful officials and businessmen using criminal and civil
defamation laws to silence criticism.
In Indonesian Papua, deeply rooted distrust of Jakarta is still a time bomb; failure
to address human rightsincluding security force abusesis one important reason
the distrust has not been dispelled.
Impunity
Former president Suharto died in January 2008 having escaped prosecution for
abuses committed during his 32-year rule. The list of abuses is extensive, and
includes anticommunist pogroms that killed half a million or more people in
1965-1966, security force atrocities in East Timor, Aceh, southern Sumatra, and
Papua, and the Trisakti and Semanggi killings in Jakarta in 1998-1999. Many collaborators
in Suharto-era abuses still hold positions of power. Several are candidates
for the forthcoming 2009 elections, including General Wiranto and
Suhartos son-in-law Prabowo Subianto, implicated in abuses in East Timor and
other crimes.
In March 2008 the Indonesian Supreme Court overturned the conviction of former
militia leader Eurico Guterres for instigating violence following the 1999 UN-sponsored
referendum on independence for East Timor. Indonesian-army-backed militias
killed hundreds of Timorese and destroyed much of East Timors physical
infrastructure. With the reversal of the conviction, all 18 people indicted by the
Indonesian Ad Hoc Human Rights Court on East Timor have been acquitted.
The Indonesian and Timorese joint Commission on Truth and Friendship released
its final report in July 2008 assigning institutional responsibility for the 1999
atrocities to the Indonesian military, police, and government. UN Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon urged accountability, but President Susilo Bambang
Yudhoyono insisted that no such action would be taken.
In August a military court convicted 13 marines for killing four civilians and
wounding eight in a 2007 incident involving a land dispute in Pasuruan, East
Java. The marines received light sentences of 18 months to three-and-a-half years.
Also in August, a US court ruled that a lawsuit against Exxon Mobil for alleged
complicity in military abuses in Aceh could proceed to trial.
Military Business
Efforts to end Indonesian military business activity, a barrier to full civilian control
of the armed forces, showed few results in 2008. An April presidential decree created
a new advisory team on military business reform but it remained unclear
whether the government would fully dismantle the militarys economic interests
before October 2009 as mandated by law.
While the government has focused on legal businesses, military involvement in
illegal businesses, including in the logging and oil palm sector, also continues to
feed corruption and generate conflicts of interest.
Freedom of Religion
In June 2008 the government ordered members of the Ahmadiyah sect to cease
public religious activities or face up to five years imprisonment. In the weeks following
the decree, Muslim hardliners attacked Ahmadiyah mosques in Cianjur, West Java, and Islamic Defenders Front members closed the local Ahmadiyah
headquarters in Makassar, South Sulawesi. In September the South Sumatra
provincial government issued a total ban on Ahmadiyah, claiming the ministerial
decree did not go far enough.
In January 2008 a mob burnt down the Sangkareang Hindu temple in West
Lombok and in July, Muslim hardliners attacked students at a Christian theology
school in East Jakarta, injuring 18 and forcing the school to shut its 20-year-old
campus.
In April, Abdul Salam, the self-proclaimed prophet and founder of the Islamic sect
Al-Qiyadah Al-Islamiyah, was sentenced to four years imprisonment for blasphemy.
Indonesian laws prohibiting blasphemy are primarily applied to practices
perceived to deviate from mainstream Islam.
Migrant Domestic Workers
Approximately two million Indonesians, mostly women, work abroad. Many
migrate as domestic workers and are subject to a range of human rights violations
(see Saudi Arabia and Malaysia chapters). Prior to departure, poorly monitored
labor recruiters often deceive workers about their jobs abroad and impose
excessive fees, placing the migrants at risk of trafficking and forced labor.
Many Indonesian foreign missions in the Persian Gulf and Asia operate temporary
shelters for the thousands of domestic workers facing abuses each year. Despite
recent improvements, foreign missions often fall short of meeting minimum
requirements including in the areas of shelter, case management, and legal representation.
Child Domestic Workers
More than 700,000 children, mainly girls, work as domestic workers in Indonesia.
Typically recruited between the ages of 12 and 15, often on false promises of
decent wages and working conditions, they may work 14 to 18 hours a day, seven
days a week, earning far less than the prevailing minimum wage. In the worst cases, child domestic workers are paid no salary at all and are physically, sexually,
and psychologically abused.
Domestic workers are excluded from existing national labor laws, which afford
protections such as minimum wage, an eight-hour work day, weekly day of rest,
and vacation time. At this writing, draft national legislation that would mandate
an eight-hour work day, a weekly day of rest, and an annual holiday for domestic
workers remained stalled in the Ministry of Manpower.
Aceh
Six political parties in Aceh will take part in general elections in 2009. All party
candidates must take a Quran reading test administered by Acehs election
commission, which discriminates against qualified secular or non-Muslim
Acehnese.
There remains no accountability for past human rights violations committed during
or after the Aceh conflict and there has been no movement toward establishing
a truth and reconciliation commission.
Papua and West Papua
Despite dozens of Indonesian government statements pledging a new approach
in Papua and positive developments on some fronts, justice has noticeably
lagged.Security forces, including special Mobile Brigade (Brimob) police units,
continue to engage in abuses in remote highland regions with virtual impunity.
Freedom of expression also continues to be corralled. In March police jailed nine
Papuan activists for displaying the Papuan Morning Star flag. They remain in
detention charged with rebellion (makar), a crime punishable by life imprisonment.
In July police assaulted 46 protesters and charged six with rebellion for
raising the Morning Star flag in Fakfak, West Papua. In August police fired live
ammunition into a crowd, killing a peaceful demonstrator after protesters raised
the Morning Star flag in Wamena.
Death Penalty
After a 14-month hiatus, Indonesia resumed executions in June 2008, killing two
Nigerians convicted of drug trafficking. In July and August four Indonesians convicted
of multiple murders were executed. In November, authorities executed
Amrozi, Mukhlas, and Imam Samudra, convicted for the 2002 Bali bombings that
killed 202 people.Over 100 people remain on death row in Indonesia.
Freedom of Expression and Press
In April 2008, the House of Representatives passed a freedom of information law
after seven years of debate. Critics are concerned with a vaguely worded provision
criminalizing deliberate misuse of public information.
Criminal and civil defamation laws continue to be used to silence press criticism.
In February 2008, Time Magazine submitted a petition to reverse the $US110 million
libel ruling against it in favor of the Suharto family. In September a Jakarta
court found Indonesias Tempo magazine guilty of defaming agribusiness giant
Asian Agri for an investigative report on alleged tax evasion. In June 2008 a court
convicted and jailed Risang Bima Wijaya, a Yogyakarta-based reporter, for an article
on sexual harassment ruled to have insulted the manager of a local newspaper.
Human Rights Defenders
In January 2008 the Supreme Court reconvicted Garuda Airways pilot Pollycarpus
Budihari Priyanto, and sentenced him to 20 years in prison for the 2004 murder
of human rights defender Munir Said Thalib. An Indonesian court sentenced Indra
Setiawan, a former airline official, to one year in prison for being an
accessory.Reinvigorated police investigations uncovered key evidence linking
Muchdi Purwopranjonoa former general, special forces commander, and deputy
national intelligence chiefwith Pollycarpus and the murder of Munir.
In a January 2008 report on Indonesia, Hina Jilani, UN expert on human rights
defenders, concluded that defenders in Papua are particularly vulnerable to
threats, harassment, arbitrary detention, and torture. She also noted that while conditions for defenders in Aceh have improved since the 2005 peace agreement,
no perpetrators have been brought to justice for abuses committed against
defenders there between 2001 and 2005.
Key International Actors
United States Defense Secretary Robert Gates visited Indonesia in February 2008
offering increased military assistance to the Indonesian military. The US military
has not resumed cooperation with Kopassus (special forces) and Brimob (antiriot
police), units notorious for rights abuses.
Forty members of the US House of Representatives sent a letter to Yudhoyono in
July 2008, requesting the release of Papuan political prisoners Filep Karma and
Yusak Pakage.
Relations between Indonesia and Australia were strengthened through the June
2008 visit of Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd. Rudd and Indonesian
President Yudhoyono discussed security cooperation and signed a joint Forest
Carbon Partnership agreement, but Indonesias commitment to curbing deforestation
remained in doubt with corruption rampant in the forestry section and inadequate
timber and financial tracking systems.
In April 2008 the UN Human Rights Council examined Indonesias human rights
record as part of the new Universal Periodic Review (UPR) process. Concerns put
to Indonesia during the UPR dialogue included continuing impunity, torture,
arrests, detention of peaceful political activists, and human rights violations in
Papua.Indonesia made no clear commitments to address ongoing violations in
Papua, but it agreed to criminalize torture and ratify the Optional Protocol of the
Convention against Torture.
In May 2008 the UN Committee against Torture issued findings that both police
and military routinely use torture; it expressed concern that no Indonesian official
has been convicted of the offense.
As a key ASEAN member, Indonesia continues to press Burma to release Aung
San Suu Kyi. Indonesia played a pivotal role in ASEAN efforts to convince Burma to lift a ban on foreign assistance following the devastating Cyclone Nargis in
May.
In October Indonesias Parliament ratified the ASEAN Charter, but lawmakers and
officials said they would press for future changes to strengthen its compliance
with international standards and establish penalties for non-compliant members.
In September 2008 the Norwegian government abandoned its US$1 billion investment
in Rio Tinto over concerns with unethical conduct and environmental devastation
at the Grasberg gold and copper mine in Papua.
Malaysia
Hopes that Malaysias human rights climate would improve following elections in
March 2008 proved unfounded. The ruling National Front coalition lost the twothirds
parliamentary majority it had enjoyed since Malaysia became independent
in 1957 but was still in power at this writing. National Front leaders continue to
insist that Malaysias multiethnic society is too fragile to sustain genuine freedom
of assembly and expression or full due process rights for all suspects.
The government continues to use outdated repressive laws and regulations to
silence its critics and extend its rule. One such critic is former Deputy Prime
Minister Anwar Ibrahim, now leading the opposition coalition Peoples Alliance. In
what was widely viewed as a politically motivated attempt to discredit him, police
charged him with consensual sexual relations with a male aide in August 2008.
The Peoples Volunteer Corps, a largely volunteer paramilitary force, continues to
commit abuses against undocumented migrants, refugees, and asylum seekers.
Detention without Charge or Trial
Malaysia uses the Internal Security Act (ISA) to indefinitely detain, without charge
or trial, individuals deemed by officials to threaten Malaysias national security.
This includes not only individuals suspected of planning terrorist attacks, such as
members of the militant Islamist groups Jemaah Islamiah and Darul Islam, but
also individuals allegedly promoting ethnic or religious discord.
On December 13, 2007, after the Hindu Rights Action Force (Hindraf) organized a
massive rally to draw attention to discrimination faced by Malaysias Indian population,
the government detained five of its leaders. In October 2008, the government
declared Hindraf an illegal organization on the grounds that it constituted a
threat to public order and morality. As of late November 2008, the leaders
remained in ISA custody.
On September 12, 2008, police detained three government critics under the ISA.
Raja Petra Kumaruddin, founder and editor of Malaysias most popular website
MalaysiaToday, was originally detained for two years for insulting Islam but was freed on procedural grounds on October 7. The government is appealing the ruling.
Authorities also detained opposition Democratic Action Party parliamentarian
Teresa Kok for a week for involvement in activities that may spark a religious dispute,
and Tan Hoon Cheng, a Sin Chew Daily reporter, for 18 hours.
According to the Abolish ISA Movement (Gerakan Mansuhkan ISA), 64 individuals
were in ISA detention as of October 2008.
Migrant Workers, Refugees, and Asylum Seekers
According to Malaysias Immigration Department, there were 2.1 million documented
migrants in Malaysia in November 2007. Undocumented migrants are
estimated at over 400,000, some 150,000 of whom are refugees or asylum seekers.
As the Malaysian Immigration Act of 1959/1963 does not distinguish between
undocumented migrant workers and refugees, all those without valid residency
status are subject to arrest, detention, and deportation. The Peoples Volunteer
Corps (RELA), numbering half a million members, is empowered by law to enter
any premises and arrest undesirable persons and suspected undocumented
migrants. No search or arrest warrants are necessary. During 2007, close to
60,000 migrantsincluding childrenwere arrested, imprisoned, or deported.
Most migrant children are denied access to schools and some end up in exploitative
forms of child labor.
In May and June 2008, migrants told Human Rights Watch researchers how RELA
members abused them with impunity during detention and in the immigration
detention centers where RELA is responsible for security. Abuses include physical
assault, intimidation, forced entry into living quarters, extortion, theft, destruction
of residency papers, and sexual abuse.
Testimonies from migrants, refugees, and asylum seekers deported from Malaysia
to the Thai border indicate collusion between Malaysian immigration officials and
human smuggling gangs who charge steep fees to facilitate deportees return to
Malaysia or back to Burma.
Cases of severe physical abuse of migrant domestic workers continue to be
reported. In September 2008 a Malaysian employer forced an Indonesian domestic
worker to drink boiling water. The criminal justice system has been slow to
respond. A verdict in the case of Nirmala Bonat, burned and brutally beaten by
her employer in 2004, was expected in late November 2008.
Many of the approximately 400,000 primarily Indonesian domestic workers in
Malaysia experience withheld wages, forced confinement, and excessively long
work hours without days off; some face physical and sexual abuse. Domestic
workers are excluded from key provisions of Malaysias 1955 Employment Act and
their work permits tie them to a particular employer, making it difficult to report
abuse for fear of deportation.
Freedom of Assembly and Police Abuse
Article 10 of Malaysias constitution guarantees freedom of assembly, but the
Police Act of 1967 severely restricts its exercise in practice. No more than four persons
may assemble in public without a police license. Police are empowered to
break up unlicensed demonstrations, arrest participants, and use force if orders
to disperse are ignored. In January 2008 a peaceful protest organized by NGOs
and opposition political parties targeting inflationary pressure resulted in 56
short detentions.
Excessive use of force at public demonstrations is one of the reasons that a May
2005 Royal Commission recommended the establishment of an Independent
Police Complaints and Misconduct Commission. No such commission has been
created.
Freedom of Expression
An increasingly vibrant blogosphere and use of electronic media and communications
are challenging longstanding restrictions on free expression, but authorities
continue periodic crackdowns on dissent.
On August 25, the Malaysian Communications and Multimedia Commission
ordered all 19 internet service providers to block MalaysiaToday, suggesting it published libelous, defamatory and slanderous material threatening public
order. Postings had probed government activities the leadership apparently did
not want exposed. The Malaysian cabinet overturned the closure order on
September 11.
The broadly worded 1948 Sedition Act has been used to silence bloggers who
express grievances against the government or who promote feelings of ill will
and hostility between ethnic groups in Malaysia. In October 2008, Kamaruddin
was put on trial for sedition for an article he wrote about a 2006 murder case.
The 1984 Printing Presses and Publications Act censors newspapers by requiring
annual renewal of publishing licenses and by controlling production and distribution
of foreign publications. The Home Affairs Ministry can restrict or ban a publication
outright on several different vaguely defined grounds and no legal remedy
or judicial review is available.
In September 2008 the ministry instructed three newspapers to show cause
why their publication licenses should not be suspended or rescinded. Sin Chew
Daily, a Chinese-language paper, had reported on allegedly sensitive issues
affecting ethnic relations; The Sun, an English Daily, was cited for manipulating
and playing up numerous sensitive issues, and Suara Keadilan, the Peoples
Justice Party internal publication, had claimed that an official became paralyzed
after heart surgery.
Freedom of Religion
Islam is Malaysias official state religion, but the constitution protects freedom of
religion for all. Tensions periodically arise over whether Malaysia is a secular or
religious state and over attempts to widen or restrict the jurisdiction of Sharia
courts.
On August 9, 2008, some 300 protestors disrupted an open forum entitled
Conversion to Islam, sponsored by the Malaysian Bar Council. The protestors
contended that non-Muslims had no right to discuss Islam. The forum addressed
issues faced by families caught in jurisdictional disputes on matters such as civil
marriage, divorce and custody battles, and burial rites.
Privacy
Section 377 of Malaysias criminal code criminalizes carnal intercourse against
the order of nature, both consensual and non-consensual. Activists have urged
Malaysian authorities to repeal provisions on consensual relations and replace
the section on non-consensual sexual acts with a modern, gender-neutral law on
rape.
Human Rights Defenders
The NGO community, the Malaysian bar, lawyers, journalists, and some opposition
politicians actively defend human rights despite serious personal and professional
risks. Police arrested and detained overnight eight activists including
members of the bar and local non-governmental organizations during a December
2007 peaceful march to commemorate International Human Rights Day. Six of the
eight went on trial in October 2008.
On January 6, 2008, police used water cannons to break up a vigil organized by
the Abolish ISA movement. On September 26 and October 9, after more ISA
arrests, police broke up additional candlelight vigils opposing the ISA. In the latter
incident, police confiscated the camera of a newspaper reporter, one of 23
people temporarily detained after the vigil.
Key International Actors
Tension in the US-Malaysia relationship surfaced in 2008. While the US praised
Malaysia as a regional counterterrorism leader, officials in August expressed concern
over the filing of sodomy charges against Anwar Ibrahim, and in September
summoned Ilango Karuppannan, the charge daffaires at the Malaysian embassy,
to protest Malaysias crackdown on critics.
Lord Malloch-Brown, the UKs minister of state in the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office, said the UK had also spoken with Malaysian officials about the crackdown
and had raised the issue with its EU partners and the Commonwealth Secretariat.
In a September address to the UN, Malaysian Foreign Minister Dr. Rais Yatim
objected to interference in Malaysias internal affairs.
Although the US Department of States June 2008 Trafficking in Persons Report
upgraded Malaysias status from Tier 3 to Tier 2, US Senator Lugar expressed concern
about continuing reports of trafficking of Burmese at the Thai-Malay border.
Malaysia has supported the creation of an ASEAN regional human rights mechanism,
but in July 2008 Foreign Minister Yatim said that its standards should
reflect the ASEAN value system, hearkening back to the Asian values debate
and the discredited notion that Asians value human rights less than others.
Nepal
National elections in April 2008 with the participation of former Maoist rebels
and the subsequent seating of a Constituent Assembly marked a new era in
Nepal after a decade of conflict that claimed over 13,000 lives. On May 28, the
assembly abolished the monarchy and declared the country a republic. The
deposed king moved out of the Kathmandu royal palace in June.
The Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) (CPN-M) won more than a third of the
assemblys 601 seats, making it the largest party. After months of political deadlock,
the CPN-M in August formed a coalition government and Maoist leader
Pushpa Kamal Dahal, also known as Prachanda, became prime minister. Women
make up a third of the new assembly, a historic jump in womens representation
in government.
Marginalized communities, particularly Dalits, ethnic minorities, and women, continue
to face widespread discrimination. There is hope that proposed constitutional
protections and new resolve from the Maoist-led governmentthe rebellion
was fueled in part by a desire to remove discrimination against such groupswill
lead to new legal protections and a significant reduction in abuses.
The new government has shown little interest in ending impunity for the widespread
human rights violations committed before, during, and after the armed
conflict.
Impunity
During the 1996-2006 armed conflict both security forces and the Maoist rebels
were responsible for human rights abuses. Security forces committed hundreds of
extrajudicial killings, widespread torture, and, in some years, the largest number
of disappearances in the world. Maoist forces abducted, tortured, and killed
civilians suspected of being informers or enemies of the revolution, extorted
donations from villagers, recruited children as soldiers, and abducted students
for political indoctrination. Maoists often executed their victims in public, forcing
the victims relatives and other villagers to observe the killing.
Even after they signed a peace agreement in November 2006, both the army and
Maoists failed to cooperate with police investigations. At this writing, not a single
perpetrator had been brought to justice before a civilian court. The Nepal Army
continues to resist accountability. The police, subservient to the army, resist filing
cases of human rights violations.
In one success, Kavre District police on August 11, 2008, following a Supreme
Court order, finally registered a complaint for the murder of royalist party member
Arjun Bahadur Lama in December 2005. But despite court orders and interventions
from local and international organizations, no arrest followed.
Morang District police still have not filed a criminal complaint in the case of civilian
Madhuram Gautam, allegedly killed by army personnel in December 2004,
despite court orders and repeated appeals by local and international organizations.
The lack of political will to address such crimes is also reflected in proposals to
grant an amnesty for serious human rights abuses committed during the conflict.
Draft laws on both a truth and reconciliation commission and a disappearances
commission contain such an amnesty.
In September 2008 the ruling parties affirmed their commitment to establish
commissions on national peace and rehabilitation, truth and reconciliation, disappearances,
and land reform, but had not made significant progress on establishing
any of them at this writing.
Impunity for killings continues. Paramilitary police deployed for the security of
Khum Bahadur Khadka, a former minister and Nepali Congress candidate, killed
seven Maoists on April 7, 2008. Accounts conflict as to who initiated fire, but
reports suggest that police used excessive force. The families of the victims have
filed complaints, but police had taken no action at this writing.
There were widespread protests after the May 8, 2008, torture and killing of businessman
Ram Hari Shrestha. Members of the Peoples Liberation Army, the
armed wing of the CPN-M, are believed responsible.
Armed Combatants in UN Cantonments
Under the November 2006 Comprehensive Peace Agreement, Maoist cadres were
registered in cantonment sites under the protection of the United Nations Mission
in Nepal (UNMIN), which also took custody of their weapons. According to UNMIN,
after the verification of registered Maoist combatants was completed in December
2007, 15,756 men and 3,846 women remain in the cantonments. CPN-M wants to
ensure that the former fighters are integrated into government security forces or
provided alternate livelihoods.
In October 2008 the government said it would set up a special committee to
ensure proper rehabilitation of combatants, but at this writing, there were still
disagreements on the extent to which Maoist combatants should be integrated
into the Nepal army.
Child Soldiers
During the conflict, an estimated 6,000 to 9,000 Maoist cadres were believed to
have been children. Not all were cantoned after the conflict, however, making a
precise count impossible. UNMIN has reported that over 3000 child recruits
remain in the cantonment sites.
The government of Nepal now including the Maoists has said it will not use or
enlist children age 18 or below in any military force and that all child soldiers will
be properly rehabilitated. To date, these policies are not being properly implemented.
Without proper rehabilitation and reintegration, many child combatants
have found their way into violent groups such as the Young Communist League
(YCL), the youth wing of the CPN-M.
Youth Communist League
The YCL has been implicated in abductions, beatings, and killings since it was reestablished
in December 2006. Violent attacks attributed to the YCL against perceived
political opponents intensified before and after the April 10, 2008, elections.
The YCL is comprised mainly of former Peoples Liberation Army commanders;
its members are age 16-40.
The YCL has assumed broad powers to patrol communities across the country and
arrest and punish offenders, saying police are failing to perform this function.
Anointing itself the moral guardian and arbiter of disputes, the YCL has attacked
political opponents, journalists, alleged drug users, and individuals suspected of
extramarital relations. On August 6, ahead of his election as prime minister,
Maoist chairman Prachandra ordered all party members including the YCL to halt
violent activities.
Torture
Despite Nepal having ratified the Convention against Torture and other Cruel,
Inhumane or Degrading Punishment, torture is still not a criminal offense in
Nepal. Between January 1 and June 30, 2008, Advocacy Forum, a Nepal-based
NGO, interviewed 1,423 detainees in their regular visits to 35 detention centers
across 16 districts. Of this number, 396124 of them childrenclaimed they had
been tortured or ill-treated by police. The cases show a pattern of police abuse of
juvenile suspects, with long periods of illegal detention, lack of access to adequate
medical and legal assistance, and inhumane treatment including frequent
and multiple beatings.
Situation in the Terai Region
Ethnic tensions continued in Nepal in 2008 over the rights of Madheshi communities
in the southern Terai region. In February a strike by Madheshi groups
turned violent. While the protesters threw stones and petrol bombs, targeting
police posts and destroying government property, the police used lethal force to
control the protest. At least six persons were killed and hundreds, including some
police officers, were injured.
Arbitrary Arrest and Torture of Tibetans
After March 10, 2008, Tibetans living in Katmandu conducted a series of protests
against the Chinese governments harsh crackdown in Tibet. Nepali authorities, in
their efforts to appease China, opposed such demonstrations and engaged in
unnecessary and excessive use of force, arbitrary arrest, sexual assault of women during arrest, arbitrary and preventive detention, beatings in detention, unlawful
threats to deport Tibetans to China, and unnecessary restrictions on freedom of
movement in the Katmandu Valley.
The government has in effect sealed the border to prevent the arrival of Tibetan
refugees and has allowed Chinese security personnel to operate on the Nepali
side of the border.
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Rights
In December 2007 Nepals Supreme Court directed the government to repeal laws
criminalizing homosexual conduct and laws otherwise discriminating against sexual
minorities. The court also directed the government to official recognize a
third gender in addition to male and female, and established a committee
to explore same-sex marriage for Nepal. No other country in South Asia has taken
these steps.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders, especially women defenders, continue to face attacks.
The Youth Communist League has been involved in several violent attacks against
defenders, journalists, and political opponents but such cases are usually not
investigated by police.
Key International Actors
Nepal relies on the aid and support of foreign governments including India,
China, the United States, the United Kingdom, the European Union, and Japan.
These actors have at times played an important role in strengthening human
rights protection and demanding an end to impunity and security sector reform.
The US has still not removed the CPN-M from its terrorist exclusion list.
Nepali Prime Minister Dahal visited India in September and November 2008, and
India assured him of economic assistance and help drafting a new constitution.
Dahal also visited China to build economic and strategic ties. On July 23, the Security Council extended the UNMIN monitoring mission until
January 23, 2009. Despite budget reductions, the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights continues to play a significant role in Nepal
investigating human rights violations, including disappearances, and seeking
accountability for abuses committed during the conflict.
North Korea
Human rights conditions in the Democratic Peoples Republic of Korea (North
Korea) remain dire. There is no organized political opposition, independent labor
unions, free media, or civil society. Arbitrary arrest, detention, and lack of due
process remain serious concerns.
North Korea runs large prison camps where hundreds of thousands of its citizens
including childrenare enslaved in deplorable conditions. Periodically, the
government publicly executes individuals for stealing state property, hoarding
food, and other anti-socialist crimes. There is no freedom of religion.
Individuals who leave the country without state permission are often considered
traitors and can face lengthy prison terms and possible execution upon return.
Ahead of and during the Beijing Olympic Games, China stepped up the arrest and
repatriation of North Korean refugees and migrants.
Officials in Washington and Seoul said leader Kim Jong Il was believed to have
suffered a stroke in September 2008. Because Kim Jong Il wields such extensive
power, his failing health, if true, could have far-reaching consequences for human
rights and governance in North Korea.
Right to Food
While the nationwide famine of the 1990s has not returned, food shortages persist
and the countrys vulnerable population suffered another hungry year in
2008. Non-elite members of society now purchase their food and necessities at
markets that have replaced the largely defunct ration system. Only a small minority
of the population, mostly high-ranking members of the Workers Party and the
security and intelligence forces, still receive regular rations.
Food prices in North Korea continued to rise in 2008, although not as steeply as
in 2007, while experts on North Koreas agriculture industry offered widely different
assessments of the extent of food shortages.
North Koreans in China
Hundreds of thousands of North Koreans fled to China in the 1990s. Many settled
in the Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture in eastern Jilin Province, near
Chinas border with North Korea. As a state party to the 1951 Refugee Convention,
China has an obligation to offer protection to refugees, but Beijing categorically
labels North Koreans in China illegal economic migrants and routinely repatriates
them. As noted above, the consequences for returnees can be severe.
North Korean women who live with Chinese men in de facto marriageseven if
they have lived in China for yearsare not entitled to legal residence and remain
vulnerable to arrest and repatriation. Some North Korean women and girls are
abducted or duped into marriage or prostitution in China.
Ahead of and during the August 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing, Chinese police
arrested and repatriated many North Koreans from Yanbian. While no official statistics
are available, local residents say that in some villages only a small minority
of North Koreans who had lived there a year ago remain. Some fled to third countries
with the ultimate goal of reaching South Korea, while others were arrested
and repatriated.
Thousands of children in Yanbian who were born to North Korean mothers live
without a legal identity or access to elementary education. North Korean children
who migrate to China have no legal right to obtain the household registration
papers that many schools demand. Children with Chinese fathers sometimes are
not registered in the household registration to avoid exposing their mothers.
By law, neither North Korean nor half-North Korean children should be required to
submit legal identity papers for admittance to schools since Chinese law provides
that all children regardless of nationality are entitled to nine years of free education,
but in reality, most schools require such documentation. Some parents and
guardians of North Korean children resort to bribery or trickery in order to ensure
children can go to school.
Refugees and Asylum Seekers outside China
A relatively small number of North Koreans in China have managed to reach South
Korea, Japan, or the United States via other countries in the region, including
Mongolia and Thailand. South Korea accepts all North Koreans as citizens under
its constitution. In 2008, South Korea has admitted more than 13,000 North
Koreans, Japan has accepted more than 100, and the US has accepted a few
dozen so far. Canada, Japan, Germany, the United Kingdom, and a few other
European countries have granted refugee status to several hundred North
Koreans in recent years.
North Korean Workers
In North Koreas Kaesong Industrial Complex, more than 35,000 North Korean
workers produce mostly consumer goods for South Korean businesses. The law
governing working conditions in the complex falls far short of international standards
on freedom of association, the right to collective bargaining, gender discrimination
and sexual harassment, and hazardous child labor.
North Koreans are also reportedly employed in Bulgaria, China, Iraq, Kuwait,
Mongolia, and Russia. In some countries, activists have expressed concern for
workers basic rights, including efforts by the North Korean government to restrict
freedom of movement, expression, and association, the constant presence of
minders accompanying workers, and indirect salary payments under which
large portions of salaries allegedly are recouped by agencies or the North Korean
government.
Abductees
The issue of foreigners allegedly abducted by North Korea mostly in the 1970s
and 1980s remains unresolved. South Korea says 496 of its citizens, abducted by
North Korean agents, remain in North Korea against their will. Pyongyang insists
that the South Koreans defected to North Korea, and remain of their own free will,
but refuses to allow South Korean relatives to communicate with them.
North Korea, meanwhile, has admitted that it abducted 13 Japanesereturning
five to Japan in 2002, but claiming the other eight died, and that no other
Japanese citizens were abducted. Japan insists that several more of its citizens
have been abducted.
Key International Actors
South Koreas President Lee Myung-bak took office in February 2008 with a
pledge to change South Koreas policies on North Korea, saying he would speak
out on the latters human rights record and demand the return of South Korean
prisoners of war and abductees. Under former presidents Kim Dae-jung and Roh
Mu-hyun, both of whom had summit meetings with North Koreas leader Kim Jong
Il, South Korea offered large amounts of aid and started major economic projects
in North Korea, but largely remained silent on human rights violations.
After Lee took office, relations between the Koreas deteriorated rapidly. In March,
North Korea fired missiles off its west coast, close to South Korea, and in July, a
North Korean soldier shot and killed a South Korean tourist near the Diamond
Mountain resort. In August, South Koreas National Prosecutors Office
announced the arrest of a man and a woman (a North Korean refugee who had
settled in South Korea) for allegedly spying for North Korea.
The deteriorating relationship appeared responsible for an interruption in food
aid, with North Korea initially rejecting offers of aid, and South Korea then failing
to respond promptly to an August plea from the World Food Program to provide
new food aid. Together with China, South Korea has been the largest donor of
unconditional food aid to North Korea in recent years.
Pyongyangs relationship with Washington, however, appeared to improve. On
February 26, the New York Philharmonic performed in Pyongyang, with many
observers cautiously calling it a prelude to a thaw between the two countries. In
May, the United States announced that it would offer 500,000 tons of food aid by
mid-2008; at this writing in November it had delivered about 120,000 tons. On
October 12, 2008, Washington removed North Korea from its list of state sponsors
of terrorism.
In a March 2008 report for the UN Human Rights Council, Vitit Muntarbhorn, UN
special rapporteur on human rights in North Korea, criticized North Korea for
appalling prison conditions and extensive use of torture and public executions.
Pakistan
2008 was a tumultuous year for Pakistan. Elections in February that ushered in a
return to civilian rule were followed by the formation and rapid collapse of a coalition
government, the forced resignation of former army chief Pervez Musharraf as
president after nearly nine years in power, and the ascension to the presidency in
September of Asif Zardari, the controversial widower of assassinated Pakistan
Peoples Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto. The new civilian government inherited
a dramatically worsening security situation and skyrocketing food and fuel prices.
The new government initially agreed to an uneasy cohabitation with Musharraf
and accepted demands from the army for transfer of power on the basis of legal
continuity, whereby the new government would not challenge the legal basis of
Musharrafs rule nor attempt to hold him or the army legally accountable for
Musharrafs coups and abuses during his time in power. Many arbitrary measures
enacted under emergency rule can only be rolled back through constitutional
amendments that require a two-thirds majority in both chambers of parliament.
Musharraf was forced out in August 2008, but Zardari inherited all the powers
Musharraf had accrued.
Since the civilian government came to power, civil and political rights protections
have improved. Media restrictions have been revoked, opposition rallies and
demonstrations have been allowed to proceed without government hindrance or
violence, and military personnel have been withdrawn from civilian administrative
and political positions. The government has emphasized dialogue to resolve the
political dispute between the federal government and Balochistan province and
to extend meaningful political rights to the troubled tribal areas bordering
Afghanistan.
While the new government has been keen to promote civil liberties and human
rights, its rhetoric has not always been matched by action. Ongoing structural
concerns include lack of an independent judiciary and fair trials; mistreatment,
torture, and unresolved enforced disappearance of terrorism suspects and opponents
of the previous military government; military abuses in operations in the
tribal areas; the failure to commute death sentences; and legal discrimination
against and mistreatment of religious minorities and women.
Elections
On February 18, 2008, Pakistanis went to the polls to vote in elections for the
National Assembly (the lower house of parliament). The elections took place in a
period of tumult, after President Musharrafs imposition in November 2007 of a
state of emergency, his controversial and illegal November 2007 reelection, his
sacking and arrest of many Supreme Court and other senior judges, and the
December 27 assassination of former prime minister Benazir Bhutto. In a rebuke
to Musharraf, major opposition parties made serious gains and formed a shortlived
coalition government.
The pre-election period was marred by widespread electoral manipulation and a
concerted attempt by the government to prevent or reduce the scale of an opposition
victory. Human Rights Watch documented the abuses and released an audio
tape of Musharrafs attorney general speaking of his awareness of a plan to massively
rig the elections. The European Union Election Observer Mission concluded
that the elections fell short of a number of international standards for genuine
democratic elections.
Judicial Independence
Upon assuming power, the government released all judges detained by Musharraf
and restored their salaries. Most of the 42 judges fired by Musharraf returned to
work under a deal with the PPP-led government that required them to take a fresh
oath of office under the constitution.
However, despite repeated public assertions to the contrary, President Zardari
reneged on commitments and his signed agreement with opposition leader
Nawaz Sharif to restore to office deposed Supreme Court Chief Justice Iftikhar
Muhammad Chaudhry, who had been arbitrarily fired and detained by Musharraf
during emergency rule.
The lawyers movement, which rose to prominence in 2007, has weakened as a
political force since the advent of an elected government but retains significant
support in the legal fraternity and in civil society.
Balochistan
The Pakistani government apologized in 2008 to the people of Balochistan for
excesses and abuses under Musharraf, released high-profile political prisoners in
the province, and affirmed its intention to reach a rights-respecting political compact
between the Pakistani federation and the province. These overtures calmed
the situation in Balochistan considerably and attacks by both Baloch militants
and the Pakistani military stopped.
The dispute in Balochistan is essentially political, centered on issues of provincial
autonomy and exploitation of mineral resources. The Zardari government has
accepted that hundreds of political opponents were disappeared from
Balochistan during Musharrafs rule, but progress in locating them or informing
their next-of-kin has remained slow.
Terrorism, Counterterrorism, and Disappearances
Pakistan was rocked by a spate of suicide bombings in 2008 that targeted the
political and military elite of the country and the symbols of its power. The most
high-profile attack took place on September 20 in Islamabad, destroying the
Marriot Hotel, killing 54, and injuring hundreds. The attack came just hours after
President Zardari had delivered his first address to a joint session of parliament.
Terrorism suspects are frequently detained without charge or, if charged, are
often convicted without proper judicial process. Human Rights Watch has documented
scores of illegal detentions, instances of torture, and disappearances in
Pakistans major cities. Counterterrorism laws also continue to be misused. It is
impossible to ascertain the number of people disappeared in counterterrorism
operations because of the secrecy surrounding such operations. Pakistans
Interior Ministry, now controlled by the elected government, has estimated the
total at 1,100. However, the government has not provided details of how many
were suspected of links to al Qaeda and the Taliban and has made negligible
progress in resolving cases and recovering victims.
Until the imposition of the state of emergency in November 2007, the Supreme
Court was investigating 400 cases of enforced disappearance. In response to
pressure from the Supreme Court, scores were freed or produced in court and charged. The Supreme Court under Musharraf-appointed Chief Justice Abdul
Hameed Dogar has notably failed to pursue such cases.
Pakistan has yet to become a signatory to the international treaty banning
enforced disappearances.
Security Operations and Displaced Persons
At the urging of the United States, the Pakistani armed forces have engaged in
increasingly aggressive counterterrorism operations in Pakistans Federally
Administered Tribal Areas along the Afghan border. The operations at times have
been accompanied by massive civilian displacement, extrajudicial executions,
house demolitions, and arbitrary detentions.
Since September 2008, US drones are believed to have carried out more than a
dozen missile attacks on alleged militant targets in the tribal areas, killing dozens
of people amid persistent claims of civilian casualties. The air raids have been a
political liability for Zardari, who has called on the US to stop them. In the Bajaur
agency area, where the fighting has been most intense, more than 200,000 people
have been displaced by the Pakistani army offensive.
Armed groups in Pakistans tribal areas continue to engage in vigilantism and violent
attacks on civilians, including suicide bombings, murder, and public beheadings.
Despite selective military operations and periodic peace deals, the government
has not succeeded in preventing the Taliban and members of other militant
groups from committing serious human rights abuses.
Throughout 2008 Taliban suicide bomb attacks and operations continued in the
settled areas of the North West Frontier Province. Battles between pro-Taliban militants
and government security forces in the NWFPs Swat valley displaced civilians
and led to severe insecurity.
Discrimination
Legal discrimination against religious minorities and women continues to be a
serious concern.
The Ahmadi religious community continues to be targeted. Blasphemy cases were
registered against Ahmadis in 2008 and two members were murdered in the
province of Sindh after Dr. Aamir Liaquat Hussain, a popular religious talk-show
host on Geo TV, declared Ahmadis appropriate targets for murder under Islamic
law.
Violence against women and girls, including rape and domestic violence, and
forced marriage remain serious problems. Honor killings were perpetrated
across the country in 2008, with particularly gruesome cases reported from Sindh
and Balochistan provinces. In one case, five women were reported to have been
shot and buried alive for marrying against their families wishes.
Despite condemnation from human rights groups, Israrullah Zehri, a senator from
Balochistan province who publicly defended honor killings as tribal custom,
and legislator Hazar Khan Bijrani, accused of presiding over a tribal jirga (council)
that in 2006 ordered the handing-over of five girls, aged six and younger, as
compensation in a dispute, were elevated to Pakistans cabinet by President
Zardari in November 2008.
Growing extremism poses new threats to womens rights, particularly in the tribal
regions bordering Afghanistan. In 2008, the Taliban and other insurgent groups
destroyed more than 100 girls schools and imposed other barriers to prevent girls
from attending schools.
Freedom of Expression
Journalists continue to face pressure and threats from non-state actors and elements
of Pakistans intelligence apparatus, but there has been a marked
decrease in government-sponsored attacks since Musharraf was forced to step
down. The elected government revoked sweeping curbs on the media put in place
by Musharraf.
Death Penalty
Pakistans prime minister announced in June 2008 that more than 7,000 inmates
on death row in Pakistan would have their sentences commuted. In a July meeting with Human Rights Watch the prime minister again emphasized his intention to
commute the death sentences. Between the June announcement and this writing
in late 2008, however, 15 more people were executed, according to the Human
Rights Commission of Pakistan.
Despite commitments to reduce the number of offenses for which the death
penalty is applicable, Zardari actually increased their number in November by
adding cyber-terrorism to the list of crimes punishable by death. Pakistans Law
Ministry appears to be stalling the commutation of death sentences and blocking
proposals to limit the applicability of the death penalty.
Key International Actors
The United States and United Kingdom, the key external actors in Pakistan,
remain focused on counterterrorism in their dealings with Pakistan, subordinating
all other issues. The US, working closely with Pakistans notoriously abusive Inter-
Services Intelligence agency, has had a direct role in disappearances of counterterrorism
suspects.
While the US and UK supported a return to electoral democracy in 2008, they
backed Musharraf even after the February elections, despite his personal unpopularity
and the illegality of his hold on office. When it became clear that his continuation
in office was untenable, they successfully urged the elected government
not to prosecute or hold Musharraf legally accountable for abuses under his rule
in return for facilitating his resignation. In contrast, they notably failed to urge full
restoration of the judiciary.
On April 17, 2008, the Pakistani government ratified the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and signed both the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights and the UN Convention against Torture.
Under Musharraf, Pakistan played an extremely negative role at the UN Human
Rights Council (HRC); the change in government has been accompanied by some
improvements in approach. Still, Pakistans positions at the HRC often do not fully
reflect the administrations stated commitments to human rights and it continues
to play an actively obstructive role on some issues. Pakistan was reviewed under
the Universal Periodic Review mechanism of the HRC in May 2008. 
Papua New Guinea
Papua New Guineas government acceded to the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights in July 2008. Police rape and torture and gender-based violence
and discrimination nevertheless remain widespread. Many people, especially
girls and women, lack access to basic education and healthcare.
Police Violence, Juvenile Justice, and Detention of Children
Despite statements by the police commissioner in 2008 promising respect for
human rights, police routinely use excessive force, torture, and sexual violence
against individuals in custody. Because girls and women are rarely formally
charged, their contact with the police, including rape in police stations, is often
not reflected in official data. In the face of widespread violent crime, such tactics
have deeply eroded the public trust and cooperation crucial to effective policing.
Impunity and corruption fuel abuse as police are rarely held accountable for violence
or other crimes, either through internal disciplinary mechanisms or by the
criminal justice system.
Progress in developing a juvenile justice system continues, but so does police
violence against children. More police were trained on new standards for dealing
with children. Thirteen of 20 provinces now have some form of juvenile court, but
children rarely receive legal representation.
Police frequently detain children with adults in police lockups where they are
denied medical care and are at risk of rape and other violence. In prisons and
other juvenile institutions, children awaiting trial are mixed with those already
convicted. Conditions in many facilities are poor; even the prison in the capital
Port Moresby lacks formal education for children. Children may spend months or
even years awaiting trial. Notably, the number of children in correctional facilities
has decreased since 2000, corresponding to the establishment of juvenile courts
and an increased use of community-based sentences and pre-sentence diversion.
As of October 2008 at least one childa 16-year-old boywas imprisoned under
a death sentence for murder. No one has been executed in Papua New Guinea
since the death penalty was reintroduced in 1991.
Violence and Discrimination against Women and Girls
Violence against women and girlsincluding domestic violence, gang rape, and
torture and murder for alleged sorceryis pervasive and rarely punished. Police
often ignore complaints, or demand money or sex from victims. Girls and
womens low status is also reflected in disparities in education, healthcare, and
employment; heavy household workloads; early marriage; and polygamy.
Although the prime minister and other officials condemned violence against
women in late 2007 following several well-publicized cases, these statements
have yet to result in improved protection for women, services for victims, or an
expectation of accountability for perpetrators.
There is only one female member of parliament.
Human Rights Monitoring Mechanisms
Several NGOs document human rights abuses connected with logging and mining
operations; some have faced threats and physical violence. In August 2008 three
men attacked Jethro Tulin, director of an NGO documenting abuses at Barrick
Porgera Joint Venture gold mine, breaking his arm and telling him he would not be
allowed to return to Canada. Tulin had delivered a statement in Canada in May at
Barricks annual shareholders meeting. Human Rights Watch has no evidence as
to whether his attackers were linked in any way to Barrick.
The Ombudsman Commission, which has taken useful steps to monitor government
corruption, has a human rights unit, but its capacity to pursue cases is
weak and it has not taken up police violence against children. A 2007 agreement
gave the commission limited oversight over selected complaints against police. In
October 2008 the commission reported that it had jointly investigated two cases
with police, one involving allegations that a provincial police commander had
raped a woman who came to the station for assistance. The officer was suspended
but was free on bail at this writing, awaiting trial. 
In 2008 juvenile magistrates conducted monitoring visits to some prisons and
police stations. Magistrates documented children being whipped, kicked,
slashed, and beaten by police; children being held without a court order; and
appalling detention conditions.
In September the National Court found that five men had a cause of action for
breach of their human rights. The men alleged that police had detained them for
three weeks without charge and tortured them, including forcing two of them to
have sexual intercourse with each other.
The government held public consultations during 2008 on the creation of a
National Human Rights Commission.
Right to Health
The closure of rural aid posts and health centers, declining transportation infrastructure,
failure of allocated funds to reach local governments, and a shortage of
drugs, medical equipment, and trained health professionals limit access to quality
healthcare. Rates of maternal and child mortality are among the highest in the
Pacific. Around 40 percent of women receive no antenatal care, according to government
reports.
Papua New Guinea has the highest prevalence of HIV/AIDS in the Pacific: around
60,000 people are living with the disease (1.61 percent of adults in 2007).
Antiretroviral therapy is inaccessible to most. Gender-based violence and discrimination,
and poor access to healthcare also fuel the viruss spread. People living
with HIV/AIDS often face violence and discrimination. Despite police training on
HIV/AIDS, police undermine prevention efforts by targeting female sex workers
and men and boys suspected of homosexual conduct for beatings and rape.
Police are able to do so in part because they can threaten arrest using laws criminalizing
homosexual conduct and certain forms of sex work, and because social
stigma against homosexuality and sex work shields police from public outrage.
Sections 210 and 212 of Papua New Guineas penal code, an inheritance of
British colonialism, punish consensual homosexual conduct between men with
up to 14 years imprisonment.
Education
Primary education is neither free nor compulsory. According to the education
department, net primary enrollment rates are low, ranging from around 22 percent
in one province to 65 percent in the capital in 2007. Only 56 percent of primary
school entrants reach the final grade of primary education; secondary
school enrollment rates are around 25 percent.
Barriers include long distances to schools, a shortage of upper secondary placements,
and school closures due to insecurity. Girls in particular suffer from sexual
abuse by other students and teachers, lack of water and sanitation facilities, and
dangerous journeys to and from school. School feesranging from 90 kina
(US$35) for lower primary school to 1,300 kina (US$508) for grade 12 boarding
studentsare prohibitively high for many families. Average annual income was
around US$770 in 2006. Despite partial government subsidies in some provinces
and the secretary of educations urging that schools should turn away students
only as a last resort, high fees have been linked to non-attendance, dropout, and
entry into child labor.
Key International Actors
The UN special rapporteurs on torture and education, and the UN Working Group
on Arbitrary Detention have all requested permission to visit the country, but, at
this writing, the government had not responded. Nor had the government
responded to a January 2008 letter from the special rapporteur on extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions seeking information on the killing of at least
eight people by private security forces at the Barrick Porgera Joint Venture gold
mine and the governments failure to investigate and prosecute those responsible.
The United Nations Childrens Fund assists juvenile justice reform efforts, and the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights stationed a human rights advisor
in the country at the beginning of 2008.
Australia remains the most important external actor and largest foreign donor,
playing a significant role in, among other areas, the law and justice sector and
HIV/AIDS response. Relations between the two countries improved following the election of Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, and Australia sent a few additional
federal police to serve as advisors in 2008. It remains to be seen whether
Australia will adopt more specific commitments to human rights in its development
policy.
The Philippines
The Philippines is a multiparty democracy with an elected president and legislature,
a thriving civil society sector, and a vibrant media. Several key institutions,
including the judiciary and law enforcement agencies, however, remain weak.
Under intense domestic and international pressure, the number of extrajudicial
killings and enforced disappearances implicating security forces dropped significantly
in 2008. The government of President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo continues
to deny complicity of security forces in most such acts despite considerable evidence
to the contrary. Hundreds of activists, journalists, and outspoken clergy
have been killed or abducted since 2001. While a few people have been successfully
prosecuted, not a single solider has been brought to justice for crimes committed
during this period.
Armed encounters between the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) and groups
such as the communist New Peoples Army (NPA), the Moro Islamic Liberation
Front (MILF), and the Abu Sayaff Group (ASG) continue. Starting in August 2008,
the conflict in Mindanao rapidly escalated, with clashes between the AFP and the
MILF displacing hundreds of thousands of civilians.
Extrajudicial Killings and Enforced Disappearances
The government maintains that most extrajudicial killings and disappearances
are the result of internal purges within the communist movement, but UN expert
Philip Alston and human rights organizations have found evidence of military
involvement in many cases. Alston presented his report on the Philippines to the
UN Human Rights Council in April 2008. A new government taskforce said in
November 2008 that out of 260 compiled disappearances cases, 19
cases involved members of the military.
Abductions of activists continue, with the military or police sometimes resurfacing
abductees and charging them with killings or other offences.
On May 15, 2008, unidentified gunmen shot and killed Celso Pojas, secretarygeneral
of a leftist farmers organization in Davao City, in southern Mindanao.
Pojas had campaigned against military operations that allegedly displaced indigenous
people and farmers in Compostela Valley. At this writing, the police have not
arrested any suspects.
On the same day, in Cagayan Valley, unidentified men abducted Randy Malayao,
former vice president of the College Editors Guild of the Philippines and a consultant
to the National Democratic Front (NDF), a coalition of underground left-leaning
organizations. A few days later, the military produced him, saying he was a rebel
leader involved in the killing of former congressman Rodolfo Aguinaldo. At this
writing, he remains in jail in Tuguegarao City, Cagayan Valley, facing murder and
attempted murder charges.
In August 2008 a regional court in Tagaytay City found the arrest and detention of
the Tagaytay Five unlawful and ordered their release. Security forces had
abducted and detained Riel Custodio, Axel Pinpin, Aristides Sarmiento, Enrico
Ybanez, and Michael Masayes in a joint military-police operation in April 2006
and forced them to admit they were members of the NPA. Rebellion charges were
later filed against the five, all of whom are farmers advocates and organizers in
the provinces of Cavite and Batangas in southern Luzon.
On September 13, the Court of Appeals in Manila dismissed charges against
Berlin Guerrero, a church pastor, and ordered his immediate release. Armed men
abducted Guerrero on May 27, 2007, in Laguna province and several days later he
appeared in police custody. He subsequently was accused of being a rebel and
charged with sedition and murder.
Meanwhile, initial optimism over new Supreme Court writs to compel military and
other government agents to release information on people in their custodythe
writs of amparo and habeas datawas dampened by a series of lower court decisions
dismissing cases seeking the release of or information on persons in
government custody. Among the cases dismissed was that brought on behalf of
Jonas Burgos, a farmers rights advocate, abducted in April 2007 in Quezon City.
Local activists have expressed concern that courts are putting unreasonable
obstacles in the way of petitioners in such cases.
From January to September 2008, five journalists, mostly radio commentators
tackling corruption and other issues, were killed. On August 4, 2008, gunmen killed radio commentator Dennis Cuesta in General Santos City. Although witnesses
identified one of the gunmen as a known police officer, no arrest had been
made at this writing.
Summary Executions of Petty Criminals and Street Youth
Reports of execution-style killings continue in several cities, particularly in
Mindanao. Local activists say more than 100 people were killed from January to
September 2008 in Davao City alone. Execution-style killings have been reported
in the cities of Davao, Digos (Davao del Sur), Tagum (Davao del Norte), General
Santos, Cagayan de Oro, and Cebu.
The majority of the victims are street children or petty criminals, including gang
members. An increasing number of victims are bystanders and victims of mistaken
identity. Killings are often perpetrated in broad daylight, some near police stations
and detention centers. The perpetrators often do not hide their faces and
ride in twos or threes aboard motorcycles with missing license plates. Gunmen
sometimes threaten witnesses, warning them that they could be targeted as well.
Police and local authorities deny the existence of vigilante groups and attribute
the killings to gang wars, but many of the killings followed tough anti-crime pronouncements
by top local officials including Mayor Rodrigo Duterte of Davao City,
Mayor Arsenio Latasa of Digos City, and Mayor Tomas Osmena of Cebu City. Local
residents and activists told Human Rights Watch in 2008 that death squads have
been operating in the cities for years with virtual impunity. In most of the cases
documented by human rights groups, no formal criminal investigation has been
opened and the perpetrators remain unpunished.
Conflict in Mindanao
On August 5, 2008, after almost eight years of negotiations, the Philippine government
and MILF were to sign a comprehensive agreement in Kuala Lumpur to
address the Moro secessionist issue in the southern Philippines. On the eve of
the signing, however, the Supreme Court, acting on a petition filed by local executives
and politicians in Mindanao who were opposed to the agreement, issued a
temporary restraining order stopping the process.
The aborted peace agreement was followed by sporadic armed clashes between
government forces and MILF rebels in several provinces of Central Mindanao
resulting in at least 62 civilian deaths. Fighting displaced more than 100,000 families,
comprising more than 500,000 individuals, mostly women, children, and
the elderly. Some soldiers and politicians reportedly began arming non-Moro
civilians to fight the MILF. Human rights groups have warned that if the government
and MILF do not return to the negotiating table, a full-blown civil war may
again erupt.
Clashes with Other Armed Groups
Under a military operation entitled Oplan Bantay Laya 2 (Operational Plan
Freedom Watch), the stated aim of which is to crush the NPA by the end of
Arroyos term in 2010, the government accelerated counterinsurgency operations
in central Luzon, southern Tagalog, Bicol, eastern Visayas, southern Mindanao,
and northern Mindanao. In 2008, armed confrontations between the AFP and the
NPA displaced thousands of people. Indigenous communities in Surigao del Sur,
Davao del Norte, and Compostela Valley were most affected.
Local human rights groups have expressed concern that the militarys regular use
of aerial and heavy artillery bombardment is putting civilian lives at risk. In
February 2008 security forces in Sulu killed seven civilians including two children
and a pregnant woman during an attack on a village suspected of hosting ASG
members. In September a pregnant woman and five children were killed in
Maguindanao during an air force attack on a village where MILF rebels were
allegedly hiding.
Filipino Workers Abroad
Approximately 1.7 million Filipinos work abroad, including hundreds of thousands
of women who work in other parts of Asia and the Middle East as domestic workers.
While the Philippine government has made some efforts to support and protect
domestic workers, many women continue to experience abuses including
unpaid wages, food deprivation, forced confinement in the workplace, and physical
and sexual abuse (see Saudi Arabia, UAE, and Malaysia chapters.)
Key International Actors
The United States is the most influential ally and the largest donor to the
Philippines. The US military has access to Filipino lands and seas under a Visiting
Forces Agreement, and the two militaries hold joint annual exercises. In fiscal
year 2008 (October 2007September 2008), the US government provided the
Philippines almost US$30 million under Foreign Military Financing for procurement
of military equipment and almost US$1.5 million in the International Military
Exchange Training program under which AFP officers are trained in the United
States. The US Foreign Operations Bill approved in December 2007 requires the
Philippine government to show progress in addressing human rights abuses,
including extrajudicial killings, in order for some additional US military funding to
be approved.
In April 2008 the UN Human Rights Council examined the human rights record of
the Philippines under its Universal Periodic Review mechanism. Several member
states raised the issue of impunity for extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances
but the Philippine government rejected recommendations for a followup
report.
Singapore
Singapore remains an authoritarian state with strict curbs on freedom of expression,
assembly, and association; denial of due process rights; draconian defamation
laws; and tight controls on independent political activity. Since 1959 the ruling
Peoples Action Party (PAP) has won all elections.
Internal security and criminal laws permit prolonged detention of suspects without
trial. Caning is obligatory for certain categories of crimes, as is the death
penalty for others. Although reforms have improved employment conditions for
some of the countrys 180,000 migrant domestic workers, the government still
fails to guarantee them basic rights.
Freedom of Expression and Assembly
Singapores constitution guarantees freedom of assembly and expression, though
parliament can and does limit both on security, public order, and morality
grounds. Opposition politicians and their supporters are at constant risk of prison
and substantial fines for simply expressing their views.
On October 13, 2008, Singapores High Court ruled that opposition Singapore
Democratic Party (SDP) Secretary General Dr. Chee Soon Juan and his sister, Chee
Siok Chin, must pay Minister Mentor Lee Kuan Yew and his son, Prime Minister
Lee Hsien Loong, US$416,000 in damages for an article in the SDPs newsletter.
The article had compared how the government is run to a scandal at a well-known
charity. The ruling may bankrupt the SDP and permanently shut it down. Dr. Chee
and Ms. Chee are already bankrupt because of previous defamation rulings
against them.
In September 2008 the Lees also won a defamation suit against the Far Eastern
Economic Review and its editor Hugo Restall for commentary on the same case.
Damages had yet to be assessed at this writing. The government is also seeking
contempt proceedings against the publisher and two editors of the Asian Wall
Street Journal for editorial comments related to the case.
In May Dr. Chee and a colleague were fined for speaking in public without a permit
during the 2006 election campaign. They were charged with trying to sell
copies of the SDP newsletter on a Singapore street.
Movies, music, and video games are routinely censored in Singapore. The Media
Development Authority controls website licensing. In May 2008 the authority
interrupted a private screening, sponsored by the SDP, of the video One Nation
Under Lee.
The Newspaper and Printing Presses Act requires that locally published newspapers
renew their licenses each year, and empowers authorities to limit the circulation
of foreign publications deemed to be engaging in the domestic politics of
Singapore.
How far Singapores leadership will loosen curbs on assembly and expression, as
Prime Minister Loong suggested in August 2008, remains to be seen. The only
step taken in 2008 was the governments decision in September to rescind the
need for police permission for gatherings and rallies of more than four people at
a popular park site officially labeled the Speakers Corner. Race and religion still
may not be publicly discussed, police may still intervene on public order grounds,
and a permit is still required elsewhere in the city.
In March, on World Consumer Rights Day, police stopped a protest against rising
prices outside Parliament House. The organizers, among them Dr. Chee, had been
refused a permit; 18 protesters have since been charged with illegal assembly
and procession. A day after the attempted rally, the non-political Consumer
Association of Singapore was able to hold a public event without incident.
Due Process
Singapores Internal Security Act (ISA), Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act
(CLA), Misuse of Drugs Act (MDA), and Undesirable Publications Act permit arrest
and detention of suspects without a warrant or judicial review. Both the ISA and
the CLA also authorize preventive detention. The MDA permits the Central
Narcotics Bureau chief to send suspected drug users for rehabilitation without
recourse to trial.
The ISA is used against suspected Islamist militants, many of whom have been
detained for long periods without trial. There is no right to challenge detention on
substantive grounds. As of April 2008 some 30 suspected Muslim militants were
being held, almost all members of Jemaah Islamiah. Another 25-30 former
detainees live under restriction orders.
Caning
Singapores penal code mandates caning combined with imprisonment for some
30 offenses, including drug and immigration felonies. It is discretionary for other
offenses. Courts reportedly sentenced 6,404 men and boys to caning in 2007,
some 95 percent of whose sentences were carried out.
Death Penalty
Although death penalty statistics are secret in Singapore, available information
indicates that it has one of the worlds highest per capita execution rates. In
December 2007 Singapore joined with 53 other states in voting against a nonbinding
UN General Assembly resolution calling for a moratorium on executions
with a view to abolishing the death penalty. Earlier, Singapores home affairs
minister, referring to the laws deterrent effects, commented that there is no
room to go soft.
Migrant Domestic Workers
Singapores labor laws exclude some 180,000 migrant domestic workers from key
protections guaranteed to other workers, such as a weekly day off, limits on working
hours, annual leave, paid holidays, and caps on salary deductions. In May
2008 acting Minister for Manpower Gan Kim Yong said it was unnecessary to
mandate a weekly rest day. He instead supported the current standard contract
provision that provides for at least one day off a month or compensatory pay.
However, many employers forbid domestic workers to take a rest day; their isolation
and employers power to have them deported at will make it difficult if not
impossible for them to bargain effectively for their due.
The government has prosecuted some employers who physically abuse domestic
workers and imposed penalties on labor recruitment agencies for unethical practices.
However it has failed to regulate exploitative recruitment charges that can
consume a third or more of workers two-year wage total.
Privacy
In October 2007 Singapores parliament rejected a proposal to repeal law 377A,
which bans private and consensual sexual relations between men. Although prosecutions
are rare, those found in violation can be jailed for up to two years on
charges of gross indecency.
In April 2008 the Media Development Authority fined a local television station for
featuring a gay couple and their baby under regulations that prohibit promotion
of gay lifestyles. It also fined a cable network for airing a commercial that showed
two women kissing.
Human Rights Defenders
State laws and political repression effectively prevent the establishment of
human rights organizations and deter individuals from speaking out publicly
against government policies.
Unless they are registered as political parties, associations may not engage in any
activities the government deems political. Trade unions are under the same
restrictions and are banned from contributing to political parties or using their
funds for political purposes. Most unions are affiliated with the umbrella National
Trade Union Congress, which does not allow members supportive of opposition
parties to hold office.
Key International Actors
Singapore is a key member of the Southeast Asia Regional Centre for Counter-
Terrorism, along with the US, Malaysia, and others, and is an active participant in
regional and sub-regional security issues. It is also an important financial and
banking center for Southeast Asia.
In February 2008 Singapore Foreign Minister George Yong-Boon Yeo, then chair of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), expressed ASEANs concern
about the conditions under which Burmas constitutional referendum took place.
Since July 2008, after Singapores term as chair of ASEAN ended, the government
has shown more support for Burmas government, even refusing to renew residency
permits for Burmese citizens who appear to have taken part in peaceful
activities critical of Burmese government policies.
Sri Lanka
On January 2, 2008, the Sri Lankan government formally pulled out of its ceasefire
agreement with the secessionist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE). The
agreement had effectively been a dead letter since mid-2006, when major military
operations by both sides resumed. Since then, the human rights situation in
the north and east of the country has deteriorated markedly, with numerous
reports of killings, abductions, and enforced disappearances by government
forces, the LTTE, and paramilitary groups.
All parties are responsible for harmful and unnecessary restrictions on humanitarian
access to populations at risk. The LTTE has continued bomb attacks on civilians
in several cities, including the capital Colombo.
The governments state of emergency continued in 2008, with increasing numbers
of arrests and detentions taking place under emergency regulations and the
Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA). The culture of impunity deepened, with investigations
and inquiries into human rights violations failing to bring significant
results, and a group of prominent international figures pulling out of an inquiry
into grave human rights abuses because of an absence of political and institutional
will on the part of the government.
Humanitarian Crisis
Since mid-2006 fighting in the north and east has created a series of humanitarian
crises. On September 8, 2008, the government ordered the United Nations
and other international agencies to withdraw foreign and non-resident local staff
and suspend their aid operations in the LTTE-controlled Vanni region. At this writing,
reports indicated there were over 240,000 displaced persons in Kilinochchi
and Mullativu Districts. The withdrawal raised fears of shortages of food and
essential items in the area and inadequate shelter.
Restrictions imposed by the LTTE make it extremely difficult for civilians to leave
the Vanni for government areas, including the LTTE requirement that civilians have
a guarantorin effect, a hostagewho remains behind. Such restrictions have resulted in entire communities being trapped in areas threatened by fighting and
with minimal humanitarian assistance.
Those who manage to escape the Vanni have faced an uncertain future, as the
government suspects Tamils from the area of being LTTE supporters. Many families
have been moved by the government to welfare centers, as in Kallimoddai
and Sirukondal in Mannar District, where their movements are severely restricted.
Concerns remain about security, sustainability, and freedom of choice for displaced
persons returning to or resettling in areas in the east, particularly in the
High Security Zone in Sampur, Trincomalee District.
Threats and Attacks against Civilians
Threats and attacks against civilians continue. In 2008 bomb blasts in urban
areas resulted in over 70 civilian deaths and some 250 casualties; the LTTE was
the prime suspect. According to local media, as many as 47 civilians were killed
in Kilinochchi District after hostilities escalated in May. T. Maheswaran, a Tamil
member of parliament and vocal critic of the government, was killed on January 1,
2008, while attending religious services at a Hindu temple in an area with high
security.
Fear of killings and abductions in the northern Jaffna peninsula is so great that at
this writing over 300 people were in protective custody in the Jaffna prison. Many
serious abuses in Jaffna have been reported during curfew hours and in highsecurity
areas, suggesting the complicity of government security forces.
As many as 22 people were killed and 26 abducted in May 2008 before and after
council elections in Eastern Province. The elections resulted in the appointment
of Pillayan, a former LTTE member and current Tamil Makkal Viduthalai Pulikal
(TMVP) leader, as chief minister. The TMVP, originally a breakaway faction of the
LTTE called the Karuna Group, continues to be responsible for abductions and
child recruitment with the complicity of the security forces.
Tamil civilians, including many who relocated to Colombo from Jaffna and other
locations in the north and east, continue to face arbitrary arrests and detentions,
round-ups, orders of eviction, and new forms of registration.
Abductions and Enforced Disappearances
Abductions and enforced disappearances continued in 2008, with approximately
43 reported cases in Vavuniya in August alone. Many cases are not reported due
to fear of reprisals. Besides a few arrests of persons alleged to be involved in
abductions for ransom, Human Rights Watch is unaware of any serious action by
the government to address the hundreds of new disappearances of the past
few years, the great majority of which remain unresolved. Most cases of enforced
disappearances implicate government security forces.
Emergency Regulations and the Prevention of Terrorism Act
Emergency regulations provide broad powers to the security forces to investigate,
arrest, and detain people in the name of national security. The government
uses the regulations to arrest and detain political opponents, journalists, human
rights defenders, and members of the Tamil minority community.
On March 7, 2008, the Terrorist Investigative Department arrested prominent journalist
J.S. Tissainayagam and detained him without charge for more than 150 days
for alleged links to the LTTE. He was later charged both under the emergency regulations
and the Prevention of Terrorism Act for printing and distributing North
Eastern Monthly magazine in 2006. A new emergency regulation introduced in
August 2008 gives the secretary of defense power to detain persons for 18
months without producing them before the courts.
Impunity
Despite government commitments to address impunity, rights violators continue
to face no serious threat of prosecution. There were no convictions of perpetrators
of serious human rights violations in 2008. The Presidential Commission of
Inquiry, formed under international pressure to investigate 16 incidents of grave
human rights abuses, failed to make any significant progress. The process was so
flawed that the International Independent Group of Eminent Persons, after regularly
raising serious concerns, eventually withdrew from its observer role. Four Sri
Lankan commissioners also resigned.
In a shocking display of impunity, Karuna Amman, former LTTE deputy commander
implicated in numerous serious abuses both with the LTTE and his breakaway
armed group, was reinstated as a leader of the TMVP upon his return to Sri Lanka
in July 2008. He had just been released after serving time for immigration fraud in
the United Kingdom. On October 7 he was inducted as a member of parliament
with the full support of the president and government.
Child Soldiers
In October the United Nations Childrens Fund reported 1,424 outstanding cases
of recruitment of child soldiers by the LTTE, including 108 still under age 18, and
133 by the TMVP, including 62 still under age 18. New child recruitment continues:
reports from Ampara District indicated an increase in TMVP abductions in late
2008 and unconfirmed reports suggest that the LTTE has sharply increased child
recruitment in response to government military operations in Kilinochchi District.
Many cases are not reported due to fear of reprisals.
Human Rights Defenders, Journalists, and Humanitarian
Workers
Threats and attacks against human rights defenders and journalists worsened in
2008. On September 27, grenades were thrown at the house of human rights
lawyer and executive director of Transparency International Sri Lanka, J.C.
Weliamuna. According to the Free Media Movement, since 2005, 14 journalists
have been killed, 7 abducted, and 13 arrested.
Humanitarian space shrunk considerably in 2008, with the government ordering
withdrawal of agencies from the Vanni region. Aggressive public statements from
senior government officials continued against international agencies, including
the UN, with many accused of being LTTE supporters or sympathizers.
Humanitarian aid agencies operations were significantly affected with restrictions
on movement and difficulties obtaining visas and work permits for expatriate
staff. No progress was made in the August 2006 execution-style slayings of 17
Action against Hunger (ACF) aid workers despite strong new evidence that state
security forces were responsible. 
Sri Lankan Migrant Workers
More than 710,000 Sri Lankan women work abroad as domestic workers, nearly
90 percent of them in Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Lebanon, and the United Arab
Emirates. Once abroad, many domestic workers face abuses, including long
hours, no rest days, forced confinement, low and unpaid wages, physical and
sexual abuse, and conditions that amount to forced labor (see Saudi Arabia and
Lebanon chapters).
Some Sri Lankan foreign missions have created shelters to assist the thousands
of domestic workers complaining of unpaid wages and abuse each year. These
foreign missions have inadequate staffing and resources, the shelters are grossly
overcrowded and unhygienic, and the services they provide often fail to meet
minimum standards. The government and the Sri Lankan association of recruitment
agencies have attempted to negotiate higher salaries for Sri Lankan domestic
workers working abroad, but enforcement in labor-receiving countries is
uneven.
Key International Actors
On May 21, Sri Lanka lost its bid for reelection to the UN Human Rights Council. A
broad coalition of national and international NGOs raised strong objections to Sri
Lankas candidacy, pointing to its poor human rights record and failure to meet
past commitments to the HRC. In May during the HRCs triennial review of Sri
Lankas record, the government agreed to implement a national action plan on
human rights.
In 2008 several influential actors, including co-chairs of the peace process in Sri
Lankathe European Union, Japan, Norway, and the United Statesdenounced
abuses by government and LTTE forces and called on all sides to respect civilian
life and humanitarian space.
Many eminent international figures who commented on the deteriorating human
rights situation in Sri Lanka were sharply criticized by senior government officials,
some even accused of being LTTE dupes or sympathizers, including UN SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and Nobel Laureates Bishop Desmond Tutu, Adolfo Prez
Esquivel, and Jimmy Carter.
Thailand
The end of a military-installed administration has not led to the restoration of
rights and democracy in Thailand. Within months of general elections in
December 2007 and formation of a new civilian government in January 2008,
political polarization between pro- and anti-government groups led to protracted
protests and occasional deadly clashes; media freedom and freedom of expression
were undermined by harassment and interference from both the government
and anti-government groups.
In the southern border provinces, Thai security forces continue to engage in extrajudicial
killings and torture. Insurgent groups continue their brutal and deadly
attacks on civilians.
New War on Drugs
During the inaugural presentation of government policy to the parliament on
February 20, 2008, then interior minister Chalerm Yubamrung announced that a
new war on drugssimilar to that carried out in 2003 by the government of
Thaksin Shinawatrawould be launched. Chalerm vowed that, if this will lead to
3,000-4,000 deaths of those who break the law, then so be it. Although the
campaign was scrapped due to strong domestic and international opposition, the
government showed no interest in reopening investigations into the 2,819 extrajudicial
killings that allegedly accompanied the 2003 campaign. On November 7,
2008, Prime Minister Somchai Wongsawat announced a new anti-drug campaign.
The government failed to end systematic police brutality and abuse of power in
drug suppression operations. For example, Police Captain Nat Chonnithiwanit and
seven other members of the 41st Border Patrol Police (BPP) unit allegedly abducted
and tortured more than 60 people over a three-year period in order to extort
money and force them to confess to drug offenses. Despite the much publicized
arrest of a BPP member on January 25, 2008, little progress has been made to
bring perpetrators to justice.
Peoples Alliance for Democracy
Starting on May 25, 2008, the Peoples Alliance for Democracy (PAD) staged protracted
protests in Bangkok and other cities to express opposition to the government.
Labeling Prime Minister Samak and his successor, Somchai Wongsawat
(former prime minister Thaksins brother-in-law), as surrogates for Thaksin, the
PAD accused the government of corruption, abuse of power, and being unpatriotic.
Protesters blocked roads and traffic in the capital, in some cases for months at
a time. Pro-government groups often violently attacked PAD rallies while police
stood by.
On August 26, PAD protesters besieged many government buildings in Bangkok,
including the National Broadcasting of Thailand (NBT) building and Government
House, where the prime minister and cabinet members have their offices. The
government obtained injunctions and arrest warrants from the courts against PAD
leaders, but could not end the siege of Government House. After clashes between
police and PAD protesters on August 29, the PAD closed international airports in
Thailands southern provinces and imposed worker strikes on train services
across the country.
Violence escalated when the pro-government Democratic Alliance against
Dictatorship (DAAD) engaged in street fighting with the PAD on September 2,
resulting in one death and more than 40 injuries. Prime Minister Samak declared
a state of emergency in Bangkok, but army chief General Anupong Paochinda
refused to use the emergency powers to crack down on the PAD and suppress
basic freedoms. After Samak was removed from office by the Constitutional
Courtthe court ruled he had violated the constitution by accepting payment for
appearances on a cooking showthe new prime minister, Somchai Wongsawat,
approved General Anupongs proposal to lift the state of emergency on
September 9.
On October 7, thousands of PAD protesters surrounded the parliament in an
attempt to block Prime Minister Somchai from delivering a policy statement. To
clear the area, police riot units and BPP units used tear gas and rubber bullets, in
some cases firing tear gas from close range directly at the protesters. PAD protesters
responded by firing guns, shooting slingshots, throwing bricks and metal pipes, trying to run over police officers with pickup trucks, and stabbing police
with flagpoles. According to the Public Health Ministry, two PAD supporters died
and 443 were injured, including four cases of amputation. About 20 police were
injured.
On October 13, Thailands National Human Rights Commission concluded that
Chinese-made tear gas canisters and grenades used by police on October 7 may
have caused many of the deaths and severe injuries.
To date, there has been no independent and impartial investigation into politically
motivated violence and human rights abuses committed by the PAD.
At this writing, the PAD was still occupying Government House. PAD leaders were
demanding that the military have the right to intervene in politics to check corruption
and to protect the monarchy and national sovereignty. They also were proposing
that the number of elected MPs be reduced to 50 percent of the total
with the remainder filled through appointment.
Freedom of Expression and Media Freedom
The government has continued to interfere in the media. A news talk radio program
hosted by former senator Jermsak Pinthong was taken off the air on
February 13, 2008, after he claimed that Prime Minister Samak distorted the truth
about a massacre of students at Thammasat University on October 6, 1976. On
April 19, Jakrapob Penkairwho was then in charge of the governments Public
Relations Departmentordered some 500 community radio operators to allocate
three hours a day to promote the government or risk closure.
Prime Minister Samak attempted to use the NBT broadcast to counter daily
attacks by PAD-controlled media outlets, ASTV, and Manager Radio. On July 21,
the time slot for the political talk show Page Four News on NBT TV Channel 11
was reassigned to commentators affiliated with the ruling Peoples Power Party
(PPP) to host a pro-government program called Truth Today.
The PADs protests included criminal violence against the media. On August 26,
armed PAD protesters stormed into NBT headquarters and attempted to stop the
broadcast of NBT television and radio stations. On that day, PAD protesters harassed NBT reporters and staff at Government House and chased them out of
their mobile broadcast trucks.
Pro-government groups also have harassed the media. On November 3, about
200 red-clad members of the Love Chiang Mai 51 Group stormed into the regional
office of the Thai Public Broadcasting Service in Chiang Mai province. They cut
open the fence and blocked the buildings entrance with tents, threatening to cut
electricity and water supplies after TPBS reported that members of the Love
Chiang Mai 51 Group were paid 2,000 baht (about US$57) each to join the progovernment
rally in Bangkok organized by the pro-government DADD on
November 1.
The PAD, the opposition Democrat Party, and senior military officers have actively
advocated the arbitrary use of lese majeste (insulting the monarchy) charges
against supporters of the government. Jakrapob had to resign from office on May
30 after he was charged with lese majeste for a speech at the Foreign
Correspondents Club about the patronage system. On July 22, government supporter
Daranee Charnchoengsilpakul was arrested for allegedly insulting the
monarchy in her speech at a DAAD rally. In 2008 authorities also closed down
more than 400 websites after accusing them of promoting anti-monarchy sentiments.
Thai authorities have warned the vibrant international media in Thailand not to
comment on the role of the monarchy. Jonathan Heada Bangkok-based reporter
for the BBCfaced a criminal investigation for allegedly making anti-monarchy
comments in his stories.
Violence and Abuses in the Southern Border Provinces
Attacks on civilians by both Thai security forces and armed separatist groups in
Thailands southern border provinces continued in 2008. Soldiers from the
Armys 39th Taskforce in Rue Soh district of Narathiwat province were implicated
in the highly publicized torture and murder of imam Yapa Kaseng on March 21. On
June 21, armed insurgents stormed a passenger train in Ra Ngae district and executed
a Buddhist Thai train police officer and three Buddhist train workers. Car
bombs were used in a March 15 attack on CS Pattani Hotel in Pattani province and an August 21 attack in Su Ngai Kolok district of Narathiwat province. Some insurgents
aimed to spread terror among the Buddhist Thai population, most notably
by beheading victims or setting their bodies on fire. Insurgents burned down government
schools and continued to engage in roadside ambushes and targeted
assassinations of teachers and students.
Although the government and General Anupong vowed to deliver justice to the
ethnic Malay Muslim population, Thai security forces still faced little or no consequences
for extrajudicial killings, torture, and arbitrary arrests of suspected insurgents.
After a sharp decline in 2007, new cases of enforced disappearances
emerged again in 2008.
Refugees and Migrant Workers
The international law prohibition against refoulementreturning refugees to any
country where they are likely to be persecuted or their lives put at riskcontinued
to be breached in 2008, as ethnic Karen refugees and asylum seekers were
deported to Burma. Similarly, Lao Hmong seeking asylum in Petchabun province
were rounded up from camps and sent back to Laos.
Thailand hosted the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Labor
Ministerial Meeting in May 2008, but migrant workers remain largely unprotected
by Thai labor laws. They continue to be vulnerable to arrest and extortion by corrupt
officials, and risk exploitation, abuse, and death. On April 10, 54 Burmese
migrants died of suffocation in an unventilated truck while being smuggled to
work in Ranong province. Decrees in Ranong, Rayong, and Phang Nga provinces
have made it unlawful for migrants to go out at night, carry mobile phones, and
ride motorcycles.
Human Rights Defenders
There has been little progress in official investigations into the cases of 20
human rights defenders killed during the Thaksin administration. This includes
the disappearance and presumed murder of well-known Muslim lawyer
Somchai Neelapaijit.
Thai authorities have threatened to revoke the registration of international NGOs
in order to deter them from speaking up about government abuses in southern
border provinces.
Key International Actors
Thailand assumed the rotating chairmanship of the ASEAN in 2008, but has yet to
ratify the ASEAN charter. Thailands efforts to set the terms of reference for the
ASEAN human rights mechanism have been discredited by its poor human rights
record and close alliance with military rulers in Burma. Prime Minister Somchai
used the October ASEAN-Europe Meeting in Beijing to launch a diplomatic campaign
to support the Burmese military government, asserting that lifting economic
sanctions and supporting government-led development is the best path to
democratization in Burma.
The United States and other western governments resumed normal relations with
Thailand after an elected government came to power in 2008. The US used its
strong bilateral relationship with Thailand to raise human rights concerns regarding
the political confrontation in Bangkok and violence in Thailands southern
border provinces.
Together with the United Kingdom, Australia, and the European Union, the US
sought to promote the restoration of democracy in Thailand and expressed strong
opposition to attempts by conflicting political factions to incite a military coup
and suppress civil liberties.
Timor-Leste
Timor-Leste faced one of its gravest challenges since independence with the near
fatal shooting of President Jose Ramos-Horta in February 2008. The police and
military united in efforts to maintain order and search for rebels following the
attack, a positive development given recent clashes between the services, but the
response was marred by continuing reports of security force abuses.
Failures of justice remain a central human rights concern. The most prominent
examples are continuing impunity for crimes committed during the 2006 crisis,
when fighting between soldiers and police triggered wider violence in which at
least 37 people were killed and crimes committed before, during, and after the
1999 UN-sponsored referendum on independence, in which Indonesian-armybacked
militias killed hundreds of Timorese and destroyed much of Timor-Lestes
physical infrastructure. Impunity for human rights crimes was boosted in 2008 by
a series of presidential pardons.
Attacks on Leaders
On February 11, 2008, Alfredo Reinado, former commander of Timor-Lestes military
police unit, led an armed group to attack the prime minister and president of
Timor-Leste. Reinado and his militia had been in hiding since 2006, when he
played a pivotal role in initiating violence in Dili. During the 2008 attack, Reinado
was shot and killed and Horta suffered a near fatal injury, requiring treatment for
two months in Australia before he was able to resume his presidential duties.
Prime Minister Xanana Gusmo escaped unharmed. After the attacks, Reinado
associate Gastoa Salsinha assumed command of the armed group and fled with
the rebels to the Ermera district. Salsinha and his 11 armed rebels surrendered
peacefully on April 29, 2008.
Impunity
On July 15, 2008, the Indonesian and Timorese joint Commission on Truth and
Friendship released its report to the leaders of both countries. The report concludes
that crimes against humanity occurred in Timor-Leste in 1999 and attributes institutional responsibility to the Indonesian military, police, and government.
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon urged the leaders of Indonesia and Timor-
Leste to follow the release of the report with initiatives to ensure full accountability
and end impunity. The leaders, however, rejected calls to bring individuals
to account and formally accepted the findings of the report, emphasizing their
determination to bring closure to a chapter of our recent past.
In May President Horta issued a decree granting full and partial pardons to 94
prisoners. As a result at least 20 prisoners have been released, including former
Interior Minister Rogerio Lobato, who played an instrumental role in the 2006 crisis
and had been jailed for manslaughter and illegal distribution of weapons.
Nine prisoners serving sentences for committing crimes against humanity in 1999
also received commuted sentences with four released in June 2008. A petition
against the presidents decision to pardon the criminals was rejected by the court
of appeal in September 2008. Timorese politicians and human rights activists
backing the petition felt that the decision strengthens impunity, weakens the
peoples faith in the justice system and undermines the rule of law.
In July 2008 Horta unveiled new draft legislation addressing the 2006 crisis. If
passed by parliament, the law would provide a wide-ranging amnesty for perpetrators:
even individuals responsible for murder and other serious crimes would
be able to immunize themselves from prosecution by issuing an apology. Several
individuals responsible for crimes against humanity in the 1999 carnage already
enjoy impunity under a May 2008 clemency decree. Continuing failure to hold
those behind the 2006 violence to account will further erode confidence in the
Timorese justice system and send a message to disaffected former fighters and
other armed groups that politics trumps justice.
Security Sector
The United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) police continue to
act as the primary law enforcement agency while taking steps to train and
strengthen the National Police Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL). In December 2007
UNMIT established a PNTL Task Force of 100 police officers in Dili. UNMIT recorded a significant decrease in Dili-based crime in the months following the creation of
the Task Force. But UNMIT reported that this was accompanied by an increase in
allegations of excessive use of force and ill-treatment during arrest, unlawful
searches of houses and abusive behaviour.
Following the February 11 attacks on Timor-Lestes leaders, the government
declared a state of emergency and members from the army and police of Timor-
Leste temporarily formed a Joint Command. The Joint Command was tasked with
coordinating the response, assisting in apprehending the rebels, and preventing
violence from spreading.
Under the state of emergency citizens were subject to a night curfew limiting their
freedom of movement. Freedom of assembly was suspended and security forces
had authority to conduct searches at night without warrants.
During the state of emergency, 58 incidents of ill-treatment by the Joint Command
were reported to UNMIT. Allegations included death threats and beatings resulting
in hospitalization. The state of emergency had ended by the end of April
everywhere except Ermera district, which remained under a state of emergency
until May 22.
Human Rights Defenders
Despite a rise in allegations of human rights violations, no attacks on human
rights defenders were reported in Timor-Leste in 2008.
The Office of the Provedor for Human Rights and Justice encouraged the public to
report human rights violations during the state of emergency and opened investigations
into 44 allegations of human rights abuses. Following investigations of
these alleged abuses, cases deemed to warrant further action will be sent to the
Prosecutor Generals Office, though there is a current backlog of 4,700 criminal
cases before the courts.
Key International Actors
Relations strengthened between the leaders of Timor-Leste and Indonesia after
both countries accepted the findings of the Commission on Truth and Friendship report and agreed not to pursue individual accountability for gross human rights
violations committed in Timor-Leste in 1999.
On February 25, 2008, the United Nations Security Council extended UNMITs
mandate for 12 months. In September Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon announced
the appointment of Takahisa Kawakami of Japan as Deputy Special
Representative for Security Sector Support and Rule of Law in Timor-Leste.
In August Prime Minister Gusmo visited Australia hoping to secure the inclusion
of Timor-Leste in the Pacific Islander guest worker scheme. Australian Prime
Minister Kevin Rudd did not commit to including Timor-Leste in the scheme. Rudd
did pledge an increase in grants for Timorese students and funding of approximately
US$5 million to build a military training centre in Timor-Leste. During his
visit Gusmo announced that security was improving in Timor-Leste and suggested
that Australias troop commitment could be reduced in 2009.
From May to September 2008 the International Organization for Migration assisted
Timor-Leste in returning and reintegrating 5,930 families (displaced by the
2006 unrest) from camps in and around Dili. As of November 2008, the government
had closed 24 such camps but some 30 camps remained in operation. 
Vietnam
The Vietnamese government continues to crackdown on democracy activists, journalists,
human rights defenders, cyber-dissidents, and members of unsanctioned
religious organizations.
Social unrest increased in 2008 as thousands of workers joined strikes for better
pay and working conditions. An informal nationwide land rights movement
swelled, as thousands of farmers traveled to Ho Chi Minh City and Hanoi to publicly
express their grievances about land seizures and local corruption.
Ethnic Khmer Buddhists in the Mekong Delta and Montagnard Christians in the
Central Highlands protested against land confiscation and religious persecution.
2008 saw the harshest crackdown on Catholics in Vietnam in decades as
Vietnamese authorities sought to curtail mass prayer vigils in Hanoi calling for the
return of government-confiscated church properties.
Political and Religious Prisoners
More than 400 political and religious prisoners remain behind bars in harsh
prison conditions. Prisoners are placed in solitary confinement in dark, unsanitary
cells, and there is compelling evidence of torture and ill-treatment of political
prisoners, including beatings and electric shock. Credible sources report the use
of forced prison labor in a cashew processing facility at Xuan Loc prison, where
many political prisoners are imprisoned.
Arbitrary Detention and Unfair Trials
National security laws are used to imprison members of opposition political parties,
independent trade unions, and unsanctioned media outlets and religious
organizations. Political dissidents are often tried without access to legal counsel
in proceedings that take less than a day.
Laws such as Ordinance 44 authorize the detention without trial of dissidents at
social protection centers and psychiatric facilities if they are deemed to have
violated national security laws. In March 2008 police arrested Bui Kim Thanh, an activist who defended victims of land confiscation and involuntarily committed
her to a mental hospital for the second time in two years.
In May a Ho Chi Minh City Court sentenced three members of the opposition Viet
Tan party to up to nine months imprisonment on charges of terrorism and threatening
national security for planning to distribute leaflets about their party.
Several land rights activists and landless farmers petitioning for redress were
imprisoned during 2008, including seven in July on charges of causing public disorder.
In September an appeals court upheld the two-year prison sentence of
activist Luong Van Sinh, who had circulated reports and photographs of farmers
protests on the internet.
Media and Internet Restrictions
The Vietnamese government strictly controls the media. Criminal penalties apply
to authors, publications, websites, and internet users who disseminate information
or writings that oppose the government, threaten national security, reveal
state secrets, or promote reactionary ideas. The government controls internet
use by monitoring online activity, harassing and arresting cyber-dissidents, and
blocking websites of democracy and human rights groups and independent
media based in Vietnam and abroad.
In July 2008 the Kien Giang Peoples Court upheld a five-year prison sentence for
internet reporter, land rights activist, and Vietnam Populist Party member Truong
Minh Duc for abusing democratic freedoms.
In September, prominent internet writer Nguyen Hoang Hai (or Dieu Cay), was
sentenced to 30 months in prison. Following his trial, police detained at least a
dozen other democracy activists and bloggers, many of whom, like Dieu Cay, had
protested Chinas claims to the disputed Spratly and Paracel islands.
In October a Hanoi court sentenced reporters Nguyen Viet Chien of Young People
(Thanh Nien) newspaper to two years in prison and Nguyen Van Hai from Youth
(Tuoi Tre) to two years re-education for having exposed a major corruption
scandal in 2005.
Freedom of Religion
Vietnamese law requires that religious groups register with the government.
Those that do not join one of the officially authorized religious organizationsthe
governing boards of which are under the control of the governmentare considered
illegal.
Authorities harass and arrest church leaders campaigning for rights or choosing
not to affiliate with state-controlled religious oversight committees. For decades,
Buddhist monk Thich Quang Do, now Supreme Patriarch of the banned Unified
Buddhist Church of Vietnam, has either been in prison or under house arrest for
publicly protesting government policies.
Five ethnic Khmer Buddhist monks remain in prison in Soc Trang province after
participating in a peaceful protest in 2007 calling for greater religious freedom.
On June 28, ethnic Khmer monk Tim Sakhorn was released from a years imprisonment
in An Giang province. Although a recognized citizen of Cambodia,
Vietnamese authorities have prohibited him from returning to Cambodia since his
release.
Authorities beat and arrest members of ethnic minorities in remote areas, such as
Montagnards in the Central Highlands, for refusing to join state-sanctioned
church organizations, protesting land confiscation, making contact with relatives
or groups abroad, or trying to seek political asylum in Cambodia. In April police
arrested Y Ben Hdok in Dak Lak province after other Montagnards in his district
tried to flee to Cambodia to seek political asylum. After three days in detention,
police told Y Bens family to pick up his battered body. According to his family, his
head was bashed in, his ribs and limbs broken, and his teeth had been knocked
out. Police labeled the death a suicide.
Freedom of Association and Labor Rights
The government bans all independent political parties, unions, and human rights
organizations. Decree 88 provides for strict government control of associations,
which effectively serve as agencies of government ministries or the Vietnamese
Communist Party.
Vietnamese workers are forbidden from organizing unions independent of the
government-controlled labor confederation. Activists announced the formation of
independent trade unions in 2006, but were arrested, imprisoned, harassed,
intimidated, and disappeared for doing so; at least 10 independent trade union
members have been arrested since 2006. The whereabouts of Le Tri Tue, one of
the founders of the Independent Workers Union, has remained unknown since
his disappearance in May 2007.
Government regulations impose fines on workers who participate in strikes not
approved by the government, enable local officials to force striking workers back
to work, and ban strikes in strategic sectors, including power stations, railways,
airports, and oil, gas, and forestry enterprises.
Despite these restrictions, thousands of workers participated in strikes calling for
better wages and working conditions during 2008, including 10,000 workers at
Keyking toy factory in Danang in February.
Freedom of Assembly
Decree 38 bans public gatherings in front of places where government, party, and
international conferences are held, and requires organizers of public gatherings
to apply for and obtain advance government permission.
Despite the restrictions, public protests and social unrest grew during 2008 as
citizens throughout Vietnam publicly aired their grievances over land confiscation,
corruption, religious persecution, confiscation of church property, and
Chinas claims to offshore islands.
During 2008 unprecedented numbers of Catholicsone of the largest officially
recognized religions in Vietnamgathered in Hanoi for prayer vigils calling for
return of government-confiscated church property. In September police used tear
gas and electric batons to disband the vigils, detained protesters, and bulldozed
properties considered sacred to Vietnamese Catholics. Hundreds of thugs, some
in the blue shirts of the Communist Youth League, harassed, cursed, and spat at
parishioners and destroyed church statues. The state-controlled press conducted
a smear campaign against the Archbishop of Hanoi after he publicly defended the vigils. On September 19, police detained and beat an American reporter covering
the events.
Police continue to forcefully disperse land rights demonstrations. In February
2008, police used dogs and electric batons to break up a land rights protest by
ethnic Khmer farmers in An Giang province, injuring several protesters. In April
2008, police and soldiers forcibly dispersed Montagnard Christians demonstrating
in the Central Highlands, and arrested dozens of protesters. In August four
Montagnards were imprisoned on charges of organizing protests and helping people
flee to Cambodia.
Women and Children
Vietnam continues to be a source of and transit point for women and girls trafficked
for forced prostitution, fraudulent marriages, and forced domestic servitude
to other parts of Asia. Sex workers, trafficking victims, street children, and
street peddlersofficially classified by the government as social evilsare routinely
rounded up and detained without warrants in compulsory rehabilitation
centers, where they are subject to beatings and sexual abuse.
Key International Actors
Various governments including New Zealand, Norway, Switzerland, Canada,
Sweden, Australia, the United Kingdom, France, and the European Union made
representations to the Vietnamese government on behalf of activists, independent
journalists, and prisoners of conscience. In October 2008 the European
Parliament called on Vietnam to cease its systematic violations of democracy
and human rights before finalization of a new EU-Vietnam cooperation agreement.
Relations with the United States continued to warm with Prime Minister
Dungs June 2008 visit to the US. The US raised concerns about arrests of journalists
and the governments crackdown on Catholic protesters, but asserted that
religious freedom continued to improve. In May the US Commission on
International Religious Freedom urged the Bush administration to reinstate
Vietnams designation as a Country of Particular Concern (CPC) for religious
freedom violations, but it did not do so. The United States, which designated Vietnam a CPC in 2004, lifted the designation just days before President Bushs
visit to Hanoi in November 2006.
Vietnam is due to be reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism of
the UN Human Rights Council in May 2009.
Armenia
Armenia experienced one of its most serious civil and political rights crises since
independence when security forces used excessive force on March 1 against
opposition demonstrators protesting the results of the February 2008 presidential
election. Violent clashes erupted between police and demonstrators, and authorities
arrested several hundred demonstrators and prosecuted more than a hundred
opposition supporters. A state of emergency temporarily restricted several
basic freedoms, including freedom of assembly. International condemnation of
the use of excessive force during the March 1 events and of the state of emergency
was widespread.
Elections and Election-Related Violence
The February 19 presidential election was won by Prime Minister Serj Sargsyan,
but was marred by election-day violence and irregularities. On election day,
assailants threatened and attacked opposition activists protesting what they
believed to be electoral fraud, domestic observers, and journalists at eight
polling stations. Several assaults occurred in the presence of police and election
officials who did not intervene; in one case a policeman appeared to assist
assailants. International observers also reported violations, including campaigning
near polling stations, ballot stuffing, vote buying, and counting and tabulation
irregularities. Observers criticized the Central Election Commission for its apparent
failure to properly investigate complaints.
On February 20, tens of thousands of supporters of Levon Ter-Petrossian, the
main opposition candidate, took to the streets in downtown Yerevan. The protests
continued peacefully for 10 days.
On March 1, special police forces confronted the demonstrators using excessive
force, beating them with batons and attacking fleeing demonstrators. Some
demonstrators also resorted to violence, including throwing stones and burning
vehicles. The clashes resulted in at least 10 deaths (eight demonstrators and two
police officers), and scores of people were injured. Police detained several hundred
demonstrators, charging more than one hundred opposition supporters and
others with organizing or participating in illegal demonstrations and mass disturbances. Police committed due process violations including incommunicado
detention, denial of access to counsel, and failure to investigate allegations of illtreatment.
Subsequent trial proceedings raised fair trial concerns: several
detainees were convicted solely on police testimony and in expedited trial proceedings.
The government declared a state of emergency on March 1, temporarily restricting
freedom of movement, assembly, expression, and access to information. The
state of emergency was lifted fully on March 21.
Under pressure from the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE),
the Armenian authorities have taken steps to establish an independent inquiry
into the March 1 events, but have yet to hold anyone responsible for the deaths.
Media Freedom
Police targeted journalists covering the February demonstrations. On February 29,
police attacked photojournalist Gagik Shamshyan while he was attempting to
photograph them. On March 1, police detained Shamshyan, took his camera, and
beat him; he needed hospital treatment for his injuries and was released after the
intervention of the Armenian ombudsman. Also on March 1, police hindered a
Radio Liberty correspondents work and beat the driver of her car. Police detained
at least two other journalists during demonstrations in Yerevan and Gyumri.
Under the state of emergency, media could use only official information from
state agencies to report on national affairs. The National Security Service (NSS)
prevented at least seven opposition and independent newspapers from publishing,
and blocked websites. At least two newspapers protested the restrictions and
refused to print. Although media restrictions were lifted on March 13, NSS representatives
interfered with the same seven newspapers printing, allowing them to
publish only on March 21. In late March tax authorities hit at least four newspapers
with apparently politically-motivated audits.
In October, the Court of Cassation overturned a February 29 ruling against the
founder of the Gyumri-based television station GALA for allegedly illegally using
the local television tower, but left in force a March 19 fraud conviction. The cases
emerged following an October 2007 tax audit that was widely seen as retaliation for GALAs airing a September 2007 Ter-Petrossian speech critical of the government.
The Asparez Journalism Club of Gyumri was apparently targeted for supporting
GALA. On January 19, an assailant attempted to set fire to the Asparez
office, and on March 21 two unidentified men torched a car being used by
Asparez director Levon Barseghyan as he returned to the car from GALA.
In June 2008 the European Court of Human Rights ruled that Armenia had violated
article 10 (freedom of expression) of the European Convention on Human
Rights in relation to the independent broadcast company A1+. The court held that
laws regulating awarding of broadcast licenses failed to protect against arbitrary
interference and that denials of a license to A1+ were unlawful. As of April, A1+
had made 12 unsuccessful attempts to regain a license since going off air in
2002. In September 2008 the National Assembly amended the law on television
and radio to suspend all licensing until a digital switchover scheduled for 2010.
The amendments are seen as further efforts to deny A1+ a license.
The Yerevan Press Club reported several apparently arbitrary arrests of journalists,
and the beating of two journalists, Lusine Barseghyan, an Armenian Times
reporter, and Hrach Melkumyan, Radio Liberty acting director, by unknown
assailants in separate incidents in August. The journalists believe they were targeted
for their professional activities.
On July 18, a presidentially-appointed commission rejected an early release
request by Arman Babajanyan, editor of the independent newspaper Zhamanak
Yerevan, who had been convicted in 2006 of forging documents in order to evade
compulsory military service. Babajanyan had served two years of a three-and-ahalf-
year sentence and was eligible for early release on parole for good conduct.
Freedom of Assembly
Just before the government lifted the state of emergency, on March 17, 2008, the
National Assembly passed restrictive amendments to the law on meetings, which
were criticized by the Council of Europe and the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE). Subsequent further amendments in April eased
some of the restrictions. The government denied numerous opposition requests
to hold public rallies in late March, and at least 90 people participating in peaceful public walks organized by opposition supporters in Yerevan were briefly
detained.
Torture and Ill-Treatment
According to local human rights defenders, torture and ill-treatment in custody
remain widespread. Several people detained in connection with the March 1
events alleged physical abuse during apprehension, transfer to police stations,
and in custody. At this writing, the authorities have not investigated these claims.
In June a Yerevan court ordered additional investigation into the May 2007 death
of Levon Gulyan, who was found dead after police arrested and interrogated him.
The authorities allege that Gulyan jumped from a second-storey window of a
police station while trying to escape, a claim denied by Gulyans relatives who
believe he was tortured.
Attacks on Human Rights Defenders and Political Activists
In November 2007 a group of unknown assailants beat Narek Galstyan, leader of
the youth wing of the opposition Social-Democratic Hnchakyan Party. Two days
earlier, police had briefly detained Galstyan and another activist for posting
leaflets critical of Serj Sargsyan.
In May 2008 the chairman of the Armenian Helsinki Association, Mikael
Danielyan, was wounded when an assailant shot him from a pneumatic gun, following
an argument while both men were stopped at a traffic light. It was reported
that the assailant was a former leader of the Armenian Progressive Party.
Criminal investigation into the attack is ongoing.
Also in May, Arsen Kharatyan, a leading member of the pro-opposition democratic
youth movements Sksela and Hima, was beaten in Yerevan by several unknown
assailants, and sustained serious head injuries. Another Hima member, Narek
Hovakimyan, was attacked and beaten in June.
Key International Actors
International election observers from the OSCE, Council of Europe, and the
European Parliament declared that the February elections were mostly in line
with international standards, but noted concerns about the election process.
International and domestic observers also criticized uneven media coverage of
candidates prior to the elections.
Citing concerns about the Armenian authorities reaction to the March 1 events,
the United States froze further payments to Armenia from the Millennium
Challenge Corporation, a five-year US$235.65 million program for reducing rural
poverty. In several statements, the European Union expressed concern about the
authorities use of force and arrests of demonstrators.
Following a visit to Armenia in early March, the OSCEs special envoy for the
South Caucasus called on the Armenian authorities to lift the state of emergency
and expressed regret that maximum restraint had not been used during the
crisis.
During its urgent debate on Armenia in April, the PACE threatened to suspend
Armenias voting rights unless it took a series of urgent measures, including
revoking the amendments to the law on meetings, conducting an independent
inquiry into the March 1 events, and releasing those detained on seemingly politically
motivated charges who had not committed any violent or serious offense. At
its June session, the PACE welcomed progress in some of these areas, but regretted
that Armenia had not complied with all requirements.
Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights Thomas Hammarberg conducted
three visits to Armenia in 2008. In addition to gathering information about the
March 1 events, Hammarberg provided support for establishing an independent
inquiry.
Azerbaijan
With its October 2008 presidential election Azerbaijan largely wasted an opportunity
to demonstrate improvements in human rights. Opposition parties boycotted
the election, and freedom of assembly and media remained restricted. President
Ilham Aliyev was re-elected with 82.6 percent of the vote.
The release of five journalists in December 2007 was a welcome step, but at least
five other journalists remain in prison on questionable charges relating to their
work. Torture and ill-treatment in police custody, political prisoners, and harassment
and intimidation of human rights defenders remain serious problems.
On November 2, 2008, at talks convened by Russian President Dmitry Medvedev,
President Aliyev and his Armenian counterpart signed an agreement to intensify
efforts for a political settlement over Nagorno-Karabakh. Some commentators
hailed it as the most significant step toward a breakthrough over the separatist
enclave and contiguous Armenian-occupied territories since the 1994 ceasefire.
Elections
Azerbaijan has a history of seriously flawed elections. All major opposition parties
boycotted the October 15 presidential election, charging that the government
failed to implement the recommendations of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and Council of Europe from past elections.
International observers from the OSCE, Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly
(PACE), and the European Parliament cited some progress in 2008s election, but
noted as shortcomings the lack of competition and little media discourse, and
that it thus did not reflect all principles of a meaningful and pluralistic democratic
election.
In the pre-election period, domestic election observers noted improvements in
voter list verification, but documented local officials interfering in signature collection
during the nominating process. Experts also noted that June election code
amendments did not address Council of Europe or local NGO recommendations.
The authorities prevented the opposition from organizing demonstrations prior to
the election. On July 11, police prevented the Musavat party from holding a rally
near the Baku municipal building to protest violations of freedom of assembly;
eight people were detained briefly. Police prevented another Musavat demonstration
on June 17, briefly detaining 16 party members and two journalists.
In September the government banned foreign television and radio companies
from using satellite equipment for live broadcasting during the presidential election,
apparently intending to prevent or delay broadcast of election information.
Media Freedom
Journalists, particularly those critical of the government, continue to face politically-
motivated charges. In December 2007 five journalists serving sentences for
criminal libel or other charges were released under a presidential pardon, but five
remained in prisontwo of them already convicted and the other three pending
trials completed in 2008. On November 14, 2008, a court sentenced the editor-inchief
of the Ideal newspaper, Ali Hasanov, to six months imprisonment on criminal
libel charges.
Eynulla Fatullayev, the outspoken founder and editor-in-chief of two newspapers
Realny Azerbaijan and Gundelik Azerbaijanwas convicted in October 2007
on charges of fomenting terrorism and libel and sentenced to eight-and-a-half
years in prison. He continues to serve his sentence, which was upheld on appeal
by the Supreme Court on June 3, 2008. Fatullayev has filed an application with
the European Court of Human Rights. Mirza Sakit, a reporter and satirist for the
opposition daily Azadlyg, is serving a three-year prison sentence for alleged narcotics
possession.
Ganimed Zahid, Azadlyg editor-in-chief, was sentenced to four years imprisonment
in March 2008 on questionable hooliganism charges. Mushfig Husseinov, a
Bizim Yol newspaper journalist, was sentenced to six years in January and banned
from journalism for two years on questionable extortion charges; in April the
appeals court reduced Husseinovs sentence to five years and left the ban
unchanged. Novruzali Mammadov, editor of the Talishi Sado newspaper and head
of the Talysh Cultural Center and of the Science Academys Linguistics Department, was sentenced to 10 years imprisonment on June 24 for high treason.
After more than 16 months in pretrial detention, he was convicted for distribution
of Talysh nationalist ideas and attempts to destroy the foundations of the
Azerbaijani state, and for spreading a negative image of Azerbaijan internationally
by writing about abuses against minorities.
On October 7 Azadlyg andYeni Musavat were allowed to resume publishing temporarily,
after having been closed following court decisions in libel cases.
The government failed to meaningfully investigate violence against journalists. In
February two security officers beat Azadlyg correspondent Agil Khalil. One month
later, four unknown assailants stabbed Khalil in the chest. On July 15 a Baku court
sentenced Sergei Strekalin, whom they claim was Khalils former lover, for the
stabbing, to which Strekalin allegedly confessed; the conviction apparently
demonstrated that the attack on Khalil was not political. In September 2007
Hakimeldostu Mehdiyev, a reporter for Yeni Musavat, was detained, threatened,
and beaten severely in police custody. He was sentenced to 15 days imprisonment
for a misdemeanor.
Four years after the murder of Elmar Huseynov, the editor-in-chief of the independent
journal Monitor, the case remains unresolved.
In November the government announced the discontinuation in 2009 of local
transmission of three international radio servicesBBC, Radio Free Europe/Radio
Liberty, and Voice of America, making them accessible only through satellite
receiver or the internet.
Torture and Ill-Treatment
Torture and ill-treatment in custody continues to be a widespread problem. Three
teenage boys convicted in June 2007 of murdering another boy have stated
repeatedly, including at trial, that they confessed after beatings and other illtreatment
by police and investigators. The government failed to conduct a meaningful
investigation into these allegations. In October, imprisoned journalist
Ganimed Zahid was beaten in custody. Azerbaijan has not allowed publication of
the European Committee for the Prevention of Tortures reports on its last three
visits. In November 2007 Faina Kungurova, a member of the Democratic Party of Azerbaijan, died of starvation following a hunger strike, after six weeks in detention
on drug-related charges believed to be politically motivated. From 2002-
2004 she had also served a prison sentence on politically-motivated charges.
In October videos of Azeri army officers beating conscripts, apparently as part of a
hazing ritual, became widely available. Two officers were subsequently arrested
for their role in the beatings.
Political Prisoners
Government officials, businessmen, and opposition politicians arrested prior to
the November 2005 parliamentary elections on allegations of attempting to overthrow
the government remain in custody, including brothers Farhad and Rafig
Aliyev, respectively former economics minister and former president of the
Azpetrol oil company, and former health minister Ali Insanov. Parts of their trials
were completely closed and lawyers cited procedural violations, raising concerns
about the trials fairness.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders continue to face pressure and harassment. On June 14,
police detained Emin Huseynov, chairman of the Institute for Reporter Freedom
and Safety (IRFS), an outspoken media monitoring organization. Police beat and
threatened Huseynov in custody, and he was hospitalized for 24 days. Huseynov
filed a complaint, but the court refused to open an investigation, and an appellate
court upheld that refusal on September 2. IRFS staff had been the target of
attacks and government surveillance in 2007.
On May 14, a Baku court found the Election Monitoring Center (EMC), an independent
domestic observer organization, in violation of registration laws and
ordered its liquidation. EMC staff and others believe the decision was politically
motivated. After being denied registration six times, the EMC had received registration
in February, but in April the Ministry of Justice suspended it, claiming the
EMC had provided inaccurate information, and petitioned for its liquidation. In
June the EMC lost an appeal against the May court decision.
Key International Actors
A number of international and regional institutions and bilateral partners criticized
Azerbaijans human rights record, especially regarding media freedoms. In
a strongly-worded June resolution, the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly
expressed concern about the deteriorating human rights situation and outlined
urgent reforms needed prior to the presidential election. The PACE also called for
decriminalization of defamation; an immediate moratorium on criminal libel
charges; the release of journalists and political prisoners; and implementation of
the European Court of Human Rights judgments. In a February report on his April
2007 visit to Azerbaijan, the United Nations special rapporteur on freedom of
opinion and expression, Ambeyi Ligabo, encouraged the government to consider
repealing criminal defamation laws and to institute a moratorium on criminal libel
prosecutions. He also noted the problem of impunity for crimes targeting media
professionals. Others making strong statements on the media situation in 2008
included Council of Europe Secretary-General Terry Davis; the PACE rapporteur on
Azerbaijan, Andreas Herkel; OSCE Representative on the Freedom of the Media
Miklos Haraszti; and United States Assistant Secretary for Democracy, Human
Rights, and Labor David J. Kramer.
On January 8, 2008, the European Union welcomed the presidential pardon of the
imprisoned journalists, and called for the release of the remaining journalists and
for a moratorium on defamation proceedings. The EUs European Neighbourhood
Policy Action Plan progress report released in April also noted that the rapid
solution of the cases of the remaining journalists in jail, and a revision of the
current norms on libel and defamation would contribute to improving the attainment
of the relevant Action Plan objectives. It highlighted the problem of torture,
noting that effective investigation of allegations of torture remained minimal. It
also called for the government to ensure judicial independence.
Azerbaijan is due to be reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism
of the UN Human Rights Council in February 2009.
Belarus
Belarusian authorities continue to use the criminal justice system and onerous
administrative demands to control civil society, political opposition, and the
media. In 2008, as in previous years, several opposition activists and journalists
were arrested and jailed for participating in unsanctioned protests. Violence was
used against some activists and journalists during demonstrations.
Belarus has demonstrated some progress by releasing its last remaining political
prisoners in 2008, but at least 10 activists continue to serve restricted freedom
sentences that permit them only to be at home or at work. Belarus introduced
new restrictions on the media that take effect in early 2009.
Political Freedoms and Civil Society
Belarus held parliamentary elections on September 28, 2008. The elections failed
to meet international standards for free and fair elections, according to the United
States, the European Union, and the Office for Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
(OSCE/ODIHR). The ODIHR noted minor improvements over previous elections,
including opposition representatives increased ability to participate in election
commissions and conduct meetings without interference; but cited a major lack
of transparency in the vote count, more than 35 percent of OSCE election
observers having been denied permission to observe that process. Observers
who were granted access observed falsification of results in several cases.
The government controls political opposition groups, NGOs, and trade unions
through costly and burdensome registration requirements, and often denies registration
for unfounded reasons. Some requirements, such as a legal address in a
nonresidential building, are often too expensive for applicants to meet, while
authorities have denied registration to NGOs for such minor technical reasons as
incorrect birth date information and typos in names on applications, rather than
giving them an opportunity to make corrections.
Activists are also required to apply for demonstration permits, but the onerous
application process serves as a tool to restrict the right to hold peaceful assemblies. Belarusian authorities continue to fine, jail, and search the homes of opposition
activists in relation to organizing and participating in unauthorized
events. In 2008 such events in Minsk included the annual Freedom Day demonstration
on March 25 and the April 26 Chernobyl rally, as well as rallies on January
10 and 21 against new policies affecting small businesses. In December 2007 riot
police beat political opposition leader Anatol Labiedzka and Young Front leader
Dmitry Fiedaruk during a protest, leaving Fiedaruk unconscious.
The Ministry of Justice has not legally registered any new NGO since 2000. Some
organizations operate despite repeated denials of registration, and the authorities
have harassed and arrested dozens of activists for acting on behalf of unregistered
organizations, a criminal offense. Even for registered NGOs, authorities
monitor correspondence and telephone conversations and conduct frequent
inspections of premises.
The Belarusian Helsinki Committee (BHC) remains under threat of closure for
alleged tax violations, following a 2007 court ruling that it is liable for back taxes
and fees of 160m rubles (about US$75,000). Authorities harassed several BHC
senior staff members. On May 1, 2008, Belarusian border guards stopped BHC
Chairperson Aleh Hulak, his wife Anastasia Hulak, and a BHC regional coordinator,
Eduard Balanchuk, at the Belarus-Poland border and searched them for more
than 10 hours. Belarusian customs officials confiscated their money and computer
for supposed verification; their belongings have not been returned. Pavel
Levinov, a human rights lawyer and representative of the BHC in Vitebsk, was
detained on May 26 and fined 700,000 rubles (approximately US$330) in connection
with legal aid he provided to journalists under investigation for televising cartoons
that allegedly insulted President Alexander Lukashenka. Officers of the KGB
(Belarus state security agency) broke into BHC activist Leonid Svetiks home in
May, seized office equipment and printed materials, and interrogated Svetik for
nine hours about an ethnic hate case he allegedly witnessed.
Political Prisoners
In February 2008 the government unexpectedly released several political prisoners,
including Young Front leaders Artur Finkevich and Zmicier Dashkevich. In
2006 Finkevich had received a sentence of two years corrective labor for malicious hooliganism for allegedly writing political graffiti. In November 2006
Dashkievich had been sentenced to 18 months in prison for organizing or participating
in the activities of an unregistered organization.
In August 2008 the authorities granted early release to Belaruss three remaining
political prisoners. Alexander Kazulin, a candidate in the March 2006 presidential
election, was released from a five-and-a-half-year prison sentence handed down
in July 2006 for hooliganism and disturbing public order after his arrest during a
peaceful post-election opposition march. Andrej Kim, a youth activist, was
released early from an 18-month sentence handed down in April 2008 for petty
hooliganism and violation of rules of organizing and holding mass actions in
connection with the two January demonstrations against new policies for small
businesses. Siarheji Parsiukevich, a businessman and former police officer, was
released from a two-and-a-half-year sentence handed down in April for violence
or threat of violence against a policeman during the January 10 protest, in which
more than 2,000 small business owners took part.
Kim had stood trial with 10 other youth activists for the January protests. Seven of
Kims co-defendants received two years of limitation of freedom without transfer
to an open correctional institute (a version of house arrest that restricts them to
home and work) and two received fines for blocking traffic.
Media Freedom
The government continues to tightly control the media. Several privately-owned
Belarusian newspapers are printed in Russia because local, state-run printing
companies are not permitted to print material that discredits Belarus by fraudulent
representation of developments in the country. There are no independent
television or radio stations and authorities monitor the internet; politically-sensitive
sites are often temporarily shut down. In August Belarusian authorities
approved a new law that will further restrict the media effective from February
2009. The new restrictions include requiring online media to register with authorities
and for registered media to reregister. The law also prohibits media outlets
from receiving foreign funding.
Journalists are affected by the restrictive measures against peaceful assembly. In
2008 police on several occasions searched, detained, interrogated, and arrested
journalists for covering demonstrations. The homes of roughly 30 journalists in
several cities were searched for materials that allegedly defamed the president in
connection with coverage of the peaceful March 25 demonstrations, and Nasha
Niva reporters Syamyon Pechanko and Andrei Lyankevich were beaten and
detained while reporting from a rally in Minsk that day. Pechanko was sentenced
to 15 days in prison for participating in an unsanctioned protest.
Death Penalty
Belarus is the only country in Europe that continues to use the death penalty. As
of mid-November 2008, three executions had been carried out this year, all in
February; there is no public information on the number of executions in 2007.
Families of those executed are not provided with information on the date of the
execution or where the body is buried.
Key International Actors
The United States and the European Union welcomed the August releases of
political prisoners and expressed hope that it would lead to improved relations.
Both have expressed clearly that more progress needs to be made, especially in
regard to free and fair elections, civil society, and the media. In October EU foreign
ministers decided to suspend the travel ban imposed on President
Lukashenka and also suspended the travel restrictions imposed on most of his
inner circle, although six Belarusian officials are still barred entry to the EU, and
the financial measures imposed against the Belarusian administration remain in
place. The US maintains a visa ban against Lukashenka and his inner circle, as
well as economic sanctions including against the energy company Belneftekhim,
imposed in response to the flawed 2006 election and subsequent arrests and
detention of independent political activists. In September 2008 the US lifted economic
sanctions against two subsidiaries of Belneftekhim, however.
US-Belarusian relations deteriorated in late 2007 and early 2008 when Belarusian
authorities demanded expulsion of US Embassy staff after the US imposed sanctions
on Belneftekhim, but relations thawed somewhat following the prisoner releases. In May the US Congress extended and amended the Belarus Democracy
Act of 2004, which authorizes assistance to organizations that promote democracy
and civil society in Belarus. The United States remains concerned about imprisoned
US lawyer Emanuel Zeltser, who was arrested by the KGB on March 12,
2008, and has been convicted and sentenced to three years imprisonment for
economic espionage and using false documents. US officials were refused access
to his closed trial and were denied consular access to Zeltser several times.
The Council of Europes Parliamentary Assembly (PACE) welcomed Alexander
Kazulins release, but noted that he should never have been jailed in the first
place. In April PACE adopted the resolution Abuse of the criminal justice system
in Belarus, urging Belarus to mitigate the effects of abusive legislation and
abolish the death penalty, among other recommendations. The resolution
encouraged the EU and the US to continue targeted sanctions, and called for a
mechanism to assist victims of human rights abuses, such as a working group of
local and international human rights defenders with tasks such as identifying officials
responsible for abuses. In a July statement PACEs rapporteur on the situation
in Belarus condemned the new media law.
Bosnia and Herzegovina
The discovery in August 2008 of a mass grave near Kamenica, believed to hold
the bodies of up to 100 victims of the 1995 Srebrenica massacre, was a reminder
that Bosnia remains marked by the legacy of the 1992-95 war. The appearance of
Radovan Karadzic in the dock of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), 13 years after his indictment, was a major blow against impunity;
but progress in prosecuting war crimes in Bosnias courts was mixed. The
number of refugees and displaced persons returning to their areas of origin continues
to decline. The climate for civil society in Republika Srpska worsened.
War Crimes Accountability
On July 30, 2008, Radovan Karadzic was transferred from Serbia to The Hague (for
his apprehension see Serbia chapter). His initial appearance before the ICTY took
place the following day. Karadzic is charged with genocide, including at
Srebrenica; crimes against humanity; and war crimes. Karadzic refused to enter a
plea during his second appearance in August, saying he did not recognize the
courts jurisdiction. A not guilty plea was entered on his behalf. In September
prosecutors streamlined the indictment, narrowing the geographic scope and
clarifying the allegations against Karadzic. In a disappointing move, the amended
Karadzic indictment remains vague on charges of sexual violence.
Ratko Mladic, fellow indicted architect of the Srebrenica massacre, remains at
large.
In November Karadzic testified as a defense witness in the ongoing ICTY appeal of
Momcilo Krajisnik, a Bosnian Serb wartime leader convicted in 2006 of crimes
against humanity.
In June Stojan Zupljanin, accused of war crimes and crimes against humanity
against non-Serbs principally in Republika Srpska, was transferred to the ICTY. In
July the appeals chamber acquitted Naser Oric, Bosniak (Bosnian Muslim)
wartime commander in Srebrenica, on all counts, reversing his 2006 conviction
and two-year sentence for crimes against Serb civilians. In September the ICTY sentenced Rasim Delic to three years imprisonment for crimes against Serb prisoners;
his conviction is under appeal.
In July 2008 a Dutch district court in The Hague ruled that it lacked jurisdiction to
hear a civil claim against the United Nations brought by some 6,000 relatives of
Srebrenica massacre victims.
Bosnias War Crimes Chamber (WCC) continued successfully to pursue its mandate
of prosecuting those responsible for war atrocities. In September 2008 the
chamber launched a new national war crimes strategy to address the backlog of
cases, which could involve as many as 10,000 suspects. According to the strategy,
prosecutions before the WCC will focus on those who planned the worst
atrocities during the war.
In November 2007 the WCC appeals chamber sentenced Gojko Jankovic, the former
commander of Republika Srpska military units operating in Foca, to 34 years
imprisonment for sexual violence and other wartime abuses in Foca. Notable
developments in the WCC during 2008 included sentences ranging from 38 to 42
years handed down in July to seven Serb defendants in the Kravica case convicted
of genocide in and around Srebrenica.
Local (district and cantonal) criminal courts continue to face challenges in their
efforts to effectively tackle war crimes trials. According to the Organization for
Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), Republika Srpska prosecutors have
brought a total of 21 indictments against 44 accused, with district courts reaching
12 verdicts and 9 cases ongoing. In the Federation, cantonal courts have decided
a total of 85 verdicts against 119 defendants, with 16 cases still in process.
The absence of witness support or protection services in most local courts discourages
witnesses from testifying. Other shortcomings include an insufficient
number of prosecutors and support staff; inadequate cooperation between prosecutors
and police, as well as between police across entity lines; lack of legal harmonization;
and insufficient outreach to affected communities.
Return of Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons
Returns of refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) to their areas of origin
continued to decline. As of June 2008 more than 132,000 Bosnians remained displaced.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees registered 286 IDP
and 246 refugee returns during the first half of 2008, the majority in both categories
being Bosniaks. Not all registered returnees remain permanently, especially
in areas where the returnees ethnic group now constitutes a minority. Limited
economic opportunities and lack of adequate housing constitute the two main
practical obstacles to sustainable return.
Roma refugees in Bosnia, the majority from Kosovo, remain vulnerable and
dependent on periodic extensions of their temporary protection status.
Citizenship and National Security
The Bosnian commission that reviews wartime decisions on the naturalization of
foreign citizens, including those who came to fight alongside Bosniaks, continued
its work. Attou Mimoun, a naturalized Bosnian of Algerian origin, was stripped of
his citizenship and expelled in December 2007. Many others (now estimated at
around 300 persons) also had their citizenship revoked. While the process is said
to be motivated solely by concerns over irregularities in naturalization decisions,
it appears also to be linked to concerns about the presence of alleged Islamist
radicals in Bosnia with links to terrorism.
Some whose citizenship was revoked left Bosnia voluntarily. Others appealed
against the loss of their citizenship and have been allowed to remain in Bosnia
pending the outcome of those appeals. In a February report, the Council of
Europe Human Rights Commissioner Thomas Hammarberg echoed NGO concerns
about the lack of adequate safeguards against the risk of return to serious human
rights abuse, including torture or ill-treatment, for those subject to forced
removal. His comments followed the January 2008 intervention by the European
Court of Human Rights to halt the removal to Syria of Imad Al-Husin, pending the
decision of the Bosnian Constitutional Court on his appeal against revocation of
citizenship and deportation. At this writing, Al-Husin remains in detention in
Bosnia.
The six Algerian national security suspects illegally transferred to Guantanamo
Bay in 2002 with the complicity of the Bosnian authorities remain there at this
writing. Their cases were among those considered by the US Supreme Court when
it ruled in June 2008 that detainees held at Guantanamo have the right to challenge
their detention in civilian courts in the United States. Their petition to the
European Court of Human Rights was expedited for consideration, but at this writing
the court has yet to rule on the petition.
Human Rights Defenders
Branko Todorovic, the president of the Republika Srpska Helsinki Assembly,
received threatening phone calls directed toward him and his family on July 23.
While the police responded promptly by opening an investigation and providing
protection, Republika Srpska authorities failed to condemn the threats. In May
the Bijelina district court convicted two men for their role in the unrelated
February 2007 murder of the organizations previous head, Dusko Kondor, and
the wounding of his daughter. The defendant convicted of the murder received a
20-year prison sentence, while his accomplice received seven years. An appellate
court rejected the latters appeal against conviction in June.
Transparency International Bosnia and Herzegovina temporarily closed its office
in Banja Luka in July following what the Office of the High Representative (OHR)
called a propaganda campaign against the organization by Republika Srpska
authorities. Republika Srpska Prime Minister Milorad Dodik accused the organization
of racketeering and extortion, and offered full witness protection to citizens
who came forward with information on its alleged wrongdoings. Dragomir Babic,
a human rights activist from Republika Srpska, had alerted OHR about the campaign
in an anonymous letter in February 2008. Babic came forward as the author
following the July office closure, and received anonymous death threats during
that month.
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Rights
The inauguration of Bosnias first cultural festival for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender people in September 2008 met with widespread denunciation and anonymous death threats. Violence at the opening injured at least eight participants;
organizers were forced to make the rest of the festival a private event.
Key International Actors
In June the Peace Implementation Council agreed, despite Russian opposition,
that no date should be set for closure of the Office of the High Representative, a
further move away from its 2006 assessment that Bosnia would be ready for full
self-governance by mid-2007.
In a positive move, the European Union concluded a Stabilization and
Association Agreement with Bosnia on June 16, 2008, the first step toward opening
membership negotiations, although its progress report in November was
somewhat downbeat.
In May the European Court of Human Rights ruled in Rodic v. Bosnia that Bosnian
Serb prisoners serving sentences for war crimes in Zenica prison had been subject
to prohibited ill-treatment in 2005 because Bosnian authorities failed to protect
the men from abuse at the hands of Bosniak prisoners. The European Court
also received written submissions during 2008 in Finci and Sedjic v. Bosnia,
which contests Bosnias constitutional requirement that its three-person presidency
must consist of a Serb, a Croat, and a Bosniak; thereby barring Jews, Roma,
and other minorities from standing for election.
Croatia
Croatia made modest improvements in human rights in 2008, motivated by its
desire to join the European Union, but it has yet to fully address obstacles to the
return and reintegration of Serbs. The impartiality and effectiveness of domestic
war crimes prosecutions remains in doubt. The closure of the Organization for
Security and Co-operation in Europe mission in December 2007 created a human
rights monitoring gap.
Return and Integration of Serbs
Despite government declarations expressing commitment to the issue, Serb
returns to Croatia slowed to a trickle. Most of the 231 displaced persons and 610
refugees who returned to their home areas during the first half of 2008 were ethnic
Croats. According to United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, around
125,000 ethnic Serbs who fled the 1991-1995 conflict are registered as having
returned to Croatia, of whom around 55,000 remain permanently.
Serb returnees continue to suffer violence and intimidation, particularly in north
Dalmatia, although at a declining rate. Most attacks were directed at property
rather than people. Police generally increased their presence at the scene following
such attacks and opened investigations, but did not identify the perpetrators.
The most serious incident occurred in March, when a group of young men stoned
a house of a Serb returnee family in the area of Benkovac, injuring a family member.
Police arrested the alleged perpetrators, who are on trial for ethnically-motivated
violent assault charges at this writing.
Serbs continue to face difficulty repossessing occupied homes, despite court
judgments in their favor. Repossession cases sometimes linger in the courts.
There is still no effective remedy for those seeking the return of occupied agricultural
land. At this writing, there are 7,743 pending appeals (mostly from Serbs)
against rejected applications for reconstruction assistance.
While the two existing government-sponsored housing care programs enable
those who wish to return to apply for and receive housing, there was no progress
toward a viable solution for Serbs stripped during the war of the right to occupy socially-owned property (an impediment to Serb return to urban areas). The government
fell short by around 100 units on its pledge to provide 1,400 housing
units for Serb returnees by mid-2008.
The government adopted a procedure in May to allow Serbs to register periods of
work in formerly occupied areas (an impediment to Serbs qualifying for Croatian
pensions). Increased government funding for legal aid for the general population
has partly benefited displaced and returnee Serbs in housing and other wartimerelated
disputes.
War Crimes Accountability
The trial of Croatian generals Ante Gotovina, Ivan Cermak, and Mladen Markac
began in March at the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
(ICTY). The three are accused of war crimes and crimes against humanity, including
persecution and murder committed during a 1995 military operation against
rebel Serbs in Krajina, during which around 200,000 ethnic Serbs were forced out
of the region. While Croatia has handed over all its indictees to the ICTY, it was
criticized by the tribunal in June for failing to deliver all requested documents
related to the Gotovina case, a charge rejected by Croatia.
In May the Zagreb county court sentenced Gen. Mirko Norac to seven years
imprisonment for war crimes against ethnic Serb civilians in the Medak pocket,
and acquitted Gen. Rahim Ademi of the same charges. The case was the first
transferred from the ICTY to Croatia. The prosecution has appealed against
Noracs sentence and Ademis acquittal.
In September delays in the prosecution of Branimir Glavas, caused by the summer
recess and wrangling over a co-defendants legal representation, led to a
breach in prosecution time-limits and forced a retrial in the Osijek county court.
Glavas and six others are charged with war crimes against Serb civilians. Glavas,
who is at liberty, remains a sitting member of the Croatian parliament.
Serbs continued to make up the majority of defendants in war crimes trials.
According to the OSCE, during the first nine months of 2008 there were 20 active
war crimes trials across eight county courts, involving 72 defendants, 45 of whom
are Serb. Nine of the trials (involving 17 defendants) reached final verdicts, with 14 defendants convicted (eight Serbs and six Croats) and three acquitted (two
Serbs and one Albanian).
In absentia prosecutions against Serbs continued in Vukovar, Sisak, and Osijek,
despite opposition from the State Attorneys Office. A similar trial in Rijeka
appears to have been suspended indefinitely. Retrials began in three cases
involving a total of four Serbs, after the Supreme Court overturned the previous in
absentia convictions because of insufficient evidence or poorly reasoned judgments.
In September the government indicated a willingness to extradite its citizens to
neighboring countries to face trial on war crimes and other charges, if other
states were prepared to do the same. Despite regional mechanisms for judicial
cooperation, Croatia and Serbia currently prohibit the extradition of their citizens,
widely seen as an impediment to war crimes accountability.
Media Freedom
In July the Association of Croatian Journalists threatened a general strike in
protest at pressure and intimidation of journalists reporting on war crimes and
other sensitive topics. The protest came after threats in February against Drago
Hedl, a reporter with Feral Tribune newspaper, apparently related to his coverage
of wartime abuses in Osijek, and a violent assault in June on Dusan Miljus, a wellknown
journalist covering organized crime and corruption. At this writing, the
police have yet to identify Miljus assailants. The government condemned both
incidents.
On October 28, Ivo Pukanic, a well-known editor of the prominent political weekly
Nacional, and his marketing director Niko Franjic, were killed by a car bomb in
Zagreb. The killings, and the murder in Zagreb two weeks earlier of Ivana Hodic, a
prominent lawyers daughter, shocked Croatia and prompted a crackdown on
organized crime, including dozens of arrests within Croatia and in neighboring
states. 
Migration and Asylum Policy
A new law on asylum and another on foreigners entered into force on January 1,
2008, intended to harmonize Croatian legislation with EU law. According to the
Croatian Law Center, there continue to be shortcomings in Croatias asylum practice.
Although the law on asylum prescribes that asylum seekers will not be punished
for illegal entry, in practice asylum seekers still risk administrative sanction
for misdemeanor for doing so. Some asylum seekers lack access to legal advice
or interpreters during misdemeanor proceedings, which can lead to them being
given expulsion decisions and deported before there is any consideration of the
asylum claim.
Asylum seekers are subject to detention if facing misdemeanor proceedings for
illegal entry, rather than being transferred to appropriate conditions at the Kutina
asylum center. Detention conditions for such asylum seekers are often inadequate,
with overcrowding, instances of inadequate heating, and limited space for
movement. This is especially the case in the Jezevo migrant facility near Zagreb,
where some detainees threatened a hunger strike in September in protest at conditions.
Childrens Rights
The European Court of Human Rights ruled in July 2008 that Croatia did not discriminate
against Roma pupils by placing them in separate classes at school,
pointing to the fact that separate classes for Roma took place within mainstream
schools and were temporary in nature (until pupils Croatian language skills
improved). Roma organizations expressed their disappointment at the decision.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights groups continue to be viewed with suspicion, but remain largely
free to operate. The positive work of the Human Rights Ombudsman was undermined
by the frequent failure of national and local authorities to respond to its
recommendations and information requests.
The closure of the OSCE Mission in Croatia on December 24, 2007, created a significant
human rights monitoring gap in the country. Although the OSCE retains a
residual presence in Zagreb, primarily to monitor war crimes trials, it lacks the
capacity to engage effectively with the Croatian government across the range of
human rights issues affecting the country.
Key International Actors
The European Union remains the most influential international actor in Croatia, an
official candidate for EU membership. In March 2008 Croatia received an entry
target date of 2010. An EU Council decision in February identified among the priorities
refugee return, adequate housing for tenancy-right holders, recognition of
Serb wartime working time for pensions, and the reconstruction and repossession
of property. In response, the Croatian authorities are developing action plans
containing deadlines by which clear progress should be attained. The European
Commission (through its annual progress report) and the European Parliament
(through its Croatia rapporteur) reiterated the need for Croatia to address these
priority issues and to ensure that legal and institutional changes on housing and
pensions deliver practical benefits to affected Serbs.
In July NATO ambassadors in Brussels signed accession protocols allowing Croatia
to join the alliance at a later stage, possibly as early as spring 2009.
Croatia signed the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in
Human Beings in February 2008.
European Union
The process of improving human rights protections in European Union law stalled
in June 2008, a consequence of the Lisbon Treaty being rejected by referendum in
Ireland. The treaty would make the EU party to the European Convention on
Human Rights, and the EU Charter on Fundamental Rights and Freedoms binding
in EU law. At present, EU institutions are not explicitly bound by the convention,
unlike individual EU member states.
The European Union and leading member states continue to pursue counterterrorism
measures that violate human rights. National security removals despite the
risk of ill-treatment on return, inadequate safeguards in detention, and curbs on
freedom of expression and the right to privacy, are among the key concerns.
Migration and asylum policies remain focused on keeping irregular migrants,
including children, out of the EU and removing those who are present rather than
ensuring their rights are protected. Racist and xenophobic incidents and policies,
particularly affecting the Roma and Sinti, Jewish, and Muslim populations, as well
as migrants, were an issue in a number of EU states.
Counterterrorism Measures and Human Rights
The EU Council approved in April an amendment to the EU Framework Decision on
Combating Terrorism, introducing new offenses of provocation (intended to give
effect to provisions in the Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of
Terrorism), and terrorist recruitment and training, including when committed over
the internet. The provocation offense gives rise to concern about criminalization
of speech with little connection to terrorism. In September the European
Parliament recommended narrowing the amendment, so that only speech intended
to directly incite specific terrorism offenses is criminalized.
The lack of safeguards in the EUs implementation of United Nations financial
measures against terrorism was highlighted in September, when the European
Court of Justice ruled in the case of Kadi that the inability of non-EU nationals
whose assets are frozen to effectively challenge the decision violates the right to
a fair hearing. This reversed the finding of the EUs Court of First Instance that the binding nature of the measures imposed by the UN Security Council, outweighed
human rights obligations.
European Union member states continued to seek the expulsion of terrorism suspects,
including through the use of diplomatic assurances, to a risk of torture or
other prohibited ill-treatment on return, despite opposition from the courts,
human rights bodies, and NGOs. In February 2008 the European Court of Human
Rights unanimously reaffirmed the absolute prohibition on return to torture or
other prohibited ill-treatment in its judgment in Saadi v. Italy, which concerned
Italys attempted expulsion of a terrorism suspect to Tunisia, with the use of
assurances. It rejected a submission by the United Kingdom government to allow
risk of ill-treatment on return to be balanced against a threat to national security.
It also rejected the notion that diplomatic assurances necessarily constitute a
guarantee against torture.
Earlier allegations in Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) and
European Parliament reports of CIA renditions programs having used secret
detention centers in Poland and Romania were finally being addressed in Poland,
but Romania has taken no significant steps. In August, at the request of Polish
Prime Minister Donald Tusk, the public prosecutor initiated an investigation into
the allegations. Critics are concerned that the scope and powers of the investigation
will not be sufficient to address serious allegations of torture and other
human rights abuses.
Common EU Asylum and Migration Policy
A European Pact on Immigration, adopted by the European Council in October,
was the centerpiece of the migration focus under Frances EU Presidency in the
latter half of 2008. The non-binding pact foresees stricter controls on family reunification
for migrants and calls on EU states to pursue expulsion, paying migrants
to return home, and readmission agreements with countries of origin, to remove
irregular migrants. The pact raises concerns about its potential impact on the
right to family life and the prohibition on return to a risk of persecution or ill-treatment.  
The continued focus of EU migration policy on border enforcement rather than
human rights protection was reflected in the 30 million increase to the 2008
budget for the EU border control agency, Frontex. At this writing, the Frontex operation
Hera during 2008 has deterred or diverted back to West Africa 4,373
undocumented migrants heading to the Canary Islands.
In June the European Parliament adopted the controversial Council Directive on
common standards and procedures in Member States for returning illegally staying
third-country nationals, known as the Returns Directive. The measure, which
will come into effect in 2010, permits the detention of undocumented migrants
and failed asylum seekers, including unaccompanied children, for up to 18
months and allows for a five-year ban on reentry. In October 2008 the UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights criticized the detention periods in the directive
as excessive and an erosion of the right to liberty for migrants.
Human Rights Concerns in EU Member States
France
Reviews by the UN Human Rights Council in May under Universal Periodic Review
and the Human Rights Committee in July identified serious human rights concerns
with Frances counterterrorism law and policy. The Human Rights Committee
called on France to end the practice of denying terrorism suspects in police custody
access to a lawyer for 72 hours after arrest and not informing them of their
right to remain silent.
The lack of an automatically suspensive appeal against expulsion in cases involving
national security was identified as a particular problem; since it can result in
the removal of suspects at risk of torture or ill-treatment before any appeal is
determined (a similar concern applies in asylum cases subject to expedited procedures).
In April the European Court of Human Rights ordered France to suspend
the national security deportation of Kamel Daoudi to Algeria, highlighting the
need for an effective in-country procedure.
In a welcome development, France ratified the Optional Protocol to the UN
Convention against Torture in July, following the appointment in June of Frances
first Inspector General of Places of Detention (fulfilling a protocol obligation).
A law adopted in February allows certain former violent offenders to be detained
for renewable one-year periods of preventive detention after they have served
their prison sentence. This undermines the presumption of innocence, the right to
liberty, and the right not to be punished twice for the same crime.
In June Frances top administrative court, the Conseil dEtat, denied citizenship to
a Moroccan Muslim woman married to a French man on the grounds that her
radical religious practices (including wearing the niqab) were incompatible with
French values, in particular that of gender equality.
Germany
The German Constitutional Court gave important rulings in February and March
that laws relating to surveillance and the storing of internet and telephone data
disproportionately restrict the right to privacy. Changes to the law governing
Germanys federal criminal police operations adopted by the Bundestag (lower
house) in November would allow investigators to use intrusive surveillance techniques
on terrorism suspects based on generalized suspicion; the changes are
pending before the Bundesrat (upper house) at this writing. Employment-based
restrictions continue on teachers and other civil servants wearing the headscarf,
despite concerns that the measures discriminate on the grounds of religion, with
courts in three states upholding headscarf bans for teachers since December
2007.
The European Centre for Constitutional Rights, an NGO, filed a lawsuit against the
German government at the Berlin Administrative Court in June for its failure to formally
request the extradition of 13 CIA agents who had been charged in Germany
for involvement in the kidnapping of Khaled el-Masri, a German citizen of
Lebanese descent apprehended in Macedonia and flown to Afghanistan, where
he was imprisoned for five months and tortured.
An attempt by Germany to extradite to Turkey Hassan Atmaca, a refugee suspected
of links to the Kurdistan Workers Party, using diplomatic assurances, is subject to a pending appeal to the European Court of Human Rights. Challenges in
German courts to deportation proceedings against two Tunisian national security
suspects using assurances are pending at this writing.
Following an August review of Germany, the United Nations Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination noted an increase in reported racism-related
incidents against members of the Jewish, Muslim, and Roma and Sinti communities,
as well as German nationals of foreign origin and asylum seekers (in particular
Africans), and called for more resolute action to prevent and punish the perpetrators.
Germany is due to be reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review
mechanism of the UN Human Rights Council in February 2009.
Greece
In April the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) leveled sharp criticism
at Greek asylum and detention policies and recommended that other European
states not return asylum seekers to Greece, a blow to EU rules that asylum claims
should generally be heard in the first EU country entered, and that reception conditions
and asylum procedures must meet common standards. UNHCR said that
asylum seekers in Greece often lack the most basic entitlements, such as interpreters
and legal aid, to ensure that their claims receive adequate scrutiny from
the asylum authorities. Greece recognized only 1.2 percent of asylum claims at
first instance in 2007.
Greek police systematically arrest migrants on Greek territory, including a large
proportion of Iraqis, detain them for days without providing legally required registration,
and in some cases beat or otherwise ill-treat them. Migrants are regularly
forcibly and secretly expelled to Turkey without consideration of their protection
needs.
Around 1,000 unaccompanied children entered Greece in 2008, the majority from
Afghanistan. There were numerous examples of such children being beaten and
kicked by Greek coastguard, police, and port police officers upon interception at
the border or during arrest and detention. Children are often detained together
with adults. Most fail to seek asylum, lack status, and are at risk of deportation.
Many live outside sponsored care and are exploited in dangerous working conditions. Unaccompanied girls in particular are at high-risk of falling into the hands
of trafficking networks.
Italy
Silvio Berlusconi was reelected prime minister in April, gaining a clear majority in
both houses of parliament. His government in July declared a national state of
emergency in relation to undocumented migration. As a result, undocumented
status in Italy is now a crime punishable by up to four years in prison as well as
being an aggravating factor for other crimes, increasing associated prison sentences.
In a memorandum in July, Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights
Thomas Hammarberg criticized the rise of racist and xenophobic incidents in Italy
as well as increased discrimination against Roma and Sinti in government policies.
Against a backdrop of vigilante incidents, including two attacks in which Roma
camps were destroyed by petrol bombs in May, and public concern about several
violent crimes allegedly perpetrated by Roma individuals, the government
declared a state of emergency for nomad communities (code for Roma) in the
Campania, Lazio, and Lombardy regions, giving local authorities special powers
including to conduct censuses and to raid and dismantle Roma camps. In July a
lawsuit was filed in Italy challenging the legality of these measures and the
European Parliament adopted a resolution calling on Italy to stop fingerprinting
Roma including children. The European Commission muted its criticism of the policy
following assurances from the Italian government that it was not collecting
ethnic data.
The trial of 26 US citizens and 7 Italian citizens for the abduction in Milan and
rendition to Egypt of the Egyptian cleric Hassan Mustafa Osama Nasr, known as
Abu Omar, resumed in March, amid allegations that the government had acted
disloyally in pursuing a claim before the Constitutional Court that the Milan
prosecutors office violated state secrecy laws in the conduct of the investigation.
In October the court agreed to hear arguments on the state secrets claims in a
closed hearing scheduled for March 2009. Also in October the Court of Cassation confirmed the conviction of Rabei Osman for links to the March 2004 Madrid train
bombings.
Despite the ruling in Saadi v. Italy, Italy expelled Essid Sami Ben Khemais to
Tunisia in June, in breach of interim measures issued by the European Court of
Human Rights requesting that Italy suspend the expulsion until the court had considered
the case. This drew criticism from Commissioner Hammarberg. The Italian
authorities justified the expulsion on the grounds that they had obtained diplomatic
assurances from the Tunisian government guaranteeing that Ben Khemais
would not be tortured and would receive a fair trial. At this writing, the case is
pending before the European Court of Human Rights.
Migrants continue to die attempting to reach Italy by sea in unseaworthy boats.
The trials of seven Tunisian fishermen for abetting illegal immigration after they
rescued 44 migrants and brought them to safety on Lampedusa, an island off
Sicily, were ongoing at this writing. There are fears that such prosecutions risk
discouraging rescues at sea and exacerbate the dangers for migrants attempting
the crossing.
Malta
Malta continued to be criticized for its failure to rescue migrants in distress at sea
and unwillingness to allow ships carrying migrants rescued at sea to enter its
ports. More than a thousand migrants reached Malta in 2008. In August, 71
migrants drowned in the Mediterranean Sea when their dinghy capsized; eight
survivors were rescued by a fishing vessel. The Maltese government has been
calling for burden sharing among EU states on irregular migration.
Migrants, including children, who come to Malta are held in closed detention centers
for up to 18 months while their claims are processed. Detention facilities for
migrants in Malta were criticized in a PACE report in May. An investigation ordered
by the Maltese government into allegations of ill-treatment against detainees
involved in a disturbance in the Safi detention center in March concluded that
there had been excessive use of force by staff, but failed to identify those responsible.
The Netherlands
A bill on administrative measures for national security aimed at preventing acts of
terrorism passed the House of Representatives in March 2007 and is pending
before the Senate at this writing. It contains provisions severely limiting the freedom
of movement and right to privacy of persons suspected of being connected
to or supporting terrorist activities. The bill has been criticized by rights groups
for its lack of clear definitions and the absence of judicial supervision over such
measures.
In January 2008 the Hague Appeals Court refused to characterize the militant
Hofstad network as a terrorist group when it cleared seven men, including
Mohammed Bouyeri, the murderer of Dutch filmmaker Theo Van Gogh, of the
charge of belonging to a terrorist group. In October the Amsterdam Appeals Court
upheld the conviction of Samir Azzouz and four others on terrorism charges.
The European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment of Punishment in a February report expressed concern about the placement
of terrorism suspects in special high-security terrorist departments in
prisons, the conditions of which it considered so strict as to amount to de facto
isolation.
There were successful court challenges to discriminatory law and policies restricting
the ability of legal residents to bring family members into the Netherlands
from non-Western countries. In July Amsterdams district court ruled that it is
unlawful to require migrants from certain countries wishing to join relatives in the
Netherlands to pass an integration test demonstrating knowledge of Dutch language
and society before being allowed into the country, although it did not
determine whether the policy violates human rights law. The test, which disproportionately
affects Moroccan and Turkish Muslim migrants, has been criticized
by Dutch MPs and NGOs. Earlier the same month, a court in Roermond overturned
a related law requiring residents wishing to bring a non-Dutch spouse to the
Netherlands to earn at least 120 percent of the minimum wage. The Ministry of
Justice is appealing both rulings, and policies are the subject of an ongoing government 
review.
Poland
Government expressions of homophobia remain a problem. In March, in a nationally
televised speech, President Lech Kaczynski threatened to block ratification of
the Lisbon Treaty, claiming that the EU Charter on Fundamental Rights and
Freedoms would force Poland to legally recognize same-sex relationships.
Reproductive rights remain extremely limited, with lack of sex education and limited
access to contraceptives. Access to safe and legal abortion is severely
restricted by law, which criminalizes abortion in most circumstances. The law also
protects a doctors right to refuse to provide abortion services for reasons of
conscience. As a result, there is a high incidence of illegal and generally unsafe
abortions, jeopardizing womens health and lives.
Spain
Following the reelection of Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero as prime minister in
March, the Spanish cabinet contained equal numbers of men and women for the
first time, including a female minister of defense.
In September the Supreme Court overturned the convictions of four of the 21 people
found guilty in 2007 in relation to the Madrid train bombings of 2004. It also
convicted one Spanish man who had previously been acquitted of providing the
explosives for the attack. In October the same court acquitted 14 of 20 men convicted
in February for plotting a bomb attack on the Audiencia Nacional, Spains
counterterrorism court.
In addition to ongoing cases involving international terrorism, there were a number
of attacks by the Basque separatist group ETA and arrests of alleged ETA
members throughout 2008, as well as ongoing prosecutions of individuals and
groups allegedly connected to ETA.
In May the UN special rapporteur on the protection and promotion of human
rights while countering terrorism, Martin Scheinin, issued a series of recommendations
to the Spanish government, highlighting the need for the complete eradication
of incommunicado detention and for a review of overly-broad terrorism offenses. These concerns were echoed by the Human Rights Committee in its
Concluding Observations in October.
Scheinin also criticized the use of diplomatic assurances in an extradition case to
Russia. In February the Audiencia Nacional had approved the extradition of
Chechen Murat Ajmedovich Gasaev on the basis of diplomatic assurances from
Russia that he would be treated humanely. At this writing Gasaev is still in detention
pending a decision from the Council of Ministers on whether to go ahead
with the extradition.
In May an Audiencia Nacional judge ordered the government to provide detailed
information about stopovers of US military planes in Spain on their way to or from
Guantanamo Bay between 2002 and 2007. The Ministry of Defense responded in
September that US military flights to Guantanamo had passed through Spain but
asserted that none carried passengers or cargo that could be controversial. The
judge requested further information.
An unrelated request by a different judge in the same court for the transfer of
Jamil El-Banna and Omar Deghayes from the UK to stand trial in Spain for terrorism
offenses following their release from Guantanamo was dropped in March.
There continued to be a marked drop in arrivals by sea of irregular migrants
down 8 percent in the first eight months of 2008 compared to the same period in
2007 and down 64 percent since 2006, according to Spains Interior Mministry. In
September-October 2008, however, Spanish authorities intercepted two boats off
the Canary Islands containing a total of 329 irregular migrants, including children.
The Spanish Ombudsman confirmed reports of ill-treatment and criticized inadequate
care facilities for unaccompanied migrant children in the Canary Islands.
The Spanish government continued to push for the return of unaccompanied children
to Senegal and Morocco without adequate safeguards. More than two dozen
court decisions blocked childrens repatriations because the repatriation decisions
did not comply with Spanish or international law.
United Kingdom
Serious human rights concerns about the UKs counterterrorism law and practice
were raised by international bodies during 2008, including the UN Human Rights
Committee, the UN Human Rights Council under its Universal Periodic Review,
and the Council of Europe.
Following a crushing defeat in the House of Lords, the government withdrew from
a draft counterterrorism bill measures extending pre-charge detention for terrorism
suspects from 28 to 42 days. It also removed a proposal to allow inquests in
secret on national security grounds. The government has said that it may reintroduce
both proposals, widely criticized as incompatible with human rights law, in
future bills. At this writing, the bill includes the power to impose blanket lifelong
notification requirements for individuals convicted of terrorism offenses in the UK
or abroad, breach of which would be a criminal offense.
The Court of Appeal overturned a number of convictions for terrorism offenses. In
February it quashed a 2007 conviction of five students under section 57 of the
Terrorism Act 2000 for downloading and sharing material considered to be terrorism-
related. The court ruled that the offense requires proof of intent that the
material is for a terrorist purpose. In July the court reversed the November 2007
conviction of Samina Malik under section 58 of the Terrorism Act 2000 for possession
of information useful to terrorists. The ruling followed a separate February
2008 Court of Appeal decision that section 58 does not apply to mere propaganda.
In May a staff member and a graduate student at Nottingham University, Hicham
Yezza and Rizwaan Sabir, were arrested for possessing a document (the Al Qaida
Manual) freely available on the internet. They were detained for six days before
being released without charge. The case raises concerns about the impact of terrorism
legislation on academic freedom.
In September the inquest opened into the killing of Jean Charles de Menezes, an
innocent man, by police officers during a counterterrorism operation in July 2005.
UK courts continued to block attempts to deport terrorism suspects on the basis
of diplomatic assurances. In April 2008 the Court of Appeal ruled that Omar Othman, (known as Abu Qatada) could not be deported to Jordan, on the grounds
that torture evidence would be used against him at trial. He was subsequently
released on bail from a high-security prison on strict security conditions including
a 22-hour curfew. In October the Law Lords considered the appeal courts ruling
in Othman, and a second appeal about removals to Algeria using assurances. It
has yet to deliver a judgment in either case at this writing.
The Court of Appeal blocked the deportation of two Libyans to Libya in April, ruling
that a memorandum of understanding with Libya was unreliable, and finding
that the men would face a complete denial of fair trial if they were returned. The
UK government is not appealing the ruling on Libya.
The use of the British Indian Ocean territory of Diego Garcia as part of the US renditions
program was confirmed. In February CIA Director Michael Hayden admitted
that the US had used Diego Garcia twice to refuel aircraft taking terrorism suspects
to Guantanamo Bay and Morocco in 2002. The UK government maintains
that it had not given consent for or been informed of this use of Diego Garcia.
In August 2008 the High Court ruled that the Foreign and Commonwealth Office
should in principle disclose material in its possession that would assist the
lawyers of Binyam Mohamed, a former UK resident facing trial before a military
commission at Guantanamo Bay, in demonstrating that confessions used in evidence
against him had been extracted through torture and were therefore inadmissible
at trial. At this writing, a further hearing to consider national security
arguments against disclosure has been adjourned pending the outcome of US
proceedings in which the US government has been directed to hand over the
materials. In October the home secretary asked the attorney general to investigate
possible criminal wrongdoing by the UK Security Service and the CIA in
Mohameds treatment.
During a review by the UN Committee for the Rights of the Child in September, the
UK government announced that it would withdraw its reservation to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child in immigration cases. The committee welcomed
the announcement but expressed regret that the best interests of the child
are not given primary consideration in the areas of juvenile justice, immigration,
freedom of movement, and peaceful assembly.
Georgia
The August conflict over the breakaway region of South Ossetia dominated events
in Georgia during the second half of 2008. All sides of the conflict committed
serious violations of international human rights and humanitarian law. The
Georgian government used indiscriminate force, including cluster bombs.
Georgian authorities failed to comprehensively investigate past use of excessive
force. The government lowered the minimum age for criminal responsibility, while
failing to resolve overcrowding and poor conditions in prisons.
Conflict over South Ossetia
After months of escalating tensions and clashes between Georgian and South
Ossetian forces, on the night of August 7-8 Georgia launched a military assault on
Tskhinvali, the capital of South Ossetia, a breakaway region. Russia deployed significant
military forces to South Ossetia, forcing a Georgian military retreat.
Russian and South Ossetian forces pursued Georgian forces beyond the South
Ossetian administrative border and occupied significant portions of uncontested
Georgian territory until October 10. Russian forces also entered Abkhazia, a second
breakaway region.
All parties committed serious violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law (see also Russia chapter), resulting in many civilian deaths and
injuries. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees estimated
that 133,000 people were displaced by the conflict, but at least 80 percent
have now returned to their homes. Thousands of Georgians from South Ossetia
still remain displaced.
During the attack on South Ossetia, Georgian forces used indiscriminate force, firing
Grad multiple rocket launchers, an indiscriminate weapon that should not be
used in civilian areas. The Georgian military used tanks and machine guns to fire
at buildings in Tskhinvali, including at apartment buildings where civilians sheltered;
South Ossetian forces had fired on Georgian forces from at least some of
these buildings.
The Georgian military also used cluster munitions against Russian military,
including in Georgian territories adjacent to the administrative border with South
Ossetia populated by civilians. Cluster munitions are indiscriminate weapons and
cause unacceptable humanitarian harm. Some civilians were killed or injured as a
result of Georgian- and Russian-fired unexploded ordnances, including cluster
duds.
Some Ossetians detained during the conflict complained of ill-treatment during
transfer to Georgian detention facilities.
Lack of Accountability for Excessive Use of Force
Despite repeated calls from key international actors, including the United States
and the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE), the government
has refused to launch a comprehensive investigation into the events of November
7, 2007, when police used excessive force against largely peaceful political
demonstrations in the capital, Tbilisi, resulting in at least 500 injured. Authorities
initiated investigations into only a handful of cases of possible excessive use of
force. The authorities paid the independent television station Imedi US$2.5 million
compensation for damage to its equipment during the November 7 police
raid on the station.
The government has also failed to conduct a comprehensive investigation into the
March 2006 operation to quell a riot in Tbilisi Prison No. 5, which left seven prisoners
dead and dozens injured.
Criminal Justice System
The government has taken steps to reduce prison overcrowding, including issuing
two presidential pardons and amnesties in 2008, and opening a new prison in
Gldani. However, overuse of pretrial detention perpetuates overcrowding. As of
October 1, 2008, the prison population totaled 19,929, a 50 percent increase in
two years. In March the government closed the infamous Tbilisi Prison No. 5,
which the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and human rights
organizations had repeatedly criticized for its overcrowding and appalling conditions. Poor conditions persist in many facilities, and allegations of ill-treatment of
prisoners continue, including at the new Gldani prison.
In 2007 the government lowered the minimum age of criminal responsibility from
14 to 12 for certain crimes, further weakening protections for children in conflict
with the law. The new minimum age entered into force in July 2008. However, the
minister of justice issued a moratorium on implementation of the law until the
creation of a separate juvenile justice system for young offenders. In its June
review of Georgia, the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child
expressed deep regret about the new minimum age and urged the government
to reinstate it at 14.
In October parliament passed amendments on judicial restructuring, creating a
new Ministry of Probation and the Penitentiary System and merging the General
Prosecutors Office with the Ministry of Justice. Independence of the judiciary in
Georgia is a longstanding concern; the merger risks weakening the judiciary further.
Elections
Joint Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), PACE, and
European Parliament observer missions lauded the January 5, 2008 presidential
election as the first genuinely competitive presidential election in Georgia, and
noted that both it and the May parliamentary elections were essentially consistent
with international standards. Observers still cited shortcomings, for instance,
during the presidential election, widespread allegations of pressureincluding
on public employees and opposition activists as well as irregularities in vote
counting and tabulation during both elections. They noted that presidential election
coverage lacked balance on most television stations, with President Mikheil
Saakashvili generally receiving the most coverage.
Media Freedom
The media environment remains mixed, with a vibrant print media, but increasingly
limited television news broadcasting, apparently due to government pressure.
Only the state-owned Georgian Public Broadcasting station and the pro-government Rustavi 2 maintained nationwide news programming throughout the
year.
Following its closure during the November 7 events, the private television station
Imedi resumed broadcasting on December 12, 2007, but two weeks later Imedi
suspended broadcasts, citing pressure from the authorities and its co-owner.
Although Imedi resumed broadcasting in May 2008, it only resumed news programming
in September. In June the independent television station Mze, widely
considered pro-government, suspended news programs, allegedly for channel
reorganization. However, the cable television company Maestro successfully challenged
an April decision by the National Communications Commission depriving
it of its license to broadcast news.
Independent television station Kavkazia experienced two suspicious transmission
interruptions, including during a September 1 program criticizing Georgian government
actions during the conflict over South Ossetia. Kavkazias director questioned
whether the transmitters technical problems were coincidental. Kavkazia
also alleged that financial police targeted companies buying advertising from the
station.
During the conflict over South Ossetia, the Georgian government blocked access
to Russian cable television stations and websites.
Journalists alleged pressure and attacks, including during the elections. A government
supporter attacked Hereti radio correspondent Khatuna Gogishvili on the
day of the presidential election by taking her recording device and physically
assaulting and threatening to kill her. In February independent journalist Gela
Mtivlishvili alleged that state security officials subjected him to surveillance and
intimidation before and after the election. Journalists reported interference with
their professional duties during the May parliamentary elections, including several
Rustavi 2 and Mze television journalists and Eliso Chapidze, editor of the newspaper
Resonance.
Key International Actors
During the conflict over South Ossetia, international actors unanimously called for
restraint by all parties, but insufficiently highlighted the need for compliance with international human rights and humanitarian law and for transparent investigations
and accountability for abuses, and the parties obligations in this regard.
In response to the conflict, the OSCE chairman-in-office, the United Nations high
commissioner for refugees, the United Nations representative of the secretarygeneral
on the human rights of internally displaced persons, the Council of
Europe commissioner for human rights, the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and the PACE conducted missions to
Georgia.
Holding the rotating European Union presidency, French President Nicolas
Sarkozy brokered a six-point peace plan between Russia and Georgia. The EU
appointed a special representative for the crisis in Georgia to prepare October
talks chaired by the UN, OSCE, and the EU and aimed at resolving tensions
between Georgia and Russia. The talks stalled on the first day and were set to
resume in mid-November. In October the EU deployed more than 200 unarmed
monitors to Georgia under the European Defense and Security Policy. On October
22, the EU and World Bank hosted a donor conference to mobilize support for a
US$660 million assistance package dispersed over three years for reconstruction,
economic recovery, and aid to the internally displaced in Georgia.
Both the European Court of Human Rights and the International Court of Justice
issued decisions calling on all parties to comply with international human rights
conventions. The International Criminal Court (ICC)to which Georgia is a state
partyannounced that crimes committed by all parties to the conflict are under
analysis by the ICC prosecutor.
In October the PACE issued a resolution declaring that both Georgia and Russia
had violated Council of Europe principles, and called for an international investigation.
Following the conflict, the OSCE Mission to Georgia increased the number of its
military monitoring officers. Russia has not allowed the monitors to enter South
Ossetia.
In September the United States approved aid for Georgia that could total up to
US$1 billion over two years, a sum 30 times greater than past annual US aid to Georgia. After an October visit to Georgia, US Assistant Secretary of State for
European and Eurasian Affairs Daniel Fried stated that NATO membership is still
possible for Georgia, but the country should do more to strengthen its democratic
institutions, particularly independent media and the judiciary.
Kazakhstan
Despite hopes for meaningful reform, spurred by the countrys selection as the
2010 chair of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE),
human rights in Kazakhstan improved little in 2008. Draft laws on election legislation
and mass media fell short of promised improvements, and parliament is
considering legislation that observers fear would severely restrict the right to
manifest religion or belief.
Kazakhstans bid for the OSCE chairmanship was controversial because of its
poor human rights record. Responding to OSCE members concerns, Foreign
Minister Marat Tazhin pledged in November 2007 that Kazakhstan would take
several reform steps prior to assuming the chairmanship. These included amending
the media law, reforming the law on elections, and liberalizing the registration
requirements for political parties by the end of 2008. Tazhin further pledged that
Kazakhstan would incorporate recommendations by the OSCEs Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) into its election legislation
and promised not to weaken the ODIHR during its chairmanship. Minister Tazhins
pledges were unprecedented and welcome, but so far have not resulted in meaningful
reform.
Election Legislation
At the start of 2008 the government established a working group of government
and civil society representatives to address election law reform. Members of the
working group reported that they were prevented from considering the repeal of
seriously flawed provisions: for example, there are currently no term limits for
Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbaev, he has sweeping powers to dissolve parliament,
can appoint a third of the members of the upper chamber, and chooses
the chair and two members of the seven-member Central Election Commission.
On November 11, the government sent to parliament a raft of amendments to
election-related legislation. These leave unchanged the requirement that political
parties gain at least seven percent of the vote to be represented in parliament.
They stipulate that at least two political forces must be represented in parliament
(no doubt a response to strong criticism of the 2007 parliamentary elections, which produced a single-party parliament). If only one party gets past the seven
percent threshold, parliamentary seats may be distributed to the party garnering
the next largest number of votes. Other draft amendments include lowering from
50,000 to 40,000 the minimum number of supporters for a party to be registered.
Freedom of Expression and Information
Most media outlets in Kazakhstan remain de facto under government control
through a variety of direct and indirect means. Of some 2,500 functioning media
outlets, the government owns a growing proportion outright. In March 2008
Samgau, a state-owned company, purchased all the remaining privately-held
stock in Khabar, once the countrys most important private media group. In July
the government combined its media assets, including Khabar, into a special holding
company, Arna Media.
In February 2008 the Ministry of Culture, Information and Public Accord declined
for the second time a draft media lawincluding key reforms on registering
media outletsproposed by a working group of civil society representatives. After
creating a new working group, the government hedged on supporting reforms,
such that the media rights organization Adil Soz called the resulting draft law at
best a tiny first step toward international standards.
One of the weaknesses of this draft law is that it focuses solely on media operations,
while ignoring other relevant criminal and administrative law. For example,
the government failed to enact essential reforms on criminal libel, which is often
invoked to intimidate journalists and political critics. In the first six months of
2008 authorities opened seven criminal cases against journalists for alleged
libel, slander, and defamation. In 2007 there were 27 such cases.
In April 2008 authorities released Kazis Toguzbaev, a journalist sentenced to two
years in prison in January 2007 for insulting President Nazarbaev in articles he
wrote criticizing the government, and expunged his verdict. The judges concluded
that Toguzbaev had demonstrated by his behavior that he was reformed. The
release is welcome, but so long as such a broad criminal libel regime remains in
place, others risk spending time and effort in defending themselves against it. In
August 2008 a court in Shymkent ordered the release of Nurlan Alimbekov, a philosopher arrested in 2007 on charges flowing from an email he wrote questioning
Kazakhstans close relationship with Russia, which the government
argued constituted incitement of racial hatred. Authorities had confined
Alimbekov to a high-security psychiatric institution. Although the court freed him
to return home, it did not dismiss the charges or conclude that Alimbekov was
mentally fit under the lawonly that his treatment does not currently require
institutionalization.
In February 2008 an Astana court ordered the independent newspaper Law and
Justice closed on grounds that it was improperly registered. Editors at the paper
believed the case to be politically motivated: it had recently published allegations
of corruption among the judiciary.
Beginning in April, the government-controlled internet monopoly Kaztelecom
blocked access to the English- and Kazakh-language services of Radio Free
Europe/Radio Liberty for seven weeks. The sites were made available again after
expressions of concern from key international actors. The websites of several
political opposition movements remain blocked.
Freedom of Religion
Kazakh authorities continue to restrict freedom of religion, primarily by pursuing
members of non-traditional religions. Addressing members of Kazakhstans ruling
political party in January 2008, President Nazarbaev urged lawmakers to take
steps to curb the activities of foreign missionaries. Misleading, fear-promoting
statements about religious minorities in media and government statements continued
during the year. In September a new draft law on religion passed the lower
house of parliament. While the bill was in draft, local human rights groups characterized
it as repressive, arguing that it imposes inappropriate restrictions on
religious groups and is open to arbitrary interpretation. The draft law makes a distinction
between religious groups, which have no legal status and therefore no
rights, and religious associations, which must have at least 50 members in a
given locality. A religious association is the only legal entity religious communities
can form. The draft law requires all communities to reregister within 18
months. On October 31 the upper house of parliament returned the draft to the
lower house, requesting several insignificant changes.
Human Rights Defenders
Granting Kazakhstan the OSCE chairmanship has rendered the work of local
human rights groups that press for reform more challenging. On the one hand,
the government has established a number of human rights-related working
groups, including one to draft a National Plan on Human Rights 2008-2011. But
on the other hand, the government deflects or even ignores criticism and proposals
for reform from rights groups, by portraying its 2010 OSCE chairmanship as
evidence that its human rights record is in good order. In July 2008 five local
human rights groups signed a memorandum to jointly monitor the implementation
of the governments reform promises prior to its OSCE chairmanship.
Key International Actors
The OSCE remained engaged with Kazakhstan throughout 2008 on issues relating
to the promised reforms and the upcoming chairmanship. After a visit to
Kazakhstan in late July, OSCE Chairman-in-Office Alexander Stubb said the OSCE
hoped to see swift continuation of reforms in fields such as media, elections
and political parties and encouraged dialogue on other reforms.
Although the United States endorsed Kazakhstans bid to chair the OSCE, US officials
remained vocal about the countrys slow progress on democratic and human
rights reforms. In his July testimony before the US Commission on Security and
Cooperation in Europe, Assistant Secretary of State for South and Central Asian
Affairs Richard A. Boucher expressed the administrations support for
Kazakhstans chairmanship but admitted that reforms were uneven. Visiting
Kazakhstan in October, it was reported that Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice
raised with President Nazarbaev the commitments for Kazakhstans democratic
reform made in November 2007, stressing that the US looked to Kazakhstan to
show leadership by example and, working closely with OSCE and civil society,
make steady progress toward meeting all of its  commitments, including the
adoption of laws governing independent media and elections, comments that
suggest the US did not assess Kazakhstan as having made sufficient progress so
far.
In September the European Union underlined the importance of reforms in view
of the Kazakh Chairmanship of the OSCE, including in the areas of media freedom,
the electoral law and the registration of political parties, as confirmed at the
OSCE ministerial in Madrid in December 2007. The first round of what is to
become an annual human rights dialogue in the framework of the EUs Central
Asia strategy was held in mid-October. The EU did not make public what specific
issues it raised or what results the dialogue yielded.
Kyrgyzstan
Pluralism and fundamental freedoms that facilitate public scrutiny of government
are increasingly at risk in Kyrgyzstan. Legislative changes passed or pending in
2008 curbed freedom of assembly and threatened to restrict religious freedoms.
The government is failing to meet its obligations to prevent and investigate torture
and domestic violence. Harassment of journalists and NGO activists intensified,
and arbitrary suspensions and terminations of asylum-seeker certificates
exposed flaws in Kyrgyzstans refugee protection system.
Elections
As a result of the December 2007 parliamentary elections, which the Organization
for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) called a missed opportunity,
President Kurmanbek Bakievs Ak-Zhol party now dominates parliament.
Controversy surrounding impending local elections heightened in September
2008 when the head of the Central Election Commission fled the country after
accusing the presidents son of threatening her. Local NGOs reported pressure on
election observers and voters during the October 5 poll.
Civil Society
NGOs can operate freely but face increasing government intimidation. Police conducted
harassing inspections and searches of the offices of local and international
human rights NGOs, including Citizens against Corruption, Kylym Shamy,
Labrys, Mir-Svet-Kultura, and the Norwegian Helsinki Committee. For example, on
the evening of April 8 three policemen forced their way into Labryss shelter for
women and transgender people. The police searched Labryss files without a warrant
and threatened to arrest anyone who did not produce identification, though
no charges were filed.
Saidkamal Akhmedov, a defense lawyer and human rights activist, was tried in
Osh on bogus embezzlement charges. Akhmedov had had refugee status in
Kazakhstan but in 2007 was forcibly returned to Kyrgyzstan by the Uzbek government
when he was visiting relatives in Uzbekistan. On February 1, 2008, he received a one-year suspended sentence after spending five months in detention
in both Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan. The sentence was upheld on appeal.
Ivar Dale, the Norwegian Helsinki Committees regional representative, was
denied entry into Kyrgyzstan for unknown reasons on October 12, 2008. One
month prior, a court ruled in Dales favor on the states charges that he had
worked illegally in Kyrgyzstan and had provided untruthful information on his
visa application.
In December 2007, 13 youth activists and human rights defenders were detained
for two days in a cold, rat-infested cell for holding small, peaceful demonstrations
in Bishkek.
Freedom of Assembly
In July 2008 the Constitutional Court ruled that any licensing regime for public
assemblies is unconstitutional. The decision effectively voided the highly restrictive
2007 Bishkek City Council ordinance regulating assemblies in the capital.
Nevertheless, on August 6 President Bakiev signed amendments to the 2002 law
on freedom of assembly that essentially establish a licensing regime and limit
possibilities for timely and spontaneous protests: The amended law requires
assembly organizers to notify local authorities 12 days in advance of any planned
event, regardless of the size, does not enumerate grounds for reasonable disagreement
by the authorities, and allows provincial governors excessive powers
to interfere with the planning of public assemblies.
Media Freedom
According to the Media Representative Institute, an NGO, at this writing at least
seven criminal cases and more than 30 defamation suits were filed against Kyrgyz
journalists and media outlets in 2008.
Most worrisome is the prosecution of the editors of two opposition newspapers,
De Facto and Alibi, on charges that they libeled the presidents nephew. They
were first sentenced in June 2008 to a prohibitively high fine of 1 million Kyrgyz
soms (US$28,500) each, and then criminally prosecuted for not paying the fine.
As a result, Alibi editor Babyrbek Jeenbekov was detained for two days in early
September, while De Facto editor Cholpon Orozbekova fled the country. On June
14 police raided the De Facto offices, confiscated its financial records and computers,
and sealed the newsroom as part of a separate criminal investigation into
allegations that a letter the newspaper had published about official corruption
amounted to a knowingly false denunciation. At this writing, the investigation is
ongoing.
The investigation into the October 2007 murder of independent journalist Alisher
Saipov was suspended in February 2008, but then reopened. No information is
publicly available about whether it has identified any suspects.
Amendments to the press law adopted in June empower the president to appoint
the executive director of state-run television and radio, reversing previous initiatives
to turn them into public broadcasters.
Violence against Women
In Kyrgyzstan the government does not adequately prevent and punish domestic
violence and bride kidnapping. Thousands of women are isolated in their homes,
beaten, humiliated, raped, and sometimes killed, generally with impunity.
According to nationwide statistics provided by the governmental judiciary committee,
in the first nine months of 2008, in three court cases involving forced marriage
the defendant was found guilty, and four other cases were dismissed.
In June parliament held its first hearing on the 2003 domestic violence law.
Participants highlighted the absence of national gender institutions, insufficient
resources, poor statistics, and inadequate training of law enforcement bodies as
factors that hinder the laws effectiveness.
Torture
On April 14, 2008, Kyrgyzstan ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention
against Torture. Despite this welcome move, torture and ill-treatment of detainees
remain pervasive. In the first nine months of 2008, a network of human rights
defenders, Golos Svobody, submitted approximately 40 complaints of torture and ill-treatment to prosecutors offices throughout the country. In response, prosecutors
initiated about a dozen inquiries, but for the others either determined allegations
not confirmed or did not reply. No case was heard by Kyrgyz courts in
2008 under the criminal code article banning torture.
One of the rare criminal investigations in 2008 related to allegations of torture
involving police treatment of four minors and one adultbegan in March. All five
had been arrested between February 29 and March 3 in Bishkek and reported
severe beatings by the police to compel confessions of theft. At this writing, only
one police officer, implicated in abuse of one of the minors, remains under investigation,
for abuse of office.
Refugee Protection
The government of Kyrgyzstan hosts hundreds of refugees and asylum seekers
from Afghanistan, Iran, and Uzbekistan, most of whom are awaiting resettlement
to third countries. However, it has also been complicit in the forced return of asylum
seekers to Uzbekistan, despite the risk of torture there.
In August the State Committee for Migration and Employment arbitrarily stopped
extending asylum-seeker certificates issued to Uzbek nationals who were seeking
asylum. In mid-September the committee renewed extensions for some asylum
seekers, but in many cases not for the full three months required by law; and in
some asylum seekers certificates the committee noted, No right for further
extension. Newly arrived asylum seekers face difficulties in registering. For
example, in 2008, 20 asylum seekers from Afghanistan and Iran challenged in
court the denial of registration on the grounds of illegal entry, as it contradicts
international and domestic law. At this writing the court decision is pending.
In its first decision on Kyrgyzstan (Maksudov et al. v. Kyrgyzstan) the UN Human
Rights Committee ruled in July that Kyrgyzstan breached the rights to personal liberty,
freedom from torture, and right to life of four Andijan refugees (see
Uzbekistan chapter) and should provide effective remedy and put in place effective
monitoring of their situation. The four had been extradited to Uzbekistan in
August 2006 despite interim measures of protection requested by the committee.
The committee also noted that Kyrgyz extradition legislation does not comply with the states non-refoulement obligations. The government so far has taken no
action to implement the decision.
Key International Actors
The Cooperation Council between the European Union and Kyrgyzstan held its
tenth meeting in July 2008. The Council welcomed progress achieved toward the
implementation of the EUs Central Asia Strategy but regretted recent developments,
especially in the area of media freedom and freedom of assembly. The
first round of what is to become an annual human rights dialogue was held at the
end of October, concluding that EU strives to reinforce overall, broad-based
cooperation with Kyrgyzstan, and failing to indicate any specific human rights
benchmarks.
In March the United States and Kyrgyzstan signed a two-year US$16 million
Millennium Challenge Corporation agreement. The program aims to implement
measures such as reforming the judicial system and combating corruption. Kyrgyz
human rights groups had urged the US to suspend the signing of the agreement
until the government proves its commitment to the [programs] objectives.
International governmental and nongovernmental actors expressed concerns
about a new draft religion law adopted by parliament on November 6, 2008. The
US Department of State noted in its Annual Report on International Religious
Freedom that the draft law severely obstructs citizens right to freedom of religion
with such changes as an increase from 10 to 200 members required for
official registration of a religious organization, the elimination of alternative military
service for all but priests and religious laymen, a ban on proselytizing, and
the prohibition of the conversion of Kyrgyz citizens to a different faith. At this
writing, the draft is with the president for approval.
Russia
Russias armed conflict with Georgia over South Ossetia and its subsequent temporary
occupation of parts of Georgia sparked international concern over the balance
of power in the region and Russias willingness to use force to protect its
interests. The election of Dmitry Medvedev to the Russian presidency did not
result in immediate improvements in the rule of law or the environment for civil
society, with the government continuing to crack down against independent
groups and activists.
International criticism of Russias human rights record remains muted, with the
European Union failing to challenge Russia on human rights issues in a consistent
and sustained manner.
Elections
In February the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of the
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe cancelled its planned observation
mission to the presidential election, citing severe restrictions on its
observers.
On March 2, Dmitry Medvedev was elected president by over 70 percent of the
vote in an election that was orderly but uncompetitive. The Parliamentary
Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) characterized the election as a
plebiscite on outgoing president Vladimir Putins rule and his handpicked successor
rather than a truly democratic election. Medvedev assumed the presidency
on May 7 and immediately appointed Putin prime minister.
The Armed Conflict over South Ossetia
After months of escalating tensions and clashes between Georgian and South
Ossetian forces, Georgia launched a military assault on Tskhinvali, the capital of
South Ossetia, a breakaway region in Georgia, on the night of August 7-8. Russia
moved significant forces into South Ossetia, ostensibly to protect Russian peacekeepers
and Russian citizens there. After several days of heavy fighting, Georgian
forces retreated, and Russian and South Ossetian forces pursued the Georgian army beyond the South Ossetian administrative border and occupied significant
portions of uncontested Georgian territory. On August 15-16, Russia and Georgia
signed a peace agreement.
On August 26, Russia recognized the independence of South Ossetia and
Abkhazia, a breakaway region in western Georgia. On October 10, Russia withdrew
from uncontested areas of Georgia.
All parties committed serious violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law during the conflict (see also Georgia chapter). The fighting
resulted in many civilian deaths and injuries. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees estimated 133,000 people were displaced by the
conflict, but at least 80 percent have now returned to their homes. The majority of
those still displaced are Georgians unable to return to their homes in South
Ossetia.
Immediately following the fighting, Ossetian militias and looters systematically
destroyed Georgian enclave villages in South Ossetia, with some militia members
admitting that they wanted to prevent ethnic Georgians from returning.
Russian forces used cluster bombs in areas populated by civilians in the Gori and
Kareli districts of Georgia, leading to civilian deaths and injuries. Russia also
launched indiscriminate rocket attacks on civilian areas, causing casualties.
Russian forces in Georgia failed to protect civilians in areas under their effective
control and prevented Georgian authorities from policing these areas, creating a
security vacuum. Ossetian militias and armed criminal gangs looted and burned
homes and killed, raped, beat, and threatened civilians in these areas.
Ossetian forces unlawfully detained at least 160 civilians, mainly elderly, in South
Ossetia and the Gori district. Detainees were held in conditions that amounted to
degrading treatment. Some were subjected to beatings and forced labor. Russian
troops and Ossetian militias detained at least 14 Georgian servicemen, subjecting
them to severe torture and ill-treatment, including beatings, burnings, and starvation,
and summarily executed at least one Georgian soldier.
Civil Society
The government continues tightening control over civil society through selective
implementation of the law on NGOs, restriction and censure of protected expression
and the media, and harassment of activists and human rights defenders.
These actions form an unmistakable part of the Russian governments efforts to
weakenin some cases beyond recognitionthe checks and balances needed for
an accountable government. In May oversight of NGOs was transferred from the
Federal Registration Service to the Ministry of Justice, raising hopes that the law
would be implemented less selectively, but as of this writing the transfer appears
to have had little practical effect.
In April Russias Supreme Court upheld the liquidation of Sodeistvie, a refugee
assistance NGO in Vladimir. Sodeistvie had submitted an activity report in 2007
but was liquidated for failure to submit past reports; a violation the government
argued could not be remedied.
Two offices of the voters rights NGO Golos suffered harassment, apparently to
interfere with elections-related work. In the two weeks before the presidential
election, Novosibirsk authorities made numerous onerous demands for documents
from Goloss regional affiliate. In Samara the prosecutor ordered the Golos
director to undergo psychiatric and drug examinations while investigating specious
accusations of software piracy.
2007 amendments to the extremism law allow any politically or ideologically
motivated crime to be designated extremist. Russian authorities apply these provisions
to silence government critics, and in 2008 initiated cases against NGOs,
activists, and independent media, including internet sites and blogs. The Nizhni
Novgorod environmental NGO Dront received a warning for unspecified extremist
content on its website. In August the Moscow City Court upheld the liquidation of
the independent news website Ingushetiya.ru for extremism.
In July a court in Syktyvkar convicted Savva Terentyev for inciting hatred against
police for a blog comment. A blogger associated with the youth political organization
Oborona came under investigation for allegedly inciting hatred against the
Federal Security Service (the state security police), having criticized them for corruption
and attempting to close Oborona. In both cases incitement provisions were applied on the basis of officially characterizing the respective police forces
as social groups.
The North Caucasus
In Chechnya the armed conflict has subsided and significant reconstruction is
ongoing in Grozny, the capital. However, security forces loyal to Chechen
President Ramzan Kadyrov continued to use torture and illegal detention, especially
against those with suspected rebel ties. A growing atmosphere of intimidation
fostered by the government in Chechnya inhibits human rights monitoring
and accountability for human rights abuses.
Local human rights groups continued to report a decline in the number of
enforced disappearances, documenting 30 abductions leading to nine disappearances
by September. However, few efforts have been made to address the cases
of as many as 5,000 people disappeared since 1999. On August 3, 2008,
Mokhmadsalakh Masaev was abducted and disappeared, less than a month
after a newspaper published his account of ill-treatment during four months in a
secret prison in Chechnya. A local police station refused to register the abduction
report filed by Masaevs brother.
Violence continued elsewhere in the North Caucasus, with armed clashes
between rebels and police in Ingushetia and Dagestan. In Ingushetia law enforcement
and security forces involved in counterinsurgency committed serious human
rights abuses including summary and arbitrary detentions, acts of torture and illtreatment,
enforced disappearances, and extrajudicial executions.
On January 26, police in Nazran, Ingushetia, arrested 10 journalists and two
human rights defenders monitoring a violent demonstration against government
repression and corruption. Two of the journalists, Said-Khussein Tsarnaev and
Mustafa Kurskiev, were kept overnight in custody and denied access to counsel,
food, and water. Police severely beat Kurskiev, then denied him access to medical
care.
In July approximately 50 armed members of the security forces in military vehicles
took Zurab Tsechoev of the human rights group Mashr from his home in Magas,
Ingushetia. Tsechoev was blindfolded and driven to an unknown location. His abductors accused him of working for Ingushetiya.ru, beat him causing serious
injuries to his chest and legs, and threatened his family.
On August 31 Magomed Yevloev, owner of Ingushetiya.ru, was shot in the head
while in police custody after being detained at Nazran airport. The killing was
ruled accidental, and no disciplinary measures were taken. Yevloevs killing and
the lack of accountability for the perpetrators prompted public indignation
against the Ingush authorities. Alleged insurgent attacks increased in the republic
in the latter part of 2008. Against this background, on October 30 President
Medvedev dismissed Murat Zyazikov as president of Ingushetia and replaced him
with a military general, Yunus-Bek Yevkurov. Political and civic activists in
Ingushetia expressed hopes that the new president would be capable of overcoming
the republics pressing human rights and security challenges.
In October the trial of 59 alleged participants in the 2005 Nalchik uprising, in
Kabardino-Balkaria, began again after a long delay. Many of the defendants have
alleged torture and other abuses while in custody.
Migrant Construction Workers
Russia has between 4 and 9 million migrant workers, over 80 percent of whom
come from other countries of the former Soviet Union. Forty percent of migrant
workers are employed in construction, where they face abuses that include confiscation
of passports, denial of contracts, non-payment or delayed payment of
wages, and unsafe working conditions. Some employers threaten or use violence
to intimidate workers who protest against non-payment. Police frequently use
document inspections to extort money from visible minorities, including migrant
workers, and may physically abuse them or force them to perform work for free.
Although Russia has liberalized migration policy in recent years, migrant workers
have few effective options for redress for these abuses.
HIV and Drug Dependence
Hundreds of thousands of people in Russia are dependent on drugs and at immediate
risk of HIV infection. While Russia has made considerable progress expanding
access to antiretroviral treatment for people living with HIV, its efforts to ensure that injection drug users have access to effective drug dependence treatment
servicesa key factor in both general HIV prevention and treatment for
injection drug usershave fallen far short.
Methadone maintenance therapy helps reduce HIV infections as it enables many
patients to stop using illicit drugs or helps them adopt less risky injection behavior;
it also helps drug users obtain and adhere to antiretroviral treatment. Yet
Russia refuses to make maintenance therapy available to drug-dependent people
and has banned the use of methadone for treatment purposes. Available drug
treatment services are insufficiently accessible, incomplete, and often not based
on scientific evidence.
Key International Actors
While many global leaders expressed concern over developments in Russia, such
as the war over South Ossetia and restrictions on civil society, human rights
issues remained on the margins of Russias bilateral and multilateral relations,
with many key interlocutors failing to press Russia for reform or to challenge it on
entrenched problems.
The European Union held two rounds of human rights consultations with Russia,
meetings ultimately undermined by the lack of high-level Russian participation or
adequate follow-up mechanisms. Human rights did not figure prominently in the
broader EU-Russia agenda. Due to Russias military actions in Georgia, in
September the EU froze negotiations to renew its Partnership and Cooperation
Agreement with Russia, which expired in December 2007, but the EU decided in
November 2008 to resume the negotiations.
The United States government issued several strong statements on human rights
but lacked the leverage to challenge Russia meaningfully on its worsening human
rights record.
Russia has served on the new United Nations Human Rights Council since its
inception in May 2006, and is due to be reviewed under its Universal Periodic
Review mechanism in February 2009. The government has not fulfilled its obligation
to cooperate fully with UN human rights mechanisms, including the UN special
rapporteur on torture, who canceled a visit planned for October 2006 and has remained unable to visit the country due to the governments continued refusal to
provide conditions that accord with the mandates terms of reference.
The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe resumed its monitoring
mandate on Chechnya. An introductory memorandum declassified in April 2008
concluded that abductions, secret detentions and torture remained commonplace
and termed the rights situation in the North Caucasus by far the most
alarming in the whole of the geographical area covered by the Council of Europe.
A fact-finding visit and full report were repeatedly postponed, most recently due
to the conflict over South Ossetia.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) announced that crimes committed by all
parties to the conflict over South Ossetia are under analysis by the ICC prosecutor.
Although not an ICC state party, Russia has provided the ICC with evidence of
what it claims are Georgian crimes.
Unable to secure justice domestically, hundreds of victims of abuse in Chechnya
have filed applications with the European Court of Human Rights. In more than 50
rulings to date, the court found Russia responsible for serious human rights abuses
in Chechnya, including torture, extrajudicial executions, and enforced disappearances.
In every ruling the court has found a failure by the Russian government
to launch a meaningful investigation. Russia has not sufficiently implemented
the general measures recommended by the court to remedy systemic problems
and prevent abuses from recurring. Russia remains the only Council of
Europe member not to have ratified Protocol 14 of the courts charter, which
would streamline the courts procedures and reduce backlog.
Serbia
Kosovo declared independence from Serbia on February 17, 2008. This is rejected
by Serbia, and it has not clarified Kosovos international legal status, although an
independent Kosovo has been recognized by a number of key bilateral partners of
both Serbia and Kosovo including several European Union states.
In Serbia the formation in June of a new coalition government produced dramatic
results on war crimes, with the arrest of Radovan Karadzic and his transfer to the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). But the government
failed to arrest Ratko Mladic. There was a wave of attacks against ethnic
Albanian businesses and homes following Kosovos independence declaration.
The Roma minority remains vulnerable. Human rights defenders and journalists
came under renewed pressure.
War Crimes Accountability
On July 30 Radovan Karadzic was transferred from Serbia to the ICTY, 13 years
after his indictment (see also Bosnia chapter). The arrest was a significant breakthrough
in Serbias cooperation with the tribunal, reflecting the growing authority
within the government of President Boris Tadics Democratic Party. The previous
month Serbia transferred to the ICTY Stojan Zupljanin, a former commander of
Bosnian Serb police. Widespread public hostility to the ICTY persists.
ICTY indictees Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic remain at large at this writing.
Serbias special prosecutor for war crimes, Vladimir Vukcevic, reiterated in August
that the arrest of both fugitives was a priority for Belgrade. In August the president
of Serbias national council on ICTY cooperation, Rasim Ljajic, said that
Mladic hid in military barracks in Belgrade from June 2002 until the end of 2005.
During a September visit to Serbia ICTY Prosecutor Serge Brammertz expressed
careful optimism that Mladic would be arrested soon, but declined publicly
to assess Serbias cooperation with the ICTY.
In October ICTY judges upheld the conviction of Milan Martic for crimes committed
during the shelling of Zagreb in 1995, sentencing him to 35 years imprisonment.
The trial of Vojislav Seselj at the tribunal continued during 2008, where he is accused of helping to orchestrate the wartime mass expulsion of Muslims,
Croats, and other non-Serbs from Croatia, Bosnia, and Serbia. Other continuing
high-profile trials included those of Milan Milutinovic, Dragoljub Ojdanic, Nikola
Sainovic, Nebojsa Pavkovic, and Vladimir Lazarevic.
The Belgrade War Crimes Chamber continues its efforts to hold alleged perpetrators
accountable for wartime abuses, despite limited funding, inadequate political
support, and little public awareness of its work. In August the chamber indicted
Branko Grujic and Branko Popovic for war crimes against Bosniak civilians in
the area of Zvornik. The Suva Reka trial, relating to the killing of Kosovo
Albanians in 1999, was among the seven ongoing prosecutions in the chamber
during 2008. The trial of four Scorpion paramilitary members, accused of war
crimes against Kosovo Albanians, resumed in October. In September Serbias
Supreme Court ruled on appeals against the 2007 convictions of four members of
another Scorpion paramilitary unit operating in the area of Srebrenica. It upheld
the convictions of three defendants (reducing one sentence from 20 to 15 years),
and ordered the retrial of the fourth, pointing to alleged irregularities in the original
trial.
War crimes special prosecutor Vukcevic continued to receive death threats, especially
following the arrests and transfer of Karadzic and Zupljanin. In October
Vukcevic made a formal request to the Albanian government to visit Albania to
investigate the alleged abduction, transfer to Albania, and murder of Kosovo
Serbs in 1999. Albanian authorities responded positively, but the visit had yet to
take place at this writing.
In June the Supreme Court sentenced former secret police chief Radomir Markovic
to 40 years imprisonment, and several other defendants to long prison terms, for
the attempted murder of opposition leader Vuk Draskovic in October 1999. Four
aides to Draskovic had been killed in the staged road accident. The verdict concluded
an eight-year cycle of trials, during which three earlier decisions of lower
courts had been annulled by the Supreme Court, which ultimately tried the case
itself.
Treatment of Minorities
Kosovos declaration of independence on February 17 triggered public anger in
Serbia. In the days that followed, ethnic Albanians suffered acts of harassment
and intimidation, many involving smashing the windows of business and homes,
as well as attempted arson, the spraying of hate graffiti, and intimidating protests
in front of homes and businesses. The response of the Serbian authorities was
inadequate: The police were more active in safeguarding minority-owned businesses
after the attacks than during a wave of similar attacks in 2003 and 2004,
but they failed to take preemptive action to protect minority homes and businesses
and generally failed to identify perpetrators, even when police were present
during attacks. Few perpetrators were charged with attacks by misdemeanor
judges or by municipal and district prosecutors.
The Roma minority continues to suffer discrimination and economic and political
marginalization; it has the highest rate of unemployment and school dropouts,
and over half live below the poverty line. During a September visit to Serbia the
Council of Europe commissioner for human rights highlighted the inhumane conditions
and social exclusion experienced by Roma.
In August Roma activists and 450 residents in Kursumlija called for a public investigation
into allegations that three local police officers beat two Roma men.
Following public pressure, the police suspended the three officers and launched
an investigation to determine whether excessive force had been used.
Internally Displaced Persons and Refugees
There was little progress in finding durable solutions for the more than 200,000
internally displaced persons and almost 100,000 refugees in Serbia. Both groups
face ongoing problems with documents, housing, and employment. More than
7,000 refugees from Bosnia and Croatia, and displaced persons from Kosovo
remain in collective centers, often in substandard conditions. The forced removal
from Western Europe of Roma from Kosovo and elsewhere in Serbia continues to
place a burden on Roma communities.
Media Freedom
The independent news organization B92 received threats in February, and during
mass protests in Belgrade linked to Kosovo on February 21, an arson attempt was
made on its offices, but was prevented by a police cordon. B92 cameraman
Bosko Brankovic and Beta news agency correspondent Milos Djorelijevski were
severely beaten while covering a protest in July against the arrest of Radovan
Karadzic, but in August and October members of two ultranationalist groups
forced their way into Betas offices, demanding coverage of protests against
Karadzics arrest. They were removed by p0lice.
Two journalists from the news weekly Nedeljni Telegraf received death threats on
March 24 in a letter signed by the Red Berets (a disbanded special police unit).
The reasons for the threats were unclear. Vukasin Obradovic, owner and editor-inchief
of the weekly Vranjske, received repeated threatening phone calls in early
November, apparently related to the magazines coverage of organized crime. The
police promptly deployed patrols around the Vranjske offices and Obradovics
home.
Human Rights Defenders
In February the executive director of the Humanitarian Law Center, Natasa Kandic,
was subjected to threats after attending the session of the Kosovo Assembly at
which it proclaimed independence from Serbia. Activists from the Socialist Party
of Serbia collected signatures to lodge a criminal complaint against Kandic,
accusing her of threatening the constitution and the state; she was not charged,
however. The newspapers Kurir and Vecernje Novosti respectively referred to
Kandic as a traitor and a woman who does not exist.
The Helsinki Committee for Human Rights in Serbia and its director Sonja Biserko
received threats in September linked to their work on war crimes accountability.
Ultranationalists protested outside the groups office on September 30. On
October 2, Biserkos home address was published by a tabloid newspaper article
calling her a traitor. She was subsequently placed under police protection.
Key International Actors
The European Union signed a Stabilization and Association Agreement with
Serbia in April, despite its failure to transfer Mladic to the ICTY. At this writing, EU
member states have yet to ratify the agreement, a move dependent on full cooperation
with the ICTY. In September the EU decided not to offer interim trade benefits
to Serbia, after the Dutch government refused to ratify the deal, citing
Serbias failure to apprehend Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic. The European
Commissions regular report on Serbia published in November highlighted
Mladic, and the plight of Roma.
The UN Human Rights Council was due to consider Serbia under its Universal
Periodic Review mechanism in December 2008.
The Council of Europes Commission against Racism and Intolerance published a
report on Serbia in April. It recommended improved legal protection for religious
minorities, enhanced legal remedies for racial discrimination, bringing to justice
the perpetrators of attacks against religious and ethnic minorities, and improved
living conditions for Roma.
Kosovo
Not only did Kosovos declaration of independence from Serbia in February fail to
clarify its international legal status, but it also brought no visible improvements to
human rights conditions. The weak criminal justice system frustrates efforts to
tackle impunity for ethnic violence and other serious crimes. Minorities face continued
violence and discrimination. Few displaced persons and refugees returned
to their homes, even as forced returns from Western Europe increased.
Uncertainty over the status of the UN interim administration in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and successor EU missions hindered their effectiveness. Kosovos status plan,
based on the so-called Ahtisaari plan (envisioned by the UN chief negotiator
Martti Ahtisaari) proposed that an EU-led International Civilian Office (ICO) and
EU police and justice mission (EULEX) would assume responsibility from UNMIK
following Kosovos declaration of independence. But the UN Security Council
failed to agree the change, delaying the deployment of EULEX, and leaving a gap
in oversight of the justice system. The UN secretary-general approved in June a more informal transfer of responsibility to EULEX and a scaled down role for
UNMIK. At this writing EULEX has yet to deploy to the Serb-controlled north of
Kosovo, a process complicated by objections from authorities in Pristina and
Belgrade about the implications for Kosovos status. The status of the ICO
remains unclear.
The NATO-led Kosovo peacekeeping force, KFOR, remains deployed throughout
Kosovo, including in the north. In the first six months of 2008 the number of
troops decreased from 15,900 to 14,759.
Protection of Minorities
There was limited violence following Kosovos declaration of independence, most
of it concentrated in the north of Mitrovica. Forty-five ethnically motivated incidents
(18 in Mitrovica) were recorded by the Kosovo Police Service (KPS) in the
first six months of the year, down from the 31 it recorded in Mitrovica during the
same period in 2007. UNMIK, which recorded almost 200 inter-ethnic incidents
in 2007, did not provide figures for 2008.
In January and February 2008, buses carrying Serbs and Gorani were stopped and
searched by armed masked men. No one was hurt and the perpetrators have not
been identified. On two separate occasions in April shots were fired at the
Serbian village of Banjski Suvi Do from a nearby Albanian village. The KPS and
KFOR attended promptly on both occasions, but the perpetrators have not been
identified. In May an elderly Serbian returnee to Decani was beaten up. The investigation
into this incident was still ongoing at this writing.
A Ukrainian policeman was killed and more than 150 people injured during clashes
in Mitrovica on March 15, after Serbs tried to storm a UN courthouse. Tension
persisted in Mitrovica in subsequent months, resulting in renewed clashes on
August 4 during which three Serbs and one international policeman were injured.
Roma, Ashkali, and Egyptians (RAE) face persistent discrimination, particularly in
employment and access to public services, and continue to be affected by the
highest unemployment, school drop-out, and mortality rates in Kosovo.
Return of Refugees and Displaced Persons
The number of voluntary returns to Kosovo, including from Serbia, continues to
decline, with only 229 (including 80 Serbs) registered during the first eight
months of the year. Returns are hampered by the unstable political situation and
the lack of conditions for sustainable return, including employment and social
services. According to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Serbs,
Roma, and Albanians from areas where they are in the minority remain in need of
international protection.
A survey by the Mitrovica Institute of Public Health in May concluded that lead
levels among displaced RAE in camps in North Mitrovica remain dangerously
high, despite efforts to administer treatment for lead contamination. The
Ombudsperson launched an investigation into the issue in July 2008. Efforts to
return RAE to their homes in Mitrovica continued, with 14 families returned to
newly reconstructed homes in 2008.
Forced returns from Western Europe continued, with 1,727 persons returned in the
first eight months of 2008, including 437 from Germany and 290 from
Switzerland. While UNMIK continues to directly manage such returns, the Kosovo
Ministry of Internal Affairs is now responsible for monitoring the process. But the
governments reintegration strategy, which foresees 5,000 returns per annum,
lacks mechanisms to ensure the access to documentation and housing necessary
to facilitate reintegration.
Impunity and Access to Justice
Ramush Haradinaj, a former commander of the Kosovo Liberation Army, was
acquitted by the ICTY on April 3, 2008. Haradinaj, who was Kosovos prime minister
at the time of his indictment, had been accused of murder, persecution, rape,
and torture during the Kosovo conflict. ICTY judges found him not guilty on all
counts. The court cited significant difficulties in obtaining testimony of many witnesses
due to security concerns. One co-defendant, Idriz Balaj, was found not
guilty on all counts, while another, Lahi Brahimaj, was convicted and sentenced
to six years imprisonment. Prosecution appeals against the two acquittals and Brahimajs sentence, and an appeal by Brahimaj against conviction, are pending
at this writing.
In July the ICTY convicted well-known Kosovar journalist Baton Haxhiu for contempt
of court for revealing the identity of a protected witness who testified during
the Haradinaj trial. He was fined 7,000.
Kosovos criminal justice system continued to be the weakest of its main institutions.
A 2004 law requiring prosecutors, rather than judges, to take the lead in
investigating cases has yet to be fully implemented. Insufficient coordination
between police and prosecutors, and between national and international actors,
remains a barrier to the effective administration of justice. The absence of designated
judicial police, as required by the law, undermines the ability of police to
meaningfully assist prosecutors. The electronic case management system is still
not operational.
Witness protection is a particular problem, especially in cases involving organized
crime, war crimes, and attacks on minorities. Widespread witness intimidation
and harassment mean that many witnesses are unwilling to come forward.
Kosovo lacks a witness protection law, and judges and prosecutors often fail to
use those measures that are available. Reluctance on the part of Western governments
to host witnesses and their families hampers witness relocation.
The number of active war crimes prosecutions remains low. The ongoing trials
include that of ethnic Albanian Gani Gashi, accused of killing Albanian civilians in
1998. Ethnic Serb Momcilo Jovanovic was arrested in March for crimes against
Albanian civilians in 1999. In May ethnic Serb Miroslav Vuckovic was sentenced to
eight years imprisonment for crimes against ethnic Albanian civilians in May
1999, including endangering lives through the use of explosives and firearms,
property destruction, theft, and looting.
There was little progress in bringing to justice persons responsible for the most
serious crimes arising from riots in the March 2004. According to the latest statistics
from UNMIK, by the end of October 2008, 35 people had been convicted on
charges of arson, looting, inciting racial, religious and ethnic hatred, and assault,
the same number as at the end of January.
There was also little progress in determining the fate of missing persons. As of
April 2008, 1,963 personsthe majority Kosovo Albanianremain missing. In
June the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe nominated Dick Marty
as rapporteur to investigate the fate of missing Serbs allegedly transferred to
northern Albania after June 1999. The Kosovo government has refused to investigate
the allegations.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders are largely free to operate without hindrance from international
authorities or the Kosovo government.
The Ombudsperson Institution remains compromised by the failure of the Kosovo
Assembly to appoint an ombudsperson, with the process restarted in September
2008 for the third time. The institution has had an acting ombudsperson since
2006. But UNMIKs cooperation improved, with progress on addressing the backlog
of correspondence and requests from the Ombudsperson. At this writing,
EULEX had yet to initiate cooperation with the institution.
The Human Rights Advisory Panel has received over 30 cases, dealing with
alleged property rights violations, access to court, and challenges to UNMIK executive
decisions. At this writing EULEX had yet to indicate whether the panel can
receive complaints against it. In December 2007 the families of two protestors
killed by Romanian UN police in 2007 filed their claim with the panel. In
September the UN Special Representative of the Secretary General (SRSG) argued
that the claim was inadmissible because of a failure to exhaust alternative remedies.
The SRSG has not provided a response to the merits of the complaint to
date, despite a request from the panel. The panel decided in October to convene
a public hearing in January 2009 to consider the admissibility and merits of the
case. At this writing, it had yet to issue a recommendation in relation to any case
before it.
Key International Actors
In October the United Nations General Assembly approved Serbias request for a
ruling by the International Court of Justice on whether Kosovos unilateral declaration
of independence accords with international law.
Tajikistan
Tajikistans human rights problems are numerous and chronic, including lack of
access to justice, due process violations, and ill-treatment in custody. The government
also exercises excessive control over NGOs, religious organizations, political
parties, and the media.
Tajikistan is on the United Nations list of 12 countries most adversely affected by
the global food crisis. At the start of 2008 severe lack of electricity, due in part to
low water levels and government mismanagement, left many without heat during
an unusually cold winter. As urban renewal continues in several cities, numerous
people have been evicted from their homes without adequate compensation.
These problems prompted an unusually high number of popular protests, all
small-scale and peaceful.
In March the International Monetary Fund demanded that Tajikistan give back
more than US$47 million in loans, after the Central Bank of Tajikistan intentionally
gave false information about the countrys financial state. The incident exposed
serious flaws in Tajikistans governance.
Institutional Human Rights Reform
In a positive move, in March 2008 the Constitutional Courts mandate was
extended to include, among other things, the right to initiate a review of any laws
compliance with the constitution and to consider complaints by legal persons.
On March 20, President Emomali Rahmon signed the Law on the Human Rights
Ombudsman, under which the ombudsman is appointed by the president and
later confirmed by parliament. At this writing, the ombudsman has not yet been
appointed.
Forced Evictions and Property Rights
The authorities in the capital, Dushanbe, continue to forcibly and sometimes violently
evict people living in the city center and resettle them on the city outskirts,
sometimes in unsafe buildings. The hundreds of victims include people whose homes will be demolished to make way for planned urban renewal, whose ownership
title or purchase agreements were declared illegal, and residents of dormitories
that were owned, and then privatized, by enterprises. Victims lack adequate
information, are not consulted properly about planned evictions, are inadequately
compensated for their property, and lack effective legal remedies. In some
cases police and marshals intimidate and beat persons resisting eviction.
Attempts by some to impede or challenge the evictions led to conflicts with law
enforcement bodies, and in most cases were not successful. In February 2008 a
Dushanbe court sentenced Bobodzhon Amirov to six years imprisonment for
obstructing law enforcement officials evicting his family; the sentence was
reduced by half on appeal. On April 15, a group of more than 20 women
approached the presidential administration building to hold a small protest to
express grievances about evictions. Police arrested the demonstrators, beating
and insulting some of them. The women were fined and released the same day.
Religious Freedom
At this writing, the government had not yet sent to parliament a controversial
draft law on religion that had been sharply criticized in 2007. Under the draft law,
all religious groups must reregister and meet such onerous conditions as providing
the address of any person who, at any point during the past 10 years, has
been a member. The draft also prohibits foreigners from chairing religious organizations.
According to Forum 18, an independent, international religious freedom group, on
September 29, 2008, a Dushanbe court reaffirmed the ban on activities of
Jehovahs Witnesses imposed in 2007. A large consignment of Jehovahs Witness
literature seized by customs in 2007 remains impounded. Two registered
Christian groups that were suspended in 2007 could not operate as the government
raised objections to their charters.
The Dushanbe synagogue was bulldozed in June, two months after a court ruled
that its architecture was inconsistent with that of the presidential palace under
construction nearby. The government did not compensate the Jewish community
or provide it with an alternate location for worship. At this writing, the Protestant church Grace Sunmin was about to lose its building for worship in Dushanbe, pursuant
to a ruling that the churchs 1997 purchase of the building was illegal.
Actions in the Name of Countering Terrorism and Extremism
Following a recommendation by the prosecutor general, the Supreme Court of
Tajikistan designated Hizb ut-Tahrir, a group that supports the reestablishment of
the Caliphate, or Islamic state, by peaceful means, an extremist organization.
The government continued to arrest alleged Hizb ut-Tahrir members and convict
them either of sedition or incitement to racial, ethnic, or religious hatred, often
simply for possessing the organizations leaflets.
Civil Society
The government continues to prohibit unregistered NGOs from operating and to
use burdensome registration requirements to unduly interfere with the activities
of local and international NGOs. More than a year after the new NGO law entered
into force, a Ministry of Justice official reported in April that of 3,130 NGOs registered
in previous years, only 1,390 had been reregistered, as had 116 of 145 previously
registered international organizations. It is not known how many NGO registration
applications were denied as opposed to how many NGOs did not have the
human or financial resources to apply for reregistration (local NGOs complained
that reregistration was a time-consuming and demanding process).
The National Democratic Institute, a US NGO, closed its Dushanbe office in May
2008, after the Justice Ministry denied for the third time in four months the organizations
registration application. Also in May, the ministry imposed a threemonth
ban on Orphans, Refugees and Aid International, a Germany-based nondenominational
Christian relief organization, for allegedly proselytizing.
Freedom of Assembly and Expression
While several small, unsanctioned peaceful demonstrations protesting social and
economic problems took place in 2008, in April local authorities prohibited the
opposition Social Democratic Party from holding a demonstration in Khorog, the
capital of the Gorno-Badakhshan autonomous province. The authorities claimed that the issues to be protestedincluding the transfer of 98 hectares of land to
China, the legal status of Gorno Badakhshan, and local police actionswere
beyond the competence of municipal authorities.
Libel and slander continue to be criminal offenses in Tajikistan, and at least two
highly worrisome criminal cases are pending at this writing. In 2007 journalist
Tursunali Aliev was charged with libel for publishing an article alleging illegal privatizations
in Sugd province. The criminal case against him was closed after the
preliminary investigation but reopened in August 2008. In September the prosecutors
office started a criminal investigation against Dodojon Avotulloev, founder
of Charogi Ruz (an opposition newspaper published in exile) and leader of the
opposition movement Vatandor. Avotulloev, who had been living in exile in
Moscow, is facing charges of sedition and libel and slander of the president of
Tajikistan. Fearing extradition, Avotulloev left Russia for a third country.
Torture and Deaths in Custody
Tajikistans definition of torture does not comply fully with the UN Committee
Against Tortures recommendations to the country in December 2006. In a positive
move, in March 2008 the Criminal Procedure Code was amended to make evidence
obtained under torture inadmissible in court proceedings.
Experts agree that in most cases there is impunity for rampant torture in
Tajikistan. In one of the few cases that reached the courts, two policemen in
Khatlon province were convicted in August 2008 for ill-treating minors; one of the
two received a four-year prison sentence, and the other a suspended sentence.
NGOs and local media reported at least three deaths in custody in 2008, including
the death from cancer of the ex-deputy chair of the Party of Islamic Revival
Shamsiddin Shamsiddinov. The party alleged his arrest in 2003 was politically
motivated and claimed that his life could have been saved had he been allowed
to undergo surgery.
In an April 1, 2008 decision (Rakhmatov et al. v. Tajikistan) the UN Human Rights
Committee found that Tajikistan violated the rights, including freedom from torture,
of five applicants, two of them minors when they were arrested. Tajikistan
failed to cooperate with the committees consideration of the complaint. Similar violations were established in an October 30, 2008 decision (Khuseynov and
Butaev v. Tajikistan).
Womens Rights
Women and girls in Tajikistan continue to confront gender-based discrimination
and violence. Surveys indicate between one-third and one-half of women experience
domestic violence, of whom most have little access to redress. The parliament
has yet to pass a pending bill on domestic violence first drafted in
2006. The UN special rapporteur on violence against women visited Tajikistan in
May 2008. In her statement concluding the visit, she highlighted that women in
Tajikistan are caught within a web of poverty, patriarchy, and a weak protective
infrastructure, resulting in increased vulnerability to violence and discrimination
inside and outside their homes. She supported Tajikistans draft domestic violence
law and urged other measures  to enhance womens access to justice
and effective services to victims.
Key International Actors
On June 3, 2008, the chairman-in-office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) met with Tajikistans president and foreign minister in
Dushanbe. The three discussed a new comprehensive mandate for the OSCE
Office in Tajikistan. The chairman-in-office also raised such problems as lack of
prison access for the International Committee of the Red Cross, child labor, and
government interference with media freedom.
Turkey
A grave political crisis in 2008 halted progress in human rights reforms in Turkey
for much of the year. The ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) narrowly
escaped closure in July, with the Constitutional Court instead fining it for anti-secular
activities. The government failed to honor its post-election pledge to engage
in meaningful consultation on a new constitution, needed to strengthen respect
for rights.
With reform stalled, the protection of human rights continues to be eroded.
Human rights defenders and journalists critical of the state face prosecution,
although they continue to raise their voices loudly. Police abuse increased, with
particular concern for excessive use of force at public demonstrations and fatal
shootings of civilians. Widespread impunity for abuses by the police and other
security forces remains.
Freedom of Expression, Association, and Assembly
Turkeys chief prosecutor launched a case in March to close down the ruling party
on the grounds that it engaged in unconstitutional anti-secular activities, citing
statements by the AKP leadership and the governments attempt in February, by
parliamentary vote, to lift the constitutional ban on wearing the headscarf at university
campuses.
The European Union and Council of Europe warned that closure of the party on
the basis of the evidence presented would be a major blow to democracy. It
would also have violated freedom of expression, association, and the right to
political participation. The court ruled on July 30 that the AKP had engaged in
anti-secular activity, but fell one vote short of closing the party; the penalty
imposed instead was to cut its treasury funding.
The pro-Kurdish Democratic Society Party also faced possible closure by the
Constitutional Court for activities and speeches deemed by the prosecutor to constitute
separatism. The courts January 2008 ruling against the closure of the pro-
Kurdish Rights and Freedoms Party set a precedent: statements about the Kurdish
problem fall within the boundaries of free speech.
Critical and open debate increased, even as restrictions on free speech continue.
In May the government made what amount to cosmetic amendments to article
301 of the 2005 Penal Code criminalizing statements that publicly denigrate
Turkishness or state institutions, following intense pressure from the European
Union. While the Ministry of Justice must now grant permission for investigations
under article 301, in a number of cases it did so in 2008.
Prosecutors used other articles of the penal code, press law, and anti-terror law
to prosecute speech in 2008, and hundreds of journalists, writers, publishers,
academics, human rights defenders, and officials of Kurdish political parties and
associations were tried and sometimes convicted, in some cases at the initiative
of the government. The courts restricted access to numerous websitesincluding
YouTubeduring 2008.
The manner in which the government chose to address the issue of women wearing
headscarves at university, and the ensuing political and constitutional confrontation,
had the effect of failing to ameliorate the situation of thousands of
women. The Constitutional Court on June 5 overturned Februarys parliamentary
decision allowing headscarves at university.
Human Rights Defenders
The trial continued of 19 people accused of the January 2007 murder of Turkish-
Armenian journalist and human rights defender Hrant Dink. At this writing, there
has yet to be a breakthrough in uncovering a conspiracy behind the killing.
Reports by the Parliamentary Human Rights Investigative Commission in July, and
by the Prime Ministry Inspectorate in November point to multiple failures by state
authorities to act on intelligence reports about plans to murder Dink, and support
the Dink family lawyers demand for criminal investigation of the Trabzon and
Istanbul police. At this writing, the trial of two junior Trabzon gendarmerie members
is ongoing, and permission has been granted for criminal investigation of six
other gendarmerie members.
Most convictions of human rights defenders for speech-related offenses or under
the anti-terror law result in fines and suspended sentences, making the prosecution
of two members of the Human Rights Association (HRA) stand out. Ethem Aikalin, chair of HRAs Adana branch, spent six months in pretrial detention following
his arrest in January for aiding and abetting an illegal organization after
attending a press conference organized by a legal political group. His prior 30-
month sentence for speech-related offenses is under appeal at this writing.
Ridvan Kizgin, former chair of HRAs Bingol branch, is currently serving two-and-ahalf
years for concealing evidence in the 2003 killing by unknown perpetrators
of five villagers. A related five-year sentence against him for aiding and abetting
an illegal organization is currently under appeal.
The decision by an Istanbul court in May 2008 to close Lambda Istanbul, a group
working on behalf of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people, highlighted
the hostile environment for the LGBT community in Turkey. The case was initiated
by the Istanbul governors office, which claimed the groups aims were against
law and morality, a view the court supported. Lambda has appealed.
Torture, Ill-Treatment, and Killings by Security Forces
Police torture and ill-treatment is on the rise since 2007. It occurs during arrest,
outside places of official detention, and during demonstrations, as well as in
detention centers. There were continuing reports of ill-treatment and cruel, inhuman,
and degrading conditions in prisons, and of fatal shootings of civilians by
police officers. Engin Ceber, age 29, died in a hospital in Istanbul on October 10
after being beaten in police custody and in prison.
During banned Newroz (Kurdish new year) celebrations in March, police used
excessive force, including indiscriminate beatings, against demonstrators and
children; and two people in Van and one in Yksekova were shot dead. Police
beat demonstrators indiscriminately at a May Day protest in Istanbul, and used
excessive force to disperse all peaceful assembly in and around the offices of the
trade union confederation DISK. The absence of a meaningful domestic investigation
into the violence precipitated DISK to apply in August to the European Court
of Human Rights. The application was pending at this writing.
Impunity
Turkish courts continued to show excessive leniency toward police and other
members of the security forces charged with abuse or misconduct, contributing to
impunity, the persistence of torture, and the unwarranted resort to lethal force.
There was no progress in bringing to justice members of security forces responsible
for the deaths of 30 prisoners during a series of prison transfers in December
2000. Two soldiers also died during the operation. In June 2008 the trial of soldiers
for ill-treatment and of guards for misconduct during transfer from
Bayrampasa prison, where 12 of the prisoners died, exceeded the statute of limitations
and collapsed. The main investigation into the deaths in that prison has
yet to be concluded.
The retrial of two gendarmerie officers previously convicted for the deadly
November 2005 bombing of a bookshop in Semdinli continued in the Van military
court. The officers were released on bail at the first hearing of the retrial in
December 2007 and, according to media reports, returned to active service in the
gendarmerie.
On October 20, 2008, the Ergenekon trial began. Over 100 defendantsincluding
retired military and gendarmerie personnel, figures associated with organized
crime, journalists, and academicsare charged with participating in an ultranationalist
conspiracy to foster a military coup through civil disturbance, violent
attacks, and planned assassinations. The criminal investigation was triggered by
the June 2007 discovery of hand grenades in the Istanbul house of a retired army
officer. Related grenades had been used in two attacks on the newspaper
Cumhuriyet in May 2006, perpetrated by the same gang responsible for the April
2006 attack on the Council of State that killed a judge. While there are doubts
that the criminal justice system is sufficiently empowered or independent to deal
effectively with the case, it provides an unprecedented opportunity for Turkey to
confront the negative role in political life played by elements of the military and
state.
Attacks on Civilians
Against a background of escalating armed clashes between the military and the
Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK), attacks on civilians continued. Attacks included a
suspected PKK bombing in Diyarbakir on January 3, killing six (four of them children);
bombings on July 27 in Istanbul, killing 17; and on July 9 outside the US
consulate in Ankara, killing six. In the latter two cases the identities of the perpetrators
remain unclear.
Key International Actors
The European Union remains the most important international actor with the
potential to foster respect for human rights in Turkey. The public hostility of some
EU member states, notably France and Germany, to eventual EU membership for
Turkeyeven if those countries did not block Turkey-EU negotiationslessened
the EUs leverage. The European Commission commented on the continuing lack
of progress on human rights in its annual progress report published in November.
At this writing, the European Court of Human Rights has issued 210 judgments
against Turkey in 2008 for torture, extrajudicial execution, unfair trial, and other
violations. In the November Grand Chamber judgment in Demir and Baykara v.
Turkeyof major significance for furthering workers rights in Turkey and across
Europethe court held that interference in the right of municipal civil servants to
unionize and the cancellation of a collective bargaining agreement violated the
rights of freedom of assembly and association under the European Convention. In
a September interim resolution about the implementation of European Court
judgments, the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe called on Turkey
to ensure effective investigations into members of security forces alleged to
have committed violations.
Turkmenistan
In the two years since the death of Turkmenistans president-for-life Saparmurad
Niazov, the government under President Gurbanguly Berdymukhamedov has abolished
aspects of his cult of personality, adopted a new constitution, and has
begun to reverse some of Niazovs most ruinous social policies. The government
ended the countrys self-imposed isolation and has attracted unprecedented
international interest in the countrys hydrocarbon wealth.
But Turkmenistan remains one of the most repressive and authoritarian countries
in the world because the government has not altered the institutions of repression
that characterized Niazovs rule. Hundreds of people, perhaps more, languish
in Turkmen prisons following unfair trials on what would appear to be politically
motivated charges. Draconian restrictions on freedom of expression, association,
movement, and religion remain in place. Teaching of the Ruhnama,
Niazovs book of the soul, has been cut back, but is still part of the state education
curriculum.
There is no possibility to establish and operate an independent NGO or media
outlet, and independent activists and journalists face government threats and
harassment. The severity of those restrictions, in particular, make it impossible to
assess a series of violent clashes in September 2008 that brought special forces
and armored vehicles to the streets of a neighborhood in Ashgabat, the capital.
The government stated that the clashes arose when law enforcement bodies
sought to disarm drug dealers. Independent sources blame law enforcement for
mishandling the situation, and put casualties at around a dozen dead and a similar
number wounded. Little is known about the clashes aftermath.
Constitutional Reform
The new constitution, adopted on September 26, 2008, dissolved the 2,507-
member Peoples Council (Halk Maslakhaty), the supreme government body that
had mixed legislative and executive powers and had been used by Niazov to rubberstamp
his decisions. But the constitutional reform otherwise strengthened the
already dominant institution of the presidency. The president appoints and dismisses
judges without parliamentary review, forms the central election commission, and has the right to issue edicts that are mandatory. There are no presidential
term limits. Political parties can be created, but a residency requirement
would automatically prevent all members of Turkmen opposition movements who
have been driven into exile from running for office. The constitution does not provide
for a constitutional court or ombudsman.
Civil Society and Media Freedom
Independent activists and journalists in Turkmenistan and in exile are under constant
threat of government reprisal for their work. Security services warned
activists in Turkmenistan not to meet with European Union and other officials who
visited the country, including the United Nations special rapporteur on freedom of
religion or belief. Government proxies tried to pressure at least two exiled human
rights activists to stop their work, and one exiled political activist, Annadyurdy
Khajiev, received death threats by phone in August 2008.
Sazak Durdymuradov, an unpaid contributor to Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty,
was seized in his home in June 2008, detained, and transferred to a psychiatric
clinic, where he was held for two weeks and beaten.
No independent organization has been permitted to carry out research on human
rights abuses inside the country, and no international agencygovernmental or
nongovernmentalhas had access to detention facilities. The utter vacuum of
human rights monitoring in Turkmenistan was highlighted by a June 2008
European Court of Human Rights decision (Ryabikin v. Russia), which held that a
Turkmen businessman living in Russia could not be extradited to Turkmenistan, in
part because the authorities systematically refused international observers
access to the country.
Political Prisoners, Government Purges, and
Enforced Disappearances
The harsh repression that prevents civic activism impedes determining the number
of political prisoners. Only one individual believed to be imprisoned for political
reasons was released in 2008, having served his full prison term. None benefited
from any of the three presidential pardons granting release to about 3,700 inmates. Well-known Niazov-era political prisoners, including Mukhmetkuli
Aimuradov, Annakurban Amanklychev, and Sapardurdy Khajiev remain behind
bars, the latter two in incommunicado detention.
Moreover, at least two persons were arrested in 2008 on politically motivated
grounds. Civil activist Valery Pal was arrested in February and sentenced in May to
12 years imprisonment on bogus embezzlement charges. In September Pal suffered
a stroke in prison. Gulgeldy Annaniazov, a former dissident who had
refugee status in Norway, returned to Ashgabat in June and was promptly arrested
and charged with illegal border crossing. On October 7, he was sentenced to 11
years imprisonment, the exact charges are unknown.
Still imprisoned are Ovezgeldy Ataev, the constitutionally designated successor to
Niazov, and his wife. The fate of about 50 prisoners implicated in the alleged
November 2002 attack on Niazovs life remains unknown, as do the whereabouts
of imprisoned former foreign minister Boris Shikhmuradov, his brother Konstantin
Shikhmuradov, and the former ambassador to the Organization for Security and
Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), Batyr Berdiev.
In a July 2008 decision (Komarovski v. Turkmenistan), the UN Human Rights
Committee found that in the aftermath of the alleged November 2002 attack the
authorities flagrantly abused the justice process and failed to investigate and
prosecute torture and arbitrary detention of suspects. The government so far has
taken no action to implement the decision. The utter lack of a system to prevent
torture and ill-treatment in Turkmenistan prompted the European Court of Human
Rights to issue a ruling in October 2008 (Soldatenko v. Ukraine) amounting to a
de facto ban on extraditions to the country.
Freedom of Movement
While some individuals have been permitted to travel abroad, the system of arbitrary
restrictions on foreign travel remains in place. For example, after spending
several months trying to clarify his status, Andrei Zatoka, an environmental
activist, in July 2008 received a letter from the Prosecutor Generals Office stating
that he is still prohibited from travelling abroad. No explanation was provided.
Rashid Ruzimatov and Irina Kakabaeva, relatives of an exiled former government
official, have been banned from travel abroad since 2003. Svetlana Orazova, sister
of opposition leader Khudaiberdy Orazov, and her husband Ovez Annaev cannot
travel abroad despite numerous attempts to challenge their travel ban in
court, most recently in April 2008. In October the daughter of Gulgeldy
Annaniazov and her family were not allowed to leave Turkmenistan.
Freedom of Religion
Following her September 2008 trip to Turkmenistan, the UN special rapporteur on
freedom of religion or belief noted that religious freedom has improved since
2007. But she raised concerns about vague or excessive legislation regulating religion
and its arbitrary implementation, prohibition of the activities of unregistered
religious communities, and continued restrictions on places of worship and on
importing religious material.
Key International Actors
Turkmenistan has hosted an unprecedented number of international delegations
and conferences, some of which have included policy discussions with the government
on human rights and the rule of law. The Turkmen government has misrepresented
these occasions as unequivocal support for government policies.
In February 2008 the European Parliament upheld the human rights benchmarks
previously adopted by its international trade committee. The Turkmen government
must fulfill the benchmarks before the European Union can proceed with an
Interim Trade Agreement with the country. These benchmarks include the release
of political prisoners, abolishing the impediments to travel abroad, realigning the
educational system with international standards, allowing free access for NGOs,
and permitting UN bodies to operate freely. Under the EUs Central Asia Strategy
the EU will guarantee loans by the European Investment Bank for projects in the
region. A European Parliament resolution adopted in September would impose
human rights conditionality on the lending, although at this writing the conditionality
mechanism has not been elaborated.
In June the EU held a structured human rights dialogue with Turkmenistan, as
part of its Central Asia strategy. But it failed publicly to comment on the numerous
serious problems marring the Turkmen governments human rights record,
including the arrests of Durdymuradov and Annaniazov, which coincided with the
talks.
The United States interest in Turkmenistans energy wealth prompted active
engagement with the Turkmen government and a reluctance to prioritize human
rights. President Bush met President Berdymukhamedov on the sidelines of the
April 2008 NATO summit.
The UN special rapporteur on religious freedom became the first UN special mandate
holder to gain access to the country. Nine other UN special procedures
remain barred from Turkmenistan as a result of the governments failure to extend
these monitors the required invitations for country visits. Turkmenistan appears
to treat its reporting obligation to various UN human rights bodies as a mere formality.
In its report for the UN Human Rights Councils Universal Periodic Review
due in December 2008, the Turkmen government did not recognize any serious
problems in meeting its human rights obligations. In September Turkmenistan
was also reviewed by the Human Rights Councils confidential complaint procedure,
a body which considers consistent patterns of gross and reliably attested
violations of all human rights. While the council did not appoint a special rapporteur
on Turkmenistan, it requested that the government respond to the numerous
individual complaints received and agreed to reexamine the situation during
its March 2009 session.
Ukraine
2008 proved to be another year of political turmoil in Ukraine. The longtime conflict
between President Viktor Yushchenko and parliament continued, despite the
appointment of Yulia Timoshenko as prime minister in late 2007 and the creation
of a coalition government with her party. During Augusts armed conflict in
Georgia and its breakaway region South Ossetia the political situation deteriorated,
and in September the coalition government collapsed, as the president and
prime minister could not agree on the proper response to Russias use of military
force in the conflict. In October Yushchenko issued a decree dissolving parliament.
When their dispute went to the courts, both sides attempted to interfere in
the judicial process: Yushchenko abolished a court that ruled in favor of a
Timoshenko challenge to his decree calling early parliamentary elections, and
parliamentarians from Timoshenkos party physically disrupted a subsequent
hearing of Yushchenkos appeal against that ruling.
Despite adoption of some important legislation, Ukraines human rights record
continued to be poor, with torture and ill-treatment in detention remaining commonplace.
Employment discrimination against women, hostility to asylum seekers,
hate attacks on ethnic minorities, and human rights abuses fueling Ukraines
staggering HIV/AIDS epidemic are all problems that the Ukrainian government
still fails to address effectively.
Criminal Justice System
A significant victory for Ukraines human rights community was the adoption of
the Criminal Justice and Law Enforcement Authorities reform, signed by President
Yushchenko on April 8, 2008. The reform was designed to bring the cumbersome
criminal justice system into line with international law. In particular, it aimed to
improve pretrial investigation procedures, strengthen protections for victims
rights, humanize the conditions and procedures of criminal punishment, and end
corruption in the judicial process.
Torture and ill-treatment in detention persist, however, as well as a myriad of abusive
conditions for detainees: overcrowding in jails and prisons, lack of adequate
sanitation, and too little light, food, water, and medical care.
Media Freedom
In March 2008 three former Interior Ministry police were convicted of the 2000
murder of journalist Georgy Gongadze. But there appeared to be no progress in
the search for those who ordered the murder. Media activists continue to demand
that this be meaningfully investigated.
Maxim Birovash, a correspondent for Business magazine, was assaulted in the
elevator of his apartment building on December 7, 2007. Two men knocked him to
the ground and stole his bag, which contained internal correspondence of the
Ministry of Internal Affairs, as well as other documents related to Birovashs
investigation into corruption in the issuance of passports. One assailant was
detained, tried, and sentenced to five years in prison. The second man was not
found, and the stolen documents were not recovered.
Employment Discrimination against Women
Although Ukraine has adopted legislation to ensure gender equality in employment,
including the Law on Equal Rights and Opportunities for Men and Women
and amendments to the Labor Code prohibiting gender discrimination in employment
and pay, research shows that women do not enjoy equal access to employment
opportunities. Both public and private employers regularly specify preferences
for men, and discriminate on the basis of age or the physical appearance
of potential female candidates during recruitment. Women are very often forced
into the low-paying, unregulated informal economy, and are disproportionately
affected by unemployment.
Treatment of Asylum Seekers and Migrants
The worrisome practice of removing refugees and asylum seekers continued in
2008. With no clear migration policy, Ukraine continues to deny asylum seekers
protection and often refuses to grant refugee status on murky procedural
grounds. Many migrants face deportation back to countries where they face torture
or ill-treatment. In March 2008 the Ukrainian government forcibly returned 11
ethnic Tamil refugees to Sri Lanka, despite the fact that all 11 were registered with
the Kyiv office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
Oleg Kuznetsov, a Russian national, was arrested on July 19, 2007, and held for a
year pending extradition. In March 2008 the State Committee on Nationalities
and Religion granted him refugee status. On July 21 the district administrative
court of Kyiv turned down the prosecutors appeal against the decision to grant
Kuznetsov asylum. Nevertheless, he was extradited to Russia a week later by
order of the prosecutor general, despite his refugee status and in violation of
Ukrainian refugee law.
Migrants and asylum seekers in detention commonly suffer violations of their fundamental
rights to legal counsel, to be informed of their rights, to inform a third
party of their detention, and to a fair trial.
Hate Crimes and Discrimination against Ethnic Minorities
Ukrainian human rights organizations note that nationalistic informal groups of
young people have been on the rise since 2005, carrying out physical assaults
and attacks on immigrants, refugees, asylum seekers, foreign students, and people
of non-Slavic appearance including Roma. In the first four months of 2008 the
Ministry of Internal Affairs reported 160 crimes against foreign nationals, including
seven murders. In response, the government created special criminal investigation
units for fighting racially motivated crimes, which have being operating in
several Ukrainian cities.
Crimean Tatars continue to endure discrimination, including unequal allocation of
land, unequal employment opportunities, unequal access to places of worship,
and unavailability of education in their native language.
Human Rights Abuses Fueling the HIV/AIDS Epidemic
The Ukrainian National AIDS Center reported nearly 11,000 newly registered cases
of HIV infection in the first seven months of 2008; 47 percent of newly registered
cases are among injection drug users. NGOs report continuing police interference
with the delivery of HIV prevention information and services. Those at highest risk
of HIV/AIDS, including drug users and sex workers, are particularly vulnerable to
police harassment and are frequently driven away from lifesaving services.
The government has taken important steps to increase access for drug users to
medication-assisted treatment (MAT) with methadone and buprenorphine, which
are widely recognized as among the most effective means to treat opiate dependence.
In December 2007 the government lifted restrictions on methadone
imports, and as of October 2008 more than 1,700 people received methadone or
buprenorphine in 51 healthcare institutions in 24 regions of Ukraine. There is no
MAT in prison, however, which means that drug users on MAT are forced to suffer
abrupt withdrawal when taken into state custody.
The Ministry of Health has taken measures to expand provision of antiretroviral
therapy for people living with HIV, although not on a scale sufficient to address
the need for it. When selecting candidates for antiretroviral therapy, medical institutions
frequently discriminate against drug users on the unfounded assumption
that they will not adhere to a rigorous course of treatment.
Key International Actors
In January 2008, then European Union Trade Commissioner Peter Mandelson and
Ukrainian Vice Prime Minister Hryhory Nemyrya signed an agreement outlining
final terms for Ukraines World Trade Organization membership. At the twelfth EUUkraine
Cooperation Council, the EU complimented Ukraine on its parliamentary
elections in September 2007, calling them a lively campaign and genuine political
competition. At the EU-Ukraine summit in Paris in September 2008 EU officials
underlined their support for Ukraines efforts to carry out vital political and
economic reforms.
The sharpening presidential-parliamentary conflict and ongoing problematic
human rights conditions were factors in NATOs deferring a decision to offer membership
to Ukraine in April 2008.
Ukraine was reviewed under the UN Human Rights Councils Universal Periodic
Review mechanism in May 2008. The outcome of this review was a set of recommendations
related to discrimination and hate crimes, ending torture, investigating
violence against journalists, and creating a more orderly process for refugees
and asylum seekers in accordance with UNHCR guidelines.
The Legal Affairs Committee of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe (PACE) called for a proper investigation to bring to justice those responsible
for ordering the murder of journalist Georgy Gongadze. After a fact-finding
mission in 2007, PACE officials called on Ukraine to finally launch reforms of the
judicial and penal systems.
The number of individual applications to the European Court of Human Rights
against Ukraine has been steadily increasing over the years; in 2007 there were
4,502 applications allocated to a decision body, and a further 4,144 in the first 10
months of 2008. The court handed down 109 judgments against Ukraine in 2007,
mostly concerning torture and discrimination. Between January and November 1,
2008, the court found against Ukraine in 77 cases, mainly involving fair trial and
property rights.
Uzbekistan
The Uzbek governments human rights record remains abysmal. In 2008 the
authorities continued to suppress independent civil society activism and religious
worship, and to deny accountability for the 2005 Andijan massacre, touting their
own version of the events to foreign government representatives. Yet international
pressure on the Uzbek government declined with the suspension and subsequent
partial lifting of European Union sanctions.
Uzbekistan held presidential elections on December 23, 2007. According to the
official tally, President Islam Karimov won reelection to a third term with 88.1 percent
of the vote, but the elections lacked any competitiveness and failed to meet
international standards. The legality of Karimovs third term was in question as he
had already served the maximum two consecutive terms allowed by the constitution.
The lack of rule of law continues to be a fundamental, structural problem. The
judiciary lacks independence and the weak parliament does not effectively check
executive power. A deeply entrenched culture of impunity for abuses persists.
Local media outlets are not free and the government refuses to accredit foreign
journalists, while also blocking access to many websites offering independent
information on Uzbekistan and on topics deemed sensitive by the government.
Forced child labor in the cotton fields remains a key rights concern.
Human Rights Defenders and Independent Journalists
The Uzbek government continues to crack down on civil society, detaining and
threatening rights defenders, journalists, and others with prosecution for their
peaceful activism. Uzbekistan continues to hold at least 11 human rights defenders
and independent journalists in prison on politically-motivated charges, and at
least two new arrests occurred in 2008. These activists languish in prison following
sham trials, serving lengthy sentences solely because of their legitimate
human rights or civic activism. Among them is Jamshid Karimov, an independent
journalist, who has been confined in a closed psychiatric ward since September
2006.
On October 10, 2008, a court in Nukus sentenced Solijon Abdurakhmanov, an
independent journalist known for his critical reporting, especially on corruption,
to 10 years in prison for selling drugs. Abdurakhmanov denies the charges and
his lawyer believes that the police planted the drugs. Police investigators failed to
carry out basic investigative steps such as fingerprinting the drugs despite the
lawyers repeated requests.
On October 23, a court in Manget sentenced Akzam Turgunov, head of the human
rights organization Mazlum, to 10 years in prison on fabricated extortion charges.
He had been arrested on July 11, and three days later, while in a police investigators
office writing a statement, someone poured boiling water down Turgunovs
neck and back, severely scalding him and causing him to lose consciousness. The
authorities refused to investigate the abuse until Turgunov removed his shirt to
reveal his burn scars during a court hearing on September 16.
Uzbek authorities continue to imprison other independent civic activists for politically-
motivated reasons. One such case is that of Yusuf Juma, a poet and dissident
sentenced to five years in a penal colony after calling during a picket for
President Karimovs resignation. Two of Jumas sons, Bobur and Mashrab, have
also been imprisoned on trumped-up charges apparently in retaliation for their
fathers activism.
In January-February 2008 the government released seven human rights defenders,
and another two in October, apparently as a gesture toward the European
Union. However, nearly all of them were required to sign pledges agreeing to
restrict their activities as a condition of release, and after release were subjected
to close surveillance and harassment. The authorities prevented the released
defenders from meeting with foreign visitors and generally from pursuing their
human rights work. Two fled the country, fearing for their safety.
The few international NGOs that remain in Uzbekistan operate in a climate of government
pressure and harassment. The government refused to allow any of the
previously expelled foreign NGOs to return, although at least two of them
attempted to do so. Human Rights Watch was forced to suspend its operations in
the country in July after the government denied work accreditation to, and then
outright banned its researcher from entering Uzbekistan.
The Andijan Massacre and the Situation of Refugees
The Uzbek government has adamantly rejected numerous and repeated calls for
an independent international inquiry into the May 2005 Andijan massacre, when
government forces killed hundreds of protestors, most of them unarmed. The circumstances
surrounding the massacre have not been clarified, and those responsible
for the killings have not been held accountable. The government continues
to persecute anyone whom it deems to have any connection to or information
about the Andijan events.
Refugees, who fled Uzbekistan in the immediate aftermath of the massacre and
later returned to the country, as well as their families, have been a particular target
of government pressure. They have been subjected to interrogations, constant
surveillance, ostracism, and in some cases overt threats to life, which has triggered
a new wave of refugees.
Refugees in neighboring countries fear for their security because Uzbek security
forces operate in some areas across the border, such as Osh, Kyrgyzstan. The
Uzbek government pressured Kyrgyz authorities to return the more than 200
Uzbek refugees in Kyrgyzstan. In 2008 several Uzbek refugees and asylum seekers
were forcibly returned to Uzbekistan under suspicious circumstances. For
example, on May 13 prison authorities in Osh handed Erkin Holikov to Uzbek
police despite his asylum case being pending with a court. On September 19, an
Uzbek refugee, Hayotjon Juraboev, disappeared after being stopped in Bishkek by
unknown individuals whom witnesses said introduced themselves as security
officials, and was forcibly returned to Uzbekistan.
Freedom of Religion
Uzbek authorities continue their unrelenting, multi-year campaign of unlawful
arrest, torture, and imprisonment of Muslims who practice their faith outside
state controls or who belong to unregistered religious organizations, with at least
6,000 currently incarcerated for nonviolent religious offenses. Peaceful religious
believers are often branded religious extremists. Dozens were arrested or convicted
in 2008 on charges related to religious extremism. Human Rights Watch
documented allegations of ill-treatment in several of these cases.
Many religious prisoners had their sentences extended without due process for
alleged violations of internal prison regulations or for alleged new crimes, as a
means of keeping them in prison.
Criminal Justice, Torture, and Ill-Treatment
Abolition of the death penalty took effect in January 2008 and many death row
inmates were given fixed-term sentences. The government also introduced
habeas corpus that month. However, in the absence of an independent judiciary
this did not provide meaningful protection against arbitrary detention or abuses
in pretrial detention.
The United Nations Committee Against Torture, reviewing Uzbekistan in November
2007, concluded that torture and ill-treatment remained routine and issued
urgent recommendations. The Uzbek authorities failed to implement these measures
and Human Rights Watch continued to receive credible, serious allegations
of torture, indicating that torture remained a widespread practice within a prevailing
law enforcement and judicial culture of impunity.
Child Labor
Although a new law on childrens rights took effect in January 2008 and the government
in March ratified the International Labour Organizations Conventions on
the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour and on the Minimum Age of
Employment, forced child labor in the cotton harvest remains a key concern in
Uzbekistan. Following the broadcast internationally of footage on forced child
labor, several retailers and clothing companies in the United States and United
Kingdom have taken measures to exclude the use of Uzbek cotton.
Human rights monitors who reported on forced child labor found themselves
often harassed by the police. For example, on October 2, police in Gulistan briefly
detained and assaulted Karim Bozorboyev, one of the seven human rights
defenders released at the start of the year, after he video recorded children in
Jizzakh being taken to the cotton fields to work.
Key International Actors
The Uzbek government persisted in its refusal to grant access to United Nations
special rapporteurs with longstanding requests for invitation, including those on
torture and human rights defenders, and failed to take meaningful action to
address concerns and recommendations by a range of UN bodies. Uzbekistan
was due to be reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism of the
UN Human Rights Council in December 2008.
In a hugely disappointing move on October 13, EU foreign ministers decided to lift
the visa ban on eight former and current Uzbek government officials thought to
have been responsible for the Andijan massacre, while retaining the purely symbolic
embargo on arms trade with Uzbekistan. The EU pledged to keep the situation
under review and called on the Uzbek authorities to release all imprisoned
human rights defenders, cease their harassment, cooperate with UN monitors,
and end interference with NGO operations including Human Rights Watch. The EU
cited progress in human rights as a justification for easing the sanctions, an
assessment that bordered on the absurd when contrasted with the prevailing
reality on the ground. Among the positive developments highlighted by the EU
was a joint EU-Uzbek government-organized seminar on Liberalization of the
Media, held in Tashkent on October 2-3. Many civil society participants from the
EU side had made clear that this seminar should not be considered evidence of
progress in the context of the impending sanctions review. The EU also welcomed
the structured human rights dialogue it had embarked on with Uzbekistan, without
recognition that such dialogue alone could not constitute progress.
The United States Congress at long last adopted legislation in December 2007
establishing specific human rights benchmarks the Uzbek government must fulfill.
In light of Uzbekistans failure to meet these benchmarks, sanctions, which
largely mirror those of the EU, were imposed in late June 2008.
Both the US and the EU issued calls for the release of Turgunov and
Abdurakhmanov.
Algeria
As the Algerian economy benefited from the worldwide surge in oil prices,
Algerians continued to suffer restrictions on civil liberties, under a state of emergency
imposed in 1992, and the government continued impunity for past and
present abuses. While political violence is down considerably since the mid-
1990s, the country confronted a new wave of bombings claimed by the al Qaeda
Organization of the Islamic Maghreb. On November 12, 2008, parliament
approved, without debate, and by a vote of 500 in favor, 21 against, and 8
abstentions, a constitutional amendment ending presidential term limits. This
allows Abdelaziz Bouteflika to run for a third five-year term in the spring of 2009.
Freedom of Expression and Assembly
The broadcast media are state-controlled and air almost no critical coverage of, or
dissent on, government policies, but they do provide live telecasts of parliamentary
sessions. Privately-owned newspapers enjoy a considerably freer scope, but
repressive press laws, dependence on revenues from public-sector advertising,
and other factors limit their freedom to criticize the government, the military, and
the powerful.
The press law imposes prison terms along with fines for defamation and for
insulting government officials and state institutions. On March 4, 2008, an
appeals court in Jijel upheld the defamation conviction of Ali Chawki Amari, a
columnist for the independent al-Watan daily, and Omar Belhouchet, its director,
for accusing a governor of buying his mistress a car with public funds. The court
imposed sentences on the pair of two months in prison and a fine of 1 million
dinars (US$15,000) each.
In June 2008 the government stripped the Agence France-Presse bureau chief and
an Algiers-based Reuters correspondent of their press credentials, accusing the
former of overstating the number of casualties caused by a terrorist bombing that
month, and the latter of reporting a bombing that never happened. As of
November, the Reuters correspondent was still without credentials and thus
unable to report for any foreign media.
Pan-Arab television stations are popular among Algerian viewers. However, since
2004 the government has banned the most popular, Al Jazeera, from operating a
news bureau inside the country.
A court in Sidi Mhamed convicted human rights lawyer Amine Sidhoum on April
13, 2008, of having, in a press interview, disparaged a court ruling and insulted
state institutions. The court sentenced the Kubba-based lawyer to six months in
prison and a fine. Sidhoum remained free pending an appeal hearing, which at
this writing had not taken place.
Authorities used state of emergency powers to ban most public demonstrations
and many gatherings. On October 5, authorities prevented a panel discussion in
Algiers from taking place, organized by the Algerian League for the Defense of
Human Rights on the riots that shook major Algerian cities in October 1988.
Religious Freedom
Religious freedom declined for Algerias tiny non-Muslim minority in 2008, with
increased enforcement of Ordinance 06-03. The 2006 law provides prison terms
for proselytizing by non-Muslims and forbids them from gathering to worship
except in state-approved locations. Authorities have refused numerous applications
submitted by Protestant Christian groups to use buildings for worship, putting
their members at risk of prosecution for worship in unauthorized places.
A court in the southwestern city of Tissemsilt on July 2, 2008, sentenced
Protestants Rachid Mohammed Seghir and Jammal Dahmani to six-month suspended
sentences and a fine of 100,000 dinars (US$1,500) on charges of distributing
Christian publications that aimed to weaken the faith of Muslims.
Authorities applied the law also against members of the long-established Roman
Catholic community. On January 30, 2008, in Maghnia, a court sentenced priest
Pierre Wallez to one year in prison for ministering to clandestine sub-Saharan
immigrants in an unauthorized location, a sentence that an appeals court later
reduced to a two-month term, suspended.
In September a court in Biskra sentenced six Muslim men to four years in prison
and a fine for eating during the fasting hours of Ramadan, under article 144bis (2)
of the penal code, which criminalizes acts that are offensive to Islam. An appeals
court overturned the verdict.
Impunity for Past Abuses
Over 100,000 Algerians died during the political strife of the 1990s. Thousands
more were disappeared by security forces or abducted by armed groups fighting
the government and have never been located, dead or alive. Perpetrators of
atrocities during this era continue to enjoy impunity. The legal framework for that
impunity is the 2006 Law on Peace and National Reconciliation, which provides
an amnesty to security force members for the actions they took in the name of
combating terrorism, and to armed group members not implicated in the most
heinous acts.
The law promises compensation for families of disappeared persons but at the
same time makes it a crime to denigrate state institutions or security forces for
the way they conducted themselves during the period of political strife.
Authorities have repeatedly harassed associations representing families of the
disappeared who protest state policies by continuing to demand justice for the
perpetrators or at least that the state provide information about the fate of their
missing relatives. For example, a Constantine court on March 26, 2008, convicted
Louisa Saker, Rabah Boulagheb, and Sofiane Mehamlia, all relatives of disappeared,
for their role in a demonstration related to the issue. The court convicted
Saker of participation in an unauthorized demonstration, while Boulagheb and
Mehamlia were convicted in absentia of that charge in addition to charges of violence,
theft, and undermining the authority of public officials. Their appeals trial
was in progress as of November.
Torture, Incommunicado Detention, and the Death Penalty
Algeria amended its penal code in 2004 to make torture an explicit crime.
Nevertheless, Amnesty International continues to regularly receive reports of
incommunicado detention of suspects in unofficial places of detention and torture
by the DRS [Department for Information and Security]. The International
Committee of the Red Cross regularly visits ordinary prisons in Algeria but not
DRS-run places of detention.
The UN Committee Against Torture, in its May 2008 examination of Algerias
report to the committee, expressed concern about reports that the legal limit of
12 days in pre-charge detention in terrorism cases can, in practice, be extended
repeatedly and that the law does not guarantee the right to counsel during the
period of remand in custody, and that the right of a person in custody to have
access to a doctor and to communicate with his or her family is not always
respected.
Algerian courts pronounced scores of death sentences during 2008, many of
them against defendants in terrorism cases and most of them in absentia.
Despite pronouncing hundreds of death sentences in recent years, Algeria has
observed a de facto moratorium on carrying out the death penalty since 1993.
Terrorism and Counterterrorism
From January to September 2008 at least 265 people were reported killed in more
than 21 bombings claimed mostly by the al Qaida Organization of the Islamic
Maghreb. The largest of them, a car bomb outside a police academy in Issers on
August 19, reportedly killed 44 people and injured 45. On December 11, 2007, two
bombs exploded a few minutes apart in Algiers, one targeting the United Nations
office and the other going off in front of the Constitutional Council. The blasts
killed 41 and injured over 177, according to news agencies. The Algerian government
said the bombs killed 26.
Security forces, presumably the DRS, immediately took into custody two Algerians
whom the United States transferred from Guantanamo Bay in July 2008, held
them incommunicado for 12 days, and charged them with membership in a terrorist
organization and use of false travel documents. The court then granted their
pretrial release. A court filed the same charges against, and then granted pretrial
release to, two other Algerians whom the United States sent from Guantanamo in
August.
The penal code definition of terrorism is so broad that it can be used to prosecute
the nonviolent exercise of civil liberties. The definition includes, for example,
any action that targets state security  via actions whose purpose is to  attack
the symbols of the Nation and the Republic  or obstruct the functioning of public institutions  or the application of laws and regulations. The code also provides
up to 10 years imprisonment for encouraging or justifying terrorist acts.
Polisario-Run Refugee Camps in Algeria for Sahrawis
The Polisario Front has since the late 1970s governed camps in remote southwest
Algeria for Sahrawi refugees who fled from Western Sahara, just across the border.
The Polisario Front allows camp residents to criticize its management of dayto-
day issues, but marginalizes those who openly challenge its rule or general
political orientation. There were, however, no confirmed reports that the Polisario
had detained anyone for political reasons during 2007 or the first half of 2008. In
2008 refugees were largely free to leave the camps if they wished, via Mauritania.
The government of Algeria did not, to Human Rights Watchs knowledge, explicitly
recognize its responsibility for safeguarding the human rights of Sahrawis living
in Polisario-run camps on Algerian soil.
Key International Actors
Despite serving on the UN Human Rights Council in 2006-2007, Algeria continued
during 2008 its non-compliance with longstanding requests for country visits by
the UN special rapporteurs on torture; on the promotion and protection of human
rights while countering terrorism; and on extrajudicial, summary and arbitrary
executions. Algeria was amongst the first group of countries reviewed under the
Universal Periodic Review mechanism of the UN Human Rights Council in April
2008.
The United States provides almost no financial aid to oil-rich Algeria but the two
countries have grown closer, notably as allies in counterterrorism. In the years
highest-level meeting between the two countries, US Secretary of State
Condoleezza Rice visited President Bouteflika in Algiers on September 6, affirming
ties of friendship and counterterrorism cooperation. Rice made no public
statement on human rights but on September 19, Ambassador-at-Large for
International Religious Freedom John Hanford criticized Algerias worsening treatment
of religious minorities when he presented the State Departments 2008
International Religious Freedom report.
Bahrain
Human rights conditions in Bahrain deteriorated in 2008. Despite the important
reforms that the king, Shaikh Hamad bin `Isa al-Khalifa, adopted in 2001-02, the
government has done little to institutionalize human rights protections in law. The
government continues to subject freedom of expression, assembly, and association
to arbitrary restrictions. People detained after demonstrators and security
forces clashed in Manama in December 2007 alleged they were tortured.
Opposition political societies that boycotted the first National Assembly elections
in 2002 participated in 2006 elections, but some groups have since boycotted
the Assembly, protesting what they regard as the absence of real legislative
authority for the elected representatives.
In June 2008 the government executed a Bangladeshi man convicted of murder,
the third execution in two years. Except for a single execution in 1996, a time of
great political turmoil, Bahrain had not executed anyone since 1977.
Freedom of Expression and Information
Authorities continue to use the press law (Law 47/2002) to restrict coverage of
controversial matters, including official corruption. In May 2008 the government
announced a new draft press law that would remove criminal penalties for most
journalistic infractions but appeared to retain the option of criminal penalties for
certain types of written or spoken comment, including those found to harm
national unity. The draft was awaiting approval by the National Assembly as of
November 2008.
In July the independent Bahrain Center for Human Rights (BCHR) reported that six
journalists from publications affiliated with opposition political movements had
been detained briefly and faced charges of inciting sectarian strife.
The countrys sole residential internet service provider, Batelco, is governmentowned.
The BCHR in October estimated that the authorities were blocking at least
22 discussion forums and other websites, including its own.
Freedom of Assembly
Law 32 of 2006 requires the organizers of any public meeting to notify the head
of Public Security at least three days in advance, and authorizes that official to
determine whether a meeting warrants police presence on the basis of its subject
 or any other circumstance. The law stipulates that meeting organizers are
responsible for forbidding any speech or discussion infringing on public order or
morals, but leaves public order or morals undefined.
In December 2007 security forces and protesters clashed in and around Manama
following the death of a protester in an earlier confrontation with security forces.
Several demonstrators affiliated with opposition political movements subsequently
faced charges, including those of illegal assembly, attacking security
forces, and arson relating to the torching of a police vehicle during the clashes.
Relatives of the detainees and several men detained briefly in connection with
the clashes told Human Rights Watch that interrogators had tortured detainees
and sexually assaulted at least one. Several detainees said interrogators abused
them to elicit confessions. A court-ordered medical inquiry in April 2008 concluded
that the men may have had injuries consistent with the abuses they
described, but that delayed medical examinations made it impossible to verify
claims of torture. In July Bahrains High Criminal Court sentenced 11 of the
detainees to jail terms ranging from one to seven years. Several of those convicted
were subsequently pardoned; five were appealing their sentences as of
November 2008.
Impunity
Decree 56/2002, which confers immunity from investigation or prosecution on
government officials alleged to be responsible for torture and other serious
human rights abuses committed prior to 2001, remains on the books. Despite the
efforts of local human rights groups to establish a means for addressing such violations,
the government insists that the matter is closed. In its submission to the
United Nations Human Rights Councils Universal Periodic Review (UPR) mechanism
in April 2008, Bahrain stated there are no cases of torture in the kingdom.
Freedom of Association and Civil Society
The government continues to deny legal status to the Bahrain Center for Human
Rights, which it ordered to be dissolved in 2004 after the BCHRs president publicly
criticized the prime minister. Several other groups, including the National
Committee for the Unemployed and the Bahrain Youth Human Rights Society,
attempted in 2005 to register with the Ministry of Social Development, as
required by law, but at this writing had received no response to their applications.
In 2007 the Ministry of Social Development drafted new legislation on civil society
organizations, but at this writing the ministry had not submitted the draft to the
parliament. The draft law contains some improvements over the existing Law
21/1989, but includes numerous provisions incompatible with international standards
and best practices regarding freedom of association. For example, a version
of the draft law circulated in November 2007 authorizes the Ministry of Social
Development to close any organization for up to 60 days without a court order if it
deems the organization to have violated any Bahraini law. It also appears to leave
open the possibility of criminal penalties by stipulating that all Bahraini law
applies to violations of the associations law.
Bahrain has ratified some International Labour Organization conventions, but neither
of the two core conventions governing freedom of association. Law 33/2002
permits workers to form and join unions, but the General Federation of Bahrain
Trade Unions (GFBTU) filed a complaint with the ILO in June 2005 protesting what
it said was the governments repeated refusal to register six trade unions in the
public sector. In 2007 the GFBTU filed another complaint protesting a November
2006 edict by the prime minister prohibiting strikes in numerous sectors of the
economy on the grounds that they provide essential services. In March 2008 the
ILOs Committee on Freedom of Association called on Bahrain to amend its trade
union law and the prime ministers ruling, including providing a more limited definition
of essential services. But in April Bahrains UPR submission noted that
trade union pluralism can weaken and split the trade union movement, and all
States tend to place restrictions on pluralism and limit the number of trade
unions and federations, placing them under the umbrella of a single entity so
they can address economic challenges. In September six Bahraini rights groups
said Bahrains Ministry of Education circulated a warning that month to employees that they risk termination if they take part in unauthorized demonstrations or
advocate strikes in vital industries.
Migrant Worker Rights
Migrant workers face the risk of exploitation, despite some formal protections
under Bahraini law including the right to join unions. In practice, foreign workers
dependence on their employers sponsorship for legal residence curtails their
ability to pursue legal remedies in labor disputes. Existing labor law does not
extend to domestic workers, over whom employers exercise inordinate power to
withhold wages and passports. Bahrains labor minister has vowed to abolish the
sponsorship system by the end of 2008.
Womens Rights
Bahrain has no written personal status law. Instead, separate Sharia-based family
courts for Sunni and Shia Muslims hear marriage, divorce, custody, and inheritance
cases. Family court judges, who are generally conservative religious scholars
with limited formal legal training, render judgments according to their individual
reading of Islamic jurisprudence. They have consistently favored men in their
rulings and are unapologetically adverse to womens equality. In October three
Bahraini women with pending divorce and custody cases met with representatives
of the Ministry of Justice and Islamic Affairs to urge them to establish a committee
charged with reviewing the decisions of these courts. Womens rights
organizations continue to call for a written unified personal status law.
Counterterrorism Measures
In August 2006 the king signed into law the Protecting Society from Terrorist
Acts bill, despite concerns expressed by the UN special rapporteur on the promotion
and protection of human rights while countering terrorism that it contained
excessively broad definitions of terrorism and terrorist acts. Article 1 prohibits
any act that would damage national unity or obstruct public authorities
from performing their duties. Article 6 prescribes the death penalty for acts that
disrupt the provisions of the Constitution or laws, or prevent state enterprises or public authorities from exercising their duties. The law also allows for extended
periods of detention without charge or judicial review. A group of Bahraini and
foreign defendants accused of preparing terrorist attacks, the first people tried
under the law, were sentenced in early 2008 to jail terms of several months but
then released on the basis of time served in pretrial custody.
Key International Actors
Bahrain hosts the headquarters of the United States Navys Fifth Fleet and figures
in logistical support for military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. The United
States designated Bahrain a major non-NATO ally in 2002.
Bahrain was the first country to undergo the UPR in April 2008. Its voluntary
pledges to the Human Rights Council include the establishment of a national
human rights institution, expected to be in place by January 2009. Bahrain won a
seat on the HRC in May 2008. Local and international NGOs also urged its government
to ratify treaties and instruments including the Optional Protocol to the
Convention against Torture and ILO conventions including Nos. 87 and 98 on freedom
of association and collective bargaining.
Egypt
Egypt continued its relentless attacks on political dissent in 2008. The government
renewed the Emergency Law (Law No. 162 of 1958) in May for an additional
two years, providing a continued basis for arbitrary detention and unfair trials,
and despite repeated promises not to do so by top officials, including President
Hosni Mubarak. Egyptian human rights organizations estimate that up to 5,000
people remain detained without charge under the law, some for over a decade.
Security forces acting with impunity prevented strikes, violently dispersed demonstrations,
and harassed and in some cases tortured rights activists. Journalists,
activists, and hundreds of members of the Muslim Brotherhoodthe banned
organization that is the countrys largest opposition groupwere jailed. The government
used lethal force against migrants and refugees seeking to cross into
Israel, and forcibly returned asylum seekers and refugees to countries where they
could face torture.
Political Violence and Torture
On April 6-7, 2008, security forces prevented workers from striking in the city of
Mahalla al-Kobra, and violently dispersed protests against rising food costs,
wounding more than 100 people and apparently killing a 15-year-old bystander.
They arrested hundreds of protestors, journalists, and activists, and detained
scores for months without charge or despite court orders for their release. State
Security Investigations officers in Mahalla tortured detainees during interrogations,
including Mohamed Marei, a translator for a US journalist covering the
protests who was detained for 87 days without being informed of any charges
against him. In July the government transferred 49 detainees cases to the
Supreme State Security Court, where procedures violate fair trial rights.
Migrants and Refugees Rights
Egyptian border guards reportedly killed 22 migrants trying to cross into Israel in
2008; as of November Egyptian forces had killed 34 migrants on the Sinai border
since July 2007. At this writing, Egypt had not allowed officials of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) access to a group of 91
Eritreans, Sudanese, and Somalis whom Israel returned in August 2008. Egypt
denied UNHCR access to a prior group of 48 whom Israel returned in August 2007,
and reportedly returned between five and twenty of them to Sudan in late 2007 or
early 2008.
In April 2008 Egypt forcibly returned 49 Sudanese men and boys, including 11
refugees and asylum seekers, to southern Sudan, where authorities detained
them for four months. In June Egypt forcibly returned at least 740 Eritreans,
including women and children, without allowing UNHCR access to them. They are
reportedly detained at a military jail and are at risk of torture and ill-treatment.
Freedom of Expression
In March a Cairo court convicted Ibrahim Issa, editor of Al-Dustur newspaper, on
charges of publishing false information and rumors about President Mubaraks
health; a Cairo appeals court upheld the conviction in September, sentencing
Issa to two months jail, but Mubarak pardoned him in October. Issa and three
other newspaper editors appealed one-year jail sentences handed down in
September 2007 for publishing false news, statements or rumors likely to disturb
public order. In August a Cairo court convicted Saad Eddin Ibrahim in
absentia of harming Egypts reputation and sentenced him to two years in prison
for writing articles urging the US to condition aid to Egypt on human rights
reforms.
In February the Arab League adopted principles introduced by Egypt and Saudi
Arabia that call on member states to prohibit satellite television broadcasts that
negatively affect social peace, national unity, public order, and public morals,
or defame leaders, or national and religious symbols of Arab states. Egypts
state-controlled Nilesat satellite subsequently dropped three channels, including
al-Hiwar, which broadcast programs featuring government critics and human
rights abuse victims. In April plainclothes police shut down the Cairo News
Company (CNC) after it supposedly supplied Al Jazeera with images of anti-government
protests; in October a Cairo court fined CNCs owner US$27,000 on
charges of owning and operating unlicensed equipment. In early February an
appeals court upheld the conviction of Al Jazeera reporter Huwaida Taha for harming the dignity of the country with a documentary about torture in Egyptian
police stations.
The government issued regulations in May requiring internet caf users to provide
detailed personal information in order to access the web. In April Cairo security
officers arrested Esraa Abd al Fattah and others who used the social-networking
website Facebook to call for strikes; and in May security officers in New Cairo
stripped and beat Ahmed Maher Ibrahim for the same activity. In July security
forces in Alexandria arrested Maher and 13 other members of the 6 April Youth
group and jailed them for two weeks without charge after they sang patriotic
songs and refused to disperse when ordered.
Freedom of Association
Egypts law governing associations, Law 84/2002, provides criminal penalties
that stifle legitimate NGO activities, including for engaging in political or union
activities. The law governing political parties, Law 40/1977, empowers a committee
headed by the ruling party chair to suspend other parties activities in the
national interest.
In an April 2008 hearing closed to defense lawyers and the public, a military tribunal
sentenced Muslim Brotherhood Deputy Supreme Guide Khairat al-Shatir
and 24 other civilians, seven of them in absentia, to prison terms of up to 10
years and ordered the seizure of millions of dollars in assets. A regular criminal
court had acquitted 17 of the defendants in January 2007 but the next month
President Mubarak transferred their cases, along with 23 others, to the military
tribunal. In March 2008, prior to local and municipal council elections, security
forces arrested and detained without charge more than 800 Muslim Brotherhood
members, including at least 148 would-be independent candidates.
In a positive development, in June 2008 the government granted NGO status to
the Center for Trade and Union Workers Services (CTUWS), which offers legal aid
to factory workers and reports on labor rights issues. In 2007 the government had
forcibly shut down all three CTUWS branches, blaming it for a wave of labor
unrest.
Womens and Childrens Rights
The Egyptian government has failed to create a legal environment that protects
women from violence, encourages victims to report attacks, or deters perpetrators
from committing these abuses. A 2008 survey by the Egyptian Center for
Womens Rights found that 83 percent of Egyptian women have experienced sexual
harassment in their lifetime. In October a mob of men and boys sexually
assaulted women in Cairo while they were celebrating the Eid holiday marking the
end of Ramadan. Eight men are reported to have been arrested and face prosecution.
These attacks mark a repeat of similar violence two years earlier when police
officers were videotaped doing nothing to stop the mob attacks.
Extensive amendments to Egypts Child Law in June 2008 included establishing a
network of government child protection committees, criminal penalties for officials
who detain children with adults, and expanded legal assistance for children
facing investigation or trial. They also criminalize female genital mutilation. At
this writing, the government has yet to issue implementing regulations for the
new law.
Privacy and Personal Integrity Rights
Since October 2007 police in Cairo have arrested at least a dozen men on suspicion
of being HIV-positive, forcibly tested them for HIV without consent, beat
them, and charged them with the habitual practice of debaucheryinterpreted
in Egyptian law to include consensual sex between adult men; nine were convicted
of this charge. Initially, the men who tested HIV-positive were chained to their
hospital beds, and were unchained only after a domestic and international outcry.
In April 2008 police in Alexandria arrested 12 men and subjected them to
forcible anal examinations, HIV tests, and other abuse; these men were also convicted
of the habitual practice of debauchery. In June Egypt blocked the
Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights, an NGO that has been instrumental in calling
international attention to this crackdown, from attending a UN high-level
meeting on HIV/AIDS.
A provision of the new Child Law makes marriage registration contingent on medical
tests showing both partners free of diseases that would affect their health or their future childrens health. Its vague wording raises concerns that it violates
individuals right to privacy and to found a family.
Religious Intolerance and Discrimination against Religious
Minorities
Although Egypts constitution provides for equal rights without regard to religion,
discrimination against Egyptian Christians and official intolerance of Bahais and
some Muslim sects continue, despite court rulings early in 2008 that ordered the
government to provide identification documents to Bahais and to allow Muslim
converts from Christianity to convert back to Christianity without penalty.
Disputes between Muslim and Christian Egyptians flared into violent clashes on
several occasions, resulting in deaths and injuries as well as destruction of property.
In January and again in May, Muslims attacked the Abu Fana monastery in
Minya province with firearms in a dispute over land ownership.
Key International Actors
The United States remains Egypts largest donor, providing approximately US$1.3
billion in military aid and US$415 million in economic assistance in 2007. In
January 2008 President Bush, during a brief visit, praised Egypts vibrant civil
society; the following day, security forces prevented demonstrators in Cairo from
holding a peaceful protest, arbitrarily detaining 30 people. In March the US
administration waived congressional restrictions conditioning US$100 million in
aid to Egypt on improving human rights conditions. In October US Secretary of
State Condoleezza Rice admitted to setbacks in Egypt, but affirmed that championing
freedom is a national security imperative.
In January the European Parliament passed a resolution criticizing rights abuses
in Egypt. In March the European Union agreed to give 558 million in aid by 2010
under the terms of an EU-Egypt Action Plan that formally insists on respect for
human rights.
Iran
With the government of President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad continuing to invoke
national security as a justification for silencing dissent, 2008 saw a dramatic
rise in arrests of political activists, academics, and others for peacefully exercising
their rights of free expression and association in Iran. There were numerous
reports of the torture and mistreatment of such detainees. The Judiciary, accountable
to Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei, and the Ministry of Intelligence continued
to be responsible for many serious human rights violations. The number of executions
also increased sharply in 2008.
Freedom of Expression and Assembly
Iranian authorities systematically suppress freedom of expression and opinion by
imprisoning journalists and editors, and strictly controlling publishing and academic
activity. Most journalists arrested in 2008 were targeted for covering ethnic
minority issues and civil society activities, and the National Security Council has
given newspapers formal and informal warnings against covering issues such as
human rights violations and social protests. The few independent dailies that
remain heavily self-censor.
Many writers and intellectuals who have evaded imprisonment have left the country
or ceased to be critical. The government has fired dissident university professors
or forced them into early retirement, a trend that intensified in 2008. State
universities also recently began banning some politically active students from
registering for their next semester, putting pressure on student associations and
their supporters to not criticize the government.
In 2008 the authorities continued to target student and internet journalists. The
government systematically blocks Iranian and foreign websites that carry political
news and analysis.
The Ahmadinejad government shows no tolerance for peaceful protests and gatherings.
Security forces arrested over a hundred student activists in 2008, often
without informing their families of the arrests. According to some of the imprisoned students and their families, security forces subjected these students to mistreatment
and abuse during their detention.
Civil Society
The government has increased pressure on civil society organizations that call for
human rights and freedom of speech by restricting their activities and barring
activists from leaving the country. These include the Center for Defenders of
Human Rights, led by 2003 Noble Peace Prize Laureate Shirin Ebadi, and the
Association of Iranian Journalists. On October 2 Irans official news agency
warned Ebadi, a lawyer who publically criticizes the government and regularly
defends political and human rights cases in court, not to misuse the tolerance of
the government. The Malaysian foreign ministry, under pressure from the Iranian
government, forced the International Peace Foundation to cancel an October
2008 conference that Ebadi was due to attend. Earlier in the year Ebadi had
received death threats. In response, she announced that the Iranian government
would be held responsible for any harm to her. The authorities later promised to
guarantee her safety.
Government intelligence officials forced Mohammad Sadigh Kaboudvand, a journalist
and human rights activist in the western province of Kurdistan, to shut
down his NGO Defending the Human Rights in Kurdistan, and in July 2007 arrested
him. He was sentenced to 11 years imprisonment in June 2008 for acting
against national security and engaging in propaganda against the state.
Criminal Justice and the Juvenile Death Penalty
Iranian law allows death sentences for persons who have reached puberty,
defined in law as age 9 for girls and 15 for boys. At this writing, Iran was the only
country to have executed juvenile offenders in 2008, a total of six persons for
crimes committed while under age 18. The country carried out 26 of the 32 known
executions of juvenile offenders worldwide since January 2005. According to multiple
sources, at least 130 other juvenile offenders are on death row in Iran. In
many cases these sentences followed unfair trials, and the executions themselves
sometimes violated Iranian national laws, such as the failure to notify families
and lawyers of the execution 48 hours in advance.
On August 4, 2008, the Judiciary cancelled the execution by stoning of four
Iranians. The Judiciary spokesman said that it would review all pending stoning
sentences. However, stoning remains a sentence permitted under the penal code.
Womens Rights
The government escalated its crackdown on womens rights activists in 2008,
subjecting dozens of women to arbitrary detention, travel bans, and harassment.
Eight womens rights activists were arrested in June as they were commemorating
a 2006 meeting on womens rights that was broken up by police. In October an
Iranian-American student researching womens rights in Iran, Esha Momeni,
was arrested and held for some three weeks in Tehrans Evin prison. Security
agents seized her computer and footage of interviews she had conducted with
womens rights activists. Later that month, security agents blocked Sussan
Tahmasebi, a leader of the One Million Signatures Campaign for Equality, from
boarding a plane and confiscated her passport, without charging her with any
crime. The Judiciary has also prosecuted women involved in peaceful activities on
behalf of the campaign for disturbing public opinion, propaganda against the
order, and publishing lies via the publication of false news.
In September an appeals court in Tehran upheld prison and lashing sentences
against two womens rights activists, Massoumeh Zia and Marzieh Mortazi
Langrudi, for taking part in a 2006 demonstration demanding equal rights. Four
women were also sentenced earlier in the year to six months in jail each for writing
articles for feminist websites.
In January 2008 the authorities released Maryam Hosseinkhah and Jelveh
Javaheri from Evin prison, where they were serving sentences for disturbing public
opinion and publishing lies. Two other activists, Ronak Safazadeh and
Hana Abdi, remain in detention in Sanandaj on charges of endangering national
security. Prior to their arrest they were active members of the Azarmehr
Association of the Women of Kurdistan, a group that organizes capacity-building
workshops for women in Iranian Kurdistan.
Minorities
Irans ethnic and religious minorities are subject to discrimination and, in some
cases, persecution. In the northwestern provinces of Azerbaijan and Kurdistan,
the government restricts cultural and political activities by the Azerbaijani and
Kurdish populations, including the operation of NGOs that focus on social issues.
The government also restricts the promotion of minority cultures and languages.
On September 10, for example, plainclothes Intelligence Ministry agents arrested
19 prominent Azerbaijani cultural activists and academics during a private
Ramadan celebration and detained them in Evin Prison. The Iranian government
accuses them of siding with armed opposition groups and acting against national
security.
On September 30, Molavi Abdolhamid, one of the most prominent Sunni clerics
in Iran, said that if the government failed to address the problems of the Sunni
community, including discrimination, its members would be unlikely to participate
in the presidential election in 2009. The 2008 execution of two Sunni clerics
in Zahedan, the assassination of two Sunni clerics in Kurdistan, the destruction of
the Abu-Hanifeh Sunni religious school near Zahedan, and the arrest of 11 Sunni
clerics who protested against this assault, coupled with systematic efforts to
remove Sunni citizens from governmental positions, the army, and the police
force, are among the major criticisms Abdolhamid leveled against the government.
The government continues to deny Irans Bahai community permission to worship
publicly or pursue religious activities. On May 14, security forces arrested six
leading Bahai adherents and members of the Bahai national coordination group,
without informing them of the charges against them, and sent them to Evin
prison. One associate of this group had already been arrested on March 5. At this
writing, all seven remain in detention.
HIV/AIDS
In late June security forces detained without charge Arash and Kamyar Alaei, who
are well known in Iran and internationally for their contributions to HIV/AIDS prevention
and treatment programs; they remain in detention at this writing. For more than 20 years the Alaei brothers have been active in addressing problems
relating to drug use, with a focus on the spread of HIV/AIDS, and have played key
roles in putting these issues on the national healthcare agenda.
Key International Actors
In 2008 Irans nuclear program again dominated discussions and policies in the
international arena, overshadowing the urgency of discussing Irans human rights
violations. During Ahmadinejads presidency, critical dialogue between the West
and the Iranian government on human rights issues effectively stopped. The
European Union has pledged to tie progress in broader cooperation with Iran to
respect for human rights, but the pledge has had little impact. The United Nations
Security Council has adopted three resolutions since 2007 to sanction Iran economically
for its nuclear program.
In 2008 Iran continued to use what it calls foreign threats as grounds to suppress
civil society and ignore widespread domestic and international objections
to human rights violations. The authorities use the rhetorical support of Western
countries, especially the United States, for dissidents and human rights
activists as an excuse to restrict the freedom of expression and assembly within
the country.
The Iranian government has not allowed the UN Human Rights Councils special
rapporteurs to enter Iran and investigate violations of human rights alleged by
activists, the media, and independent sources since 2005.
Iraq
Human rights conditions in Iraq remain extremely poor. Security gains in 2008
did little to ease Iraqs crisis of displacement, with about 2.8 million Iraqis displaced
within the country and another 2 million abroad, mainly in Syria and
Jordan.
The government continues to rest on a narrow political and ethnic/sectarian
base, though Tawafuq, a Sunni bloc, returned to its ranks in July after a year-long
boycott. The government was to incorporate into state forces up to 100,000 mainly
Sunni paramilitaries paid by US forces to provide local security, but government
officials disputed their numbers and threatened to arrest some leaders, casting
doubt over the plans.
Government-run detention facilities struggled to accommodate over 24,000
detainees, and tardy judicial review of cases exacerbated overcrowding. The US
military said in October its detainee population had fallen to about 17,000 from a
peak of approximately 26,000 in late 2007. Some detainees have spent years in
custody without charge or trial.
As of mid-November 2008, Iraqs parliament was preparing to vote on a security
agreement with the US to govern the presence of foreign troops when the UN
Security Council mandate for the Multi-National Force-Iraq (MNF) expired at the
end of 2008.
Political Developments
Iraqs parliament passed legislation in February intended to refine procedures for
vetting former Baath Party members; the new law continues to focus on group
affiliation rather than individual responsibility for past abuses. An amnesty law
was passed at the same time aimed in part at easing overcrowding in the detention
system, but had limited impact on the detainee population. In September
parliament passed legislation needed to hold provincial elections, seen as crucial
to redressing a 2005 polls boycott by Sunnis and loyalists of Shia cleric Muqtada
al-Sadr; however, it deferred a decision on elections in ethnically divided Kirkuk.
MNF and Iraqi Government Military Operations
Military operations by the MNF continued against insurgents throughout the country,
and continued also to cause civilian casualties. For example, on September
19, US troops backed by airstrikes killed seven Iraqis north of Baghdad; the MNF
said it had targeted an al Qaeda bomb maker, but local officials said those killed
were members of a displaced Baghdad family.
Iraqs military launched offensives against insurgent and militia forces in various
parts of the country. The government launched military operations with US military
backing against loyalists of Muqtada al-Sadr in Basra and Baghdad in April
and May. April operations centered in Baghdads Sadr City killed at least 595 people,
nearly half of them civilians, according to UN figures.
Attacks on Civilians and Displacement
Civilians remained the targets of attacks by Sunni and Shia armed groups across
the country, though the number of such attacks fell after the US and Iraqi security
offensive (surge) in 2007. In February 2008 Muqtada al-Sadr extended a freeze
on the activities of his Jaysh al-Mahdi (Mahdi Army) militia; many Iraqis attributed
the reduced level of violence in Iraq to the halt in the militias armed activities in
2007 following bloody clashes with rival Shiite forces.
In Baghdad, twin bombings in a crowded commercial district on March 7, 2008,
killed as many as 71 people, a June 18 truck bomb in a neighborhood where
Sunnis have been displaced by Shiite militias killed as many as 63 people, a
female suicide bomber targeting Shia pilgrims killed at least 32 people on July 28,
and two separate waves of attacks before and during the Eid al-Fitr holiday in
early October killed at least 48 people. A car bomb in Dujail, north of Baghdad,
killed as many as 32 people on September 12. A second female suicide bomber
on July 28 in Kirkuk killed about 25 people during a Kurdish protest over the
provincial elections law.
Displacement born of sectarian violence continued, but economic pressures and
difficulties maintaining legal status in Syria, Jordan, and Egypt induced some
refugees to return, and Iraqs government periodically announced financial incentives
for returnees. (For the situation of the largest Iraqi refugee population, and of Palestinians fleeing Iraq and stuck at the Syrian border, see Syria chapter.) In
Baghdad, returnees were seldom able to reclaim their former homes, though a
campaign launched by security forces to evict squatters from homes they occupy
was aimed at paving the way for returns. In Baghdad and elsewhere, orders for
squatters to vacate public properties threatened to compound displacement.
In August the office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) reported that only 10,000 of the 30,000 Iraqis it had referred for settlement
in the US since early 2007 had departed, though the pace accelerated in
mid-2008. In September the US State Department said it had reached its goal of
admitting 12,000 refugees in fiscal year 2008 (up from 1,600 in 2007), and had a
target of 17,000 admissions in fiscal year 2009. The European Union for the first
time also promised to take more Iraqi refugees.
Detention and Torture by Iraqi Forces
Reports of widespread torture and other abuse of detainees in detention facilities
run by Iraqs defense and interior ministries and police continue to emerge.
Detainees interviewed by Human Rights Watch at Iraqs Central Criminal Court in
May recounted abuse by police and military personnel in initial detention; the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) previously reported widespread
allegations of abuse in pretrial detention. Iraqs presidency council in
August ratified parliaments approval for Iraq to become a party to the UN
Convention against Torture.
The number of detainees in Iraqi government custody (excluding the northern
Kurdish region) stood at approximately 24,000 in August, according to a Human
Rights Ministry official. Judicial authorities reported in August over 100,000
approved amnesty applications but as of September diplomats tracking amnesty
implementation estimated releases stood at only 5,000-8,000; estimates from
Iraqi officials in October suggested a lower figure. The United Nations Childrens
Fund (UNICEF) in August reported some easing of overcrowding at al-Tobchi juvenile
detention facilitywhere detainees had told UNAMI of sexual abuse in custody
in 2007following the release of hundreds of detainees under the amnesty.
MNF Detention
As of early October 2008 the US military said it was holding about 17,000
detainees in Iraq; the previous month it said it had released approximately
13,000 since the beginning of 2008. Reviews of cases were limited to administrative
hearings that fall short of internationally recognized due process norms. MNF
officials estimated in May that no more than a tenth of detainees would be
referred for criminal proceedings in Iraqi courts. In June the US Supreme Court
issued a disappointing decision regarding two US citizens, Shawqi Omar and
Mohammad Munaf, detained by the US in Iraq. While the Court upheld federal
court jurisdiction over the mens cases, it paid little heed to the mens substantive
claims that they would be tortured if turned over to Iraqi custody, stating that
such assessments were for the political branches of government to make.
The number of children in MNF custody dropped during 2008 from a high of nearly
900 in December 2007 to approximately 170 as of mid-September 2008. The
sharp decrease appears to reflect faster MNF processing of childrens cases,
transfers to Iraqi custody for trial, and a shift from arrests by the MNF to arrests by
Iraqi forces. Juvenile detainees in MNF custody continue to lack access to independent
legal counsel to challenge detention.
Accountability for Past Crimes
In May the Iraqi High Tribunal (IHT) began trying former foreign minister and
deputy prime minister Tariq Aziz, along with seven other defendants, for the former
governments execution of merchants accused of profiteering while Iraq was
under sanctions in 1992. Previous trials in the IHT, including that of former president
Saddam Hussein for crimes against humanity, were marred by failure to disclose
key evidence, government conduct undermining the independence and
impartiality of the court, and violations of defendants right to confront witnesses.
Gender-Based Violence
Violence against women and girls in Iraq continues to be a serious problem, with
members of insurgent groups and militias, soldiers, and police among the perpetrators.
Even in high-profile cases involving police or security forces, prosecutions are rare. Insurgent groups operating in Basra and Baghdad have specifically targeted
women who are politicians, civil servants, journalists, and womens rights
activists. They have also attacked women on the street for what they consider
immoral or un-Islamic behavior including not wearing a headscarf. The threat
of these attacks keeps many Iraqi women at home. Honor killing by family
members also remains a prevalent physical threat to Iraqi women and girls. While
dozens of cases were reported in 2008, few resulted in convictions.
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people are also vulnerable to attacks
from state and non-state actors.
Key International Actors
As of September 2008, the United States had approximately 146,000 troops in
Iraq (down from 160,000-170,000 at the height of the 2007 surge). The United
Kingdom, the only other country with a significant number of personnel in Iraq,
had approximately 4,000. Most other countries with forces in Iraq were expected
to withdraw them ahead of the lapse of the MNFs mandate in December 2008.
Prime Minister Nouri al-Malikis government in November approved a security
agreement with the US that would entail the withdrawal of all US forces by the
beginning of 2012. Drafts of the agreement indicated that Iraqi-US committees
would determine whether Iraqi legal jurisdiction could apply in instances where
US troops were accused of committing crimes while outside specified military
installations.
In August the UN Security Council voted to extend the mission of UNAMI for one
year. The UNAMI Human Rights Office monitors, reports, and follows up on
human rights violations as part of a plan aimed at developing Iraqi mechanisms
for addressing past and current abuses.
Israel/Occupied Palestinian Territories (OPT)
Israels blockade of Gaza and restrictions on movement to protect illegal West
Bank settlements, along with indiscriminate Palestinian rocket attacks on Israeli
towns and serious abuses by Fatah and Hamas against each others supporters,
were major components of the human rights crisis in the Israeli-occupied
Palestinian territories in 2008.
Palestinian civilians accounted for around half of those killed in Israeli military
operations in Gaza prior to a June ceasefire between Hamas and Israel. More
Palestinians were killed in Gaza by the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) in the first half
of the year than in all of 2007 in both the West Bank and Gaza.
Israels blockade of Gaza has exacerbated the humanitarian crisis affecting
Gazas 1.5 million residents. In the West Bank, Israel maintains onerous restrictions
on freedom of movement for Palestinians.
Palestinian armed groups fired rockets and mortars indiscriminately into Israeli
towns, particularly Sderot, killing four civilians and wounding others. Fatah and
Hamas, the dominant Palestinian parties in the West Bank and Gaza, respectively,
were responsible for extensive human rights violations as they sought to
impose their authority, and retaliated for each others violations.
Palestinian armed groups in Gaza continued to hold as hostage Israeli soldier
Gilad Shalit, captured in June 2006.
Israel
Gaza Strip
Israels comprehensive blockade of the Gaza Strip has severe humanitarian and
economic consequences for the civilian population. Even after the June ceasefire,
continued restrictions reduced the availability of basic goods and the provision of
essential services. Imports in September represented 30 percent of what Israel
allowed into Gaza in December 2005. Exports remained completely barred. Israel is Gazas major source of electricity and sole source of fuel, so its restrictions
on their supply cripple transportation as well as water-pumping, sewage,
and sanitation facilities.
Israel also continues to restrict the movement of Palestinians out of Gaza. The
restrictions rely on Egypts cooperation along its border with Gaza, in particular at
the Rafah crossing.
In the first half of the year, Israel permitted only a small number of persons with
medical emergencies to leave. In July a handful of students with foreign scholarships
left Gaza. In August and September Israel eased some restrictions and
allowed more emergency medical cases to exit. In September over four thousand
Palestinians, including 1,100 pilgrims, entered Egypt via Rafah, but Egyptian
authorities prevented some 800 students from leaving to study abroad. The vast
majority of Palestinians remain unable to travel outside the territory. Foreign
Minister Tzipi Livni wrote in July that this policy was due to a September 2007
security cabinet decision declaring Gaza to be a hostile entity.
Israel reintroduced a complete blockade in November in retaliation for a wave of
Palestinian rocket attacks. The complete closure by Israel cut off food and medical
aid, as well as fuel supplies, halted the United Nations food distribution to
750,000 people, and caused widespread power cuts.
Palestinian Deaths and Israeli Impunity
Between January and June 2008, Israeli forces conducting military operations
killed 388 Palestinian fighters and civilians in Gaza, about half of whom were
civilians; 59 of the dead were children. Israeli forces killed 41 Palestinians in the
West Bank between January and the end of October, of whom at least 15 were
civilians. The largest Israeli military operation, between February 27 and March 3
in Gaza, killed 107 Palestinians, more than half of them civilians. Human Rights
Watch examined one area occupied by Israeli troops during the operation and
found strong evidence in four incidents that Israeli forces deliberately fired at and
killed five civilians, medical personnel, and incapacitated fighters. In other
attacks, Israeli forces did not appear to take all feasible precautions to ensure targets
were military and not civilian.
As of November 2008, Israeli Military Police launched only one formal investigation
into suspicious killings of civilians.
On August 12, Judge Advocate General Brig.-Gen. Avishai Mandelblit informed the
Reuters news agency that the decision by an Israeli tank crew to target a Reuters
cameraman in Gaza on April 16 was sound. The attack killed the cameraman
and eight other civilians, including six children. Mandelblit said the crew acted
properly even though, he acknowledged, they could not identify the cameraman
as a combatant.
Freedom of Movement
Israel increased its extensive, often arbitrary restrictions on freedom of movement
for Palestinians in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. From September 4, 2007,
through September 1, 2008, closure obstacles in the West Bank increased from
572 to 630. These restrictions make it difficult or impossible for many Palestinians
to access jobs, education, and health services, as well as to visit family and
friends.
Settlements and the Wall
The route of the separation barrier or wall, more than 80 percent of which
extends into the West Bank, further restricts the ability of thousands of
Palestinian residents to access their land, essential services such as education
and healthcare, and water.
As of mid-2008, more than 600 buildings were under construction in illegal West
Bank settlements (not including East Jerusalem) and tenders had been issued for
more than 2,400 others. In July government approval of Maskiot marked the first
official recognition of a settlement in almost nine years.
The Israeli human rights organization BTselem, in October, reported 429 cases of
settler violence against Palestinians and their property in 2008, a 75 percent
increase over 2007. These included physical assaults with firearms, beatings, and
destruction of crops and other property. Israeli authorities seldom apprehend or
prosecute perpetrators. In September a bomb placed outside his home injured 77-year-old Hebrew University professor Zeev Sternhall, a prominent critic of the
settlement movement.
Discriminatory Legislation
Israel continues to apply laws and policies that discriminate on the basis of ethnic
or national origin. Since 2002 Israel has prohibited Palestinians from the OPT
who are spouses of Israeli citizens from joining their partners in Israel. In 2007
the Knesset extended the ban through 2008 and expanded its scope to include
citizens of Iran, Iraq, Syria, and Lebanon married to Israelis from living with their
spouses in Israel.
In a positive development, since October 2007 Israel approved nearly 32,000
family unification requests in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, the first exceptions
to a freeze on family unifications put in place in September 2000. Some 90,000
family reunification requests remain pending.
Israeli laws and practices continue to force tens of thousands of Bedouins in the
Negev region to live in unrecognized shanty towns. The state deliberately
excludes Bedouin villages from its national planning process, thus denying them
legal status. Israeli authorities demolished dozens of Bedouin dwellings in 2008.
An official commission headed by retired Supreme Court Justice Eliezer Goldberg
held public hearings to examine the land ownership issues in early 2008, but as
of November had not issued any findings or recommendations.
Expulsion of Asylum Seekers
Between August 23 and 29, the IDF forcibly returned to Egyptian custody 91
Eritreans, Sudanese, and Somalis who illegally crossed the border along the
Sinai. (Egypt has not notified the UN High Commissioner for Refugees of their
whereabouts, and reportedly deported to Sudan some of the 50 Sudanese whom
Israel had forcibly returned in August 2007.)
The Palestinian Authority (PA) and Hamas
Attacks on Israeli Civilians
Palestinian armed groups in Gaza indiscriminately fired locally-made rockets into
the Israeli border town of Sderot and other civilian areas throughout the first half
of 2008. The rocket fire killed four Israeli civilians and wounded others in 2008,
prior to the June ceasefire. Palestinian armed groups, excluding Hamas, continued
to fire small numbers of rockets after the ceasefire came into effect.
According to media reports, Hamas authorities temporarily detained several
Islamic Jihad members for planning or carrying out rocket attacks. In early
November Hamas and other Palestinian armed groups fired over 80 rockets at targets
inside Israel, including civilian populated areas in response to an Israeli military
operation that killed six fighters. As in previous rocket attacks, Palestinian
authorities in Gaza took no action to prosecute any of the individuals involved.
On February 4, a Palestinian suicide bomber killed a 73-year-old woman and
injured 11 other civilians in the southern Israeli town of Dimona. The Al-Aqsa
Martyrs Brigades and Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine claimed joint
responsibility in a Gaza press conference. Neither of the groups or individuals
who claimed responsibility were arrested by Palestinians authorities in Gaza or
charged with any offense.
On March 3, a Palestinian with an assault rifle killed eight Israeli civilians, four of
them under age 18, in a Jerusalem yeshiva, or seminary. The gunman, who was
apparently acting independently, wounded 10 other students. Senior Hamas
spokesmen appeared to give their support to the attack as well as to four others
in 2008 in which Palestinians targeted Israeli civilians in Jerusalem.
Intra-Palestinian Fighting and Lawlessness
Hamas forces in Gaza and Fatah-dominated Palestinian Authority forces in the
West Bank have carried out arbitrary arrests of each others supporters, tortured
prisoners in their custody, and closed down scores of charities, political societies,
and other organizations. The PA prosecuted defendants before military courts, circumventing
due process safeguards.
These abuses occurred throughout the period since Hamas took control of Gaza
in June 2007, peaking in July 2008 after a bombing in a Gaza City beach caf
killed a four-year-old girl and five members of Hamass armed wing, the Izzedin
al-Qassam Brigades. Qassam Brigades members, who have no law enforcement
powers, arbitrarily arrested over 200 people. In the West Bank, PA security forces
responded by arbitrarily arresting over 100 people considered sympathetic to
Hamas.
Palestinian security forces tortured detainees during interrogation, sometimes
leading to their deaths. On February 14, the General Intelligence Services (GIS),
which reports to PA President Mahmud Abbas, arrested Majid al-Barghuti, leader
of a mosque in a village outside Ramallah. Eight days later al-Barghuti was dead,
almost certainly as a result of injuries sustained from torture. On April 13, in Gaza,
armed men arrested Sami `Atiya Khattab, a former GIS captain; 36 hours later he
was dead, his body bearing what a Palestinian human rights defender called
obvious signs of torture.
In early August Hamas forces assaulted a Gaza City area controlled by the Hillis
family, whom Hamas accused of sheltering the perpetrator of the beach caf
bombing. Of the 12 Hillis members killed, two were reportedly executed, and eyewitnesses
said some of those wounded had been shot after they had surrendered.
In mid-September Hamas forces used excessive force in an attempt to arrest
members of the Dugmush clan in Gaza City. Eleven family members were killed in
the clashes, including three children, and 43 people were injured. Two policemen
were also killed.
Despite the gravity of these violations, the Palestinian Authority took no steps to
investigate them or hold anyone to account. Hamas authorities claimed in early
June that they had punished 35 officers for violating human rights but did not
provide details.
The struggle between Hamas and Fatah also contributed to Gazas humanitarian
crisis. In August Hamas authorities interrupted regular diesel shipments to the
Coastal Municipalities Water Utility, an agency controlled by the PA in Ramallah.
Death Penalty
A military court in Gaza handed down a death sentence in January and another in
July. In the West Bank a military court in Jenin handed down death sentences in
April and July; a military court in Hebron also sentenced a man to death in April. A
civil court in Gaza handed down death sentences in October to four men, including
to a 22-year-old who was a juvenile at the time of the alleged offense. A military
court in Bethlehem sentenced a 24-year-old man to death in November.
Key International Actors
Israel is the largest recipient of aid from the United States, receiving US$2.38 billion
in military aid in 2008. Washington has not made any funds conditional on
Israel improving its adherence to international human rights and humanitarian
law. The US trained and equipped Palestinian security forces, which took over
some security functions in Jenin and Hebron.
The current European Union-Israel Action Plan only briefly and vaguely mentions
human rights concerns, in contrast to similar plans between the EU and other
countries in the region. As talks commenced in late 2008 about an upgraded
relationship with Israel, the EU said any new agreement would include a formal
subcommittee on human rights.
The Quartet (the EU, US, Russia, and UN) provided limited humanitarian aid to
Gaza; the US and EU continued their economic sanctions against the de facto
Hamas government there.
Israel was reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism of the UN
Human Rights Council in May 2008.
Jordan
In 2008 Jordan promised human rights reform, but failed to implement it in most
areas. In a missed opportunity for reform, Jordans revision of an old, restrictive
NGO law resulted in a new, more restrictive law. A new law on assembly remained
incongruent with international human rights standards, despite changes.
Attempts to extend trade union membership to non-Jordanian workers in a new
labor law failed in parliament, but provisions to include domestic workers under
labor protections succeeded. An ambitious prison reform program and legal
amendments failed to tackle widespread torture. Jordan continues to observe an
unofficial moratorium on carrying out the death penalty, in force since May 2006.
Arbitrary Detention, Administrative Detention, and Torture
The General Intelligence Department (GID) released Isam Barqawi (Abu
Muhammad al-Maqdisi) after three years of arbitrary detention and denial of due
process. Jordan also freed national security suspects Adnan Abu Nujila and
Samir al-Barq, after the GID first arrested them but then prosecutors did not bring
them to trial for two to three years.
A Penal Code amendment in October 2007 made torture a criminal offense for the
first time. But Jordan has no effective mechanisms to bring perpetrators of torture
to justice. A deficient complaint mechanism, lacklustre investigations and prosecutions,
and lenient sentences at the Police Court, which is not independent,
allow torture in prisons to remain routine and widespread and to take place with
near total impunity. Riots occurred in February in Birain prison and in April in
Muwaqqar and Swaqa prisons. Reasons included ill-treatment, nighttime strip
searches, and a badly implemented plan to separate convicted from untried prisoners.
In Muwaqqar a senior guard tortured several inmates in April by beating
and suspending them from iron grates; two of those inmates died in a fire at the
prison on April 14, which the authorities failed to quickly control.
In the first 10 months of 2007, provincial governors administratively detained
12,178 persons, more than in 2006, without proof of criminal conduct or to circumvent
the obligation to present suspects to the prosecutor within 24 hours.
Jordanian law allows governors to detain persons administratively under the Crime Prevention Law. Administrative detainees must meet a financial bail guarantee
to gain release, but indigent detainees frequently resort to hunger strikes
instead.
Freedom of Expression, Association, and Assembly
Criticisms of the king, government officials, and the intelligence forces are strictly
taboo and carry heavy penalties. Prosecutors also rely on the penal code to criminalize
speech diminishing the prestige of the state, and harming relations with
other states. In December 2007 police arrested Omar Matar of the Arab
Organization for Human Rights for alleged remarks he made on King Abdullahs
genealogy to a colleague in a private dispute. The State Security Court in
December 2007 found him guilty and sentenced him to one year in prison, but an
appeals court overturned the verdict and freed him in February 2008. In
September a prosecutor charged a professor with lse majest for prohibiting colleagues
from hanging the kings portrait in their offices, Agence France-Presse
reported. A prosecutor in June summoned Danish journalists to Jordan for insulting
the religious feelings of Jordanians by republishing cartoons about the
Prophet Muhammad, and one journalist said he was prepared to go to Jordan to
defend himself.
In July parliament passed an amended Law on Public Gatherings (Assembly Law)
and a Law of Charitable Societies (Nongovernmental Organizations Law), both of
which failed to fulfill promises Prime Minister Nader Dahabi had made in January
following NGO protests on earlier drafts. The Assembly Law maintains a governors
power to deny, without justification, permission, to hold any meeting discussing
public affairs. The NGO Law maintained provisions giving the government
discretion to license an NGO and to shut it down without judicial process, in addition
to broad powers to replace an NGOs management with government officials,
and to reject an NGOs internal decisions. The law adds to these old restrictions
new ones, such as prime ministerial approval for every donation or financial grant
from foreigners to domestic NGOs, and from Jordanians to foreign NGOs. Dahabi
promised in September 2008 to revise the law yet again.
Situation of Refugees Fleeing Iraq
There are an estimated 500,000 Iraqis in Jordan, most of them de facto refugees
(only Syria hosts a higher number of Iraqis). The majority of Iraqi refugees in
Jordan arrived after 2003. After the Amman hotel bombings of November 2005,
Jordans traditional tolerance toward Iraqis eroded. Jordans government, which
does not have an established mechanism to determine refugee status, has practically
shut its land borders and airport to fleeing Iraqis. Since May 2008 a new
visa regime prevents Iraqis from entering Jordan without a visa, and thus reaching
safety. The governments of Iraq and Jordan encouraged Iraqis to return in 2008,
despite inadequate measures to ensure their safety. Jordan again admitted Iraqi
children to public schools for the 2007-2008 school year.
Womens Rights
In 2008 Jordan released all women victims of violence or under threat of violence
held in protective custody from the Juwaida prison, with most moving either to
a government-run or an anonymous NGO-run shelter. Jordanian authorities, however,
require a family member to agree to their transfer. Girls who are victims of
violence or who are at risk of abuse continue to be held in protective custody in
the Khanza juvenile detention center for girls.
Jordanian courts continue to issue lenient verdicts for honor killings perpetrated
by family members against women and girls they suspect of immoral behavior.
These killings make up the majority of female murders in Jordan. In October a
resident of Amman confessed to killing his unmarried niece whom he suspected
of being involved in an illicit affair. By November 2008, 16 women had been
killed in Jordan under the guise of family honor.
Migrant Worker Rights
New reports documented abuses of Southeast Asian migrants working in Jordans
Qualified Industrial Zones or as domestic workers, and of Arab migrants working
in construction and agriculture. The government toughened a policy of inspections
and conditions for rewards of mention on a golden list attesting to a companys
absence of labor violations. A new labor law of July 2008 for the first time included domestic workers under its provisions, but an attempt to give non-
Jordanians (non-voting) rights in Jordanian labor unions under the new law failed
in parliament.
In January 2008 the Philippines stopped its citizens from going to Jordan as
domestic workers, due to the increased number of complaints of abuse. In
September Indonesia arrested 40 Jordanians on charges of trafficking in humans
there. Jordans Ministry of Interior reacted by promising a new law against trafficking.
The new labor law stipulates penalties of up to 2,000 dinars (US$3,000) for
employers who use any worker in a forced way, or through threat, deception, or
coercion, including by keeping his travel document, the Amman Center for
Human Rights reported.
Abusive labor conditions include beatings, sexual harassment and attacks, long
working hours, withholding of passports and paychecks, pay discrimination
based on sex or nationality, preventing workers from leaving the worksite at any
time, and denying medical care.
Key International Actors
The United States gave Jordan more than US$700 million in economic and security-
related assistance in 2008 (compared to the European Unions 265 million for
2007-2010), concluding in September for the first time an agreement securing
US$660 million in annual assistance to Jordan for five years in support of security
and stability in the region,  economic development and political reform. In
February, the US Embassys website for the first time published a long list of conditions
Jordan had to fulfill to qualify for funding. Human rights conditions were
not among them. However, US policy in 2008 supportedalthough unsuccessfully
further revision to the NGO Law before it passed parliament in July.
The EU continued to publicly praise Jordan, but was more critical in reporting
progress on political and human rights reform and also initiated a program of
prison reform with the Public Security Directorate. Nevertheless, the EU has not
found a unified voice to speak in support of human rights in Jordan.
The United Kingdom continues to try to return at least two Jordanians to Jordan,
saying that it relies on a 2005 memorandum of understanding with Jordan to prevent torture, under which the government permits Adaleh (a Jordanian NGO with a
very limited track record of investigating, publicizing, and preventing torture) to
monitor the treatment of a returned detainee.
In a positive step, Jordan in March 2008 ratified the International Covenant on
Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Jordan is due to be reviewed under the
Universal Periodic Review mechanism of the UN Human Rights Council in February
2009.
Lebanon
In 2008 Lebanon pulled back from the brink of civil war. Enduring tensions
between the Hezbollah-led opposition and pro-government groups broke out into
full-scale fighting in May. But the various parties reached a political agreement in
Qatar on May 21, paving the way for the election of a new president, the formation
of a national unity government, and the resumption of parliamentary activity.
However, the agreement failed to set the ground for real reforms, and political
instability and sporadic fighting endures.
Impunity remains prevalent with armed gunmen rarely held accountable for
attacks against civilians. Security forces use force to extract confessions, especially
from security suspects. Palestinian refugees from the destroyed Nahr al-
Bared refugee camp are living in dire circumstances while awaiting the reconstruction
of their camp. Lebanese law continues to discriminate against women
by, among other things, denying them the right to pass their nationality to their
children or spouses. Migrant domestic workers face exploitation and abuse by
their employers with little possibility of redress.
Despite pledges by the new government, the families of the estimated 17,000 who
disappeared during and after Lebanons deadly 1975-1990 civil war continue to
wait for information on the fate of their loved ones.
Internal Fighting
Fighting broke out on May 7 between the Hezbollah-led opposition and pro-government
groups, killing at least 71 people in two weeks. Both opposition and progovernment
fighters committed violations of international humanitarian law,
including attacks on civilians and civilian property. Members of the opposition
groupsHezbollah, Amal, and the Syrian Social Nationalist Partymilitarily took
over parts of Beirut. They also attacked and shut down media offices affiliated
with the Future Movement. Supporters of the pro-government groupsthe Future
Movement and the Progressive Socialist Partyalso resorted to violence in areas
under their control, including the killing of captive opposition fighters in the
northern town of Halba.
The political settlement reached on May 21 failed to address abuses committed
during the fighting. Sporadic clashes continued for another three months in the
Beka` and the north, leaving at least 40 dead in Tripoli. With very limited exceptions,
Lebanese judicial authorities have failed to hold to account those responsible
for attacks against civilians.
Legacy of Past Wars
More than two years after the end of the war between Israel and Hezbollah, neither
the Israeli nor the Lebanese government has investigated the violations of
the laws of war committed by the warring parties.
The estimated one million cluster submunition duds left behind by Israels
bombing campaign continue to harm civilians. According to the official Lebanon
Mine Action Center, such duds killed two civilians and wounded 35 in 2008, raising
the post-war casualty toll from clusters to 42 killed and 282 wounded. Israel
continues in its refusal to turn over detailed information on the location of the
areas it targeted with cluster attacks.
In July 2008 Israel and Hezbollah swapped the bodies of 200 Lebanese and
Palestinian fighters who had died in the 1970s and 1980s and five living
Lebanese prisoners, including Samir Kontar, for the bodies of two Israeli soldiers
kidnapped by Hezbollah in July 2006.
The Lebanese government pledged in its ministerial declaration on August 4 to
take steps to uncover the fate of the Lebanese and other nationals who disappeared
during and after Lebanons 1975-1990 civil war and to ratify the
International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance. However, the government took no practical steps to uncover mass
graves or collect information on the disappeared.
The fates of Lebanese and other residents of Lebanon who disappeared at the
hands of Syrian security forces remain unknown. Lebanese human rights groups
have compiled a list of 640 victims of Syrian enforced disappearances in
Lebanon. An official joint Syrian-Lebanese committee established in May 2005 to
investigate such cases had not published any findings at this writing.
Torture, Ill-Treatment, and Prison Conditions
A number of detainees reported being beaten and tortured during interrogation in
a number of detention facilities, including the Military Intelligence unit of the
Ministry of Defense, the Information Branch of the Internal Security Forces, the
Drug Repression Bureau detention facilities in Beirut and Zahle, as well as certain
police stations. Lebanese law prohibits torture, but accountability for ill-treatment
and torture in detention remains elusive.
Conditions in prison and detention facilities remain poor, with overcrowding and
lack of proper medical care a perennial problem. At least 21 people died in custody
in 2008. In August the Ministry of Interior opened an investigation into allegations
of abuse inside Lebanese prisons, following public allegations of corruption
and ill-treatment of prisoners. The outcome of the investigations had not
been made public at writing.
On October 10 the justice minister presented a draft law to abolish the death
penalty.
Palestinian Refugees
Palestinians remain subject to wide-ranging restrictions on housing and work
despite limited efforts by the authorities to relax some of the labor restrictions.
Palestinians from the Nahr al-Bared refugee campdestroyed in the 2007 battle
between the Lebanese army and the armed Fatah al-Islam groupare living in
dire conditions while they wait for the camp to be rebuilt. The Lebanese government
appealed in June to international donors for US$445 million for the reconstruction
of the camp, but only US$113 million has been pledged at this writing.
In August the Lebanese authorities agreed to issue temporary identity cards to
Palestinian refugees in Lebanon without any legal documentation. The decision
should improve the legal status of at least 3,000 Palestinians in Lebanon who
had previously lived in constant fear of arrest.
Iraqi Refugees
An estimated 50,000 Iraqis live in Lebanon. The United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) recognizes all Iraqis from central and southern
Iraq seeking asylum in Lebanon as refugees on a prima facie basis. However,
Lebanon does not give legal effect to UNHCRs recognition of Iraqi refugees and
generally treats the vast majority of them as illegal immigrants subject to arrest.
The number of detained Iraqis in Lebanon decreased in 2008 following the
release of more than 200 Iraqis between March and September as part of a regularization
of foreign nationals in Lebanon.
Hariri Tribunal
The UN-appointed international commission continues its investigations into the
killing of former prime minister Rafiq Hariri in 2005 and other politically motivated
assassinations, but it has not named any official suspects. Its final report is
due on December 2. The tribunal to try those responsible for the Hariri killing,
established by the UN Security Council in June 2007, is expected to start operating
in 2009.
Four former heads of Lebanese intelligence and security servicesGen. `Ali al-
Hajj, Gen. Raymond Azar, Brigadier Gen. Jamil al-Sayyed, and Gen. Mustafa
Hamdanas well as two civiliansAhmad and Mahmud Abdel-`Alremain in
detention without charge following their arrest in 2005 on suspicion of their
involvement in Hariris assassination. In March the UN Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention called their continued detention without charge arbitrary and
unjust.
Another civilian, Ibrahim Jarjoura, is also in detention since January 2006 on the
accusation of making false statements to the international commission.
Discrimination against Women
Despite womens active participation in all aspects of Lebanese society, discriminatory
provisions continue to exist in personal status laws, nationality laws, and
penal laws relating to violence in the family. Current Lebanese law does not allow Lebanese women to confer nationality on either their spouses or children. As a
result, thousands of children born to Lebanese mothers and foreign fathers are
denied full access to education, healthcare, and residency.
Migrant domestic workers face exploitation and abuse by employers, including
excessive hours of work, non-payment of wages, and restrictions on their liberty.
Many women migrants suffer physical and sexual abuse at the hands of employers,
in a climate of impunity for employers. At least 45 migrant domestic workers
died in Lebanon in 2008, a majority of whom committed suicide or died while trying
to escape.
Key International Actors
Multiple international and regional actors compete for influence in Lebanon.
France, the United States, and the European Union are key supporters of the
Lebanese government and provide assistance for a wide range of programs,
including armed forces training, torture prevention seminars, and civil society
activities. However, these countries have not used their leverage to push Lebanon
to adopt concrete measures to improve its human rights record, such as investigating
specific allegations of torture or adopting laws that respect the rights of
refugees or migrant workers.
Regionally, Syria, Iran, and Saudi Arabia maintain strong influences on Lebanese
politics through their local allies. After three tense years, Lebanese-Syrian relations
improved in 2008 and the two countries agreed on October 15 to establish
diplomatic relations following French mediation. Qatar emerged as a new powerbroker
after its successful mediation of the fighting in May.
The UN Security Council continues to follow up on the implementation of
Resolution 1559, which calls among other things for the Lebanese government to
extend its control over all Lebanese territory. UN peacekeepers are still present in
large numbers at Lebanons southern border.
Libya
Libyas international reintegration accelerated in 2008 despite the governments
ongoing human rights violations. In September a US secretary of state visited the
country for the first time since 1953. Driven by business interests and Libyas
cooperation in combating terrorism and illegal migration, European governments
also strengthened ties with Libya during the year. The Libyan government continues
to imprison individuals for criticizing the countrys political system or its
leader, Mu`ammar al-Qadhafi, and maintains harsh restrictions on freedom of
expression and assembly.
Political Prisoners
Libya continues to detain scores of individuals for engaging in peaceful political
activity. Hundreds more have been disappeared, some for decades. Many were
imprisoned for violating Law 71, which bans any group activity opposed to the
principles of the 1969 revolution that brought al-Qadhafi to power. Violators of
Law 71 can be executed.
Fathi al-Jahmi remains Libyas most prominent political prisoner, imprisoned
since March 2004 after calling for democratization and criticizing al-Qadhafi. In
late 2005 a secret court deemed al-Jahmi mentally incompetent and in May 2006
ordered his detention at a psychiatric hospital. According to al-Jahmi, who suffers
from diabetes, hypertension, and heart disease, the authorities denied him medical
care at the hospital. In July 2007 he was transferred to the state-run Tripoli
Medical Center.
In March 2008 the Qadhafi Development Foundation, run by al-Qadhafis son Seif
al-Islam al-Qadhafi, facilitated a visit to al-Jahmi by Human Rights Watch and
Physicians for Human Rights. The groups investigation showed that negligent
care in detention had seriously degraded his health. To Human Rights Watchs
knowledge, al-Jahmi remains under guard in the Tripoli Medical Center, unable to
leave his room and with restricted family visits.
In February 2007 Libyan security agents arrested 14 organizers of a planned
peaceful demonstration intended to commemorate the anniversary of a violent crackdown on demonstrators in Benghazi. On May 27, 2008, the authorities
released one of the men, Jum`a Boufayed, who had been missing since his arrest.
A second man, `Adil Humaid, was released on June 10. A third man, `Abd al-
Rahman al-Qotaiwi, has remained disappeared since his arrest. On June 10 a
state security court found the remaining 11 men guilty of planning to overthrow
the government and meeting with an official from a foreign government, apparently
a US embassy official. The court, located inside Tripolis Abu Salim prison,
sentenced the men to prison terms of between six and 25 years. The main organizer
of the planned demonstration, Idris Boufayed, received a 25-year sentence,
but was released from detention on medical grounds in October due to his
advanced lung cancer. Another member of the group, Jamal al-Haji, a writer who
holds Danish citizenship, was sentenced to 12 years of imprisonment. Libyan
authorities have rebuffed Danish government requests to visit him.
Freedom of Association and Freedom of Expression
Libya has no independent nongovernmental organizations. Law 19, On
Associations, requires a political body to approve all such organizations and
does not allow appeals against negative decisions. The government has refused
to allow independent journalists and lawyers organizations.
Freedom of expression is severely curtailed. Article 178 of the penal code orders
life imprisonment for the dissemination of information considered to tarnish [the
countrys] reputation or undermine confidence in it abroad. Negative comments
about al-Qadhafi are frequently punished, and self-censorship is rife. Uncensored
news is available via satellite television and Libyan websites based abroad,
which the government occasionally blocks. In April 2007 Libyas legislative body,
the General Peoples Congress, created a committee to examine the state-controlled
media. The government has announced no further information about the
committees work.
The exceptions to these rules are organizations run by Seif al-Qadhafi, including
the Qadhafi Development Foundation. In August 2007 his al-Ghad company
launched Libyas first private newspapers and television station, which leveled
mild criticisms at the government.
Torture
Reports of torture continue to be of deep concern, affecting both Libyan citizens
and foreignersmostly sub-Saharan Africanswho are detained during immigration
sweeps.
Libyan human rights groups abroad allege that Libyan authorities tortured
Mohamed Adel Abu Ali, a Libyan citizen whom Sweden returned to Tripoli in May
2008 after rejecting his asylum claim. The Swedish Migration Board confirmed
that Abu Ali died in Libyan custody; a relative says he was detained incommunicado.
Sweden suspended deportations to Libya in July, pending an investigation
into the death. It lifted the moratorium in August after the investigation failed to
determine how Abu Ali had died.
Violence against Women and Girls
The governments position on violence against women remains one of denial,
leaving victims unprotected and without remedies. Libya has no domestic violence
law, and inadequate laws punishing sexual violence. The government prosecutes
only the most violent rape cases, and judges have the authority to propose
marriage between the rapist and the victim as a social remedy to the
crime. Rape victims themselves risk prosecution for adultery or fornication if they
attempt to press charges.
Police officers are not trained to handle cases of violence against women, and
there are no womens or girls shelters. Instead, the government detains dozens
of victims, particularly rape victims, in social rehabilitation facilities. Many are
denied the opportunity to challenge the legality of their detention. The authorities
subject them to forced virginity examinations and punitive treatment, including
solitary confinement. The only way out of these facilities is if a male relative takes
custody of the woman or girl, or if she consents to marriage. In February 2006 the
government said it had established a committee to study the facilities; the committees
work, if any, is unknown. 
Abu Salim Prison
The government still has not released any findings on the large-scale killings in
Tripolis Abu Salim prison in June 1996. According to an ex-prisoner, Internal
Security Agency forces killed as many as 1,200 inmates who had revolted over
prison conditions. In October 2006 guards killed at least one prisoner and reportedly
injured nine after another reported revolt.
Families of the 1996 victims have gone to court to demand information about the
fate of their missing relatives. In June 2008 a Benghazi court ordered the state to
reveal the identities of the dead and the circumstances in which they had died. To
Human Rights Watchs knowledge, the state has not yet complied with the ruling,
sparking protests from family members. In July Seif al-Qadhafi stated that the
results of an initial investigation into the killings showed excessive use of force
and abuse of power at the prison. He promised a public trial but gave no
timetable.
Treatment of Foreigners
The government continues to forcibly deport foreigners who lack proper documentation,
sometimes to countries where they could face persecution, including
Eritrea. Foreigners reported arbitrary arrests, beatings, and other abuse during
their detention and deportation.
Libya has no asylum law, has not signed the 1951 Refugee Convention, and has
no formal working agreement with the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR). However, the government reportedly grants UNHCR representatives
regular access to detention facilities.
Promises of Reform
In 2008 the government continued, for the fourth year, to review proposals for a
new penal code and code of criminal procedure. In 2005 the secretary of justice
stated the new penal code would impose the death penalty only for the most
dangerous crimes and for terrorism. A 2004 draft of the new code suggests the
government might accept a very broad definition of terrorism, which could be used to criminalize the expression of peaceful political views. The government
has yet to present either draft code to the General Peoples Congress.
Key International Actors
In 2008 the United States and some European governments upgraded relations
with Libya despite its human rights abuses. In August the US and Libya signed a
claims settlement agreement, indemnifying each other against outstanding lawsuits
for Libyan bombings and US airstrikes in the 1990s. In September US
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice visited Libya, saying she respectfully raised
human rights concerns with al-Qadhafi. Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi
also visited Libya in September, pledging US$5 billion in reparations for the
damage inflicted during Italys colonial rule. Berlusconi said Italy would receive
increased access to Libyan oil and gas and fewer clandestine immigrants.
Russias then-president Vladimir Putin signed multi-billion-dollar arms and energy
deals during a visit in April, the first by a Russian president. Al-Qadhafi signed billions
of dollars in contracts during visits to France and Spain in December 2007.
Libya reportedly continues to share intelligence on militant Islamists with Western
governments. In 2006 and 2007 the US government returned two Libyan citizens,
Mohamed al-Rimi and Sofian Hamoodah, after detaining them at Guantanamo
Bay. In December 2007 US officials visited both men at Libyan state security
offices and reported that they were being detained without knowledge of the
charges against them and apparently without access to a lawyer.
European countries continue to cooperate with Libya to control illegal migration,
often without adequate regard for the rights of African migrants or the need to
protect refugees and others at risk of abuse on return to their home countries.
Morocco/Western Sahara
Morocco continues to present a mixed picture on human rights. It has made great
strides in addressing past abuses, allowed considerable space for public dissent
and protest, and reduced gender inequality in the family code. But authorities,
aided by complaisant courts, continue to use repressive legislation to punish
peaceful opponents, especially those who violate the taboos against criticizing
the king or the monarchy, questioning the Moroccanness of Western Sahara, or
denigrating Islam. The police continue to use excessive force to break up
demonstrations.
There was sporadic unrest in 2008 over socioeconomic grievances, notably in the
city of Sidi Ifni where security forces intervened on June 7 to lift a protesters
blockade of the port. The security forces used excessive force and committed
other abuses in Sidi Ifni, according to numerous reports.
Controls are particularly tight in the restive and disputed Western Sahara region,
which Morocco administers as if it were part of its national territory. A pro-independence
movement known as the Polisario Front (Popular Front for the
Liberation of the Sagua al-Hamra and Ro de Oro) contests Moroccan sovereignty
and demands a referendum on self-determination for the Sahrawi people. The
Polisario rejected a Moroccan proposal, presented in April 2007, for enhanced
autonomy for the region, mainly because that proposal nowhere mentions a referendum
in which independence would be an option. (For human rights in
Polisario-run refugee camps, see Algeria chapter.)
Terrorism and Counterterrorism
Hundreds of suspected Islamist extremists arrested in the aftermath of the
Casablanca bombings of May 2003 continue to serve prison terms, despite a
series of royal pardons that freed a few hundred of them. Many of those rounded
up in 2003 were held that year in secret detention for days or weeks, subjected to
mistreatment and sometimes torture while under interrogation, then convicted in
unfair trials. Some of those convicted were sentenced to death, a punishment
that Morocco has not abolished even though it has not carried it out since 1993.
Since August 2006 police arrested hundreds more suspected Islamist militants, bringing the total to more than a thousand (by some estimates) as of September
2008.
Intelligence agencies continued to interrogate terrorism suspects at an unacknowledged
detention center at Temara, near Rabat, according to numerous
reports from detainees. Suspects allege that police tortured them under interrogation,
while holding them in pre-charge custody for longer than the 12-day maximum
the law provides for terrorism cases. For example, schoolteacher Abdelkrim
Hakkou went missing from near his home in Ain Taouijdat on May 16, 2008. His
family did not learn his whereabouts until July, when he was brought before a
judge and charged with attempting to recruit jihadists to fight in Iraq. Hakkou told
his family that police had held him during most of the six-week period in secret
detention in Temara, where they tortured him. At this writing, Hakkou remained in
pretrial detention. The authorities claim Hakkou was arrested only on July 1 and
presented to the prosecutor July 11.
Over the past decade, those like Hakkou who disappeared turned up after
some weeks in police custody, unlike hundreds of persons who had disappeared
during the reign of the late King Hassan II and were never found again
alive. The state acknowledged responsibility for this practice following the work of
Moroccos Equity and Reconciliation Commission and its 2005 report. Beginning
in 2007, the state paid the equivalent of around US$85 million in compensation
to some 16,000 victims or to their survivors, and began providing other forms of
assistance to individuals and to communities that suffered repression in past
years.
The Justice System and Law Enforcement
Police are rarely held accountable for violating human rights. In cases with political
overtones, courts rarely provide fair trials, ignoring requests for medical examinations
lodged by defendants who claim to have been tortured, refusing to summon
exculpatory witnesses, and convicting defendants on the basis of apparently
coerced confessions. Police in Marrakesh arrested Sahrawi human rights activist
Nama Asfari on April 17, 2008, and charged him with drunk driving and assaulting
a woman motorist. According to Asfari, the police beat him severely during an interrogation that focused mainly on his political activism, and then forced him to
sign a confession. The court sentenced him to two months in prison.
After raucous anti-gay demonstrations in the city streets, a court in Ksar el-Kbir,
under penal code article 487, sentenced six men to between four and 10 months
in prison on December 10, 2007, for committing homosexual acts, even though
the prosecution introduced no evidence that acts violating the article had
occurred. An appeals court upheld the verdicts on January 15, 2008.
In another closely watched case, authorities in February announced the dismantling
of a terrorist plot and arrested five political figures and a journalist whom
they accused of complicity. The figures included members of three legally recognized
parties, one of which, al-Badil al-Hadari (the Civilized Alternative), they
promptly dissolved. The men remained in custody while awaiting the scheduled
opening of their trial November 14.
Morocco is home to an estimated 10,000 sub-Saharan illegal immigrants, many of
whom hope to gain entry to Europe. On April 29 a Moroccan naval ship intercepted
an inflatable dinghy filled with would-be migrants in the Mediterranean Sea.
According to interviews a Moroccan NGO conducted with survivors, when the
dinghys crew defied orders to return to shore, a crewman of the naval ship punctured
the dinghy, causing a reported 29 passengers to drown. Morocco denied its
agents played any role in the drowning but conducted no inquiry that was made
public.
Freedom of Association and Assembly
Authorities generally tolerate the work of the many human rights organizations
active in Rabat and Casablanca. They generally do not hamper foreign human
rights organizations visiting Morocco, and often respond to their letters of concern.
However, in Western Sahara surveillance is tighter and harassment of rights
defenders more common. Authorities have refused to grant legal recognition to
any Sahrawi organization dedicated to exposing Moroccan abuses. Authorities
expelled on April 25 a delegation from France that had come to observe the trial
of Nama Asfari and that included members of pro-Sahrawi organizations.
Most types of public assembly require authorization from the Interior Ministry,
which can refuse permission if it deems them liable to disturb the public order.
Although many of the frequent public protests in Rabat run their course undisturbed,
baton-wielding police have brutally broken up others. For example, during
a peaceful sit-in on July 1 in front of the Parliament in Rabat in solidarity with
political prisoners, law enforcement officers used excessive force to disperse participants,
injuring members of the Moroccan Human Rights Association.
Police systematically prevented or dispersed peaceful sit-ins or gatherings by
groups that favor independence for Western Sahara. They often used excessive
force in responding to incidents when Sahrawi demonstrators laid stones across
streets or threw rocks or, very occasionally, threw Molotov cocktails. Sahrawi protester
violence fatally injured a policeman for the first time, on February 26 in
Tantan.
Freedom of Expression and the Media
Media criticism of the authorities is often quite blunt. It is nevertheless circumscribed
by a press law that provides prison terms for maliciously spreading
false information likely to disturb the public order or for speech that is defamatory,
offensive to members of the royal family, or that undermines Islam, the
institution of the monarchy, or [Moroccos] territorial integrity.
On July 11, 2008, a Rabat court fined Hassan Rachidi, Al Jazeera televisions
Morocco bureau chief, for maliciously spreading false news. The charge
stemmed from an Al Jazeera report, citing human rights sources, that people had
died when security forces clashed with protestors in Sidi Ifni. The court convicted
Rachidi even though Al Jazeera had broadcast government denials of the fatalities.
Authorities also suspended Rachidis press accreditation. The same day, a
Rabat court convicted on the same grounds the person who had provided Al
Jazeera this information, Brahim Sabalil of the Moroccan Center for Human
Rights. The day before, a court sentenced Sabalil to six months in prison and a
fine for insulting authorities by alleging fictional crimes when he accused security
forces at a June 26 press conference of crimes against humanity in connection
with alleged deaths, rapes, and disappearances in Sidi Ifni. An appeals
court upheld Sabalils six-month sentence. A Casablanca court sentenced Fouad Mourtada on February 22 to a three-year
prison term on a charge of usurping an identity for having created an unauthorized
and spurious, but non-defamatory, Facebook profile of King Mohamed VIs
brother. An Agadir court on September 8, handed a two-year prison term to
Mohamed Erraji for disrespecting the king in an article he published at
www.hespress.com criticizing the way that the monarch dispensed privileges and
favors. After international outcry over the convictions, the king pardoned
Mourtada on March 18, and an appeals court overturned Errajis conviction on
September 18.
In April a royal pardon freed seven members of the Moroccan Human Rights
Association imprisoned nearly one year earlier for attacking sacred values by
allegedly chanting slogans against the king during 2007 marches. But in February,
wheel-chair-bound, 95-year-old Ahmed Nasser died in prison, five months into
the three-year sentence he received for attacking sacred values for allegedly
insulting the king during a street altercation.
In May 2008 authorities revoked Al Jazeeras license to broadcast its Maghreb
news show from Rabat. They cited technical and legal reasons, but observers suspected
the real reason to be dissatisfaction with the stations coverage of
Morocco.
Family Law and Womens and Childrens Rights
Reforms to the family law enacted in 2004 have raised the minimum age of marriage
for women from 15 to 18, made the family the joint responsibility of both
spouses, rescinded the wifes duty of obedience to her husband, expanded
access to divorce for women, and placed the practice of polygamy under strict
judicial control. In January 2007 Morocco reformed its nationality code to give
women the right to pass their nationality to their children. Reaffirming the minimum
legal age for marriage, authorities in September 2008 closed schools and a
website run by a cleric who advocated marriage for girls as young as nine.
Morocco lacks a functioning child protection system, and government efforts to
create a system of child protection units showed little progress in 2008.
Unaccompanied children are at special risk of abuse while attempting to cross to Spain (see European Union chapter) and upon return to Morocco, including police
beatings and detention with adult criminal suspects.
Key International Actors
Morocco has sought privileged relations with the European Union, which is in turn
eager for Moroccos cooperation in combating terrorism and illegal migration. The
kingdom is the biggest beneficiary of the European Neighbourhood and
Partnership Instrument, with 654 million in aid earmarked for 2007-2010. On
October 13, the EU voted to give Morocco advanced status, placing it a notch
above other members of the EUs neighbourhood policy. While noting progress
in many areas of human rights, the EU also renew[ed] its appeal  that Morocco
ensure respect for freedom of expression and  reform again the Press Code and
the Penal Code by decriminalizing offenses of opinion. The EU also invited
Morocco to safeguard freedom of association and assembly, notably in the territory
of Western Sahara, and called upon the forces of authority [sic] to show
restraint in the recourse to force.
Presenting its request that the United States grant Morocco a total of US$29 million
in aid in 2009, the State Department called Morocco one of the United
States oldest and closest allies in the region. [A] moderate, stable, democratizing
Arab Muslim nation, an important actor in the war on terrorism and a constructive
force in the pursuit of Middle East peace. In 2007 the US governmentbacked
Millennium Challenge Corporation approved a five-year US$697.5 million
economic aid package to Morocco to fight poverty and promote economic growth.
The US State Department has stated that it supports autonomy for Western
Sahara under Moroccan sovereignty. While supporting this basic Moroccan position,
US officials held meetings with Sahrawi human rights activists, and publicly
criticized Moroccan abuses in Western Sahara. In addition, a law took effect in
December 2007 conditioning US$1 million in US military aid to Morocco on
human rights progress, particularly in the realm of freedom of expression on the
Western Sahara issue.
France is Moroccos leading trade partner and the leading source of public development
aid and private investment. It also endorses Moroccos autonomy plan
for Western Sahara.
The UN Security Council in April 2008 renewed for one year the MINURSO peacekeeping
force in Western Sahara but once again declined to extend its mandate
to include human rights observation and protection. Morocco opposes giving
MINURSO such a mandate, whereas the Polisario says it supports it.
Morocco was examined under the UN Human Rights Councils Universal Periodic
Review in April 2008. The review did not cover the situation in Western Sahara.
Saudi Arabia
Human rights conditions remain poor in Saudi Arabia. International and domestic
pressure to improve human rights practices remained feeble, and the government
undertook no major reforms in 2008. The government systematically suppressed
the rights of 14 million Saudi women and an estimated 2 to 3 million members of
minority Shia communities, and failed to protect the rights of foreign workers.
Thousands of people received unfair trials or were subject to arbitrary detention.
Curbs on freedom of association, expression, and movement, as well as a lack of
official accountability, remain serious concerns.
The government-approved National Society for Human Rights failed to issue its
second annual report in 2008. The governmental Human Rights Commission
opened a womens branch, but its board remained all-male.
Womens Rights
The government continues to treat women as legal minors, denying them a host
of fundamental human rights. The government requires women to obtain permission
from a male guardian to work, study, marry, travel, and even receive a
national identification card. The Ministry of Interior did not implement a cabinet
recommendation from July to abolish the requirement for a guardians permission
to issue IDs to women.
In addition, the government neither set a minimum age for marriage nor adopted
any comprehensive policies to combat forced and early marriages. Marriages of
Saudi girls as young as 10 to much older men were reported in 2008, although
the Human Rights Commission intervened in one such case to delay the marriage
for five years.
Strictly enforced sex segregation hinders a Saudi womans ability to participate
fully in public life. Women are prohibited from working in offices or entering government
buildings that lack female sections, or pursuing degrees in disciplines
not taught in womens colleges. The Ministry of Labor replaced its prohibition on
mixed workplaces with vaguely worded obligations to respect Islamic law on the
matter, and so the current workplace environment remains highly segregated. The Ministry of Justice denies women the right to be judges or prosecutors, or to practice
law. In February 2008 religious police arrested a 36-year-old Saudi businesswoman
for illegal mingling while meeting with a male colleague in a Starbucks
in Riyadh.
Migrant Worker Rights
An estimated 8 million foreign workers, primarily from India, Indonesia, the
Philippines, and Sri Lanka, fill jobs in the construction, domestic service, health,
and business sectors. Many suffer a range of abuses and labor exploitation,
sometimes rising to slavery-like conditions.
Despite renewed announcements in July, the Ministry of Labor did not implement
its commitment to end the restrictive kafala (sponsorship) system. This policy ties
migrant workers residency permits to their employers, fueling abuses such as
employers confiscating passports, withholding wages, and forcing migrants to
work for months or years against their will.
The government also failed to enact an amendment, first proposed in 2005, to
extend labor law protections to the 1.5 million migrant domestic workers in the
country. Asian embassies report thousands of complaints each year from domestic
workers who are forced to work 15-20 hours a day, seven days a week, and
denied their wages. Many endure a range of abuses including forced confinement
in the workplace, food deprivation, and psychological, physical, and sexual
abuse.
Migrants encountering the criminal justice system sometimes face severe delays
and lack access to interpreters, legal aid, or their consulates. Migrants pursuing
criminal cases against abusive employers have little hope of redress. In May
2008 a Riyadh court dropped charges against the Saudi employer who abused
Indonesian domestic worker Nour Miyati so severely she needed her toes and fingers
amputated.
Arbitrary Detention and Unfair Trials
Detainees, including children, are commonly the victims of systematic and multiple
violations of due process and fair trial rights, including arbitrary arrest and
torture and ill-treatment in detention. Saudi judges routinely sentence defendants
to thousands of lashes, often carried out in public. In 2008 the kingdom
carried out 88 executions as of mid-November (compared to 150 over the equivalent
period in 2007), including for drug offenses.
Saudi Arabia has no law setting an age below which a child should not be tried
as an adult, and judges have discretion regarding the bases for arrest and length
of detention for children. In July 2008 an appeals court ordered the retrial in adult
court of Sultan Kohail, whom a juvenile court had earlier sentenced to one year in
prison and 200 lashes for his involvement when he was 16 in a schoolyard brawl
that resulted in a young mans death. If convicted, Kohail faces the death penalty.
A 2006 announcement raising the age of criminal responsibility for boysthere is
none for girlsfrom seven to 12 years is not fully observed.
Saudi Arabia has made no progress in implementing the Judiciary Law adopted in
October 2007 that sets up specialized courts, and has yet to write a penal code or
ensure that law enforcement officials adhere to its criminal procedure code.
Authorities rarely inform suspects of the crime with which they are charged, or the
evidence supporting the accusation. In the absence of a penal code, prosecutors
and judges have discretion to decide what constitutes a criminal offense.
Detainees do not have access to a lawyer during interrogation, face excessive pretrial
delays, and at trial often cannot examine witnesses or evidence or present a
defense.
The Human Rights Commission was unable to resolve the arbitrary detention of
Yondje Obed, a Cameroonian arrested in 2006 on frivolous charges whose trial
has yet to begin. At this writing, Falih remains on death row.
Secret police (mabahith) in 2008 detained or continued to detain without trial or
access to lawyersin many cases for yearsaround 2,000 persons suspected of
sympathies with or involvement in terrorism. In October the government
announced it would bring 991 domestic terrorism suspects to trial for the first
time. The United States in late 2007 returned more Saudis from Guantanamo Bay, leaving only about a dozen Saudi detainees in US military custody there (out of a
group originally comprising more than 130). The returnees faced detention without
charge, usually for several months, and involuntary participation in rehabilitation
programs.
Freedom of Expression
Freedom of expression in Saudi Arabia deteriorated in 2008. The government did
not respond publicly when chief judge Salih al-Luhaidan in September endorsed
the idea that owners of TV stations that broadcast allegedly lewd shows during
Ramadan deserved to be killed. Nor did the government sanction prominent cleric
Abd al-Rahman al-Barrak in March after he called for the killing of journalists
Abdullah Bajad Utaibi and Yusif Aba al-Khair for articles criticizing extremist interpretations
of Islam.
Official tolerance for incitement to violence contrasted with intolerance toward
dissident opinions. Intelligence officials detained blogger Fuad Farhan without
charge from December 2007 until April 2008 after he criticized the arbitrary arrest
of other peaceful critics. Prosecutors in May charged Raif al-Badawi, a self-proclaimed
liberal who challenges the views of the religious establishment, with
setting up an electronic [web]site that insults Islam, a charge that carries a fiveyear
prison sentence under a 2007 Law to Combat Crimes of Information; the trial
was set to begin in November. Also in May, secret police arrested Matrook al-
Faleh, a prominent reform activist and university professor. As of November, he
remained in solitary confinement without charge. The Human Rights Commission
secured visitation rights for al-Falehs wife, but did not address the underlying
issue of his arbitrary detention.
Freedom of Religion and Religious Discrimination
Saudi Arabia systematically discriminates against its religious minoritiesin particular,
the Twelver Shia in the Eastern Province and around Medina, and the
Ismailis, a distinct branch of Shiism, in Najran, in the southwest of the country.
Official discrimination against Shia (including Ismailis) encompasses government
employment, religious practices, education, and the justice system. Government
officials exclude Ismailis from decision making and publicly disparage their faith.
In 2006 and 2007, Judge al-Luhaidan and the Senior Council for Religious
Scholars called Ismailis infidels, a position reflected in official textbooks stating
that the Ismaili faith constitutes the sin of major polytheism.
In Najran, only one of the 35 department heads of local government is Ismaili;
there are almost no Ismailis in senior security jobs or working as teachers of religion.
Ismailis face difficulties obtaining building permits for their privately
financed mosques, while the state funds Sunni mosques and pays the imams.
After Ismaili leader Shaikh Ahmad bin Turki Al Sab met with King Abdullah in
April 2008 to complain against official treatment of Ismailis, Saudi intelligence
arrested him, and continued to detain him as of November. On November 4, the
king accepted the resignation of Prince Mishal, the governor of Najran.
Key International Actors
Saudi Arabia is a key ally of the United States and the United Kingdom. US pressure
for human rights improvements was imperceptible in a year that saw visits
by President Bush, Vice-President Cheney, and Secretary of State Rice. UK efforts
through the Two Kingdoms Dialogue to promote human rights had no tangible
effect, if such efforts were made at all.
Saudi Arabia is due to be reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism
of the UN Human Rights Council in February 2009.
Syria
Syria emerged from its international isolation in 2008, but its human rights record
remains very poor. The authorities arrested political and human rights activists,
censored websites, detained bloggers, and imposed travel bans. Emergency rule,
imposed in 1963, remains in effect and Syrias multiple security agencies continue
to detain people without arrest warrants.
The Supreme State Security Court (SSSC), an exceptional court with almost no
procedural guarantees, sentenced 75 people in 2008, mostly Islamists, to long
prison terms. Syrian Kurds, the countrys largest ethnic minority, continue to
protest their treatment as second-class citizens. Months after military police shot
and killed rioting inmates at Sednaya military prison, no information has been
disclosed about casualties.
Political Activists on Trial
Starting in December 2007, the Syrian security services detained over 40 political
activists who attended a meeting of the National Council of the Damascus
Declaration, comprising a number of opposition groups. While most were
released within 48 hours, the authorities referred 12, including former member of
parliament Riad Seif, to the Damascus Criminal Court, which sentenced them on
October 29, 2008, to 30 months in prison on charges of weakening national sentiment,
and spreading false news affecting the countrys morale. On May 7,
2008, security services detained writer and political analyst Habib Saleh for articles
critical of the government and in defense of opposition figure Riad al-Turk.
He is awaiting trial on multiple charges, including weakening national sentiment.
The SSSC sentenced over 75 people in 2008 on various grounds, including membership
in the banned Muslim Brotherhood, Kurdish activism, membership in
unauthorized political groups, and independent criticism of the government.
On April 23 the Military Court in Damascus sentenced Kamal al-Labwani, a physician
and founder of the Democratic Liberal Gathering, to a three-year prison term term he received in 2007 for having advocated peaceful reform while visiting the
United States and Europe.
In a welcome move, on August 7 authorities released economics professor Dr.
`Arif Dalila, a proponent of political liberalization who was serving a 10-year sentence
for attempting to change the constitution by illegal means.
Freedom of Expression
Syrian authorities continue to restrict freedom of expression, and an independent
press remains nonexistent. The government has extended to online outlets
restrictions it applies to other media, detaining journalists for posting information
online. Syrian internet censorship extends to popular websites such as Googles
blogging engine, Blogspot, as well as Facebook and YouTube.
On April 7 the SSSC sentenced writer and poet Firas Sa`ad to four years in jail for
weakening national sentiment after he published articles on the website
www.ahewar.org in which he defended a call for improved relations between
Lebanon and Syria and criticized the Syrian armys role in the July 2006 war
between Israel and Hezbollah. On May 11 the SSSC sentenced to three years in
prison blogger Tarek Biasi, 23, whom the government detained in July 2007 for
insulting security services and weakening national sentiment. At this writing,
Karim `Arbaji, 29, moderator of popular online youth forum www.akhawia.net, is
on trial for spreading false information that may weaken national sentiment.
Arbitrary Detention, Torture, and Disappearances
Syrias multiple security services continue to detain people without arrest warrants
and frequently refuse to disclose their whereabouts for weeks and sometimes
months, in effect forcibly disappearing them. On August 15 Syrian security
services detained Mash`al al-Temmo, spokesperson for the Kurdish Future Current
in Syria, an unauthorized political party, while he was driving alone at night, and
held him incommunicado for 11 days. The security services are also believed to
hold a small number of detainees who were arrested in Pakistan in recent years
and held for a time in secret CIA custody.
Human Rights Watch received numerous reports of ill-treatment and torture by
security agencies. In January, eight of the 12 detainees of the National Council of
the Damascus Declaration reported that State Security officers beat them during
interrogation, including prominent writer `Ali al-Abdullah who suffered ear
injuries. A Kurdish activist showed Human Rights Watch photos of bruises he said
Political Security officers inflicted on him in July 2008 during interrogation. At
least 11 of the 75 people sentenced in 2008 by the SSSC had told the court that
security agencies tortured them.
On July 5 military police opened fire on rioting inmates in Sednaya prison. A number
of inmates and prison guards were reportedly killed, but authorities have
released no information on the number or names of those killed and wounded.
As in previous years, the government failed to acknowledge security force involvement
in the disappearances of an estimated 17,000 persons, mostly Muslim
Brotherhood members and other Syrian activists detained by the government in
the late 1970s and early 1980s as well as hundreds of Lebanese and Palestinians
detained in Syria or abducted from Lebanon. The vast majority remains unaccounted
for and many are believed to have been killed.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights activists continue to be targets of government harassment and
arrest. On April 22 a military court sentenced Ahmad al-Hajji al-Khalaf, a board
member of the Arab Organization for Human Rights in Syria, to five days in jail for
criticizing appointments at the Ministry of Education. Similarly, on June 23 a military
court sentenced Mazen Darwish, president of the Syrian Center for Media and
Freedom of Expression, to five days in jail for reporting on violent clashes in the
Damascus suburb of `Adra. On June 29 a military court sentenced Muhammad
Badi` Dek al-Bab, a member of the National Organization for Human Rights, to six
months in jail for articles in which he criticized the government for detaining intellectuals.
The government continues to prevent activists from traveling abroad, and in some
cases, their families also. The number of activists banned from traveling is estimated
to be in the hundreds. 
All Syrian human rights groups remain unlicensed, as officials consistently deny
their requests for registration.
Discrimination and Repression against Kurds
Kurds, Syrias largest non-Arab ethnic minority, comprise about 10 percent of the
population of 19 million. They remain subject to systematic discrimination,
including the arbitrary denial of citizenship to an estimated 300,000 Syria-born
Kurds.
Authorities suppress expressions of Kurdish identity, including the teaching of
Kurdish in schools. On March 20, 2008, Syrian internal security forces opened fire
on Kurds celebrating the Kurdish New Year in the town of Qamishli, leaving three
dead.
On September 14 a military court sentenced 50 Kurds to six months in jail for
demonstrating against the 2005 assassination of Kurdish leader Sheikh Ma`shuq
al-Khaznawi. Security officials detained a number of Kurdish political activists,
including Muhammad Musa, secretary of the Syrian Kurdish Left Party, and
Mash`al al-Temmo and Omran al-Sayyid, leaders in the Kurdish Future Current in
Syria. At this writing, all three face trial.
Womens Rights
Syrias constitution guarantees gender equality, and many women are active in
public life, but personal status laws and the penal code contain provisions that
discriminate against women and girls. The penal code allows a judge to suspend
punishment for a rapist if the rapist chooses to marry his victim, and provides
leniency for honor crimes. While the number of honor crimes is unknown, the
Syrian Womens Observatory, an unlicensed group, documented at least 10 in
2008, including the killing in April of a 14-year-old by her brother because she
had a relationship with another teenager.
According to media reports, a committee tasked with drafting a law against
human trafficking submitted a draft to the Council of Ministers in July 2008. At
this writing, the draft had not yet been made public or referred to Parliament.
Situation of Refugees Fleeing Iraq
Syria hosts the largest number of Iraqi refugees, estimated at 1 to 1.5 million, and
provides them with access to public hospitals and schools but prohibits them
from working. Since 2007 Syria has implemented increasingly restrictive visa and
entry requirements for Iraqi refugees. Combined with the lack of employment in
Syria and a relative improvement in the security situation in Iraq, this led thousands
of Iraqi refugees to return to Iraq in early 2008: in May the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees estimated that only slightly more Iraqis entered
Syria each day than left for Iraq. Syria continues to refuse entry to Palestinians
fleeing Iraq. At this writing, several hundred remain at makeshift camps in the nomans-
land between Iraqi and Syrian border checkpoints; with thousands more in
camps on the Iraqi side close to the border.
Key International Actors
Syria emerged from its international isolation in 2008, with French President
Sarkozy and other high-level foreign dignitaries visiting Damascus. However, the
renewed ties have had little impact on Syrias human rights record. During 2008
the European Union issued public statements expressing concern over the human
rights situation in Syria and calling for the release of all political prisoners,
although in September Javier Solana, the EU foreign policy chief, indicated that
the EU might be willing to resume talks on an Association Agreement, which were
frozen following the assassination of Lebanese Prime Minister Hariri in February
2005.
Iran continues to be Syrias main regional ally, and the two countries increased
their cooperation in the military and economic spheres. Saudi Arabia and Syria
exchanged sharp criticism over regional roles, highlighting tensions between the
two countries.
Tunisia
President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali and the ruling party, the Constitutional
Democratic Assembly, dominate political life in Tunisia. The government uses the
threat of terrorism and religious extremism as a pretext to crack down on peaceful
dissent. There are continuous and credible reports of torture and ill-treatment
being used to obtain statements from suspects in custody.
In office since 1987, Ben Ali announced he will seek a fifth term in 2009. The
authorities keep the countrys few legal opposition parties weak and marginalized
through repressive measures and denying them media coverage.
On November 5, 2008, the president conditionally released the last 21 imprisoned
members of the banned Islamist party al-Nahdha, who had been in prison
since a military court convicted 265 party members and sympathizers in a tainted
trial in 1992 on charges of plotting to topple the state. However, the overall number
of political prisoners has grown in recent years as authorities have convicted
scores of young men under the 2003 anti-terror law. The authorities make life difficult
for released political prisoners, monitoring them closely, denying them
passports and most jobs, and threatening to rearrest some who have spoken out
on human rights or politics.
Human Rights Defenders
Authorities have refused to grant legal recognition to every truly independent
human rights organization that has applied over the past decade. They then
invoke the organizations illegal status to hamper its activities.
The independent Tunisian Human Rights League (LTDH), a legally recognized
group, continues to face lawsuits filed by dissident members. The broader context
showed these supposedly private suits to be part of a pattern of repression: the
courts ruled systematically in favor of the plaintiffs, providing a legal veneer for
large-scale police operations to prevent most League meetings at its branches
around the country.
Human rights defenders and dissidents face surveillance, arbitrary travel bans,
dismissal from work, interruptions in phone service, and physical assaults. Police
arrested Bizerte-based Mohamed Ben Sad of the LTDH on July 28, 2008, on a
dubious charge of failing to obey a traffic policeman, a charge that earned him
two months in prison after an unfair trial. Authorities on September 28 jailed
Tarek Soussi, also of Bizerte, two days after he accused security forces of abductions
on Al Jazeera television because of the way they had allegedly flouted legal
arrest procedures. A court charged Soussi, a member of the unrecognized, Tunisbased
International Association in Support of Political Prisoners, with maliciously
spreading false information capable of disturbing the public order and on
September 25 released him provisionally pending trial.
The Justice System
In cases that have a political character, courts fail to guarantee defendants a fair
trial. Prosecutors and judges usually turn a blind eye to torture allegations, even
when defense lawyers formally demand an investigation. Trial judges convict
defendants solely or predominantly on the basis of coerced confessions, or on
the testimony of witnesses whom the defendant does not have the opportunity to
confront in court.
During consideration of Tunisia in March 2008 by the UN Human Rights
Committee, Tunisian authorities announced they would grant Human Rights
Watchs longstanding request to visit the countrys prisons; the Justice Ministry
and Human Rights Watch were negotiating the terms of the visits at this writing. If
carried through, the arrangement will be the first time since 1991 Tunisia has
opened its prisons to an independent human rights organization. The
International Committee of the Red Cross visits Tunisian prisons but, in accordance
with its mandate, reports its findings only to the government and not to the
public.
According to human rights lawyers and organizations, the most common forms of
torture and ill-treatment during police interrogation are sleep deprivation; threats
to rape the detainee or female family members; beatings, especially on the soles
of the feet (falaka); and tying and suspending detainees from the ceiling or from a
rod in the roast chicken position.
Tunisia has ratified the Convention against Torture and enacted strong legislation
criminalizing acts of torture. However, despite the submission of formal complaints
by lawyers on behalf of defendants in hundreds of cases in recent years,
no case has come to public attention of authorities holding a state agent accountable
for torturing persons held for politically motivated offenses.
Media Freedom
None of the domestic print and broadcast media offers critical coverage of government
policies, apart from a few low-circulation magazines such as al-Mawkif,
an opposition party organ, that are subject to occasional confiscation. Tunisia has
privately-owned radio and television stations, but private ownership is not synonymous
with editorial independence. The government blocks access to certain
domestic and international political or human rights websites featuring critical
coverage of Tunisia, including www.kalimatunisie.com, whose print edition
authorities have refused to legalize.
Journalist Slim Boukhdir of Sfax wrote online essays critical of the president and
his relatives for nepotism. On November 26, 2007, police ordered him out of a
taxi and placed him under arrest. A court convicted him one month later of insulting
the police officer who stopped him, refusing to hand over his identification,
and violating public decency, accusations Boukhdir denied. Authorities insisted
his case had nothing to do with free expression, but it was hardly the first time
that they imprisoned critics on common criminal charges that appeared unfounded.
They provisionally released Boukhdir on July 21, 2008, but continued to refuse
him a passport, a situation he has faced since 2003.
Counterterrorism Measures
Since 1991 there has been one deadly terrorist attack in Tunisia: an April 2002
truck bomb that targeted a synagogue on the island of Djerba, for which al Qaeda
claimed responsibility. In addition, security forces have clashed once with armed
militants, in December 2006 and January 2007, outside the capital.
The 2003 Law in Support of International Efforts to Fight Terrorism and the
Repression of Money Laundering contains a broad definition of terrorism that the UN Human Rights Committee criticized on March 28, 2008, for its lack of precision.
The definition encompasses acts of incitement to racial or religious hatred
or fanaticism regardless of the means employed. Authorities have charged many
hundreds of men, and some minors, under the law. Nearly all of those convicted
stood accused of planning to join jihadist groups abroad or inciting others to join,
rather than of having planned or committed specific acts of violence.
Suspects arrested in the context of the counterterrorism law commonly face a
range of procedural abuses that includes the failure by authorities to notify their
kin promptly, in violation of Tunisian law, extension of pre-arraignment detention
beyond the legal six-day limit, and the refusal of judges and prosecutors to act on
requests that the suspect undergo a medical examination, a means of detecting
signs of torture.
Socioeconomic Unrest
Sporadic protests over corruption, joblessness, and high prices erupted in
January 2008 in the depressed mining region surrounding the southern town of
Redhayef, and simmered throughout the year. Authorities deployed large numbers
of security forces to suppress the protests, round up their leaders, and seal
off the region from journalists and others trying to reach it. On June 21, they
arrested the spokesman of the protest movement, trade unionist Adnane Hajji,
and charged him with founding a criminal enterprise and other offenses. Hajji
remained in pretrial detention at this writing. Courts imposed prison terms of several
months on dozens of others for their role in the protests. For example,
authorities on July 27 arrested human rights and opposition party activist Zakia
Dhifaoui and six others who had marched peacefully that day in Redhayef to
demand the release of those arrested during the ongoing protests. An appeals
court on September 15 sentenced Dhifaoui to four-and-a-half months in prison
and the six others to three months. President Ben Ali conditionally released her in
early November, along with about 20 others convicted for their role in the
protests.
Key International Actors
In 2008 Tunisia announced it would accept visits by the UN special rapporteurs
on torture and on the promotion and protection of human rights while countering
terrorism, but neither had conducted a mission at this writing.
France is Tunisias leading trade partner and its fourth largest foreign investor. In
April 2008 President Sarkozy, on his second official visit to Tunisia, declared at a
state dinner hosted by President Ben Ali, Today, the sphere of liberties [in
Tunisia] is progressing. I have complete confidence in your will to continue to
enlarge the space of freedom in Tunisia. Neither Sarkozy, nor his minister of
state for human rights, Rama Yade, who accompanied him on this trip, offered
any public human rights criticism, but the French presidency did announce during
the visit Tunisairs purchase of several Airbus jets.
The United States enjoys good relations with Tunisia and praises it as a counterterrorism
ally, while urging human rights progress there more vocally than it does
in most other countries in the region. In her first visit to Tunisia as US secretary of
state, Condoleezza Rice met with Ben Ali on September 6 and told reporters later
that despite some political reforms, we have been very clear that we would hope
that Tunisia would do more. She said she wished that media access, freedom
of the internet, access to the television for the opposition will really be
enshrined in the lead-up to the 2009 election.
While the US gives minimal financial aid to Tunisia, the Department of Defense
provides counterterrorism training and exchange programs for the military.
United Arab Emirates (UAE)
While the economy of the UAE continues to grow, human rights progress remains
scant. Authorities censor and harass human rights activists, impeding independent
reporting that could help curb abuses. Other forms of governmental accountability
are minimal. Only 6,600 UAE citizens, chosen by the rulers of the emirates
out of a population of roughly 900,000 citizens (and 4.7 million foreigners), can
vote or stand for the 20 elected seats in the 40-seat Federal National Council, an
advisory body to the president.
Freedom of Association and Expression
The only legally recognized human rights organization, the Emirates Human
Rights Association, took up the cause of cancer patients facing workplace discrimination,
but did little to address persistent human rights abuses by the government.
As of October 2008 the Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare had not
responded to applications from 2004 and 2005 to establish other human rights
organizations.
Human rights defenders and government critics face harassment, including criminal
charges. According to Muhammad al-Mansoori, former president of the Jurists
Association, charges against him from 2006 for allegedly insulting the public
prosecutor were dropped, but revived in October 2007. Al-Mansoori sought to
fight the charges in court but says the public prosecutor refuses to bring the case
to trial. Al-Mansoori claims that officials warned him to cease his human rights
advocacy, and have refused to renew his passport since March 2008.
In June 2005 authorities accused Hassan al-Diqqi, the founder of the unrecognized
Emirates Peoples Rights Organization, of raping a housekeeper. The
charges aroused suspicion, coming two months after al-Diqqi established the
PRO Emirates website. Al-Diqqi went into hiding and was sentenced to death in
absentia in a 2005 trial in which forensic evidence did not support the charge,
according to a local rights activist and lawyer who saw the evidence. Sharjah
police arrested al-Diqqi in July 2008 on the old rape charge. On August 5 a court
ordered his release, and the next day an appeals court affirmed the release order,
but then without explanation the first instance court rescinded its initial release decision. Al-Diqqi says authorities are harassing him because of his human rights
activism.
Authorities arrested Salem Abdullah al-Dousari, a professor of religious education,
on May 6 without explanation. According to the Geneva-based human rights
organization Alkarama, he was detained in a psychiatric facility for three months
without charge before being released.
In May the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention concluded that
Sabihat Abdullah Sultan al-Alili was arbitrarily detained in February 2007 for exercising
his right to freedom of expression. In October 2007 the Federal Supreme
Court sentenced him to three years in prison for revealing state secrets. The
Working Group noted that, at his trial, al-Alili was not allowed to speak, his lawyer
was not allowed to plead, and a coerced confession was used against him.
According to lawyer and independent human rights activist Muhammad al-Roken,
the government returned his passport in May 2007 but in 2008 the Ministry of
Justice threatened to cancel his law license. Al-Roken received a three-month suspended
sentence after being charged with sex out of wedlock in a politically motivated
case in 2007.
Although Prime Minister Shaikh Muhammad decreed in 2007 that journalists
should not face prison for reasons related to their work, a 1980 law still in force
provides for the imprisonment of journalists and suspension of publication for
publishing materials that cause confusion among the public. The government
monitors press content, and journalists routinely exercise self-censorship. In July
2008, for example, Al-Khaleej newspaper refused to publish a column by `Abd al-
Khaliq Abdullah on the growing demographic imbalance between foreign workers
and Emiratis.
The government has targeted educators suspected of Islamist sympathies. In
June, 83 teachers staged a protest 11 months after being removed from their positions,
without explanation, because of what the government said were their
Islamist views. In July authorities without explanation banned law professors
Ahmed Salah al-Hamadi and Seif al-Shamsi from resuming their teaching positions
at the national university in al-Ain.
Prisons and Ill-Treatment
In a positive development, a former Dubai prison director and six jail wardens
were sentenced to six-month prison terms for beating prisoners during an inspection
for contraband in August 2007. Another 18 jail wardens involved in the abuse
were sentenced to three-months.
Migrant Workers Rights
Foreigners account for up to 85 percent of UAE residents and nearly 99 percent of
the private-sector workforce. Immigration sponsorship laws grant employers
extraordinary power over the lives of migrant workers. Laws in force, as well as a
draft revised labor law made public in 2007 but not yet implemented, fail to protect
workers rights to organize and to bargain collectively, provide punishments
for striking workers, and exclude from coverage domestic workers employed in
private households. Although the Labor Law of 1980 calls for a minimum wage, in
June 2008 the Ministry of Labor stated it had no plans to adopt such a measure.
Women domestic workers are at risk of unpaid wages, food deprivation, forced
confinement, and physical or sexual abuse. In October 2008 two Filipina domestic
workers tried to leave their employers household, complaining of physical
abuse and non-payment of wages. Their employers returned them to their recruitment
agency, Al Doukhi Labour Supply Company, which detained them in a small
kitchen for days before they escaped.
The standard contract for domestic workers introduced in April 2007 provides
some protections and calls for unspecified adequate breaks, but does not limit
working hours or provide for a rest day, overtime pay, or workers compensation.
The government announced plans in late 2007 to draft a law protecting domestic
workers, but this has yet to be finalized.
Exploitation of migrant construction workers is also severe. Abuses include nonpayment
of wages, extended working hours without overtime compensation,
unsafe working environments leading to deaths or illness, squalid living conditions
in labor camps, and withholding of passports and travel documents. 
In March, 1,500 workers with engineering contractor Drake and Scull went on a
violent strike at a labor camp in Sharjah, destroying company offices, cars, and
buses. Workers told local media they were protesting unpaid wages. In July police
in Ras al-Khaima arrested more than 3,000 workers employed by the Al Hamra
construction company after a riot reportedly sparked by anger at the poor quality
of company-supplied food. Authorities detained most of those involved for 13
days, and the Labor Ministry ordered some instigators expelled from the country.
Also in July, Sharjah police arrested 625 construction workers who blocked a
road after they were denied promised housing and forced to sleep on construction
sites. In October more than 3,000 workers of the ETA Contracting Company in
Abu Dhabi went on strike to protest delayed payments and demand wage increases
needed to meet food costs after the company banned workers from cooking
their own meals.
The Labor Ministry mandated an afternoon break for workers on outdoor construction
sites from 12:30 to 3 p.m. during July and August, when temperatures often
exceed 43 degrees Celsius. In July 2005 the ministry had directed companies to
give workers a four-hour break, but reduced it to two-and-a-half hours due to
company lobbying. Heat exhaustion cases have reportedly decreased overall,
although in August 2008 a hospital in Dubai reported receiving an increased
number of construction workers suffering heat exhaustion during the mandated
break period, suggesting some companies violated the law.
In August 2008 public health authorities in Dubai stated that 40 percent of that
emirates 1,093 labor camps violated minimum health and fire safety standards.
That same month, 11 construction workers died when the 30-room Dubai residence
where 500 workers were illegally housed caught fire; some had to jump out
of windows due to blocked exits. In June a chickenpox outbreak in a Sharjah labor
camp was linked to unhygienic conditions and workers inability to afford vaccines.
Workers died on the job due to apparently unsafe working conditions. In June
three Indian employees of Seidco General Contracting were killed when a basement
ceiling collapsed at a hotel construction site in Ajman; a police chief said
the scaffolding was unable to take the weight of the concrete. In September Abu Dhabi police blamed lax safety procedures for the deaths of two Pakistani workers
when a well they were digging collapsed.
The UAE has not ratified core International Labour Organization conventions protecting
freedom of association and the right to organize, which includes the right
to strike and the right to collective bargaining.
In May the UAE released its first annual report on trafficking, dedicated substantial
funds to counter-trafficking efforts, and publicly acknowledged that trafficking
takes place. In its 2008 annual report on human trafficking the United States
State Department listed the UAE as a Tier 2 country, taking it off its Watch List.
The UAE government has yet to take crucial measures to fight trafficking and
forced labor, however, such as major reform of inadequate labor and immigration
laws, stronger monitoring of recruitment agencies, screening for trafficking, and
prosecutions for trafficking into forced labor.
Key International Actors
The UAE cooperates with the United States on security matters. The US Navy routinely
uses the Dubai port of Jebel Ali. In December 2007 the Bush administration
notified the US Congress of the possible sale to the UAE of several air defense
missile systems as well as various munitions. On July 28, 2008, the US returned
to the UAE Abdullah al-Hamiri, a UAE national who had been detained at
Guantanamo Bay.
In a bid to increase the UAEs food security, the Abu Dhabi Development Fund
announced plans to buy and develop farmland in several countries, including
tens of thousands of hectares in Sudan, and possible projects in Uzbekistan,
Vietnam, and Cambodia.
The UAE was reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism of the UN
Human Rights Council in December 2008.
Yemen
The human rights situation in Yemen has deteriorated markedly over the past several
years. Yemen had previously made advances in the rule of law, setting out
rights in the constitution, the penal code, and criminal procedure code. However,
these have been eroded by hundreds of arbitrary arrests and several dozen
enforced disappearances, mainly in the context of armed clashes in the north, but
also relating to the governments domestic counterterrorism efforts and crackdown
on social and political unrest in the south of the country.
Yemen is one of only five countries known since January 2005 to have executed
persons for crimes committed while under age 18.
Arbitrary Arrests and Enforced Disappearances
Conflict in Sada governorate between government forces, abetted by tribal allies,
and a rebel group known as the Huthis, first erupted in 2004. A fifth round of
fighting that broke out in May 2008 ended on July 17. In the context of this recurring
armed conflict, Yemens security forces carried out hundreds of arbitrary
arrests and enforced disappearances of civilians. Since 2007, and especially in
the first half of 2008, the extent of arbitrary arrests and disappearances
expanded, with the authorities broadening the targets of such arrests and detentions
to include persons reporting on the wars impact on civilians.
On August 17, a month after the fifth round of fighting ended, President Ali
Abdullah Saleh announced some prisoner releases, but dozens, and possibly
hundreds, of persons remain arbitrarily detained, and new arrests have taken
place. Estimates of the numbers of persons disappeared vary. Yemeni rights
organizations have documented dozens of cases of persons who have disappeared,
most of whom eventually reappeared at the facilities of the Political
Security Organization, the security and intelligence agency directly linked to the
office of President Saleh. In August 2008 officials stated that there were approximately
1,200 political prisoners still detained, with plans to release 130 of these.
The government has taken no steps to investigate or hold accountable those
responsible for enforced disappearances.
Denial of Humanitarian Access to Conflict Areas
Since June 2004 the armed conflict in northern Yemen has displaced up to
130,000 people, a great many of whom remained out of the reach of humanitarian
agencies as of November 2008. Particularly since 2007, when international aid
agencies sought access to all parts of Sada governorate, Yemeni authorities have
severely restricted these agencies from reaching tens of thousands of civilians in
need. After fighting erupted again in May 2008, the government blocked the
movement of commercial goods in Sada, including basic foods and fuel, an act
that appears to constitute collective punishment.
When President Saleh declared an end to the fighting in July, 60,000 displaced
persons had found refuge in Sada town, where they received limited assistance.
However, tens of thousands of otherspossibly as many as 70,000 personshad
been displaced in remote areas or other urban areas, where government restrictions
on movement largely prevented aid agencies from providing them with the
assistance they needed. Since August the government has told international
humanitarian agencies that they have unrestricted access to the whole of Sada
governorate, but the reality is different. Many agencies are told they must apply
for and be granted a separate Interior Ministry permission for each and every trip,
an almost impossible operational requirement. At this writing the access of
humanitarian agencies was insufficient to reach many of those who have long
been without assistance and remain at risk.
Freedom of Information
Also distinguishing the conflict in 2008 was the extent of government control over
information. Officials prevented journalists and humanitarian workers from going
to the conflict zone, threatened journalists with reprisal if they reported on the
conflict, and prosecuted at least one journalist, opposition website editor Abd al-
Karim al-Khaiwani, before a State Security Court. In June 2008 the court sentenced
him to a six-year prison term. President Saleh pardoned him on
September 25. The authorities also had disconnected all but a select number of
mobile telephone numbers in the conflict area.
Terrorism and Counterterrorism
Terrorism resurged in Yemen in 2008. Al Qaeda in Yemen also launched an online
magazine, Sada al-Malahim (Echoes of Battles), urging jihadists to kidnap
Western tourists to secure the release of jailed members. In response, the United
States has been pressuring the government to enact sweeping counterterrorism
measures that local human rights groups fear would repress dissent and increase
arbitrary arrests and detentions.
In September 2008 a sophisticated attack involving coordinated car bombs
directed at the gates of the US Embassy in the Yemeni capital, Sana, killed six
Yemeni security personnel, four civilians, and the six attackers. In March 2008
unknown perpetrators fired mortars toward the embassy, hitting a nearby school.
In January 2008 gunmen killed two Belgian tourists and their two Yemeni drivers.
Yemeni officials blamed insurgents linked to al Qaeda for all three attacks.
Yemeni authorities have released some arrested security suspects, including
Jamal al-Badawi, a Yemeni convicted of organizing the October 2000 attack on
the USS Cole, in return for their pledges to cooperate with security forces.
Of approximately 255 prisoners still in US military detention at Guantanamo Bay,
more than 100 are Yemenis, the largest group by nationality. Two of the three
Guantanamo detainees convicted by controversial US military commissions are
Yemenis; both were convicted in 2008.
Criminal Justice and the Juvenile Death Penalty
Yemen retains the death penalty for a wide variety of offenses, among them murder
of a Muslim, arson or explosion, endangering transport and communications,
apostasy, robbery, prostitution, adultery, and homosexuality.
In 1994 Yemen amended its Penal Code to require reduced sentences for crimes
committed by persons under 18, including a maximum penalty of 10 years imprisonment
for those who commit capital offenses. However, implementation of this
provision and a similar provision in the Juvenile Act has been hampered by
Yemens very low birth registration rate and weak juvenile justice system, which
make it difficult for many juvenile offenders to prove their age at the time of the offense. While Yemeni law provides for age determinations conducted by an
expert, it does not clarify how the determinations should be conducted, nor
require that defendants receive the benefit of the doubt if the expert finds that
the defendant could have been younger than 18. According to NGOs working on
juvenile justice in Yemen, the country lacks adequate forensic facilities with staff
trained in conducting age determinations, and judges do not routinely question
young defendants about their age at the time of the alleged offense to help
ensure that juvenile offenders are not mistakenly tried as adults.
In February 2007 Yemen executed Adil Muhammad Saif al-Maamari for a crime
allegedly committed when he was 16. According to Penal Reform International, at
least 18 other juvenile offenders are believed to be on death row.
Early and Forced Marriage
Yemens Personal Status Law sets no minimum age for marriage of girls, stating
instead that a girl is not to be wed until she is ready for sex, even if she exceeds
15 years. In addition, the Penal Code does not criminalize marital rape and girls
and women in forced marriages have little recourse against abuse. Early marriage
is widespread in Yemen and linked to elevated rates of maternal mortality,
domestic violence, and school dropout. A 2005 survey in al-Hodeidah and
Hadhramaut governorates by Sanaa Universitys Gender Development Research
and Studies Center found 52 percent of girls were married by age 18, with some
girls marrying as young as eight. In April 2008 parliamentary committees rejected
provisions in a proposed Safe Motherhood Law, introduced in 2005, that would
have raised the minimum age of marriage to 18 and banned female genital mutilation.
The governmental Womens National Committee had called for the amendments
following public outcry over the case of a nine-year-old girl who sought
divorce after her forced marriage to a much older man who raped her. The
Ministry of Health said it planned to reintroduce the draft law with a provision setting
the minimum marriage age at 15.
Key International Actors
Saudi Arabia, Qatar, and other Persian Gulf states provide substantial amounts of
assistance to Yemen, but for the most part do not make figures public. Many Yemenis believe that this, along with substantial amounts of aid to private actors,
including tribal leaders and religious institutions, make Saudi Arabia Yemens
largest donor.
Nine European Union states also provide aid to Yemen. The United Kingdom is
the largest Western donor; the UK Department for International Development
states that it will have provided 117 million (US$189 million) between 2007 and
2011.
Because of the presence of many Yemeni and other Arab veterans of wars in
Afghanistan, counterterrorism has been the key issue in Yemens relations with
the United States. For the fiscal year 2008 the Bush administration estimates it
spent US$17.5 million in military and other assistance to Yemen, including US$2
million specifically for counterterrorism measures. However, the US suspended a
planned additional grant of US$20.6 million to the Yemeni government to protest
the release of Jamal al-Badawi.
All donor states were reluctant in 2008 to press the government on its conduct in
the Sada conflict, apparently out of concern about the governments political stability.
Numerous United Nations agencies have a presence in Yemen, including the
World Food Program, UN Childrens Fund, the UN Development Programme, and
UN High Commissioner for Refugees, although the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights has no staff there. Security concerns have placed
all UN staff in the country on heightened alert and agencies have operated in only
two towns in Sada governorate.
Yemen is due to be reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism of
the UN Human Rights Council in May 2009.
United States
US criminal justice policy continues to raise serious human rights concerns. 2008
saw the resumption of executions after a seven-month hiatus and continued
growth of the US prison population, already the worlds largest. Also in 2008,
Human Rights Watch confirmed that there are more than 2,500 US prisoners serving
sentences of life without possibility of parole for crimes committed when they
were under 18; no other country imposes this penalty on juvenile offenders.
In positive developments, the US Supreme Court struck down a law that barred
Guantanamo detainees from challenging the legality of their detention, and the
Department of Justice brought its first prosecution under a 1994 law allowing
courts to try torture committed abroad by US citizens or anyone present in the
United States.
Death Penalty
From September 2007 until May 2008 there were no executions in the United
States while the Supreme Court considered whether lethal injectionthe method
used by all US death penalty jurisdictionsconstitutes cruel and unusual punishment.
In April 2008 the Court ruled in Baze v. Rees that it does not, and executions
quickly resumed. Between May and October 2008 there were 30 executions,
half of which were in Texas.
Nevertheless, courts and legislatures continue to narrow the scope of capital punishment.
In December 2007 New Jersey abolished the death penalty, becoming
the first state in more than 40 years to do so. In June 2008 in Kennedy v.
Louisiana the US Supreme Court ruled that the death penalty may not be imposed
for any crime against another person that does not result in death. US courts pronounced
110 new death sentences in 2007, the lowest number since capital punishment
was reinstated in 1976.
Between January and October 2008, four prisoners were exonerated and released
from death row, bringing to 130 the number of death-sentenced prisoners
released since 1973 due to evidence of their innocence. 2008 saw a step backward for non-citizens sentenced to death without being
allowed to contact their consular officials as required by the Vienna Convention
on Consular Relations. On August 5, Texas executed Mexican national Jos
Medellin despite an International Court of Justice (ICJ) decision directing the
United States to reexamine such cases, and a directive from President George W.
Bush that state courts comply with the ICJ ruling.
Juvenile Life without Parole
In 2008 Human Rights Watch revised upward to 2,502 our estimate of the number
of persons in the United States sentenced to life without the possibility of parole
for crimes committed when they were under age 18. We also verified that there
are no juvenile offenders serving this sentence anywhere else in the world.
Efforts to end juvenile life without parole in the United States continue with
reform legislation pending in Congress and in state legislatures in California,
Florida, Louisiana, Michigan, and Nebraska. In 2008 the United Nations
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination recommended that the
United States, in light of the disproportionate imposition of the sentence on
racial minorities, discontinue its use for crimes committed by individuals under
18 and review the status of people already serving such sentences.
Incarceration
A June 2008 report by the US Justice Departments Bureau of Justice Statistics
found that the incarcerated population had reached an all-time high of 2.3 million,
or 762 per 100,000 residents. The United States continues to have both the
largest incarcerated population and the highest per capita incarceration rate in
the world.
The burden of incarceration falls disproportionately on members of racial and ethnic
minorities. Black men are incarcerated at six times the rate of white men, and
10.7 percent of all black males age 30 to 34 are behind bars on any given day. A
2008 Human Rights Watch report, Targeting Blacks, found that racial disparities
are even worse for drug offenders, with a black man almost 12 times more likely than a white man to enter prison with a new drug conviction, despite similar rates
of drug use among blacks and whites.
In March 2008 the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination expressed concern with regard to the persistent racial disparities
in the criminal justice system  including the disproportionate number of persons
belonging to racial, ethnic and national minorities in the prison population,
and urged the United States to take all necessary steps to guarantee the right of
everyone to equal treatment before tribunals and all other organs administering
justice.
One out of five state prisoners in the United States is incarcerated for a drug-related
offense. Many prisoners, particularly those convicted of drug possession or
property crimes, have histories of substance use and addiction. The prevalence of
diseases related to injection drug use such as HIV/AIDS and hepatitis C is significantly
greater among prisoners than in the general population. Yet US prisons and
jails remain resistant, even hostile, to evidence-based practices such as condom
distribution or methadone therapy, which have proven to reduce transmission of
HIV, hepatitis C, and sexually transmitted diseases and to treat drug addiction.
The Prison Litigation Reform Act (PLRA) of 1996 creates a variety of obstacles for
prisoners seeking to vindicate their rights in court. These restrictionswhich
apply only to prisonershave resulted in dismissal of lawsuits alleging sexual
abuse and other significant injuries. In November 2007 a bill was introduced in
the House of Representatives to amend or repeal some provisions of the PLRA.
Corporal Punishment in Public Schools
According to the US Department of Education, more than 200,000 public school
students received corporal punishment at least once during the 2006-2007
school year. Corporal punishmentwhich typically takes the form of one or more
blows on the buttocks with a wooden paddleis legal in public schools in 21
states. A 2008 Human Rights Watch report, A Violent Education, focuses on corporal
punishment in Texas and Mississippi, two of the states where it is most
prevalent. The report found that corporal punishment can result in serious injury and is used disproportionately against black students and special education students.
Womens Rights
Struggles to achieve pay equity for women continued in 2008, with members of
Congress working to overturn a 2007 Supreme Court decision that narrowly construed
the statute of limitations for pay discrimination lawsuits against employers.
Despite widespread mobilization by womens rights groups, the Lilly
Ledbetter Fair Pay Act died in the Senate after passing the House of
Representatives. Nonetheless, the gender pay gap narrowed to its smallest size in
history, with women earning 78 cents for every dollar earned by men.
US international aid remains laden with restrictions that undermine the sexual
and reproductive rights of women. Congress in 2008 reauthorized the Presidents
Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief for another five years, but continued to direct
funding toward abstinence-only programs and retained the requirement that
organizations pledge their opposition to sex work before receiving US funds.
Similarly, the global gag rule continues to prohibit foreign organizations receiving
US funding from providing abortions, counseling women about abortion, or
engaging in advocacy for abortion rights, even if no US funds would be used in
those efforts.
Sexual Violence
In the United States, the crime of rape has one of the lowest arrest, prosecution,
and conviction rates among serious violent crimes. In 2008 Human Rights Watch
began an investigation into the failure of law enforcement authorities to preserve
and test evidence in rape cases. When reporting a sexually violent crime, a victim
is asked to submit to a four- to six-hour exam to collect DNA evidence that, if tested,
may aid in the criminal investigation. But the Justice Department estimates
that up to 500,000 of these rape kits sit untested in crime labs and police storage
facilities across the United States. In Los Angeles alone there are over 7,300
untested rape kits, with the backlog growing by about 30 a month.
Discrimination Based on Sexual Orientation and Gender
Identity
US law continues to offer no national protections against discrimination based on
sexual orientation or gender identity, in employment or other areas of life. The
Defense of Marriage Act, which prohibits the federal government from recognizing
the relationships formed by same-sex couples, remains in force. In 2008 the
California and Connecticut supreme courts ruled in favor of equal access to marriage
for same-sex couples in those states, but a statewide referendum in
November overturned the California ruling. The Uniting American Families Act,
which would allow same-sex relationships between a US citizen and a foreign
national to be recognized for immigration purposes, did not advance in Congress.
Rights of Non-Citizens
There are some 38 million non-citizens living in the United States, of whom nearly
12 million are undocumented. In 2008 this population faced human rights problems
largely similar to those in previous years.
As documented in our 2007 report, Forced Apart, legal immigrants who have
lived in the United States for decades, including lawful permanent residents, are
summarily deported under laws passed in 1996 if they have been convicted of a
crime, even a non-violent offense such as shoplifting or low-level drug possession.
During the deportation proceedings, judges are not permitted to balance
the seriousness of a non-citizens crime against his lawful presence in the US,
family relationships (including with a US citizen spouse and minor children), business
ownership, tax payments, service in the US military, or likelihood of persecution
after deportation. In 2006, the most recent year for which data are available,
the number of non-citizens deported increased yet again, to 95,752 from
90,426 in 2005, bringing the total number of persons deported under these laws
to 768,345.
In 2008 US Immigration and Customs Enforcement continued a pattern begun in
2007 of large-scale workplace raids in search of undocumented workers. In
August 2008, in the largest such raid in US history; nearly 600 non-citizens were
arrested in Laurel, Mississippi.
Similarly, in May 2008 immigration agents rounded up 389 undocumented workers
at a meatpacking plant in Postville, Iowa. After the raids, Iowas attorney general
filed more than 9,300 criminal misdemeanor charges against the plants owners
and managers for labor law violations including child labor and long shifts
without overtime pay. Prosecutors, however, also threatened to charge workers
some of whom had used false IDs to obtain workwith aggravated identity theft,
a charge that carries severe penalties and is aimed at persons committing theft
by fraud rather than undocumented immigrants seeking jobs.
The United States detains approximately 300,000 non-citizens each year at an
annual cost of US$1.8 billion, according to Immigration and Customs Enforcement
(ICE). Non-citizens are held in some 300 detention facilities: about two dozen are
directly under the control of ICE, although some are operated by private companies,
and the remainder are state and local prisons and jails that contract with
ICE to provide bed space for ICE detainees.
The large number of detained non-citizens in the United States raises multiple
human rights concerns. In a December 2007 report, Chronic Indifference, we
found that ICE fails to monitor adequately the medical care of detainees with HIV,
and does not comply with international or national guidelines for appropriate HIV
treatment. Research by Human Rights Watch into medical care for women in
immigration detention facilities similarly found inadequate provision of routine
gynecological care, cervical and breast cancer screenings and diagnosis, family
planning services, pre- and post-natal care, and services for survivors of sexual
and gender-based violence.
A series of articles published in the Washington Post in May 2008 revealed that
30 non-citizens died in detention between 2003 and 2008 as a result of actions
taken or not taken by medical staff.
In a positive step, Congress repealed the 15-year-old law barring HIV-positive noncitizens
from entering the United States. Although President Bush has signed the
bill, at this writing the administration had not yet passed regulations to fully
implement repeal of the travel ban.
Guantanamo Bay, Indefinite Detention, and Military
Commissions
Although President Bush said he would like to see the detention facility at
Guantanamo Bay closed, 255 men remained there at this writing, and no steps to
close the facility were expected before the end of the administration. The vast
majority of these detainees have been held for nearly seven years without charge.
More than half are held in high-security facilities where they spend 22 hours a
day in small cells with no natural light or fresh air and few diversions.
In June 2008 the Supreme Court in Boumediene v. Bush struck down a law that
denied Guantanamo detainees the right to bring federal habeas corpus challenges
to the legality of their detention. Nearly all of the detainees filed habeas
petitions, but these cases have been delayed by a host of procedural and legal
questions such as whether hearings can be conducted in secret.
More than two dozen detainees who were cleared for release cannot be returned
to their home countries due to the likelihood that they would face torture upon
return. In October 2008 a federal court ruled that the United States must release
17 Chinese Uighurs detained at Guantanamo into the United States. The US government
had acknowledged that the men posed no threat but could not be
returned to China because they face persecution there. A federal appeals court
issued a stay of that order, and the fate of these men remained undecided at this
writing.
The United States has continued to repatriate other Guantanamo detainees without
meaningful or independent assessment of the risk of torture or abuse they
faced upon return. While some detainees obtained court orders requiring advance
notice of any transfer, many detainees do not have such orders in place. The
United States has claimed that diplomatic assurancespromises of humane
treatmentfrom the receiving governments are sufficient protection against
abuse, despite compelling evidence to the contrary.
The US government continues to detain Qatari citizen Ali Saheh Kahlah al-Marri in
the United States as an enemy combatant without charge or trial. Al-Marri was
first declared an enemy combatant in 2003, just weeks before his scheduled trial
for financial fraud and giving false statements. In 2007 a federal appeals court panel ruled that al-Marris detention was unlawful, but the full court overturned
the decision. Al-Marri has appealed that ruling to the US Supreme Court.
Meanwhile, the administration continues to prosecute Guantanamo detainees
before military commissions that lack fundamental due process guarantees. In
May 2008 the US government filed military commission charges seeking the
death penalty against Khalid Sheikh Mohammed and four other detainees
accused of responsibility for the September 11 attacks. All five were held in secret
CIA prisons before they were brought to Guantanamo, and were reportedly subject
to years of torture and other abuse. No trial date has been set. The United
States is also pursuing cases against 15 other detainees, including Omar Khadr
and Mohammed Jawad, who were juveniles when they were first brought to
Guantanamo nearly seven years ago.
Only three detainees had been convicted by military commissions at this writing.
Australian David Hicks was convicted by plea agreement in March 2007 and is
now free in Australia. The first military commission trial took place in July 2008
against Salim Ahmed Hamdan, Osama bin Ladens former driver. Hamdan was
acquitted of conspiracy and convicted of providing material support to terrorism,
and sentenced to five-and-a-half years with credit for five years time served. As it
has said with respect to all Guantanamo detainees, the Bush administration contends
that Hamdan can be detained even after his sentence is completed. In
November 2008 Ali Hamza al Bahlul was convicted on terrorism charges and sentenced
to life in prison.
Torture Policy
Over the past three years Congress and the courts have repudiated the Bush
administrations reliance on torture as an interrogation technique. In September
2006 the Pentagon announced new rules applicable to all US military interrogations
and disavowed abusive techniques, such as waterboarding, forced nudity,
and induced hypothermia. In February 2008 Congress passed legislation mandating
that the CIA adhere to these same rules, but it was vetoed by President Bush.
Secret CIA Prisons
In April 2008 the Department of Defense announced the transfer to Guantanamo
of a detainee previously held in CIA custody, indicating that the CIAs secret prisons
were still operational as of that time. Two to three dozen former CIA detainees
remain disappeared, their whereabouts unknown. Many of them are believed to
have been unlawfully rendered to countries such as Syria, Libya, Pakistan, and
Algeria.
Denial of Refugee Protection
US law allows authorities to deny refugee protection to persons believed to have
associated with or provided material support to certain armed groups. The
broad terms of the law have led authorities to bar persons who qualify as
refugees under international law, including rape victims forced into domestic
servitude by rebel groups. In January 2008 Congress passed legislation that gave
the administration the power to waive these bars in deserving cases, but the
exercise of this discretion has been painstakingly slow.
Domestic Prosecution of Torture Abroad
In a positive development, the Department of Justice brought its first case under a
1994 law allowing courts to try torture committed abroad by US citizens or anyone
present in the US. A Miami jury in October 2008 convicted Charles Chuckie
Taylor, Jr., the son of the former Liberian president and a US citizen, on several
counts of torture for crimes committed by the elite military unit he headed in
Liberia from 1997 to 2003.
Key International Actors
At the conclusion of his June 2008 visit, the UN special rapporteur on extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions called on the United States to improve its
military justice system and to ensure that the death penalty is applied fairly and
without racial discrimination. The special rapporteur on contemporary forms of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance expressed concern about residential racial segregation and the poor state of public education
after his visit in mid-2008.
Although the European Union has called on the United States to close the
Guantanamo detention facility, it has not publicly criticized the military commissions
or made concrete proposals regarding trial or release of Guantanamo
detainees. By contrast, the EU and member states have intervened and attempted
to halt executions in a number of US death penalty cases.