Rights Struggles of 2013:
Stopping Mass Atrocities, Majority Bullying,
and Abusive Counterterrorism
By Kenneth Roth
Looking back at human rights developments in 2013, several themes stand out.
The unchecked slaughter of civilians in Syria elicited global horror and outrage,
but not enough to convince world leaders to exert the pressure needed to stop it.
That has led some to lament the demise of the much-vaunted “Responsibility to
Protect” doctrine, which world governments adopted less than a decade ago to
protect people facing mass atrocities. Yet it turned out to be too soon to draft the
epitaph for R2P, as it is known, because toward the end of the year it showed
renewed vitality in several African countries facing the threat of large-scale atrocities:
Central African Republic, South Sudan, and the Democratic Republic of
Congo.
Democracy took a battering in several countries, but not because those in power
openly abandoned it. Many leaders still feel great pressure to pay lip service to
democratic rule. But a number of relatively new governments, including in Egypt
and Burma, settled for the most superficial forms—only elections, or their own
divining of majoritarian preferences—without regard to the limits on majorities
that are essential to any real democracy. This abusive majoritarianism lay behind
governmental efforts to suppress peaceful dissent, restrict minorities, and
enforce narrow visions of cultural propriety. Yet in none of these cases did the
public take this abuse of democracy sitting down.
Since September 11, 2001, efforts to combat terrorism have also spawned human
rights abuses. The past year saw intensified public discussion about two particular
counterterrorism programs used by the United States: global mass electronic
surveillance and targeted killings by aerial drones. For years, Washington had
avoided giving clear legal justifications for these programs by hiding behind the
asserted needs of secrecy. That strategy was undermined by whistleblower
Edward Snowden’s revelations about the surveillance program, as well as by onthe-
ground reporting of civilian casualties in the targeted-killing program. Both
now face intense public scrutiny.
In the midst of all this upheaval, there were also important advances in the international
machinery that helps to defend human rights. After a slow and disappointing
start, the United Nations Human Rights Council seemed to come onto its
own, most recently with significant pressure applied to North Korea and Sri
Lanka. And two new multinational treaties give hope for some of the world’s most
marginalized people: domestic workers and artisanal miners poisoned by the
unregulated use of mercury.
Responsibility to Protect: Pummeled but Still Potent
In 2005, the world’s governments made an historic pledge that if a national government
failed to stop mass atrocities, they would step in. The international community
has since invoked the R2P doctrine successfully to spare lives, most
notably in Kenya in 2007-2008 and Côte d’Ivoire in 2011. However, many governments
criticized the doctrine after NATO’s 2011 military intervention in Libya,
where NATO was widely perceived to have moved beyond the protection of civilians
to regime change. The reaction poisoned the global debate about how to
respond to mass atrocities in Syria. The utter failure to stop the slaughter of
Syrian civilians has raised concerns that the doctrine is now unraveling. Yet that
damning shortcoming should not obscure several cases in 2013 in which R2P
showed considerable vibrancy. In the Central African Republic and South Sudan,
the African Union (AU) and UN Security Council moved quickly to deploy peacekeeping
troops in an effort to prevent the slaughter of civilians on religious and
ethnic grounds. And in eastern Democratic Republic of Congo, international pressure
succeeded in convincing Rwanda to stop its military support for the latest in
a succession of rebel groups committing atrocities in this long-suffering region.
Syria
Syria was by far the deadliest armed conflict of 2013. Now in its third year, the
uprising-turned-civil war stood out for the ruthlessness of the government’s military
strategy. Rather than targeting only opposing combatants, as international
humanitarian law requires, the government indiscriminately attacked civilians in
areas held by the armed opposition. One of its apparent aims appeared to be to
drive away as many civilians as possible so rebel forces would not deploy among
them or live off a functioning economy. It also used collective punishment to turn people against the opposition and to send a message to all Syrians that life will
be miserable if they let the opposition prevail where they live.
The most outrageous example of this strategy was the August 21 sarin attack on
Ghouta, an opposition-held suburb of Damascus, which evidence strongly suggests
was carried out by government forces. Hundreds of civilians were killed that
night, including many children in their pajamas. Local monitoring groups report
that roughly 5,000 individuals are being killed by conventional weapons each
month, many the result of laws-of-war violations, with civilians constituting some
35 percent of the deaths. Opposition forces have also been responsible for atrocities,
and concern about their conduct has grown as Islamist extremists, some
linked to Al-Qaeda, gain ascendancy in their ranks. But the vast majority of civilian
deaths result from government attacks. Syrian troops have used ballistic missiles,
rockets, artillery shells, cluster bombs, incendiary weapons, fuel-air explosives,
barrel bombs, and regular aerial bombardment, as well as chemical
weapons to indiscriminately attack populated areas in opposition-held territory
and sometimes to target functioning bakeries, medical facilities, schools, and
other civilian structures.
Government forces have also massacred civilians and fighters in their custody,
and horror stories have emerged about the fate of the countless individuals who
have been arbitrarily detained, tortured, and in some cases killed in Syrian detention
facilities. As Syria’s population has become increasingly displaced (approximately
2.3 million outside Syria and 6.5 million within) and needy (an estimated
10 million depend on humanitarian aid), the government has erected countless
obstacles to delivering humanitarian supplies to civilians in opposition-held territory,
despite a UN Security Council presidential statement in October that urged
these barriers be lifted.
The international community’s response to this slaughter and suffering has been
painfully narrow. Amid questions about whether US President Barack Obama
would enforce his declared “red line” over the use of chemical weapons and his
threat to use military force, the United States and Russia brokered an agreement
in September according to which Syria is to surrender those weapons. Reports
indicate Syria is largely cooperating. But the accord addresses the method
responsible for a small fraction of the civilians killed in the conflict. Insufficient
pressure is being put on Syria to stop killing civilians by conventional means, and to permit humanitarian access to besieged towns and cross-border humanitarian
assistance as the easiest and surest way to reach many of those in need in opposition-
held areas.
In recent months, international efforts to address the Syria conflict have focused
mainly on peace talks known as Geneva II. But while the likelihood of reaching a
political accommodation among the warring factions anytime soon is remote, the
fear of doing anything that might dissuade Damascus from participating in
Geneva II has become the latest excuse for not putting real pressure on Syria to
stop killing civilians by conventional means and to permit the free flow of humanitarian
aid. The US has also been reluctant to pressure Russia—as Syria’s primary
backer, the government with the greatest influence over Damascus—because of
other priorities, most recently ensuring its help in implementing the chemicalweapons
deal to avoid renewed calls for the military action that President Obama
was so eager to avoid. Iran’s support for Syrian President Bashar al-Assad has
been overshadowed by negotiations over its nuclear capacity. The consequence
is diplomatic complacency about the Syrian government’s largely unimpeded,
murderous strategy for Syrian civilians.
What pressure might help to curb the slaughter? Western and Arab governments
so far have been unwilling to deploy more aggressive banking sanctions of the
sort that have proven so powerful elsewhere. Russia has been unwilling to countenance
the UN Security Council referring Syria to the International Criminal Court
(ICC), imposing an arms embargo, or even condemning government atrocities. In
the case of the ICC, Washington also has not publicly backed a role for the court,
apparently guided partly by a desire to avoid the unlikely possibility that Israeli
officials would be prosecuted for transferring people to the relatively static settlements
on the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights. (The expanding West Bank settlements
are a different matter, but a Syrian referral would not confer ICC jurisdiction
there).
Governments in the region have also been unhelpful. Lebanon, Iraq, and Egypt
have reportedly refused to enforce Arab League sanctions, sending oil to keep
Syria’s killing machine running. Gulf countries, including Saudi Arabia and Qatar,
have reportedly armed and funded extremist groups that have been responsible
for repeated atrocities, and along with Kuwait, have closed their eyes to funding
by their citizens. Iran and Hezbollah continue to back the Syrian government.
The international community seems all too willing to let the killing of Syrian civilians
continue. Some governments reinforce their apathy by promoting the narrative
of ruthless combatants killing each other, whether the Syrian military,
Hezbollah, or jihadists. Arab governments, particularly in the Gulf, see the conflict
mainly through the prism of Sunni-Shia relations, and a simmering conflict
between Saudi Arabia and Iran over regional hegemony. But to a horrifyingly large
extent, this is a war on civilians. Urgency, rather than complacency, should be the
order of the day.
Central African Republic and South Sudan
Despite this failure in Syria, the final months of 2013 showed that the R2P doctrine
still retained considerable force. When mass slaughter on religious grounds
broke out in the Central African Republic, France and the AU sent troops to reinforce
overwhelmed AU peacekeepers, the US contributed more than US$100 million,
and the UN began preparing for its own, much-needed peacekeeping mission.
Much more remains to be done to pull the country back from the brink, but
the international community has demonstrated a greater acceptance of its
responsibility to act.
In mid-December, in neighboring South Sudan, hundreds were killed as a political
conflict degenerated into the ethnic targeting of civilians and a wider civil war.
Within days, the UN Security Council approved an additional 5,500 peacekeepers
for the country. That may not be enough to stop the mass killing or stabilize the
dire situation, but the swift response suggests that, at least in the right circumstances,
the R2P doctrine is still a force to be reckoned with.
Notably, the intervention in each case was as much about stopping the slaughter
of civilians by government troops and militias as by rebel forces—one of the most
controversial challenges for the R2P doctrine.
Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of Congo
The international community also mounted an effective international response in
eastern Congo, where Rwanda has long supported a succession of abusive rebel
groups, contributing to the massive loss of life over the past two decades.
President Paul Kagame typically got away with this because of a combination of the international community’s guilt at not having stopped the 1994 genocide in
Rwanda and admiration for the economic progress that the country has made
under his leadership.
Things began to change in June 2012, when Human Rights Watch and a group of
UN experts uncovered compelling evidence that Rwanda was providing extensive
military support to the M23 rebel group in eastern Congo despite its record of
atrocities. For the first time, Western powers, including Rwanda’s most important
backers, the US and Britain, began to publicly criticize the government and even
suspended some assistance. Rwanda flatly denied supporting the M23, undermining
the government’s credibility and reconfirming the importance of pressuring
it to stop.
At first the pressure succeeded in forcing the M23 to pull back from Goma, the
area’s largest city, but this was not enough to stop the M23 from preying on the
people of the region. The UN Security Council responded by significantly bolstering
the military capacity of peacekeeping troops deployed in eastern Congo.
Then, when the M23 launched an offensive in October 2013 with ongoing
Rwandan military support, US Secretary of State John Kerry and British Foreign
Secretary William Hague phoned Kagame and told him to stop. This time, the
combination of pressure and firepower seemed to work. Deprived of Rwandan
military support and facing intensified pressure from the reinforced UN peacekeeping
force, the M23 crumbled within days. Other armed groups, as well as the
Congolese army, are still responsible for attacks on civilians, but eastern Congo is
at the time of writing apparently free of the predations of a Rwandan-backed
armed group for the first time in years.
Abusive Majoritarianism
Democracy has three essential components: periodic elections, the rule of law,
and respect for the human rights of all. Many dictatorships fear allowing anything
like free and fair elections. But authoritarian governments have also learned that
it is possible to adopt the form but not the substance of democracy, permitting
elections, often controlled, but nothing more. This feigned democracy rejects
basic principles, such as that governments must be accountable under the rule of
the law, limited by the human rights that protect minorities, and committed to
allowing free and continuous public debate.
In the past year, many relatively new governments pursued this abusive majoritarianism,
showing more enthusiasm for representing a majority—sometimes determined
by elections, sometimes by their own convenient assessment—than for
respecting the basic rights within which a democracy is supposed to function.
Some leaders also seemed to adopt a conveniently narrow vision of democracy in
which all that matters is a vote on election day, not public debate the rest of the
year. Resenting the give and take of ordinary politics, they tried to suppress the
public protests and criticism in the press and on social media that are also a staple
of any meaningful democracy.
The most glaring example was in Egypt. First, the Muslim Brotherhood government
of President Mohammed Morsy ruled in a manner that left secular and
minority groups fearing exclusion in an Islamist-dominated government. Then, in
the wake of Morsy’s ouster by the army in July, the military-dominated government
of Gen. Abdel Fattah al-Sisi launched the worst repression that Egypt has
known in decades, including by killing hundreds of Muslim Brotherhood
protesters.
Despite Morsy’s narrow win in the 2012 presidential contest—a 25 percent plurality
in the first round, and a bare majority of 51.7 percent in the second—he governed
as if the rights of the minority were of little concern. He convened a constituent
assembly that many felt gave an inadequate role to non-Brotherhood representatives,
and rammed through a constitution, endorsed by referendum, which
many feared would privilege an Islamist interpretation to the detriment of basic
rights, especially for women and religious minorities. He temporarily gave himself
exceptional powers to stand above judicial review “on sovereign matters.” And in
a misguided effort to buy good will, he made little effort to end the impunity that
the security forces enjoyed, despite their long record of killing, torture, and arbitrary
detention. Indeed, the military was granted even greater autonomy under
Morsy than it ever enjoyed under President Hosni Mubarak, a former general.
When millions of Egyptians took to the streets in June 2013 to demand new elections,
the military read the protests as license to overthrow Morsy, claiming to
speak for the majority without even the benefit of an election. It then proceeded
to disregard basic rights far more blatantly than Morsy ever dared. It drafted a
constitution that, while promising some greater protection for the rights of women
and religious minorities, retained military trials for civilians and expanded the shield protecting the military from civilian oversight. And despite this constitutional
exercise, the military acted as if unconstrained by any rights at all.
The military-dominated authorities used excessive lethal force to break up
Muslim Brotherhood sit-in protests in Cairo, indiscriminately and in some cases
deliberately killing up to 1,000 people. They rounded up thousands of Muslim
Brotherhood leaders and rank-and-file members and detained them, sometimes
without acknowledging their detention, frequently on trumped-up or no charges.
They officially designated the Muslim Brotherhood a terrorist organization, exposing
its members to criminal sanctions and even the death penalty, and seizing its
assets. They also froze the assets of affiliated medical centers and threatened to
take over Brotherhood mosques and replace their preachers.
The government adopted a law banning demonstrations without official permission,
which it showed no inclination to grant. It deepened the military’s autonomy
beyond anything Mubarak had ever allowed and worse even than Morsy’s permissive
approach. And despite many liberals misguidedly backing these measures, it
began turning its repressive attention to the secular activists who had been at the
forefront of the original Tahrir Square movement three years earlier. For the second
time since the fall of Mubarak in February 2011, a government is in power
with little apparent inclination to limit itself by respecting basic rights.
Tunisia offered proof that Egypt could have taken a different path. In 2011 elections
to the National Constituent Assembly, Tunisia’s first free elections, the
Islamist Nahdha party won a plurality of the vote, well ahead of others. Despite a
stalled economy and political polarization, the major political parties across the
spectrum negotiated compromises that preserve important rights. In the draft
constitution, they removed provisions referring to the “complementary” role of
women, which could undermine gender equality, and criminalizing attacks on
“sacred values,” a vague provision that could be used to penalize peaceful
expression. A draft law on “immunization of the revolution” was abandoned to
avoid excluding people from political life who have no history of criminal conduct
merely because of their past political affiliations.
The hubris of claiming to speak for a majority without regard for rights could be
found in other countries as well. In Turkey, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan
has repeatedly won a parliamentary majority, but his method of ruling has seemed increasingly autocratic as he shows less willingness to listen to opponents,
critics, or rivals. The tipping point was Erdogan’s plan to replace one of the
few parks in central Istanbul with a shopping-mall complex. The police’s violent
dispersal of a small sit-in against the project in May triggered a much larger occupation
of the park and mass protests in other cities. Erdogan treated the demonstrations
as a personal affront, repeatedly deploying the police to break them up.
The police used excessive force, including deliberately firing teargas canisters at
protesters, leading to deaths and serious injuries. Even once the protests subsided,
Erdogan and his circle continued to exert strong pressure on media organizations
that they saw as too sympathetic to their political opponents. And while
strongly supportive of the police in their handling of the demonstrations, Erdogan
was quick to demote dozens of officers and even a prosecutor whose investigations
threatened to implicate government ministers and his own son in a corruption
scandal.
In Burma, the government of President Thein Sein has committed itself to reform,
but major questions remain about its willingness to allow open political competition,
including by letting opposition leader Aung San Sui Kyi run for president.
The government has been particularly disappointing in its response to violence by
Buddhist extremists against ethnic Rohingya and other Muslims, with security
forces often standing aside as mobs attack and doing little to bring the perpetrators
to justice. It also has done nothing to prosecute security force personnel for
war crimes committed in the context of the various ethnic-based civil wars along
the country’s periphery.
Aung San Suu Kyi has been disappointing as well. Aware that the army will determine
her ability to run for president, she has refrained from criticizing its abuses.
And because the vulnerable and stateless Rohingya are so unpopular in Burma,
she has refused to come to their verbal defense as they have been violently
attacked. The Nobel laureate defends her stance by saying that she was always a
politician and remains so. The world was apparently mistaken to assume that as
a revered victim of rights abuse she would also be a principled defender of rights.
In Thailand, the government of Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra took advantage
of its electoral majority to seek a broad amnesty both for people involved in
violent abuse and, not incidentally, her elder brother, former prime minister
Thaksin Shinawatra, who has been living in exile since 2006 to avoid corruption charges. This overplaying of her parliamentary majority sparked widespread
street protests. Many in the opposition, however, seemed virtually to solicit a military
coup, opposing new elections out of fear that, yet again, they would lose.
That appeared to breach the principle that, even though elections are no excuse
to abuse rights, they are a prerequisite for democratic rule.
In Kenya, the government of President Uhuru Kenyatta and his deputy, William
Ruto, has used its narrow electoral victory—50.07 percent of the vote, barely
avoiding a runoff—to deploy all the resources of the state toward stopping their
prosecution by the International Criminal Court for their alleged leadership roles
in the 2007-08 post-election violence. Ruto himself, as well as Kenyatta’s supporters,
fought efforts to create a special tribunal in Kenya to address the violence,
betting that the ICC would never get involved. They bet wrong.
Now that the ICC has charged the two, they have been decrying its so-called interference
in their ability to govern, particularly since the Islamist armed group Al-
Shabaab’s October attack on a Nairobi shopping mall, and what they portray as
the ICC’s exclusive focus on African suspects—which also happens to be a focus
on African victims. But the alternative they offer is not national prosecution but
impunity. Their unstated and wrongful assumption is that their electoral victory is
sufficient to extinguish the right to justice for the victims of the electoral violence
and their families. Although its efforts failed to orchestrate a mass withdrawal of
African states from the ICC, Kenya has succeeded in enlisting the African Union
on behalf of its quest for impunity. One can only hope that other African leaders
prioritize African victims over the powerful who prey upon them.
In Russia, President Vladimir Putin was clearly shaken in 2011 and 2012 by the
large protests in opposition to his party’s parliamentary victory in a reportedly
fraudulent election and his own return to the Kremlin. Since then, the government
has taken various steps to prevent the opposition from mounting further challenge,
including limiting protests, punishing dissent, and trying to force critical
nongovernmental groups (NGOs) that receive foreign funding to wear the discrediting
label of “foreign agent.” The Kremlin has also pandered to its conservative
political base through a series of abusive measures such as banning homosexual
“propaganda” (ostensibly to protect children), and imposing punitive, disproportionate
charges on activists from the punk band Pussy Riot and the environmental
group Greenpeace. Apparently to avoid international criticism as February 2014’s Sochi Winter Olympics approached, Putin then amnestied or pardoned many of
Russia’s highest-profile prisoners. But the effect was largely to highlight the arbitrariness
of his rule as the crackdown on government critics continued, drawing
new victims into the revolving doors of Russia’s politicized justice system.
In Ukraine, when President Viktor Yanukovych’s decision to eschew closer ties
with the European Union met with mass protests in Kiev, the authorities largely
let the protests proceed. But when episodes of police brutality against protesters
and journalists reporting on the protests sparked wider demonstrations across
Ukraine, the authorities promised to bring officials responsible for the violence to
account. So far, they have mainly tried to intimidate protesters who complained
about stalled investigations.
In Venezuela, after Nicolás Maduro was declared the winner of the April presidential
election, the results of which were disputed by the opposition, state security
forces beat and arbitrarily detained supporters of his opponent, Henrique
Capriles, who staged anti-government rallies. Some of those arrested reported
being asked, “Who is your president?” and being beaten if they did not respond
“Nicolás Maduro,” yet public prosecutors failed to investigate credible allegations
of abuse. When Capriles called for a peaceful demonstration in the capital,
Maduro said he would not allow it to take place, vowing to respond to such “fascism”
with an “iron fist” and attributing responsibility for all post-election violence
to Capriles. Days after the election, while the opposition was calling for a
recount, the president of the National Assembly—who belongs to Maduro’s
party—refused to give fellow legislators the right to speak until they individually
recognized Maduro’s victory. Maduro’s minister of housing threatened to fire any
employee critical of the government. In November, at Maduro’s behest, members
of his party passed legislation granting him sweeping power to govern by decree.
The government has continued to intimidate and sanction media outlets critical of
its policies, and has impeded human rights defenders with funding restrictions
and the threat of prosecution.
In China, the government will not even risk elections for senior officials but claims
to speak for the majority based on the self-appointed leadership of the
Communist Party. The new government of President Xi Jinping introduced some
modest reforms—abolishing “re-education through labor” but not other methods
of detaining people without trial, and easing the conditions in which some Chinese couples can have a second child, but not ending altogether the use of
official coercion and surveillance in such personal matters. However, the government
continued its predecessor’s intolerance toward organized dissent, and even
retaliated against journalists who work for media companies that took up such
sensitive topics as the enormous unexplained wealth of Chinese leaders and their
families. Nobel Laureate Liu Xiaobo remains in prison serving an 11-year sentence
for advocating democracy, and his wife, Liu Xia, remains under unlawful house
arrest.
China seemed most worried about the new threat to its monopoly over public conversation
posed by the rise of social media. China’s “Great Firewall,” built to
block access to the Internet outside the country, is worthless for preventing conversation
among Chinese that social media sites like Sina Weibo now permit. And
with China having an estimated 400 million social media users and growing, the
government is having a hard time keeping up, despite its proliferation of censors.
Social media have given the Chinese people new opportunities to spotlight official
misconduct, and at times the government has had no choice but to be
responsive.
Beyond elections, abusive majoritarianism comes in cultural forms as well.
Whether it is Saudi Arabia or Afghanistan restricting the rights of women, or
Uganda or Russia undermining the rights of gays and lesbians, abusive leaders
often speak in terms of a dominant or traditional culture, as if that justifies abusing
those who differ from it or fomenting discrimination against them. Typically
these leaders pretend that alternatives to their tradition are imposed from the
outside, as if all homosexuals in their country were imported or all women who
oppose discrimination are transplants. In fact, the only imposition going on is by
the dominant elites of those countries against those who dare to differ or stand
up for their rights. No one insists that any particular women must reject gender
stereotypes or that particular gays or lesbians must abide by their own sexuality
rather than the government’s preconceptions. But if they choose to do so, antidiscrimination
obligations make it their choice, not that of the government. The
international community gets involved when a government denies that choice,
not to impose any particular choice.
National Security: An Excuse for Violating Rights
Since beginning his second term in January 2013, President Obama has done little
to alter his disappointing record on national security issues. To his credit, upon
taking office he banned torture and closed CIA detention centers where suspects
were forcibly disappeared for months or years—two of the most shameful practices
of the Bush administration in response to the September 11, 2001 attacks.
Yet he has refused to prosecute anyone for those abuses. He also has stymied
efforts to investigate them and provide redress for victims.
In addition, Obama has done little to fulfill his promise to close the Guantanamo
Bay detention center and has continued to try suspects before fundamentally
flawed military commissions despite their dismal record. In two important areas—
targeted killing, often by drones, and mass government electronic surveillance—
he has built on and expanded his predecessor’s programs.
With respect to drones, the Obama administration has not followed its own stated
policies or made clear what legal framework it believes governs specific strikes.
Though formally eschewing the Bush administration’s “global war on terrorism,”
the Obama administration has asserted that it is in an armed conflict with the
Taliban, Al-Qaeda, and “associated forces” with no geographic boundaries. It has
engaged in targeted killings in Pakistan, Yemen, and Somalia, saying it is at war
with these armed groups or claiming national self-defense.
But given the at-most sporadic violence involving the United States in many of
these places, it is far from clear that the more permissive laws of war even apply.
And even if they do, civilians have been killed unlawfully under that legal framework
without any US inquiry or known compensation to the victims or their families.
The separate and more restrictive body of international human rights law
allows the use of lethal force as well but in far more narrow circumstances: only if
absolutely necessary to meet an imminent lethal threat. That would make even
more of the deaths caused by drones unlawful.
In a May speech, Obama suggested that the use of the rules of war should end at
some unspecified time, and outlined policies governing drone attacks to limit
civilian casualties that are in many respects closer to human rights law than the
laws-of-war rules that the CIA and military claim to follow. But it is far from clear
that these announced policies are being followed. Civilians continue to be killed, and the Obama administration refuses to take public responsibility for carrying
out all but a few attacks.
The US government seems to feel no urgency to demonstrate the lawfulness of its
use of drones for attacks because for the moment it stands nearly alone in using
them. But that will certainly change, and Washington will undoubtedly rue the
precedents it has set of enabling governments to label anyone deemed to be a
threat as a “combatant” subject to attack under the laws of war, rather than abiding
by the more protective standards of human rights law.
Because of the disclosures of whistleblower Edward Snowden, the world is now
aware of the virtually unchecked mass electronic surveillance that the US government
and certain allies, most notably Britain, is conducting. No one questions
that national security sometimes requires governments to use targeted surveillance
after making an evidentiary showing. But the US government’s mass surveillance
without such limits has largely eradicated the right to privacy in a modern
world that virtually requires electronic communication.
To justify this conduct, the US government has invoked a series of legal assumptions
that do not withstand serious scrutiny, even though most have been ratified
by a secret and deferential Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court that hears only
the government’s arguments. For example, the government feels free to collect
metadata about potentially all phone calls in the US because, under woefully outdated
rules, no one is said to have any legitimate expectation of privacy when it
comes to this information because they share it with the phone company. Despite
a huge percentage of the world’s Internet and phone communications passing
through the United States, the government has adopted the policy that non-
Americans outside the country have no recognized privacy interest in even the
content of their communications. And the government conveniently claims that
the right to privacy is not implicated when it collects communications, only when
it examines them—as if it would be okay for the government to collect and store a
video stream from peoples’ bedrooms so long as it purports not watch the video
until it comes up with some compelling reason.
Global outrage at this trampling on the right to privacy offers some promise of
change. Brazil and Germany, for example, sponsored a unanimously adopted UN
General Assembly resolution demanding further study of the violation of privacy “in the context of domestic and extraterritorial surveillance … including on a mass
scale”—a welcome development, as there is little transparency about the kind of
surveillance that governments other than the United States and its immediate
allies have undertaken. But for all the protests, there is disturbingly little willingness
by any rights-abiding government to shelter Snowden as a whistleblower
from US efforts to prosecute him under the US Espionage Act. Sadly, this has
allowed Russia, which granted temporary asylum to Snowden, to recast itself as a
champion of privacy rights.
To his credit, Obama appointed a reform panel that recommended 46 policy
amendments—a strong starting point for reform. It called for an end to the government’s
bulk metadata collection, greater privacy protection for non-Americans,
and increased transparency, among other things. But it is unclear whether any of
these recommendations will be acted on. Moreover, there is a danger that in
response to the US government’s overreaching, other governments, some with
poor rights records, will force user data to stay within their own borders, setting
up the potential for increased Internet censorship.
Enhanced Human Rights Machinery
The defense of human rights depends on many elements: a vibrant movement of
activists and NGOs, a general public that believes in the importance of basic
rights, and governments that are committed to upholding these principles. In
addition, an international architecture has emerged to bolster this defense. Two
developments strengthened that architecture over the past year: the UN Human
Rights Council in Geneva is increasingly living up to its promise as the leading
multilateral institution devoted to the protection of rights, and two new treaties
were adopted that should help protect some of society’s most vulnerable members.
Greater Hope for the UN Human Rights Council
Over the past year the council continued to show promise after a dismal beginning.
The council was established in 2006 to replace the UN Human Rights
Commission, which had lost credibility as repressive governments flocked to it in an effort to use their votes to avoid censure. The council has tighter membership
standards, but for its first few years was little better than its predecessor.
In recent years, however, the council has come into its own. One important factor
was the Obama administration’s decision to join it after the Bush administration
had shunned it. Other governments have also played an important role, including
Mexico, Switzerland, Chile, Botswana, Brazil, Argentina, Mauritius, Benin,
Maldives, Costa Rica, and a number of EU states. Together they successfully
bridged the political divides and overcame the apathy that often blocked effective
action. Even traditionally more reluctant countries, such as Nigeria and Thailand,
were persuaded to play productive roles.
The positive results were most visible with Sri Lanka. In 2009, when some 40,000
civilians were killed in the waning months of the conflict with the Tamil Tigers, the
council’s initial reaction was to congratulate the government on its victory. But for
the past two years, the council has pressured Sri Lanka to honor its pledge to
investigate war crimes by both sides and to bring those responsible to account.
Similarly in March 2013, among other useful steps, the council established a commission
of inquiry to collect evidence of North Korea’s crimes against humanity—
the first step toward possibly prosecuting those responsible.
These and others such steps show that a pro-rights majority exists on the council,
despite the election at the end of 2013 of several countries such as China, Cuba,
Russia, and Saudi Arabia that historically have been hostile to human rights
enforcement. With proper diplomatic efforts, this majority can be mobilized to
respond to the most severe human rights crises.
Two New Treaties to Protect Rights
The tens of millions of women and girls laboring as cleaners and caregivers in
people's homes are among the world’s most vulnerable workers. Working in isolation
and historically excluded from basic protections afforded most other workers
under national labor laws, they are at high risk of economic exploitation, physical
and sexual abuse, and trafficking. Many governments have been reluctant to legislate
working conditions in the home, and employers have often pushed the
myth that these workers are treated like members of the family.
That should begin to change with the International Labour Organization’s
Domestic Workers Convention, which took effect in September. It entitles domestic
workers to protection from abuse and harassment as well as key labor rights
such as a weekly day off, limits on hours of work, and a minimum wage. Domestic
workers, trade unions, migrants groups, and human rights activists have leveraged
the convention to advocate for national reforms. In the two years since the
convention was adopted, dozens of countries have embraced important reforms,
including comprehensive legislation in the Philippines and Argentina and new
protections in Brazil’s constitution. There is still a long way to go, but increasingly
domestic workers’ second-tier status under national labor laws is coming to an
end.
The world also took a step forward toward realizing the right to the highest attainable
standard of health by addressing the danger of mercury poisoning. Much of
the world’s artisanal gold mining uses mercury to separate gold from ore. Mercury
is toxic, and particularly harmful to children. Exposure can cause life-long physical
and mental disability. A treaty adopted in October requires governments to
eliminate the most dangerous uses of mercury in mining and promote alternative
forms of gold processing that do not require the metal.
Conclusion
Despite the year’s turmoil year, with numerous atrocities in some countries and
deepening repression in others, 2013 also featured a vigorous movement fighting
back. In several cases there were victories to savor. More often there was a struggle
that, if not immediately victorious, at least raised the cost of abuse—a strategy
that, over time, tends to mitigate human rights violations.
The Responsibility to Protect doctrine was certainly strained, at an unspeakable
price for the people of Syria, but it retained enough vitality to provide a modicum
of assistance to people facing mass atrocities in several African countries. A
notable number of leaders opted to govern under a convenient assessment of
majority preferences without respecting the rights that allow all elements of society
to participate in the political process or to live secure from governmental
abuse. But as the public protested, this stratagem did not bring leaders the legitimacy
they sought. And as the perennial problem of human rights abuse in the
name of counterterrorism centered on mass electronic surveillance and targeted killings by drones, the traditional efforts to avoid legal challenges by hiding
behind the secrecy of national security were clearly failing. So while the year certainly
had more than enough suffering, it also held out promise that steps were
being taken to curtail these rights abuses.
Kenneth Roth is the executive director of Human Rights Watch.
The Human Rights Case for Drug Reform
How Drug Criminalization Destroys Lives, Feeds Abuses,
and Subverts the Rule of Law
By Maria McFarland Sánchez-Moreno
Nearly every country in the world plays a part—as producer, consumer, or transit
point—in the multibillion-dollar illicit drug trade that supplies more than 150 million
people every year and keeps on growing.
To combat this trade, many countries over recent decades have launched socalled
“wars on drugs” that entail crackdowns on participants large and small in
the drug business, including harsh penalties for users.
Human Rights Watch has long documented the widespread human rights abuses
resulting from this approach: in the United States, the devastation that disproportionate
prison sentences for drug offenses have wrought on individuals and their
families and disturbing racial disparities in drug law enforcement; in Mexico, the
killings committed in the name of combatting drugs; in Canada, the US, and
Russia, how fear of criminal law enforcement deters people who use drugs from
accessing necessary health services, exposing them to violence, discrimination,
and illness; in Afghanistan and Colombia, how narcotics production has fueled
armed groups opposed or allied to the government; in India, Ukraine, and
Senegal, how cancer patients suffer severe pain due to drug control regulations
that render morphine inaccessible; and in China, Vietnam, and Cambodia, the
“drug rehabilitation centers” where people are subjected to torture, forced labor,
and sexual abuse.
But there was a growing sense within Human Rights Watch that this approach did
not go far enough—that the problem did not lie merely with ill-considered policies
or their abusive execution. Rather, the criminalization of drugs itself seemed to
be inherently problematic. Especially when it came to personal possession and
use, imposing the full force of the criminal justice system to arrest, prosecute,
and incarcerate appeared contrary to the human rights to privacy and personal
autonomy that underlie many rights.
Heavy emphasis on enforcing criminal prohibitions on drug production and distribution
was also dramatically enhancing the profitability of illicit drug markets and
fueling the growth and operations of groups that commit atrocities, corrupt
authorities, and undermine democracy and the rule of law in many countries.
In my own work as Human Rights Watch’s Colombia researcher from 2004 to
2010, it was clear that the illicit drug market was a major factor in the country’s
long-running war involving left-wing guerrilla groups, right-wing paramilitary
groups, and security forces.
Certainly, Colombia’s staggering levels of abuse—massacres, killings, rape,
threats, and kidnappings that displaced more than 3 million people—had roots
that went beyond the drug trade and predated the explosion in the cocaine market
in the 1970s. But most armed groups in Colombia in some way benefitted
from the illicit trade. The paramilitaries, in particular, were among Colombia’s
biggest drug lords. Often, they threatened or killed people living on land they
wanted to control for coca production or as drug transportation corridors. Illicit
drug profits helped pay for their weapons and uniforms, wages for their “soldiers,”
and bribes for public officials to evade justice for their crimes.
So it became increasingly difficult—as we documented the atrocities, called for
justice, and pressed the US to enforce human rights conditions on its assistance
(the US provided Colombia more than US$5 billion in mostly military aid in 2000-
2010)—to ignore that many of the abuses we advocated to end would inevitably
continue in some form unless US and global drug policy itself changed.
My later work on US policy towards such countries as Afghanistan and Mexico,
and on the US criminal justice system, only strengthened my view—which others
at Human Rights Watch shared—that drug criminalization was inherently inconsistent
with human rights.
After much discussion, the organization in 2013 adopted a policy calling on governments
to decriminalize all personal use and possession of drugs. We also
urged them to consider—and eventually adopt—alternative policies on the drug
trade to reduce the enormous human rights costs of current approaches.
Change is urgent, as our research consistently shows.
Medellín: The More Things Change, the More They
Stay the Same
Alex Pulgarín knew a lot about the power that the illicit drug trade gave to criminals—
and the damage it could inflict.
When I interviewed him in 2007, he was a fresh-faced 30-year-old with an easy
smile who looked younger than his age but spoke with the confidence of a seasoned
player in the complicated politics of his city, Medellín, a major hub for
Colombia’s cocaine trade.
As a child in the 1980s, Alex witnessed the bloody “war” the infamous Medellín
cocaine kingpin Pablo Escobar waged against Colombia’s government in a bid to
secure a ban on extraditions to the US. The car bombings, airplane hijackings,
and frequent assassinations that Escobar ordered garnered Medellín the label,
“murder capital of the world.”
So many rejoiced when Colombian security forces, with US backing, killed
Escobar in 1993. But the bloodletting didn’t end there. As the world turned its
attention elsewhere, others discreetly filled his shoes.
One of them was Diego Murillo, also known as “Berna,” a former Escobar rival
who in the 1990s went on to build his own drug trafficking empire in Medellín,
forging close ties with the paramilitaries. As a teenager in a low-income neighborhood,
Alex saw his peers get swept into a seemingly endless cycle of brutality
and death as Berna and others battled for control over the city.
But when I interviewed Alex, city officials were claiming that Medellín had turned
a corner. The government and paramilitaries had announced a “peace deal,” and
hundreds of young men had turned in weapons at “demobilization” ceremonies,
signing up for government stipends. Former paramilitary leaders received reduced
prison sentences. Homicide rates were near their lowest in years.
Among those who supposedly demobilized was Berna. Several of his henchmen
formed the Democracy Corporation, a group with the ostensible mission of working
with the city to help demobilized paramilitaries get education and jobs and
reintegrate into society.
But Alex told a different story. The corporation, he said, was a front for organized
crime, still under Berna’s control. The government’s backing gave the corporation a veneer of legality, allowing it to exert political influence while retaining its ruthless
dominance over much of the city. “Peace with a knife to your throat,” as Alex
called it.
A Democracy Corporation leader, Antonio Lopez (“Job”), had ordered his accomplices
to kill demobilized individuals who disobeyed him—especially “coordinators,”
point people for the demobilized in each neighborhood. Others confirmed
what Alex said: the apparent peace that Medellín was experiencing was not due
to Berna’s demobilization, but rather the result of his monopoly over crime in the
city after he defeated most competing groups. And he was retaining that control
in part through the Democracy Corporation.
While Alex knew many people in the world of local crime, he had taken a different
path. He had become an activist, joined the left-leaning Democratic Pole party,
and won a spot on his neighborhood action council. Respected and well-liked, he
dreamed of running for higher office.
But Alex was now in Job’s sights. A few months earlier, Job had asked him to run
for the Medellín City Council as the Democracy Corporation’s candidate, trying to
capitalize on Alex’s popularity. Alex would get a car, armed guards, and a stipend
if he agreed. He refused.
Instead, he began reporting what he knew to police and prosecutors, recording
his calls with coordinators who were being threatened and sharing them with the
authorities. He spoke during community meetings with international agencies and
the Catholic Church. “Aren’t you afraid you’ll get killed?” I asked when we met. He
brushed off the question.
Two years later, in 2009, it looked like Alex might emerge unscathed. Berna had
been extradited to the US, where he pled guilty to cocaine trafficking charges and
received a 31-year sentence from a federal court in New York City. Job had been
gunned down, reportedly by rivals, in an upscale restaurant near Medellín. And
Alex testified in a trial against another Democracy Corporation member, John
William López, or Memín. Several witnesses were murdered during the trial, but
Memín was convicted of forcibly interfering with elections, conspiracy, and forced
displacement.
But it is hard to escape the grasp of Colombia’s criminal networks. That
December, armed men—Memín associates—accosted Alex on the street and shot
him several times in broad daylight. He died at the scene.
A Resilient and Lucrative Global Market
Profits from the illicit drug trade in Colombia have not only fueled the country’s
conflict but have also enabled criminals to buy off or intimidate public officials.
More than 100 Colombian congress members and countless other officials have
been investigated in recent years for alleged collusion with paramilitaries. In
Medellín, new groups with shadowy leadership structures have replaced Berna’s
organization, much as Berna’s had replaced Escobar’s. Violence—often via
threats and displacement—is pervasive.
These problems extend well beyond Colombia. In many countries illicit drug profits
are an enormous motivator and funding source for groups that commit atrocities,
corrupt authorities, and undermine democracy and the rule of law.
Indeed, according to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), illicit
drugs constitute the largest income source for transnational crime and may
account for one-fifth of all crime proceeds. The UNODC also estimated the value
of the 2003 global illicit drugs market to be $322 billion at retail—higher than the
gross domestic product of 88 percent of the world’s countries at the time.
Afghanistan, for example, produces around 90 percent of the world’s opium
(along with cannabis). In 2009, the late Richard Holbrooke, then-US special representative
for Afghanistan and Pakistan, decried how enforcing drug policies—particularly
US efforts to eradicate poppy (a crucial crop for many impoverished
Afghan farmers)—drove people “into the arms of the Taliban.” But that has only
been part of the picture. The illegal opium market has dramatically distorted the
country’s power structure, bankrolling armed groups such as the Taliban and
local warlords responsible for numerous atrocities. It also fuels rampant corruption,
making efforts to apprehend and prosecute those implicated in these crimes
extraordinarily difficult.
Meanwhile, in Mexico the homicide rate has exploded, with at least 80,000 people
killed in the country’s “war on drugs” since 2007 (El Salvador, Honduras, and
Guatemala face similar problems). The US has provided more than $2 billion in
funding to Mexico to combat drugs during that time. Yet the Mexican security
forces deployed in the country’s “war on drugs” have themselve Tougher Enforcement?
The US, Russia, and other countries, with UNODC support, have argued the
answer to the exploding violence and corruption around illicit drug markets is to
vastly expand enforcement. For decades, they have poured billions of dollars into
combatting drugs (some estimate at least $100 billion a year). With varying
degrees of lawfulness they have pursued, surveilled, killed, extradited, prosecuted,
and imprisoned kingpins and low-level dealers alike. They have fumigated
crops, paid farmers to grow other crops, and interdicted shipments.
Yet, as the Global Commission on Drug Policy—a group of former presidents, senior
UN officials, and prominent public figures—stated in its June 2011 report,
these vast expenditures have “clearly failed to effectively curtail supply or consumption.
Apparent victories in eliminating one source or trafficking organization
are negated almost instantly by the emergence of other sources and traffickers.”
Indeed, as pressure increases in one place, the drug trade often shifts accordingly.
My native country, Peru, recently replaced Colombia as the world’s largest producer
of coca, according to UNODC—the same position it occupied in the 1980s.
In turn, “tough” enforcement has created its own nightmare for human rights protection.
Thailand’s 2003 “war on drugs” resulted in some 2,800 extrajudicial
killings by state security forces in its first three months. In Canada, Kazakhstan,
Bangladesh, and Ukraine, police have violently mistreated people who use drugs.
In Tanzania, police and quasi-official vigilante groups brutally beat people who
inject drugs. Russia’s policies have resulted in mass incarceration, often in environments
that pose high risk of HIV transmission, and detention of drug offenders
without trial.
In countries such as Singapore and Malaysia, drug offenders face the death
penalty. Iran imposes a mandatory death sentence for various drug offenses.
Other countries impose grossly disproportionate punishment in drug cases. The
US, for example, has the world’s largest reported incarcerated population (2.2
million people in adult prisons and jails), in significant part due to harsh sentences
for drug offenses. Nearly a quarter of all prisoners—498,600 in 2011—
including nearly half of federal inmates, were serving time for mostly low-level
drug offenses. Some of those convicted, and many of those arrested, have done
nothing more than use drugs, yet they will suffer the consequences of their conviction or arrest record for the rest of their lives. For immigrants, convictions, even
for nonviolent offenses, can mean deportation and separation from their families.
US drug law enforcement is also marred by deep, discriminatory racial disparities.
Although whites and blacks use and sell drugs at comparable rates in the US,
blacks are arrested on drug charges at more than three times the rate of whites
and are imprisoned for drug convictions at ten times the white rate.
The Harms of (Criminalizing) Drug Use
Proponents of criminalization of drug use often argue that it is necessary to protect
individuals’ health and keep people from harming themselves or others.
It is legitimate for governments to address societal harms that may result from
drug abuse. But policymakers too easily attribute social problems—domestic
abuse, unemployment, or violence—to illicit drug use, when causes are more
complex.
Imprisoning people who use drugs does little to protect their health: prisoners
often find that drug treatment—as we found in New York—is not available.
Recidivism of drug offenders is common.
Instead, criminalization often compounds existing harms. Fear of law enforcement
can drive people who use drugs underground, deterring them from accessing
health services and increasing the risk they face of violence, discrimination,
and serious illness, as our research in Canada, the US, and Russia has shown.
Outside Africa, one-third of HIV infections are attributable to contaminated injection
equipment. But police enforcement of drug prohibitions is a barrier to providing
sterile syringes, and incarceration makes it harder to treat and care for those
already living with HIV.
Aggressive laws and enforcement also contribute to the stigmatization and abusive
treatment of people who use drugs. Poor public education around drugs and
their risks means that, in many countries, there is little understanding about the
real harms that may flow from drug abuse, much less how to prevent or treat
them.
The Pitfalls of Involuntary Treatment
While criminalization is deeply problematic, extrajudicial systems of drug control
can also be extremely abusive. Thailand, for example, detains people who use
drugs without trial for extended periods in locked “treatment facilities.” In China,
the 2008 Anti-Drug Law allows officials to detain people who use drugs for up to
six years with no trial or judicial oversight.
In Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam, people who use drugs are held in governmentrun
centers where they are often mistreated in the name of “treatment.” In
Vietnam, detainees are used as forced labor to process cashews or manufacture
clothes for export. In Cambodia, they are subjected to brutal punishments, including
torture. In 2013, four years after we first reported on this issue, we found that
individuals held in these drug detention centers are still being beaten, thrashed
with rubber water hoses, forced to stand in septic water pits, and sexually
abused. Lack of due process protections also renders these facilities convenient
places to detain people whom Cambodian authorities consider “undesirable”—
including homeless people and street children—in sporadic crackdowns often
occurring before visits of foreign dignitaries.
A Human Rights Approach to Drug Control
To ensure their drug policies are in line with international human rights standards,
governments should:
• Decriminalize personal use and possession of drugs for personal use.
Laws criminalizing drug use are inconsistent with respect for human autonomy
and privacy rights. Governments may limit these rights if necessary for a
legitimate purpose, such as preventing harm to others. But like other private
behavior that some may view as immoral (such as consensual homosexual
conduct among adults), there is no legitimate basis for criminalization. Nor
is criminalization necessary to protect people who use drugs: Governments
have many non-penal measures to encourage people to make good choices
around drugs, including offering substance abuse treatment and social support.
Governments can also criminalize negligent or dangerous behavior
(such as driving under the influence) to regulate harmful conduct by individuals
who use drugs, without criminalizing drug use itself.
• Reduce criminal regulation of drug production and distribution.
Criminalization of the drug trade carries enormous human rights costs, dramatically
enhancing the profitability of illicit drug markets and fueling the
growth and operations of groups responsible for large-scale violence and
corruption. Finding alternative ways to regulate production and distribution
and cutting into illicit drug profits would allow governments to weaken the
influence of such groups and reduce the various abuses—killings, disproportionate
sentencing, torture, and barriers to access to health care—that governments
often commit in the name of fighting drugs.
• Ground approaches to treatment and care in human rights, avoiding abusive
administrative sanctions and ensuring patients have access to needed
medications.
Governments should close drug detention centers where people are held in
violation of international law and expand access to voluntary, communitybased
drug treatment with the involvement of competent nongovernmental
organizations. They should also ensure that anyone with a legitimate medical
need for controlled medications like morphine or methadone has adequate
access to them.
Many alternatives to current policies have yet to be tested (except with
respect to alcohol). So governments should assess proposed solutions carefully
to reduce the risk they could lead to new problems or human rights
concerns.
Yet, there are some models to consider: Some governments have decriminalized
personal use and possession of illicit drugs or resisted enforcing
certain prohibitions. In Portugal, in conjunction with comprehensive harmreduction
strategies, decriminalization had positive results; rather than substantially
increasing, drug consumption reportedly dropped in some categories—
as did recidivism and HIV infection. Researchers have also developed
theoretical models for potential systems of drug regulation with varying
ways of handling licensing, privatization versus state monopoly control
of supply, taxation, public health education, the protection of children, and
treatment. And some jurisdictions are beginning to put these models into
practice.
A Changing Landscape
The pendulum is starting to swing on drug policy, with Mexico, Guatemala, and
Colombia calling for a review of the global drug control regime. “As long as the
flow of resources from drugs and weapons to criminal organizations [is] not
stopped,” they said in a 2012 joint statement decrying the failure of current prohibitionist
strategies, “they will continue to threaten our societies and governments.”
In a study in 2013 on the effectiveness of current policies, the Organization of
American States opened up a discussion about their costs and outlined, without
endorsing, various possible scenarios for future development—including decriminalization.
In December, Uruguay approved a law legalizing marijuana and establishing a
regulated system of production and distribution for the drug, though a compulsory
treatment bill was also pending at time of writing.
Change is slowly happening in the US, too. Attorney General Eric Holder in 2013
issued guidance for federal prosecutors that would allow US states to legalize
marijuana, noting that a regulated market may further federal priorities of combatting
organized crime. Washington State and Colorado are legalizing the possession,
production, and distribution of marijuana for recreational use; 20 other
states have legalized medical marijuana.
Several UN agencies and special rapporteurs have called for drug detention centers
to close immediately. The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) called for
all children to be removed from Cambodia’s centers; still, one in 10 people held
in Cambodia’s centers today is a child.
Indeed, progress has been limited and fragile. Criminalization remains the tool of
choice for drug control in most countries, where there is often little debate around
harsh and counterproductive policies. Meanwhile, the devastating costs of the
current approach—in lives lost to violence, people subjected to long prison terms,
barriers to health, harm to families and communities, and damage to the rule of
law—keep mounting. It is time to chart a new course.
Maria McFarland Sánchez-Moreno is deputy director of the US Division.
Putting Development to Rights:
Integrating Rights into a Post-2015 Agenda
By David Mepham
Before Tunisia’s popular uprising erupted in late 2010, many in the international
community saw the country as a development success story. Economic growth
was close to 4 percent, 9 in 10 children went to primary school, and life expectancy
was an impressive 75 years.
But for many Tunisians this progress was clearly not enough: higher incomes and
better access to services did not compensate for the ills and costs of corruption,
repression, inequality, and powerlessness. Nor did it satisfy aspirations for
greater justice, freedom, and dignity. In January 2011, popular protests ousted
Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali from the presidency after 23 years in power.
While Tunisia’s struggle for rights-respecting democracy continues, its recent
experience exposes the narrowness and inadequacy of many existing approaches
to development. It also provides a compelling case for development to be
reframed more broadly, not just as higher income (important as this is), but as
the creation of conditions in which people everywhere can get an education, visit
a doctor, and drink clean water, and also express themselves freely, be protected
by a fair and accessible justice system, participate in decision-making, and live
free of abuse and discrimination. These are some of the basic economic, social,
cultural, civil, and political rights that governments are obligated to honor but
deny to hundreds of millions of people.
Many of those who are most impoverished belong to society’s most marginalized
and vulnerable social groups—women, children, people with disabilities, ethnic
minorities, people infected with HIV—who often lack the power, social or legal
standing, or access to decision-making that allows them to challenge their disadvantaged
status or improve their circumstances.
For the most part, development policy and programs have ignored the critical
interdependence of economic and social rights with civil and political rights, and
so have failed to challenge systemic patterns of discrimination and disadvantage
that keep people in poverty. As a result, many poor people have been excluded, or have failed to benefit, from development programs. More disturbingly still,
people have been harmed by abusive policies carried out in the name of development:
forced from their land to make way for large commercial investors, compelled
to toil long days for low pay in dangerous and exploitative conditions, or
exposed to life-threatening pollution from poorly regulated industries.
Development can also be unsustainable, achieved at considerable cost to the
environment —including carbon emissions, soil erosion, pollution, depletion of
fresh water supplies, over-fishing, or damage to biodiversity—which then damage
people’s rights, including those to life, health, safe food, and clean water.
More than a decade ago, in 2001, world governments set about addressing such
problems by agreeing on eight Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Set for
achievement by 2015, they included halving the proportion of people suffering
from extreme hunger, reducing child and maternal mortality, and achieving universal
primary education.
With this date fast approaching, a United Nations-led process is under way to
agree on successor goals. This is a crucial opportunity to change the daily reality
for millions of people currently overlooked, disadvantaged, or damaged by development
efforts. Despite growing civil society support for rooting development in
human rights standards, many governments, especially authoritarian ones,
remain hostile to them, and will seek to minimize and marginalize the role of
rights in any new international agreement.
To counter this threat and build wider international support for rights, it is essential
and urgent to show how their fuller integration can contribute to improved
development outcomes—promoting a form of development that is more inclusive,
just, transparent, participatory, and accountable, precisely because it is rightsrespecting.
An Unfulfilled Vision
The UN Millennium Declaration of 2000 was strong on human rights and democratic
principles. World governments endorsed it in September 2000, asserting
that freedom, equality, solidarity, and tolerance were fundamental values. Making
progress on development, they said, depended on “good governance within each
country,” adding that they would “spare no effort” to promote democracy, strengthen the rule of law, and respect internationally recognized human rights
and fundamental freedoms.
Strong words. But the Millennium Declaration’s vision, and the important principles
it contained, never found their way into the new Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs), which emerged from a UN working group in early 2001 and soon
became the dominant framework for international development cooperation.
While drawn from the Millennium Declaration, the MDGs were far more circumscribed.
They prioritized an important set of economic and social issues, which
were seen as less political and easier to measure, such as child and maternal
mortality and access to primary education. These issues were defined in technical
terms rather than as a set of rights obligations. Nor did the MDGs set any goals or
targets related to political freedom or democratic participation, equality for ethnic
minorities or people with disabilities, freedom from violence and abuse in the
family and community, freedom of expression, or rights to peaceful protest and
assembly.
Despite these limitations, the MDGs have contributed to real progress for many
people. They have embodied and helped generate substantial international consensus
about the focus of development cooperation. And in many countries they
have facilitated higher levels of public investment in health and education, contributing
to significant increases in school enrolment rates and big reductions in
child mortality over the last decade. Since 1990, for example, child mortality has
almost halved globally, plummeting from 12 million to 6.6 million in 2012, while
the number of primary school-age children out of school has fallen from 102 million
in 1990 to 69 million in 2012.
But the neglect of human rights by many governments, donors, international institutions,
and the MDG framework has been a serious missed opportunity, which
has greatly diminished development efforts and had other harmful consequences
for poor and marginalized people, as elaborated below.
Unequal Development
Even before the MDG framework was established, many governments were unwilling
or unable to address discrimination and exclusion in their development
strategies and their broader social and economic policies. Authoritarian governments were obviously reluctant to empower restless minorities or disadvantaged
groups that might threaten their grip on power, and were generally unwilling to
address sensitive issues around ethnic or religious conflict. Such governments
also often refuse to accept that women, girls, indigenous people, or other marginalized
social groups deserve equal status under the law.
But development donors and international institutions like the World Bank also
shied away from the more complex and politicized approach to development
implied by an explicit emphasis on rights. The MDGs, with their stress on measuring
development in terms of average or aggregate achievement of particular
goals, for example on child and maternal mortality, did little to change these calculations
and meant that marginalized communities continued to be overlooked.
Indeed, because it is often more difficult or expensive to assist poor and marginalized
communities, the MDG framework may have actually worked against them,
incentivising a focus on people who are easier to reach and assist, such as those
living in cities rather than far-flung rural areas.
Nowhere is unequal development better documented and more visible than in the
widespread and systematic discrimination against women and girls. Most development
organizations have identified gender discrimination as a major obstacle
to inclusive development and there is a growing international consensus on the
need to tackle it. For example, the World Bank, the European Commission, and
the United Kingdom’s Department for International Development (DFID) have all
made strong statements on the importance of combating gender inequality and
empowering women and girls. As the World Bank’s Chief Economist Justin Yifu Lin
put it in 2012, “Blocking women and girls from getting the skills to succeed in a
globalized world is not only wrong but economically harmful. Sharing the fruits of
growth equally between men and women is essential to meeting key development
goals.”
Nonetheless, development agencies often underreport or fail to address properly
many forms of gender discrimination. In Bangladesh, for example, where considerable
progress has been made (at the aggregate level) towards some MDGs,
Human Rights Watch has documented entrenched discrimination in the country’s
Muslim, Hindu, and Christian laws governing marriage, separation, and divorce.
These often trap women or girls in abusive marriages or drive them into poverty when marriages fall apart, contributing to homelessness, reduced incomes,
hunger, and ill-health.
Our 2012 report “Will I Get My Dues Before I Die?,” for example, documented the
disastrous consequences of this discrimination for Shefali S., a Muslim woman
who was abandoned by her abusive husband while pregnant and, according to
the country’s laws, not entitled to maintenance from 90 days after notice of
divorce. Without income, she was plunged into poverty and dependence, and was
forced to live with her in-laws who beat her.
Many of the 1 billion people with disabilities worldwide—80 percent live in the
developing world—also experience unequal development. Human Rights Watch’s
research on education in Nepal and China has documented widespread discrimination
against children with disabilities, who are much less likely to be in school
than other children. This is despite the fact that both countries are state parties
to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), which affirms the right to
education, and to the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
(CRPD).
Our 2011 report, Futures Stolen, documented how in one school in the far west of
Nepal, a 16-year-old boy had to crawl to his classroom due to lack of ramps,
and—unable to use the toilet by himself, and unaided by teachers—was forced to
wait until he got home, or have another child run home to fetch his mother to
assist him. Other children, afraid to sit near him, left him isolated in a corner.
These patterns of discrimination are replicated across the world and explain why
people with disabilities are disproportionately represented among the world’s
poor people. And yet, the MDGs make no reference whatsoever to disability.
In our 2008 report A Question of Life or Death, we similarly documented barriers
to treatment for women and children in Kenya living with HIV, violating their right
to health. Mothers and children suffered discrimination, abuse, and abandonment
by husbands and relatives, and many lived in precarious conditions after
being kicked out of their homes. In addition, HIV policies prioritized HIV care for
adults, and HIV care for children was not widely available. Many children died as
a result.
Ethnic and religious minorities also often experience serious discrimination,
sometimes rooted in basic prejudice towards them on the part of other groups; at other times linked to hostility towards the political or separatist agendas of particular
ethnic groups. This discrimination can worsen levels of poverty and prevent
these groups from benefiting from development opportunities. The Londonbased
Overseas Development Institute (ODI) suggested in a recent report that
two-thirds of the world’s poorest people live in households headed by a member
of an ethnic minority, with these families more likely to be sick, illiterate, and
malnourished.
Abusive Development
The neglect of human rights in many development strategies and programs, as
well as in the MDGs, has another serious, adverse consequence. Incongruous as
it may sound—especially to those who view development as a uniformly benign
process—large numbers of poor, vulnerable, and marginalized people around the
world are harmed by policies carried out in the name of development. These abusive
patterns occur because basic rights—including the right to consultation, participation,
fair treatment, to join with others in a trade union, and to just and
accessible legal processes—are missing.
In China, for example, the government maintains that its development progress is
extraordinarily successful. Income poverty has indeed fallen very rapidly in recent
years, with the UN estimating a decline in extreme poverty from 60 to 12 percent
from 1990 to 2010. But the record is decidedly less impressive if development is
defined, as it should be, to include freedom from fear, violence, ill-health, lifethreatening
environmental pollution, and abusive employment practices, as well
as the opportunity to be protected from abuse, or seek remedy for abuse, through
a fair and accessible justice system.
In our 2011 report, My Children Have Been Poisoned, Human Rights Watch documented
the devastating effects of lead poisoning on children who could no longer
talk or walk, had stopped eating, or were constantly sick. This poisoning epidemic
in four provinces—Shaanxi, Henan, Hunan, and Yunnan—is rooted in tension
between the Chinese government’s goals for economic growth and its stated commitments
and international obligations to protect its citizens’ health and wellbeing.
Without institutions to protect their rights and hold local officials accountable
for abuses, hundreds of thousands of Chinese children have had their right
to health violated and have suffered appallingly, including from reading and learning disabilities, behavioural problems, comas, and convulsions. Some have
even died.
Aspects of Ethiopia’s development model have similar problems. The country has
made commendable progress in relation to the MDGs on health and education,
but other elements of its development strategy have led to serious rights abuses.
Our 2012 report “Waiting Here for Death,” documented rights violations linked to
the “villagization” resettlement program in Gambella region. Ethiopia’s government
justifies the program in development terms, and says it is voluntary. Some
1.5 million people in five regions are being relocated to new villages with the stated
aim of giving them better infrastructure and services. But our research into the
first year of the program in one of those regions found people were forced to
move against their will and that government security forces beat and abused
some who objected. Moreover, new villages often lacked promised services and
adequate land for farming needs, resulting in hunger, and even starvation.
Our 2012 report What Will Happen if Hunger Comes? also documented that the
Ethiopian government is forcibly displacing indigenous peoples from southern
Ethiopia’s Lower Omo Valley to make way for large-scale sugar plantations. The
cost of this development to indigenous groups is massive: their farms are being
cleared, prime grazing land is being lost, and livelihoods are being decimated.
While failing to meaningfully consult, obtain their free, prior, and informed consent,
compensate, or discuss with these affected communities, and recognize
their rights to land, the Ethiopian government has used harassment, violence,
and arbitrary arrests to impose its development plans.
Workers are particularly vulnerable to abusive development. They include the
more than 50 million domestic workers worldwide, most of them women and girls,
who are employed as cooks, cleaners, and nannies. In many countries, such
workers lack basic legal rights and protection. Yet their work provides essential
services to households and enables the economic activity of others. Human
Rights Watch’s research over 10 years, in countries as diverse as Indonesia, Saudi
Arabia, Morocco, Guinea, and El Salvador, has exposed many examples of abuse,
including employers insisting on extremely long working hours; withholding or
providing low wages; confiscating passports; and subjecting workers to beatings,
verbal abuse, and sexual violence. 
Similarly, millions of migrant workers in more visible sectors of the economy, like
construction, suffer abuses. Ironically, these are often most egregious in the context
of hugely expensive and high-profile construction projects intended to showcase
economic achievements and encourage investment and tourism. In our 2012
report, Building a Better World Cup, Human Rights Watch documented pervasive
abuses against migrants as they build sleek hotels, state-of-the-art infrastructure,
and other glossy construction projects in Qatar linked to the 2022 World Cup.
Abuses include arbitrary wage deductions, lack of access to medical care, and
dangerous working conditions. A recent investigation by the UK’s Guardian newspaper
found that 44 Nepalese workers died from work-related accidents in Qatar
between June and August 2013, more than half of them from heart attacks, heart
failure, or workplace accidents.
Human Rights Watch has also exposed the terrible abuses and right to health violations—
including fevers, nausea, and skin conditions that leave fingers corroded
to stumps, and flesh prematurely aged, discolored, and itchy—that many thousands
of people suffer while working in tanneries in and around Hazaribagh, a
neighbourhood of Bangladesh’s capital, Dhaka. Our 2012 report, Toxic Tanneries,
shows that these abuses are occurring in what is the backbone of the country’s
lucrative leather industry. The tanneries employ some 15,000 people—some as
young as seven-years-old—and export millions of dollars’ worth of leather goods
to around 70 countries worldwide. Our 2013 report on Tanzania Toxic Toil documented
similar abuses in Tanzania, especially affecting young children working in
small-scale gold mines. Many are exposed to toxic mercury and vulnerable to
mercury poisoning.
Rights-Respecting Development
Making rights integral to a post-2015 global development framework would have
a number of clear benefits, not least by:
• Ensuring focus on the poorest and most marginalized communities. The
MDGs include global targets for percentage reductions of child and maternal
mortality and hunger. By contrast, a rights approach to development would
need to set universal goals for providing effective and accessible healthcare
and nutrition for all women and children, including the poorest and most
disadvantaged, alongside specific targets for reducing disparities between social groups and improving the conditions of the worst off. Progress would
be greatly aided and incentivised by disaggregating national and international
data, making it possible to measure policy impact on different social,
income, and age groups.
• Prompting action to address root causes of poverty—such as inequality, discrimination,
and exclusion—by requiring legal and policy reforms and challenging
patterns of abuse, as well as harmful cultural practices like child
marriage. Governments and donors should be obliged in a new development
framework to bring their policies and practices into line with international
standards on non-discrimination and equality. Concerted action is also
needed to tackle formal, informal, and cultural barriers that prevent women,
ethnic minorities, people with disabilities, and indigenous peoples in particular
from owning and having equal access to land, property, assets, and
credit; inheriting and transferring property; and accessing education and
health services.
• Making people agents and not subjects of development by emphasising
empowerment, participation, transparency, the rule of law, and access to
justice. A rights approach requires that poor people are fully consulted
about development projects or programs that affect them. Indigenous peoples,
for example, have the right to give or withhold consent to development
projects on their traditional lands before they are approved and after receiving
all relevant information. Such safeguards would help prevent the kind of
abusive, environmentally harmful patterns of development already cited. But
abusive development also occurs in places like China because basic civil
and political freedoms are not respected more generally and because the
legal system is politicized and discriminatory. Commitments to civil and
political rights should be integral to the post-2015 development agenda,
including to freedom of speech, assembly, and association, the ability of
people to participate in free elections, and access to fair and effective justice
systems. Transparency and free flow of information are critical too, creating
space for informed debate about use of the national budget, exposing
mistakes and environmental harm, and allowing communities to mobilize for
social change and redress for abuse and malpractice.
• Tackling corruption. Each year, senior government officials or powerful private
individuals steal hundreds of millions of dollars that were intended to
benefit the poor through development programs in health, education, nutrition,
or water. In our 2013 report on Uganda, Letting the Big Fish Swim,
Human Rights Watch documented a lack of political will to address corruption
and the harmful consequences of this. Ugandan anti-corruption institutions
have been crippled by political interference, as well as harassment
and threats to prosecutors, investigators, and witnesses. Most recently,
US$12.7 million in donor funds was discovered to have been embezzled
from Uganda’s Office of the Prime Minister. This money had been earmarked
to help rebuild northern Uganda, ravaged by a 20-year war, and to help
development in Karamoja, Uganda’s poorest region. Rights-respecting development
would help to tackle corruption of this kind by emphasizing budget
transparency, freedom of information, and free media; strengthening efforts
to prosecute those responsible for corrupt practices, including the highest
ranking members of the government; and supporting anticorruption civil
society organizations.
• Bringing rights standards into the work of business and international institutions.
In the debate about the post-2015 development agenda, there has
been little discussion about the responsibilities of either the private sector
or international financial institutions to protect, respect, and fulfil rights.
Over the years, Human Rights Watch has documented many cases of corporate
complicity with human rights violations, including a Canadian mining
company using forced labor, via a local contractor, in Eritrea; out-of-control
mining operations fuelling corruption and abuse in India; and sexual violence
by private security guards employed by a Canadian company in Papua
New Guinea. Governments should introduce mandatory requirements for
corporations to report publicly on human rights, and the social and environmental
impact of their work. Similarly, international financial institutions
such as the World Bank, which influence development in many countries by
providing millions of dollars-worth of development assistance and loans,
should have to respect human rights in all their work and be held accountable
if they fail to do so, as set out in our 2013 report, Abuse Free
Development.
• Strengthening accountability. Accountability is fundamental to rightsrespecting
development: rights are of limited value if no one is charged with
guaranteeing them or if citizens whose rights are denied have no opportunity
to seek redress or remedy. The post-2015 development agenda should
therefore require all those involved in development—governments and international
bilateral donors, international financial institutions, the business
sector, private foundations, and NGOs—to be more accountable and transparent
about implementing their commitments and the impact their policies
have on the rights of the poor, including through feedback and complaints
mechanisms and regular reporting at the local, national, and global level.
• Affirming the universality of the global development agenda. Low income is
not an excuse for governments of poor countries to abuse their citizens’
rights, and many developing country governments have scope to make different
choices about how they allocate national resources. Still, low income
and limited capacity can make it harder for well-intentioned governments to
meet their rights obligations. A post-2015 development agenda should
therefore place two important obligations on the world’s wealthier governments:
— To do no harm, by ensuring that existing policies and practices do not
directly or indirectly contribute to human rights violations, unequal
development, or abusive development elsewhere, through policies on
trade, tax, investment, intellectual property, arms sales, and transfers
of surveillance technology. These governments have an obligation to
respect and protect human rights and to remedy any violations.
— To proactively help to advance rights-respecting development in other
countries, including through support for inclusive development in
areas like health, education, nutrition, and sanitation, as well as support
for the rule of law, and police, justice, and security sector reform.
Bringing Rights to the Fore
How human rights issues will be dealt with in any new post-2015 development
agreement remains unclear. Support for rights emerged as a priority among civil
society participants in the UN-sponsored global consultations on post-2015, and
there were strong references to human rights in the reports of the High Level Panel of Eminent Persons on the post-2015 Development Agenda and the UN secretary
general’s report on the same topic in June 2013.
But many governments remain hostile. With the process now at the stage of intergovernmental
negotiations, we can anticipate serious efforts to marginalize the
role of rights or chip away at progress that has been made. Some will no doubt
continue to invoke the tired old argument that poor people care mainly about
material improvements and that wider human rights entitlements, like freedom of
speech and association or access to justice, are not necessary to secure these.
But this position has been thoroughly discredited, not least by ordinary peoples’
own actions and expressed preferences. Across the globe, people are striving not
only for economic improvement, but also for an end to indignity and injustice, for
their voices to be heard, and for the opportunity to shape their future.
As UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon stated in July 2013, “Upholding human
rights and freeing people from fear and want are inseparable.” A post-2015 development
agenda that embraces this essential truth will help promote development
that is more inclusive and just, and advances basic rights and freedoms for
allSome of the most powerful and sophisticated actors on the world stage are
companies, not governments. In 2011 alone, oil and gas behemoth ExxonMobil
generated revenues of US$467 billion—the size of Norway’s entire economy.
Walmart, the world’s third-largest employer with more than 2 million workers, has
a workforce that trails only the militaries of the United States and China in size.
David Mepham is UK director at Human Rights Watch.
The Right Whose Time Has Come (Again)
Privacy in the Age of Surveillance
By Dinah PoKempner
Technology has invaded the sacred precincts of private life, and unwarranted
exposure has imperiled our security, dignity, and most basic values. The law must
rise to the occasion and protect our rights.
Does this sound familiar?
So argued Samuel Warren and Louis Brandeis in their 1890 Harvard Law Review
article announcing “The Right to Privacy.” We are again at such a juncture. The
technological developments they saw as menacing—photography and the rise of
the mass circulation press—appear rather quaint to us now. But the harms to
emotional, psychological, and even physical security from unwanted exposure
seem just as vivid in our digital age.
Our renewed sense of vulnerability comes as almost all aspects of daily social life
migrate online. At the same time, corporations and governments have acquired
frightening abilities to amass and search these endless digital records, giving
them the power to “know” us in extraordinary detail.
In a world where we share our lives on social media and trade immense amounts
of personal information for the ease and convenience of online living, some have
questioned whether privacy is a relevant concept. It is not just relevant, but crucial.
Indeed, privacy is a gateway right that affects our ability to exercise almost every
other right, not least our freedom to speak and associate with those we choose,
make political choices, practice our religious beliefs, seek medical help, access
education, figure out whom we love, and create our family life. It is nothing less
than the shelter in which we work out what we think and who we are; a fulcrum of
our autonomy as individuals.
The importance of privacy, a right we often take for granted, was thrown into
sharp relief in 2013 by the steady stream of revelations from United States government
files released by former National Security Agency (NSA) contractor Edward Snowden, and published in the Guardian and other major newspapers
around the world. These revelations, supported by highly classified documents,
showed the US, the UK, and other governments engaged in global indiscriminate
data interception, largely unchecked by any meaningful legal constraint or oversight,
without regard for the rights of millions of people who were not suspected
of wrongdoing.
The promise of the digital age is the effortless, borderless ability to share information.
That is its threat as well. As the world’s information moves into cyberspace,
surveillance capabilities have grown commensurately. The US now leads
in ability for global data capture, but other nations and actors are likely to catch
up, and some already insist that more data be kept within their reach. In the end,
there will be no safe haven if privacy is seen as a strictly domestic issue, subject
to many carve-outs and lax or non-existent oversight.
Human Rights Watch weighed in repeatedly throughout 2013 on the human rights
implications of Snowden’s revelations of mass surveillance, and the need to protect
whistleblowers. This essay looks at how the law of privacy developed, and
where it needs to reach today so that privacy is globally respected by all governments,
for all people. Global mass surveillance poses a threat to human rights
and democracy, and once again, the law must rise to the challenge.
A Concept Develops: The “Right to be Let Alone”
Many countries have long recognized the values that underlie the legal right to
privacy—honor, reputation, and the sanctity of home and family life. But it was in
the United States that private rights of action to defend privacy crystallized in the
wake of Warren and Brandeis’ call.
Judge Cooley in 1882 described privacy as “the right to be let alone.” Tort law
over the next century allowed people—many of them celebrities or people trying
to avoid celebrity—to obtain remedies against unwanted public disclosure or nonconsensual
exploitation of private information. The developing legal doctrine,
aimed at shielding reputation and honor, quickly conflicted with press freedom
and the public’s right to information—most notably when newspapers sought to
cover issues of general public interest that might include embarrassing information
about public figures.
The law as it developed in the US was deferential to freedom of speech concerns,
in practice allowing media-wide latitude; in Europe, there was greater emphasis
on protecting reputational rights and shielding personal information.
Privacy as a limit on government intrusion gained ground in the wake of World
War II and the rise of modern surveillance states. The Third Reich had relied heavily
on census data to persecute, while many Communist states developed elaborate
surveillance and data collection systems to monitor their populations and
suppress dissent—restrictions that continue today in China, Vietnam, North
Korea, Turkmenistan, and Cuba.
After World War II, the right to privacy made its way into many international
human rights instruments and national constitutions, often phrased as freedom
from interference with “privacy, family, home or correspondence,” and the more
traditional freedom from attacks on “honour and reputation.”
Privacy has never been considered an absolute right. In international law it can
be derogated, or restricted, when a grave public emergency threatens the nation’s
life. Even then, the emergency must be officially proclaimed, and restrictions not
greater than the threat requires, nondiscriminatory, and consistent with international
law, including respect for human rights.
If there is no such emergency, intrusions on privacy, family, home, and correspondence
may not be arbitrary and must be embodied in laws that create clear
expectations as to how and when they will likely be applied. These laws must aim
to protect a legitimate interest in a democratic society, such as public safety or
national security, be necessary and proportional to that end, and subject to judicial
safeguards and remedies. These basic principles are common to most modern
judicial consideration of various aspects of privacy.
Mind the Gap: New Technology and “Reasonable”
Expectations
An important aspect of the law of privacy developed from the regulation of government
search and seizure, generally in the context of criminal investigation. As
the law developed, judicially authorized warrants for official searches became a
common requirement, and some legal systems treated unauthorized searches as a crime. The notion of “correspondence” broadened to include new technologies,
such as telephones, with laws regulating when authorities could use wiretaps.
Yet protecting privacy has often lagged behind technological change. In the 1928
Olmstead case, the Supreme Court held that an unauthorized wiretap introduced
as evidence in a criminal trial did not violate the constitutional right of the people
“to be secure in their persons, houses, papers and effects.” In 1967, the court
reversed course, determining a person has “reasonable expectation of privacy”
when talking in a public phone booth. This bit of common sense developed into a
doctrine for when to limit government power to conduct warrantless searches.
While the home has generally remained inviolable in US law, what is outside the
home or in public view (trash at the curb, a car backseat) is not.
But even judicial doctrine as to when expectation of privacy is “reasonable” has
often not kept pace with rapid technological shifts or even popular expectations.
Brandeis, later a Supreme Court justice, foresaw this problem in his famous
Olmstead dissent when he predicted: “Ways may someday be developed by
which the Government, without removing papers from secret drawers, can reproduce
them in court, and by which it will be enabled to expose to a jury the most
intimate occurrences of the home.” He added: “Can it be that the Constitution
affords no protection against such invasions of individual security?”
Brandeis’ concern is fully justified in our age of mass data interception. Wiretaps
eventually needed warrants, but surveillance metastasized in the 21st century
under new laws that set lax standards for many types of digital information.
Privacy: Secrecy or Self-Determination?
The “reasonable expectation” doctrine led US law to conclude that many types of
business records were not protected from search without warrant, based on the
rationale that an individual shared the information willingly with a third party and
could not object if it became known.
But the objection has often been raised that sharing some personal information
with a corporation does not mean there is an expectation it will be divulged to the
government; on the contrary, we usually expect some discretion and confidentiality
in our business transactions. Nor is it entirely accurate to say that sharing personal information via business records is entirely “voluntary,” given how many
necessary transactions of modern life require considerable disclosure.
US law has grown to equate “privacy” of communications with “secrecy,” an
approach “ill-suited to the digital age,” in the recent words of Justice Sonia
Sotomayor. The law in Europe took a different path. Germany, which recognizes a
constitutional right of “personality,” or the protection of one’s integrity and
capacity for self-development, led the way. In 1983, its Constitutional Court
annulled the national census law, announcing “informational self-determination”
as a fundamental democratic right.
Key to the European approach was the belief that individuals have a right to
access and correct their data held by various institutions, and ultimately have a
right to determine its use and disposal. An interlocking system of regional guidelines
and standards emerged, albeit subject to national variation in legislation
and application.19 In contrast, US data privacy law is a welter of difficult-to-navigate
state laws or laws governing particular industry sectors that are often
focused on data breach and fraud rather than on informational self-determination.
Still, the European approach is not beyond criticism: it has required businesses
to retain data for significant periods beyond their own needs so the government
may have access, and makes oversight of government access subject to varying
national standards. As data accumulation has moved from centralized storage to
global “cloud” computing that involves more jurisdictions, actors, and laws,
maintaining control over one’s personal data has become more complicated as
well.
Anonymity as the Ultimate Data Protection
One of the surest ways to control personal data—withholding one’s real identity
when communicating—found acceptance more readily in the US than elsewhere,
not least because many of the nation’s founders published revolutionary manifestos
under pseudonyms.
While anonymity has never been considered an absolute or stand-alone right, the
US Supreme Court has long recognized it to be part of speech that is entitled to a
high level of protection, in part, as Justice Stevens wrote in 1995, because it can encourage speech. “Anonymity,” he asserted, “…provides a way for a writer who
may be personally unpopular to ensure that readers will not prejudge her message
simply because they do not like its proponent.”
Anonymity is increasingly precious—and imperilled—amid the growing quantity of
information online and advances in aggregating and searching databases, and is
critical for people to be able to share ideas publicly without fear of retaliation or
persecution.
In April 2013, the UN special rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the
right to freedom of opinion, Frank LaRue, wrote of the “chilling effect” that restrictions
on anonymity had on the free expression of information and ideas. He pointed
out that when corporate actors exploit real name registration requirements to
amass and mine personal data, they assume a serious responsibility to protect
the privacy and security of such information.
Physical Privacy: Autonomy, Security, and Identity
As the law of search and seizure shows, understanding privacy in the physical
world can influence its application to the virtual world. The strand of law protecting
a person’s intimate bodily attributes and decisions—including whether to
choose marriage, abortion, start a family, or accept medical treatment—describes
privacy as a way to assert one’s physical autonomy and preferred identity, not as
isolation or secrecy. As such, it holds relevance for protecting autonomy and
identity in cyberspace as well.
A key decision related to physical privacy is the 1994 case of Nicholas Toonen v.
Australia. The Human Rights Committee, the treaty body that interprets the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), repudiated
Tasmania’s criminal law of sodomy declaring “it is undisputed that adult consensual
sexual activity in private is covered by the concept of ‘privacy.’” Toonen
rejected the rationale that the law was to prevent the spread of HIV/AIDS, and
argued it was not a reasonable or proportionate means to that end, and more
likely to drive a vulnerable population underground.
In Goodwin v. U.K., the European Court of Human Rights in 2002 similarly emphasized
the many adversities post-operative transsexuals suffer when they cannot
change the sex on their birth certificate, including denying their right to marry, employment discrimination, and the denial of social benefits. The court focused
on privacy in the sense of “the right to establish details of their identity as individual
human beings” and concluded that transsexuals were entitled to “personal
development and physical and moral security in the full sense enjoyed by others
in society.”
The logic of Toonen and Goodwin informs two recent foci of Human Rights Watch’s
privacy-related work: our call for decriminalizing simple drug use and possession
(see the essay The Human Rights Case for Drug Reform in this volume), and our
push for decriminalizing voluntary sex work by adults.
Both drug use and even voluntary sex work can pose serious risks to health and
safety (including heightened risk for HIV/AIDS), but driving participants into the
shadows is usually highly counterproductive to efforts to treat, mitigate, or prevent
harm. Criminalization in both cases can cause or exacerbate a host of ancillary
human rights violations, including exposure to violence from private actors,
police abuse, discriminatory law enforcement, and vulnerability to blackmail,
control, and abuse by criminals. These severe and common consequences, and
the strong personal interest that people have in making decisions about their
own bodies, mean it is unreasonable and disproportionate for the state to use
criminal punishment to discourage either practice.
These approaches to physical self-determination are directly relevant to online
privacy too. The physical and the virtual world are of course connected; our
offline choices about friends, work, sexual identity, and religious or political
beliefs are reflected in our online data and communications. Unwanted exposure
of our private information can undermine the physical and moral security that the
Goodwin decision emphasized is a key aim of privacy, and prevents us from
developing a personal identity sheltered from coercion—considerations that
underlie the creation of data privacy laws in the first place.
Surveillance’s “Golden Age”
Two important developments have transformed the debate on privacy and ushered
in what some have termed a “golden age of surveillance.”
The first was the shift of almost every aspect of social, economic, and political
relations online, so that disruption to, or surveillance of, online activity can potentially harm or be used to harm almost every human right—whether civil,
political, economic, social, or cultural.
The second development is the enormous advance in our ability to store, search,
collate and analyze data with minimal effort and cost. This has serious implications
for collecting and retaining data, providing enormous incentive to amass
information at a time when much of our lives is exposed through online data.
Moreover, governments like that of the US have devoted considerable resources
to ensuring our data is always accessible, including seeking backdoors into technology
and collection points, and cracking strong encryption.
Concerns about the privacy of online communications and digital information
were strong even before Edward Snowden began disclosing in June 2013 the massive
and global extent of surveillance by the US National Security Agency. But
since then, intense debate has raged as to whether mass surveillance is ever justified,
and whether privacy can actually be effectively protected against governments
and corporations bent on espionage.
Once again, we find that law and the courts have not kept pace.
Legal Loopholes for Surveillance
Though a crime in most legal systems, espionage is not banned in international
law, and most governments practice it to some degree. But as the birthplace of
the Internet, home to major related industries, and with most global online communications
running through its territory or facilities, the US is uniquely placed to
conduct global surveillance. Consequently, it is worth examining the loopholes it
has knit into its legal doctrines that give it a relatively free hand in capturing bulk
data.
The first big loophole is that the US does not extend Constitutional rights to foreigners
abroad, whether protection from “unreasonable” search, privacy, or freedom
of speech (including anonymous speech). Nor does the US recognize extraterritorial
application of its obligations under the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights. Instead, US law authorizes warrantless surveillance of foreign
intelligence so long as the secret Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court
(FISC) approves measures to “target” collection of “foreign intelligence” information
and “minimize” the incidental collection of the communications of US citizens or residents. While foreigners have no protection against data collection,
there are many exceptions for US persons that allow the government to retain
their data as well—including encrypted communications and attorney-client communications.
Another big loophole is that the US considers “metadata,” or the information
about each message—such as date, time, location, sender, recipient—to be business
records that are disclosed to third parties, and so entitled to a far lower
standard of protection than substantive conversation, under both constitutional
doctrine and section 215 of the PATRIOT Act. This type of data can provide an
incredibly detailed portrait of anyone’s movements, interlocutors, transactions,
and concerns over time.
These two exceptions give enormous scope for bulk surveillance, but the government
has also applied elastic interpretations to the law’s already generous terms.
Orders for “targeting” foreign intelligence do not need to specify particular investigations
or persons, just general objectives; and such “targeted” surveillance
means having just “51% confidence”—a hair better than a coin toss—that the
people whose data is collected are foreigners abroad. The FISC determined that
all metadata records from major US telephone companies such as Verizon could
be “relevant” to intelligence or espionage investigations, an interpretation that
begs the meaning of “relevant.”
Another major loophole to both international and domestic legal obligations is
intelligence sharing arrangements that let states avoid particular legal strictures
on their own data collection activities. This appears to have been the case with
US cooperation with the UK.
The present-day data collection practices of European states, including those collaborating
with the NSA, have yet to be tested under the European Convention on
Human Rights, but the case of Klass v. Germany suggests more demanding scrutiny
could eventuate. There, the European Court of Human Rights emphasized that
for surveillance to respect the right to privacy, there must be “adequate and effective
guarantees against abuse” and that in view of the danger secret surveillance
poses to democracy, states may not, “in the name of the struggle against espionage
and terrorism, adopt whatever measures they deem appropriate.”
The US Congress is percolating with legislative proposals to reform the legal
structure that enables mass surveillance, though none so far would protect the
privacy rights of foreign persons located outside US territory. But a world of globalized
communications and surveillance needs universal standards that are not
too readily evaded or bent. Unless the development of privacy as a legal right
catches up to fill these gaps, the right may well become obsolete.
Global Communications, Global Obligations
What should be done?
Some argue we must simply live with the reality of pervasive online surveillance,
and that public expectation of privacy has eroded. But this is neither accurate nor
dispositive. Our understanding of privacy has in fact grown far beyond “a right to
be left alone” into a right of personal self-determination, embracing the right to
choose whom we share our personal details with and what identity we project to
various communities. When applied to the digital world, privacy gives us some
boundaries against unwanted monitors, and with it the essential freedom for personal
development and independent thought.
While global surveillance will require a complex and global response, the US
bears a particular burden, as a leader in both cyber-technology and mass surveillance,
to rein in the serious overreach Edward Snowden brought to light. Among
the steps Human Rights Watch has emphasized are requiring judicial warrant protection
for metadata, recognizing that privacy is breached when data is collected
(and not just when viewed or used), revamping the FISA court to make it a more
adversarial and transparent body to check the NSA, and protecting whistleblowers
who reveal rights-violating national security practices.
We must also recognize that the duty to protect rights in a world of globalized
communication cannot stop at territorial borders. International law of the twentieth
century assumed that a state’s primary obligation is to ensure rights to all
people in its territory or under its jurisdiction or effective control. This makes
sense, as generally one state cannot secure rights for people abroad without violating
another country’s sovereignty. But there are circumstances when a government
must carry its human rights obligations beyond its national borders—such as when its police or military abroad capture an individual. What about when it
captures the communications of millions of people at home and abroad?
Arguably, collecting and banking mass personal data over time confers such
power to track, analyze, and expose people’s lives that it should be thought of as
a form of “effective control.” Some of us may not care about who sees our
Facebook postings, but the security and human dignity of many people all over
the world depends on the ability to limit who knows about their political preferences,
sexual orientation, religious affiliation, and more.
Intentionally damaging acts, such as blackmailing, drone targeting, and coercion
depend on discovering personal details; even when information is carelessly handled
or misconstrued, terrible harms may result. A state that, without reasonable
cause, appropriates in bulk the communications data of another state’s inhabitants
is damaging their security, autonomy, and exercise of their rights. At minimum,
governments should apply the same legal protections to all persons whose
privacy they breach as they do to their own citizens.
The several bills before the US Congress seek to address some of the abuses
involved in NSA bulk surveillance, though none compel the US to protect the privacy
of foreigners abroad. European governments, quick to condemn NSA excesses,
have failed so far to carry out effective reviews of their own policies of mass
surveillance at home or abroad, including the extent to which they have collaborated
in, or benefitted from, US data collection.
It will take time to move the debate towards recognizing a global duty for states
with extraterritorial surveillance capability to respect the privacy of all within their
reach, but several encouraging signs suggest this will happen. In 2009, for example,
Special Rapporteur on Human Rights and Counter-Terrorism Martin Scheinin
called for developing soft law on data privacy and surveillance. In 2013, Special
Rapporteur LaRue endorsed the need for the Human Rights Committee to update
its General Comment on the right to privacy.
Two sets of principles that civil society expert groups recently issued may provide
a basis for increasing consensus around standards: the Global Principles on
National Security and the Right to Information (“The Tshwane Principles”),
endorsed by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe; and the
International Principles on the Application of Human Rights to Communications Surveillance. These largely collect and restate general principles related to the
right to privacy, transparency, and regulating surveillance in international law.
Most recently, Brazil and Germany in November 2013 introduced a UN General
Assembly resolution that aims to create consensus against privacy abuses in digital
surveillance both at home and abroad. The resolution calls for continuing
reporting on mass surveillance and the right to privacy, including the implications
of extraterritorial surveillance. Mirroring these efforts to articulate new standards
are demands from civil society actors to reform government surveillance practices,
ranging from a statement from major internet companies to a petition
addressed to world leaders by 562 well-known authors in 80 countries. These
developments can strengthen international legal consensus and tip the balance
of power back to individuals.
The year 2013 may well come to be viewed as a watershed when people around
the world stood up to reassert their right to privacy. But this can only happen if
these debates produce global standards and enforceable domestic laws with
teeth. We cannot wait for individuals like Edward Snowden to blow the whistle,
but must demand thorough investigation into the full extent of government and
corporate data collection and analysis. States should commit to transparent and
public review of their practices and laws in order to maximize—not trade off—privacy,
security, and technical innovation that can enhance and further our lives
and rights as human beings.
The right to privacy is not just about leaving people alone; it is about empowering
them to connect, speak, think, and live on their own terms, without arbitrary state
interference. The technological revolution is upon us, and we must do our best to
help the law catch up—again.
Dinah PoKempner is general counsel at Human Rights Watch.
CHILD MARRIAGE
SOUTH SUDAN
BY BRENT STIRTON/REPORTAGE BY GETTY IMAGES FOR HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
Helen, 16, stands beside her husband,
Jade, 50, outside their home in a
village near Juba, South Sudan. Helen
was married at 15 and said she would
have chosen school over marriage, but
her family was could not afford school
fees. She was in labor for five days
before having a cesarean section. Her
son is now 8 months old.
Kansuk, Central Equatoria State,
February 2013
A young woman recovers after giving birth
to twins in Bor Hospital in Jonglei State.
She was married at the age of 12 and had
her first child at the age of 15, enduring a
five-day labor. She is now 20 and these are
her 4th and 5th children.
Bor, Jonglei State, February 2013
Akuot’s father died when she was a young child. Her uncle
tried to force her into marriage, even though she and her
mother protested. Now 16, Akuot resisted the marriage and
ran away, determined to continue her education. Her uncle
and male cousins caught her, dragged her back to their
village, and beat her for three days while keeping her locked
inside without food or water.
Bor, Jonglei State, February 2013
A pregnant student stands in a classroom at
the Juba Day Secondary School. The school
administration does not permit students
who become pregnant to remain in regular
classes, but the teachers union offers
evening sessions for pregnant girls and
young mothers to continue their education.
Juba, Central Equatoria State, February 2013.
Cattle rest in the countryside near the town
of Bor. In pastoralist communities, dowry is
largely paid in cattle, while agriculturalist
communities combine money with cattle or
other livestock. Customary practices attach
great social and economic importance to
dowry payment, and a husband’s
consequent rights over his wife.
Bor, Jonglei State, February 2013
(opposite page, above) Migrant workers from
Tajikistan on a construction site in Krasnaya
Polyana, Sochi. Thousands of workers from
outside Russia and from other parts of Russia
have come have come to Sochi to work in
construction that is underway ahead of the 2014
Winter Olympic and Paralympic Games.
(opposite page, below) Alexander Mzokov, 59,
and his wife, Natalia, who lived with their sons
Yuri and Evgenii and eight of their relatives in a
three-story home in Sochi, learned in April 2012
that the authorities would demolish their home of
13 years to make way for a road providing
infrastructure for the 2014 Winter Olympic and
Paralympic Games in Sochi. Although the
Mzokovs had full legal title to the house and the
land on which it stood, the authorities sued them
for constructing an “illegal structure,” and on
appeal won a court order to demolish the house
without providing them fair compensation. The
house was demolished on October 4, 2012.
(above) Members of the Sochi branch of the
Russian Geographical Society conducting field
research in the Caucasus Mountains in Sochi.
The Society's Sochi branch has frequently
publicized information about the potential
environmental impacts of Olympic construction.
Numerous activists and journalists in Sochi have
faced harassment, pressure, and threats after
criticizing Olympics-related human rights abuses
and other concerns.
Residents of Kudepsta, Sochi, protest the
proposed construction in their mountain
village of what was projected to be the
world’s largest natural gas power station.
The plant was to be part of infrastructure
development in Sochi ahead of the 2014
Winter Olympic and Paralympic Games.
Before environmental review and other
legally required procedures were
completed, workers built a bridge, felled
trees, and erected a large fence at the
power plant site. Residents painted “No to
the Kudepsta power station!” on the bridge.
Residents fear pollution, property
devaluation, and devastation of the
landscape and the town’s appeal as a
tourist destination.
UNFOLDING TRAGEDY
THE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
BY MARCUS BLEASDALE/VII FOR HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
FOMAC peacekeepers confiscate
machetes from people who fled into the
FOMAC compound to escape fighting
between anti-balaka militias and former
Seleka forces.
Displaced people find shelter in a disused
factory at the Christian mission in
Bossangoa. Tens of thousands of people
have been displaced by the fighting between
Seleka and anti-balaka forces.
(above) Captain Wilson, from the Republic of Congo, stands in
the FOMAC peacekeeping compound. When heavy clashes
erupted in Bossangoa in December 2013, the captain rallied his
peacekeeping troops with remarkable speed, deploying them
around town to safeguard tens of thousands of displaced people
sheltering in the Catholic church and other sites.
(left) Residents of Bossangoa, Central African Republic,
lie on the ground of the compound of FOMAC, the regional
peacekeeping Multinational Force of Central Africa, on
December 5, 2013. The residents had fled from gunfire from
anti-balaka forces. FOMAC troops tried to protect people from
anti-balaka attacks in the town, which lies 300 kilometers
(190 miles) north of the capital, Bangui.
Anti-balaka fighters have recruited
and armed children in villages
surrounding Bossangoa.
Angola
José Eduardo Dos Santos, Angola’s president for the past 34 years, secured
another five-year term in the August 2012 elections. Although the polls consolidated
the control of the ruling Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola
(MPLA), the authorities intensified repressive measures to restrict freedom of
expression, association, and assembly in 2013.
The government has pursued numerous criminal defamation lawsuits against
outspoken journalists and activists, while continuing to use police abuse, arbitrary
arrests, and intimidation to prevent peaceful anti-government protests,
strikes, and other gatherings from taking place. The government also resumed
mass forced evictions of informal settlements in 2013 and launched a new initiative
to remove street traders in the capital, Luanda. Both measures affect
Angola’s poorest communities and have been conducted with brutality.
Freedom of Expression
Freedom of expression is severely restricted in Angola due to limited independent
media, self-censorship, and government repression. Only 3 percent of the
Angolan population has access to the Internet and social media, which are the
main channels for commenting on government policies.
The authorities use criminal defamation laws to silence and intimidate journalists
and bloggers. On July 5, bloggers José Gama and Lucas Pedro were charged
with “abuse of press freedom” and defamation for articles published on the
news website www.club-k.net, which is hosted outside of Angola. Brought by
Angola’s attorney general and the criminal investigation police director, the
lawsuits are based on articles published between January and May that
accused the attorney general of corruption and criminal investigation police
officers of torture.
Between March and July, Rafael Marques, an investigative journalist and human
rights defender who won the Transparency International Integrity Award in
2013, was charged with defamation in 11 criminal lawsuits. The plaintiffs are
high-ranking generals, their business associates, and three private companies
that operate in the diamond-rich Lunda Norte province. Marques accused the plaintiffs of involvement in torture, rape, and killings in a book he published in
Portugal in 2011. Angola’s Attorney General’s office shelved a complaint filed by
Marques against the generals and business associates in 2012, and has failed
to investigate the allegations. Marques has regularly experienced threats,
harassment, and pervasive surveillance, including apparently targeted hacker
attacks on his computer and blog.
On June 11, Domingos da Cruz, journalist of the private weekly Folha 8, was
charged with “instigation of collective disobedience” according to a 1978 law
on crimes against the security of the state. The law was revoked and replaced
by a new law in 2010. The charges were based on an opinion piece that da Cruz
published in 2009. A court acquitted him on September 9, arguing the law had
been revoked.
Right To Peaceful Assembly
Despite constitutional protection for freedom of assembly, since 2011 the
authorities have responded to peaceful anti-government protests organized by
youth groups and others in Luanda and elsewhere with excessive force, arbitrary
arrests, unfair trials, harassment, and intimidation of participants, journalists,
and observers. The state-owned media, controlled by the ruling party,
present the protests as a threat to peace. Protest organizers and participants
were also targeted by surveillance and harassment and occasionally by violent
attacks and abduction by security agents in 2013.
On December 22 in 2012, and March 30, May 27, and September 19 in 2013,
police used excessive force to disperse peaceful youth protests in Luanda, arbitrarily
detaining protesters and in several cases threatening journalists. Most
protesters were released the same day without charges. However, 22-year-old
Emiliano Catumbela, who was arrested on May 27, was charged with bodily
harm, and later charged with attempted assassination of a police commander.
He was denied access to his lawyers for several days and said he was beaten
and tortured in custody. On June 25, he was released without charges.
On September 12, police arrested 17-year-old Manuel Chivonde Nito Alves, a
youth activist and protest organizer, when he collected t-shirts produced for a
protest planned for September 19. He was charged with “outrage” against the
president based on the t-shirt slogan which called President Dos Santos a “disgusting dictator.” “Outrage” against the president is considered a crime against
the security of the state under Angolan law since 2010. He was conditionally
released on November 8 to await trial, after being jailed arbitrarily for almost
two months.
Three journalists—Rafael Marques, Alexandre Neto, and Coque Mukuta—were
arrested on September 20 and severely beaten and threatened in police custody
after they interviewed several just-released protesters on the street.
During those protests, youth groups demanded an official explanation on the
whereabouts of Isaías Cassule and António Alves Kamulingue. Unknown men
abducted Cassule and Kamulingue after they organized a protest of former
presidential guards on May 27, 2012. In March 2013, police arrested Alberto
Santos, who witnessed Cassule’s abduction. Santos claimed that police tried to
pressure him to incriminate opposition activists as responsible for the abductions.
He was released on October 1 without charges. On November 9, an
Angolan website published details of a leaked confidential report from the
Ministry of the Interior that revealed that Kamulingue and Cassule were abducted,
tortured, and killed by police and intelligence officials soon after their
abduction.
In April, the authorities banned a teacher’s union strike in Lubango, Huila
province. Union leaders faced anonymous threats and intimidation. On April
30, police detained two union leaders and charged them with disobedience and
defamation of the authorities. A court acquitted them for lack of evidence on
May 2.
Arbitrary Detentions in the Enclave of Cabinda
An intermittent separatist insurgency persists in the oil-rich enclave of Cabinda
despite a 2006 peace agreement. The government has used security as a pretext
to crack down on peaceful dissent. Security forces continue to arbitrarily
arrest supporters of the separatist guerilla movement Front for the Liberation of
the Enclave of Cabinda (FLEC) and use torture in military custody to force
detainees to confess or incriminate others. Such violations of due process
rights, as well as harassment of journalists who document such cases and
threats against defense lawyers, have undermined the credibility of trials for
alleged national security crimes in Cabinda.
Between August 10 and September 12 2013, military and intelligence officials
arrested, mistreated, in several cases tortured, and jailed at least 20 men in
Cabinda, including an adviser to the deputy governor of Cabinda. They were
charged with armed rebellion and remain in pretrial detention.
Nine men of Congolese origin and Angolan, Belgian and French nationalities,
alleged to be former members of the defunct Armed Forces of Zaire (FAZ) were
arrested on November 22, 2012, beaten and tortured by military and border
guards while in incommunicado detention. In May, they were charged with
armed rebellion against the government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, illegal entry and stay in Angola. As of November 2012, the men
remained in pretrial detention.
Since January 2013, Arão Tempo, a lawyer and local representative of the
Angolan Bar, has received repeated death threats from intelligence officials
warning him to stop defending the 20 men held in Cabinda and the 9 alleged
FAZ members.
Police Brutality during Removals of Street Traders
In October 2012, the governor of Luanda ordered urgent measures to reduce
street trade in the capital. Since then, the authorities have scaled up efforts to
remove street vendors from the streets of Luanda.
During these operations, police and government inspectors have routinely mistreated
street vendors, including pregnant women and women with children, by
seizing their goods, extorting bribes, threatened them with imprisonment, and
in some cases arresting them. The authorities have also intimidated, harassed,
and arbitrarily arrested journalists, activists, and witnesses who seek to document
the brutality of the operations.
Forced Evictions
The majority of Angola’s urban population lives in informal settlements without
legal protection. Angola’s laws neither adequately protect people from forced
eviction nor enshrine the right to adequate housing. In 2013, the government
continued to carry out mass forced evictions in areas that it claimed were reserved for public use. The operations occurred without adequate prior notice
and security forces used excessive force.
In the first days of February, security forces forcibly evicted an estimated 5,000
residents from an informal settlement in the peripheral Cacuaco municipality in
Luanda. Following the evictions, security forces arbitrarily arrested dozens of
residents, at least 40 of whom were charged with illegal land occupation and
disobedience, and were convicted and given prison sentences.
On October 7, International Habitat Day, the authorities prevented a protest
against forced evictions in Luanda organized by SOS Habitat, a nongovernmental
organization.
Key International Actors
Angola is the second largest economy in the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), and an increasingly influential power both in the sub-region
and the continent due to its economic and military clout. Angola’s oil wealth
and soaring economic growth continue to attract business interests from all
over the world, and few of its partners prioritize the governance and human
rights concerns in their cooperation agenda.
Angola’s periodic report to the UN Human Rights Committee, the treaty monitoring
body for the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, was considered
in 2013. The Committee urged the government to end impunity and
investigate killings, torture, ill-treatment, and enforced disappearances by the
security forces, among other recommendations.
In early April, the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, Navi Pillay, visited
Angola at the invitation of the government. During her visit, Pillay raised a wide
array of human rights concerns, including restrictions on freedom of expression
and of the media, the excessive use of force to repress protests, mistreatment
and sexual violence against irregular migrants, forced evictions, and violations
of economic and social rights. Pillay’s visit was a rare spotlight on Angola’s
human rights record, which is mostly ignored by Angola’s regional and international
partners in favor of strengthening trade links.
Burundi
The Burundian government committed to strengthening human rights protections
and made progress in certain areas, such as initiatives to address genderbased
violence. A five-day national debate on the justice sector produced a set
of recommendations on judicial reforms. However, the justice system remained
weak and under-resourced and suffered from political interference and allegations
of corruption.
Impunity for human rights abuses, particularly by state agents and youth of the
ruling party, was a dominant concern. Most cases of extrajudicial killings and
other acts of political violence between 2010 and 2012 remained unresolved.
Prosecutions were initiated against a small number of alleged perpetrators, but
proceedings were slow or seriously flawed, and several police officers accused
of involvement in killings and ill-treatment were released.
Most leading opposition figures who had fled the country after boycotting the
2010 elections returned to Burundi, encouraged by the government, in advance
of the 2015 general elections. However, opposition party members continued to
face obstruction and harassment.
Journalists and civil society activists also encountered intimidation by the government,
which accused them of siding with the opposition. In June, President
Pierre Nkurunziza promulgated a new press law severely curtailing media freedoms.
Impunity for Political Killings and Other Abuses
Few of the perpetrators of the scores of political killings in 2010-2012 were
brought to justice, due to a lack of political will and weak judicial system. In
many cases, victims’ families were too afraid to seek redress.
In a small number of cases, judicial authorities arrested, charged, and prosecuted
police officers, following investigations by a commission of inquiry into
extrajudicial killings and torture set up in 2012 by the prosecutor general. The
High Court in Gitega tried Michel Nurweze, known as Rwembe (“razor blade” in
Kirundi), a deputy police commissioner in Gitega province, for his alleged
involvement in the November 2011 murder of Léandre Bukuru, a member of the Movement for Solidarity and Democracy (MSD) opposition party. Nurweze was
also tried for attempted murder and torture in two other cases. His trial could
have set an important precedent in ending impunity, but at least two prosecution
witnesses would not testify in court because of the absence of adequate
protection.
On August 12, the court acquitted Nurweze of the murder and torture charges,
changed the offense of attempted murder to grievous bodily harm, and sentenced
him to three months’ imprisonment. He was released, as he had already
served a year in prison. The prosecution appealed. Appeal hearings opened in
October but were postponed to January 2014.
Appeal hearings in the trial of those accused of involvement in an attack in
Gatumba in September 2011, which killed 39 people, concluded in November.
Proceedings were complicated by the escape from detention of one of the principal
defendants, Innocent Ngendakuriyo. The trial in 2012 had been seriously
flawed, with several defendants convicted despite claiming they had been tortured.
Political Parties
Most opposition party leaders who had fled the country after boycotting the
2010 elections returned to Burundi, including Alexis Sinduhije, president of the
MSD, and Agathon Rwasa, former rebel leader and head of the National
Liberation Forces (FNL). Following their return, members of opposition parties,
including the FNL and the MSD, were harassed and intimidated, despite government
promises that political parties could operate freely. Government officials
and police disrupted or obstructed party meetings and arrested a number of
FNL and MSD members.
Members of the imbonerakure—the youth league of the ruling National Council
for the Defense of Democracy-Forces for the Defense of Democracy (CNDDFDD)—
committed acts of violence, including killings, beatings, rape, threats,
and extortion against their perceived opponents and other Burundians. Despite
a public outcry and promises by government and party officials to punish such
actions, abuses continued throughout the year. Some opposition party members
threatened to retaliate in kind through their own youth groups. A clash between imbonerakure and MSD youth in Gihanga, Bubanza province, on
October 6 caused injuries on both sides.
Killings, Ill-Treatment, and Arbitrary Arrests of Religious
Worshippers
Police opened fire on a large crowd of religious worshippers near Businde,
Kayanza province, on March 12, killing nine people. The police then lined up
the worshippers and beat them. The victims included men, women, and children.
The worshippers, part of an informal spiritual movement that makes a
monthly pilgrimage to Businde, consider themselves Roman Catholics, but have
been rejected by the Catholic Church hierarchy in Burundi and have repeatedly
clashed with local clergy, police, and governmental officials since 2012. The
police, instructed by the government to prevent the worshippers from gathering
at Businde, beat them severely on several previous occasions in late 2012 and
January 2013. Some victims sustained broken bones and other serious injuries.
Hundreds of these worshippers were arbitrarily arrested in late 2012 and 2013.
Most were accused of “rebellion” for disregarding the government decision to
prohibit prayers at Businde. Many were released without charge but some were
rearrested. In some cases, a condition for their release was that they would
agree not to return to Businde, in violation of their right to religious freedom.
More than 200 people arrested in March and April were tried summarily on the
day of their arrest, without a defense lawyer, and received sentences of up to
five years’ imprisonment. On appeal, their sentences were reduced to a fine
and all but two of them were released. Thirty-three others arrested in late 2012
remained in pretrial detention.
The prosecutor of the appeal court at Ngozi ordered the arrest on March 16 of
Bosco Havyarimana, the police commander accused of ordering the shootings
and supervising the beatings, and two other police officers, Syldie
Nsengiyumva and Innocent Nizigiyimana. On May 29, all three were provisionally
released, pending further investigations. At time of writing, they had not been
brought
to trial.
Harassment of Civil Society Activists and Journalists
Burundi has a vibrant independent civil society and media, but government officials
have attempted to silence their criticisms and accused them of siding with
the political opposition. Government and judicial officials harassed, intimidated,
and questioned several journalists about their reporting and threatened
them with legal action.
On April 27, a policeman threatened Patrick Niyonkuru, a journalist with Radio
Publique Africaine (RPA), as he attempted to investigate alleged extortion of
bicycle-taxi drivers by the police. The policeman then shot Niyonkuru, injuring
him in the arm. The policeman was arrested, tried summarily, and sentenced to
15 years in prison on the day of the attack.
On April 25, armed men broke into the house of Willy Abagenzinikindi of Radio
Television Renaissance, forced him to the ground, hit him with a machete, and
demanded that he hand over audio cassettes he had recorded as part of his
investigations.
Hassan Ruvakuki, journalist with Radio France Internationale and Bonesha FM,
who had been sentenced to life imprisonment in 2012 for alleged participation
in terrorist acts after interviewing a rebel group, was released in March after
spending 15 months in prison. His sentence had been reduced to three years on
appeal. Following much international attention on the case, he was released
early on medical grounds, then granted conditional release in October. On
February 19, police fired teargas to disperse journalists marching in support of
Ruvakuki in the capital Bujumbura.
The National Communication Council suspended the online readers’ forum of
Burundi’s main independent newspaper Iwacu for 30 days on May 31, claiming
that unspecified readers’ comments had violated legal provisions on “endangering
national unity, public order and security, incitement to ethnic hatred,
justification of crimes, and insults to the head of state.”
In June, the government adopted a new restrictive press law, despite strong
national and international expressions of concern. The law undermines the protection
of sources and limits the subjects on which journalists can report,
potentially criminalizing reporting and analysis on subjects such as inflation, public order and security, and political killings. While eliminating prison sentences
provided under the old law, it imposes new, heavy fines.
A draft law on public demonstrations and meetings, adopted by parliament but
not yet promulgated, and another on nongovernmental organizations, awaiting
parliamentary debate, also raised concerns about possible restrictions of freedom
of association and assembly. Amendments by the National Assembly to
the law on public demonstrations and meetings took into account many recommendations
by Burundian civil society organizations, but the draft retained the
right of an administrative official appointed to attend public meetings to suspend
or dissolve them to maintain public order.
Transitional Justice
At time of writing, parliament had not yet adopted a draft law establishing a
Truth and Reconciliation Commission to cover crimes committed since 1962,
despite assurances by President Nkurunziza that the commission would be
established by the end of 2012. The draft law does not provide for the establishment
of a special tribunal to prosecute those accused of the most serious
offenses.
Returnees
Around 35,000 Burundian refugees, many of whom had been living in Tanzania
for several decades, returned to Burundi between October and December 2012
following an ultimatum by the Tanzanian government. Overall the returns took
place peacefully, but there were tensions around property and land ownership,
and controversy over some decisions of the National Commission for Land and
Other Property, responsible for resolving such disputes.
Key International Actors
Burundi’s Universal Periodic Review, which took place in January 2013, contained
important recommendations on the protection of civil and political as
well as social, economic, and cultural rights. While welcoming progress in some
areas, many governments raised concerns in the Human Rights Council about
extrajudicial killings, impunity for human rights abuses, and restrictions on press freedom, among other issues. The Burundian government rejected all the
recommendations to fight impunity for extrajudicial killings, as well as those on
the prevention of discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender
identity and the decriminalization of consensual same-sex conduct.
The United Nations Office in Burundi, BNUB, encouraged dialogue between
political parties and organized a meeting between political actors in March.
Participants agreed to create an environment conducive to free, fair, transparent,
and peaceful elections in 2015, the right of all parties to carry out their
activities unhindered, and a commitment not to use violence.
Central African Republic
A rebel coalition known as the Seleka took control of Bangui, the capital of the
Central African Republic (CAR), on March 24, 2013, forcing out the former president,
François Bozizé. A transitional government was established, and Michel
Djotodia was formally named interim president in April. New elections were
scheduled for early 2015.
Rebels belonging to the Seleka, which means “alliance” in Sango, the national
language, engaged in widespread human rights abuses, particularly killing civilians
indiscriminately. These killings, both in Bangui and outside the capital,
were often followed by widespread looting and pillaging, leaving sections of an
already-poor population homeless and destitute.
Djotodia denied that Seleka fighters committed abuses, initially blaming the
violence on Bozizé loyalists, “false Seleka,” or bandits. On September 13, he
dissolved the Seleka as a group. However, members of the Seleka continue to
kill with impunity and the central government does not appear to be in total
control of the Seleka.
Armed groups originally created by Bozizé to fight banditry, the anti-balaka
(“anti-machete”), clashed with the Seleka in late 2013. Violence and insecurity
took on an alarming sectarian dimension, as the anti-balaka, who are predominantly
Christian and include some soldiers who served under Bozizé in the
Central African Armed Forces (FACA), attacked Muslim civilians around
Bossangoa, the capital of Ouham province, in response to Seleka abuses,
mostly against Christian civilians.
The dire security situation hampered the delivery of humanitarian aid and
Seleka fighters intimidated and harassed journalists and civil society activists.
An African Union (AU)-led peacekeeping force, the International Support
Mission in Central Africa (AFISM-CAR) has requested financial, logistical, and
technical support from the international community, but as of October 31 had
only 2,589 of the 3,500 personnel requested.
Seleka Abuses
The Seleka was created in late 2012 out of three main rebel factions, primarily
from CAR’s impoverished north. The group called for more political inclusiveness
and an end to the marginalization of the predominantly Muslim northern
region. The Seleka includes fighters from Chad and Sudan, and it has recruited
child soldiers.
The group launched an offensive in December 2012 and swiftly moved toward
the capital, capturing towns along the way. A peace agreement was reached
with the government in January, but was soon ignored by both parties, as the
rebels advanced on Bangui, forcing former President Bozizé to flee. Along the
way towards the capital, they destroyed numerous rural villages, looted homes,
and raped women and girls.
After taking power, the Seleka killed scores of civilians who were trying to flee
attacks. In some villages, every single structure was at least partially burned.
The destruction was often accompanied by pillaging, leaving civilian populations
utterly destitute.
Many villagers, forced to abandon their homes, are living in extremely difficult
conditions in the bush. Lacking humanitarian support, numerous people have
died of illness, injuries, or exposure to the elements. International humanitarian
agencies have been able to provide limited support to only a few affected
areas. Governmental and nongovernmental health services were systematically
targeted, and destroyed or closed.
In Bangui, the Seleka looted entire neighborhoods as they took control of the
city. Areas such as Damala, Boy-Rabe, Kasai, and Walingba saw wanton attacks
and scores of civilians killed. Boy-Rabe, in particular, has been routinely ransacked
by the Seleka. Government officials claimed that these were disarmament
operations.
Fighting escalated in September around Bossangoa in the north. Hundreds of
people have been killed and numerous communities have been burned to the
ground. The anti-balaka groups have singled out Muslim communities for
attack, as they are perceived to be allied with the Seleka.
Almost all of the abuses have been carried out with complete impunity. A small
number of alleged Seleka perpetrators have been arrested and some prosecutions initiated against them, but the judicial system remains severely hampered
and trials, at time of writing, had yet to commence. The functioning of the government,
especially in the rural areas, has been seriously disrupted and limited
by the coup, with many administrative buildings destroyed.
Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons
The situation for displaced people is bordering on catastrophic because of their
limited access to humanitarian assistance. In September 2013, the United
Nations reported that about 170,000 people fled intense fighting in the north
around Bossangoa. Most were left to fend for themselves in the bush, but
about 36,000 found refuge in the compound of a Catholic church and at a local
school in Bossangoa. The number of internally displaced persons stands at
about 400,000. Almost 65,000 CAR refugees were in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (DRC) and other neighboring countries.
Commission of Inquiry
On May 22, a presidential decree established a national commission of inquiry
to investigate human rights violations committed since 2002 and to identify the
persons most responsible for these crimes. The commission, comprising
judges, human rights defenders, and police officers, is also tasked with identifying
individual victims and assessing levels of damage for eventual compensation.
The commission was initially incapable of doing its work due to a lack of funding,
but in September it received technical assistance and vehicles from the
government to conduct investigations. Some civil society actors have questioned
the ability of a national commission to achieve results and have called
for the establishment of an international commission of inquiry.
The International Criminal Court
CAR first accepted the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court (ICC) in
2001, when it became a state party to the Rome Statute. On December 22,
2004, the government went one step further and referred the situation in the
country to the ICC prosecutor, after a Bangui court of appeals ruled that domestic courts were unable to prosecute grave international crimes effectively. In
2007, the ICC opened an investigation into crimes committed during the 2002-
2003 civil war. The investigation has so far led to only one case, that of Jean-
Pierre Bemba Gombo, a Congolese national and former vice-president of the
DRC. Bemba and his Movement for Liberation of Congo forces were invited to
CAR in 2002 by then-President Ange-Félix Patassé to support resistance of a
coup attempt by Bozizé. Bemba is currently on trial at the ICC for war crimes
and crimes against humanity.
ICC Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda continues to monitor developments in the
country and has indicated that she may exercise jurisdiction over more recent
crimes. She issued public statements on April 22 and August 7, warning those
responsible for recent abuses that their crimes may fall under the ICC’s jurisdiction
and that her office would investigate and prosecute those most responsible
for committing serious crimes “if necessary.”
Peacekeeping Forces
In March, while trying to protect the Bozizé government, 13 soldiers of the
South African Defence Force were killed outside of Bangui by Seleka forces. The
soldiers were there under a bilateral arrangement between Bozizé and
President Jacob Zuma of South Africa.
Also unable to stop the Seleka were the Multinational Forces for Central Africa
(FOMAC), regional peacekeepers deployed in CAR through an agreement signed
in late 2007 with the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS)
under the Mission for the Consolidation of Peace in Central African Republic
(MICOPAX). In April, ECCAS decided to deploy an additional 2,000 troops to
support MICOPAX.
In August, MICOPAX was transitioned into the AU-led AFISM-CAR. Most of the
requested 3,500 troops will be made up of contingents that were already serving
in MICOPAX. The mandate of AFISM-CAR includes civilian protection and the
creation of conditions for the provision of humanitarian assistance. As of
October 31, 2013, AFISM-CAR had roughly 2,589 of the 3,500 requested peacekeepers
on the ground.
French troops, meanwhile, maintain control over the international airport in
Bangui.
Key International Actors
The international response to the Seleka takeover was initially regional. In
December 2012, the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS)
called on the Seleka to halt its advance on Bangui. In January, a power-sharing
agreement brokered by ECCAS was signed between the Seleka and the Bozizé
government, but was ignored by both sides. When the Seleka took Bangui in
March, the ECCAS turned its focus to supporting and augmenting the FOMAC
presence.
Ivan Simonovic, the assistant secretary-general for human rights at the United
Nations, visited CAR from July 29 to August 2. In an August 14 report to the UN
Security Council (Security Council), he stated that the current conflict “was
marked by an unprecedented level of violence, looting and destruction” and
that the Seleka were committing the most “serious violations of international
human rights and international humanitarian law.”
In October, the Security Council unanimously adopted a resolution strongly
condemning the widespread human rights and humanitarian law violations,
notably by “Seleka elements,” strengthening the UN’s mandate to monitor and
report on human rights abuses on the ground, and demanding safe and unhindered
access for humanitarian aid.
John Ging, the UN’s operations director for the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, said in November after a visit to CAR that he was “very
concerned that the seeds of a genocide are being sown.”
In mid-November the secretary-general presented the Security Council with
options for international support to the African peacekeeping force and the
potential creation of a UN peacekeeping force. The Security Council was expected
to pass an additional resolution toward the end of the year.
Côte d’Ivoire
During 2013, the government of President Alassane Ouattara made progress in
creating the legislative framework for greater respect for human rights and in
ensuring better discipline within the security forces. Inadequate headway was
made in strengthening the judiciary’s independence, ensuring accountability
for crimes committed during the 2010-2011 post-election crisis, and addressing
root causes of the country’s decade of violence—notably impunity, corruption,
land conflict, and the proliferation of small arms.
Security force abuses decreased from 2012, in part due to government efforts.
However, members of the security forces continued to engage in numerous
human rights violations and acts of criminality, including arbitrary arrests, cruel
and inhuman treatment of detainees, and extortion at checkpoints.
One-sided justice for the post-election crisis undermined reconciliation and,
together with ongoing weaknesses within the judiciary, hindered progress in
establishing the rule of law. While Ivorian authorities have investigated and
charged numerous supporters of former President Laurent Gbagbo for their role
in the post-election violence, there has been a near complete absence of
accountability for serious crimes committed by President Ouattara’s forces. The
government made some efforts to improve access to justice for other crimes,
including by opening a new tribunal in western Côte d’Ivoire, but corruption and
the judiciary’s lack of independence remain a general concern.
The country’s security situation improved, though land conflict simmered in
western Côte d’Ivoire with ineffective government response, contributing to several
cross-border attacks from Liberia and small-scale inter-communal violence.
As disarmament proceeded slowly, the country remained awash in guns, often
in the hands of disgruntled former combatants.
Some of Côte d’Ivoire’s partners, notably the United Nations and the United
States, showed more willingness to criticize the lack of accountability for past
crimes, while others, particularly France, remained largely silent. The
International Criminal Court continued investigations, though many Ivorians
criticized the lack of progress in the investigation of crimes by pro-Ouattara
forces. 
National Justice for Post-Election Violence
The Ouattara government has failed to deliver on its promise to render fair and
impartial justice for crimes committed during the 2010-2011 post-election crisis.
This crisis was the culmination of a decade of politico-ethnic conflict in which
security forces, rebel forces, and allied militia groups regularly committed serious
crimes with complete impunity.
On the Gbagbo side, Ivorian authorities have charged more than 150 civilian
and military leaders, including at least 55 with serious violent crimes. However,
they have failed to charge a single member of the pro-Ouattara Republican
Forces for the serious crimes they committed during the crisis. Ongoing investigations
also appear one-sided. A national commission of inquiry reported in
August 2012 that both sides had committed hundreds of summary executions,
yet the UN reported that, as of July 2013, only three of the 207 investigations
subsequently opened relate to perpetrators from pro-Ouattara forces.
Military trials against several key military leaders under Gbagbo were set to
start in late November. At this writing, civilian courts had yet to begin trials for
post-election crimes, meaning that most pro-Gbagbo defendants have languished
in pre-trial detention for two and a half years, violating their right to a
trial within a reasonable time. Ivorian authorities did provisionally release 14
pro-Gbagbo defendants in early August.
International Criminal Court
On September 30, the International Criminal Court (ICC) unsealed an arrest warrant
against, Charles Blé Goudé, the youth minister under Gbagbo, for four
counts of crimes against humanity, following the unsealing in 2012 of arrest
warrants against Laurent and Simone Gbagbo. Many Ivorians grew disenchanted
with the lack of progress in the investigation of crimes by pro-Ouattara
forces, although the Office of the Prosecutor stressed that its investigations
would ultimately target both sides.
On February 15, Côte d’Ivoire ratified the Rome Statute, taking a positive step in
the fight against impunity. In October, 18 months after the ICC issued an arrest
warrant against Simone Gbagbo, the Ivorian government filed an admissibility
challenge contesting her transfer on the grounds that national proceedings are ongoing for substantially the same crimes. The government has yet to respond
to the warrant against Blé Goudé, raising further concerns about its intent to
cooperate fully with the ICC.
In June, the ICC’s Pre-Trial Chamber asked the prosecutor to consider providing
additional evidence in the case against Laurent Gbagbo, as it decides whether
or not to confirm charges for four counts of crimes against humanity.
Security Force Abuses
The government and military prioritized human rights training for the armed
forces, perhaps contributing to fewer abuses. However, members of the security
forces continued to carry out arbitrary arrests and detentions; cruel and inhuman
treatment of detainees; and frequent acts of extortion and theft at road
checkpoints. The government took occasional action to reduce checkpoint
extortion, including arresting some soldiers involved, though the problem
remained widespread.
Authorities made little progress towards accountability for serious security
force abuses committed since Ouattara took office, including the July 2012
attack on the Nahibly internally displaced persons camp, which left at least 12
dead; and the widespread arbitrary detention, cruel and inhuman treatment,
and torture by soldiers that occurred in August and September 2012 following
several attacks on military installations.
There have been no prosecutions for these crimes, although authorities have
started investigations into the Nahibly case. The military prosecutor did investigate
and prosecute some soldiers in other, less politically sensitive cases,
including for murder and theft. While these prosecutions were significant, they
also suggest that the failure to prosecute in more sensitive cases stems from
lack of political will.
Land Rights
During the post-election crisis, violence displaced hundreds of thousands of
people, either as refugees or internally within Côte d’Ivoire. Many people have
returned to find their land illegally taken over through illegal sales or, in some cases, hostile occupations—violating their property rights and rights as returning
refugees.
In August, the government passed reforms to land tenure and nationality laws,
rightly recognizing their link to recent politico-military violence. However, it
failed to adequately support local administrative and judicial mechanisms
involved in resolving land conflicts, leaving many people unable to access their
land more than two years after the crisis. Several attacks in March 2013 on
Ivorian villages near the Liberian border were related to land dispossession,
showing the potential for future violence if the government does not ensure the
fair resolution of land disputes.
Disarmament and Security Sector Reform
The Ivorian government made slow progress in security sector reform and in
disarming tens of thousands of former combatants who fought during the crisis.
According to the UN, the government had by June 2013 disarmed and demobilized
around 6,000 former combatants. Some armed former combatants
engaged in violent criminality, while others staged demonstrations in several
towns protesting the slow progress of reintegration programs.
There was improvement in 2013 in returning basic security functions from the
military to the police and gendarmerie, but the military maintained a presence
at road checkpoints and in leading the response to internal security threats.
Although less visibly present than in 2011 and 2012, many youth who fought
with pro-Ouattara forces during the crisis continued to perform security duties
under military commanders. Several military commanders implicated in serious
human rights abuses remain in key positions.
Sexual Violence
Sexual violence remained a major problem. The UN reported at least 100 cases
of sexual violence in the first half of 2013, including many against children.
Although not required by law, Ivorian authorities often refuse to undertake
investigations unless the victim presents a medical certificate, for which she
must pay. Accountability for sexual violence is further undermined by the dysfunctional
state of the cour d’assises, the Ivorian courts mandated to try such
cases. Authorities often have to downgrade rape to indecent assault, which can
be prosecuted in other courts but carries significantly less penalties.
With assistance from the UN, the Ivorian government is finalizing a national
strategy to combat sexual violence. The government and military have also prioritized
reducing sexual violence by the security forces. While these represent
important steps forward, deficiencies among law enforcement and the judicial
system continued to hinder investigations and prosecutions of most sexual violence
cases. In addition, victims’ access to health and psychosocial services
remains limited, particularly outside Abidjan.
Corruption
The UN Group of Experts, appointed by the Security Council to monitor the
sanctions regime in Côte d’Ivoire, reported in April that former rebel warlords—
now commanders in the Ivorian military—are plundering millions of dollars from
the Ivorian economy through smuggling and a parallel tax system on cocoa,
timber, and other export goods. Such corrupt practices could potentially undermine
efforts to improve access to health and education, among other rights.
In November, 14 former cocoa sector officials, originally charged in 2008, were
convicted for embezzling hundreds of millions of dollars between 2002 and
2008. Authorities have yet to credibly investigate the role of high-level political
officials also believed to have been implicated and to have used the embezzled
funds, in part, to purchase arms.
Key International Actors
Many of Côte d’Ivoire’s international partners, including France, remained largely
silent on the lack of accountability for past crimes, failing to learn from Côte
d’Ivoire’s own history the dangerous costs of impunity.
The European Union, France, and the United States supported justice and security
sector reform, along with the UN mission in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI), which
also monitored human rights abuses and helped implement human rights training
for the security forces.
The UN Human Rights Council’s (HRC) independent expert on human rights in
Côte d’Ivoire published reports in January and June, highlighting, among other
things, concerns about the one-sided nature of justice for post-election crimes
and its impact on reconciliation.
Democratic Republic of Congo
Armed conflict continued in eastern Democratic Republic of Congo, with
Congolese security forces and non-state armed groups responsible for serious
abuses against civilians. The Rwandan-backed M23 armed group committed
widespread war crimes, including summary executions, rapes, and forced
recruitment of children. As the military focused attention on defeating the M23,
many other armed groups also attacked civilians.
In the capital, Kinshasa, and elsewhere, government authorities have sought to
silence dissent with threats, violence, and arbitrary arrests against human
rights activists, journalists, and opposition political party leaders and supporters
who were critical of government officials or participated in anti-government
demonstrations.
In March, M23 leader and former Congolese military commander Bosco
Ntaganda surrendered to the United States embassy in Rwanda. He is awaiting
trial at the International Criminal Court (ICC) on charges of war crimes and
crimes against humanity committed in northeastern Congo in 2002 and 2003.
One of the region’s most brutal warlords, Ntaganda commanded forces that terrorized
civilians for the past decade.
Abuses by the Security Forces
When government soldiers fled the M23’s advance on the eastern city of Goma
in late November 2012, they went on a rampage and raped at least 76 women
and girls in and around the town of Minova, South Kivu. In Kitchanga, North
Kivu, soldiers from the 812th Regiment, allied with a Tutsi militia they had
armed, clashed with a primarily ethnic Hunde armed group in late February
through early March. At least 25 civilians died in the fighting. Many of the civilians
killed were Hunde who appear to have been targeted by soldiers because
of their ethnicity. Security forces also deliberately killed civilians during operations
against Mai Mai fighters in Katanga province.
Military and intelligence officials detained many former M23 fighters and
alleged collaborators for several weeks without bringing them before a court,
often incommunicado and in harsh conditions.
War Crimes by M23 Rebels
During their occupation of Goma and nearby areas in late November 2012, M23
fighters summarily executed at least 24 people, raped at least 36 women and
girls, looted hundreds of homes, offices, and vehicles, and forcibly recruited
soldiers and medical officers, police, and civilians into their ranks. The M23
withdrew from Goma on December 1 when the government agreed to start
peace talks in Kampala, Uganda.
Following infighting between two M23 factions and Ntaganda’s surrender in
March, abuses by the M23 continued. Between March and July, M23 fighters
summarily executed at least 44 people and raped at least 61 women and girls.
In August, after intense fighting resumed between the M23 and the Congolese
army supported by MONUSCO, the UN peacekeeping mission in Congo, the M23
shelled populated neighborhoods in and around Goma, killing at least 7 civilians
and wounding more than 40.
Since its inception, the M23 had received significant military support from
Rwanda, including the deployment of Rwandan troops to Congo to fight alongside
it; weapons, ammunition, and other supplies; training for new M23
recruits; and the forcible recruitment of men and boys in Rwanda, who were
then sent across the border to fight for the M23.
Following public denunciations and aid suspensions to Rwanda by Western
allies, when fighting resumed in late October, the M23 did not receive the military
support from Rwanda on which it had previously relied. The rebels were
quickly defeated by the Congolese army and UN forces. On November 5, the
M23 announced an end to its armed rebellion. Many of its remaining leaders
and fighters fled to Uganda and Rwanda.
Attacks on Civilians by Other Armed Groups
Numerous other armed groups have carried out horrific attacks on civilians in
eastern Congo, including in North and South Kivu, Katanga, and Orientale
provinces. Fighters from the Nduma Defense of Congo militia group, led by
Ntabo Ntaberi Sheka, killed, raped, and mutilated scores of civilians between
May and September in Masisi and Walikale territories, North Kivu. Sheka is
sought on a Congolese arrest warrant for crimes against humanity.
Other armed groups have also carried out ethnically based attacks on civilians
in North and South Kivu. They include the Raia Mutomboki, the Nyatura, the
Mai Mai Kifuafua, and the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda
(FDLR), a largely Rwandan Hutu armed group, some of whose members participated
in the Rwandan genocide in 1994. Some groups have targeted human
rights activists who spoke out against their abuses. In September, FDLR fighters
abducted a human rights activist in Miriki, North Kivu, detained him in an
underground cell for eight days, and accused him of providing information
about FDLR abuses to UN peacekeepers.
In Beni territory, North Kivu, the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), a rebel group
led by Ugandan fighters, as well as other militia groups active in the area, kidnapped
several hundred Congolese civilians. In Orientale province, fighting
between the Patriotic Resistance Force in Ituri (FRPI) and other militia groups
and the Congolese army forced more than 80,000 people to abandon their
homes.
In Katanga, Mai Mai fighters forcibly recruited hundreds of children into their
ranks and killed, raped, and mutilated civilians. Some of these Mai Mai fighters
are led by Gédéon Kyungu Mutanga, a warlord who was convicted by a military
court in 2009 for crimes against humanity but escaped from prison in
September 2011. On August 7, militia fighters in Pweto, Katanga, summarily
executed a human rights activist who had denounced abuses by the group.
The Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), a Ugandan rebel group with a long record of
atrocities, continued to attack civilians in northern Congo and eastern Central
African Republic. At time of writing, the LRA’s three senior leaders sought on
arrest warrants from the International Criminal Court (ICC)—Joseph Kony, Odhok
Odhiambo, and Dominic Ongwen—remained at large.
Few efforts have been made to curb abuses by these armed groups or to investigate,
arrest, and prosecute those responsible. Elements of the Congolese
army have in some cases collaborated with and provided support to armed
groups responsible for serious abuses, including the FDLR and Nyatura.
Freedom of Expression and Peaceful Assembly
Government and security forces have used violence, intimidation, threats, arbitrary
arrests, and judicial proceedings based on trumped-up charges to silence
dissent and prevent political leaders and activists from freely expressing their
peaceful opinions or demonstrating.
Eugène Diomi Ndongala, a former member of parliament and minister, has been
detained since April. Diomi is the president of the Christian Democrats
(Démocratie chrétienne) opposition party and a founding member of the
Popular Presidential Majority (Majorité présidentielle populaire)—a political
alliance supporting opposition leader Etienne Tshisekedi.
Another member of parliament, Muhindo Nzangi, was sentenced to three years
in prison in August. Only two days after he made remarks on a radio program in
Goma that were viewed as critical of President Joseph Kabila’s policy in eastern
Congo, Nzangi was tried and convicted for endangering internal state security.
On August 20, police forcibly disrupted a peaceful sit-in by Nzangi’s supporters
outside the North Kivu governor’s office in Goma. They beat several protesters,
arrested five, and threatened t0 charge them with rebellion.
Security forces also threatened, beat, or detained journalists and human rights
activists. On March 10, police and Republican Guard soldiers beat or threatened
four journalists for covering Tshisekedi’s return to Kinshasa from South
Africa. In July, a human rights activist was accused of being a spy; soldiers beat
him after he conducted a research mission to document M23 abuses.
Justice and Accountability
The vast majority of human rights abuses committed in Congo have gone
unpunished. However, there have been some positive developments. On March
18, Bosco Ntaganda turned himself in to the US embassy in Kigali, Rwanda, and
was flown to The Hague, where he faces charges of war crimes and crimes
against humanity at the ICC. The Congolese government issued arrest warrants
for several M23 leaders, and government officials have stated clearly that they
will neither provide an amnesty nor integrate into the army those allegedly
responsible for war crimes.
In November, the trial began in North Kivu’s military operational court in Goma
for 39 soldiers and officers allegedly involved in the mass rape and pillaging in
and around Minova a year earlier.
In December 2012, the ICC acquitted and released Mathieu Ngudjolo Chui, who
had been charged with crimes against humanity and war crimes allegedly committed
in northeastern Congo in 2003. The trial of Ngudjolo’s co-accused,
Germain Katanga, continues. Sylvestre Mudacumura, the FDLR’s military commander
sought on an arrest warrant from the ICC for war crimes, remained at
large at the time of writing.
Key International Actors
In February, 11 African countries signed the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of Congo and the Region in Addis
Ababa, under the auspices of the UN secretary-general. The signatories agreed
not to tolerate or provide support of any kind to armed groups; neither to harbor
nor provide protection of any kind to anyone accused of war crimes or
crimes against humanity, or anyone who is listed under the UN sanctions
regime; and to cooperate with regional justice initiatives. The former president
of Ireland, Mary Robinson, was appointed UN special envoy for the Great Lakes
region to support implementation of the agreement.
In March, the UN Security Council authorized the deployment of an Intervention
Brigade. This 3,000-member force within MONUSCO, made up of African troops,
is mandated to carry out offensive operations to neutralize armed groups operating
in eastern Congo.
Equatorial Guinea
Corruption, poverty, and repression continue to plague Equatorial Guinea under
President Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, who has been in power since
1979. Vast oil revenues fund lavish lifestyles for the small elite surrounding the
president, while a large proportion of the population continues to live in poverty.
Mismanagement of public funds and credible allegations of high-level corruption
persist, as do other serious abuses, including arbitrary detention,
secret detention, and unfair trials.
The period surrounding legislative elections in May 2013 was marked by the
denial of fundamental freedoms. The government blocked planned protests by
political opponents and arrested the organizers. The ruling party gained an
overwhelming victory in the election, but the poll lacked credibility because of
biased electoral processes and restrictive conditions for international
observers.
The new government that formed in September maintained a system that lacks
effective checks on the powers of President Obiang. Obiang appointed his eldest
son and possible successor, “Teodorin,” to one of 15 senate seats he personally
selects, under 2011 constitutional changes. Obiang retained Teodorin
as second vice president, an appointed post not contemplated in the constitution.
Obiang and his government strongly defended Teodorin against allegations of
corruption and money laundering, which are the focus of foreign law enforcement
investigations in France and the United States. Although several legal
decisions went in Teodorin’s favor in August, notably a California judge’s dismissal
of part of a case against him, followed by Interpol’s unexpected withdrawal
of an international arrest warrant against him in a separate case filed in
France, intensive investigations in both countries continue and a Europe-wide
warrant issued at France’s request remains in effect.
Economic and Social Rights
Equatorial Guinea is the third largest oil producer in sub-Saharan Africa and
has a population of approximately 700,000 people. According to the United Nation’s 2013 Human Development Report, the country has a per-capita gross
domestic product of US$32,026, which is the highest wealth ranking of any
African country and one of the highest in the world, yet it ranks 136 out of 187
countries in the Human Development Index. As a result, Equatorial Guinea has
by far the largest gap of all countries between its per-capita wealth and its
human development score.
Despite the country’s abundant natural resource wealth and government’s obligations
to advance the economic and social rights of its citizens, it has directed
little of this wealth to meet their needs. Figures released by the International
Monetary Fund in early 2013 showcase the government’s spending priorities:
while half of Equatorial Guinea’s capital spending in 2011 was used to build
infrastructure and another 22 percent was spent on public administration,
health and education together accounted for only 3 percent of capital spending.
About half of the population lacks clean water or basic sanitation facilities,
according to official 2012 statistics. A large portion of the population also lacks
access to quality health care, decent schools, or reliable electricity. The government
does not publish basic information on budgets and spending, and citizens
and journalists lack the freedom to monitor the use of the country’s natural
resource wealth.
Freedom of Expression and Association
Equatorial Guinea is notorious for its poor record on press freedom. Local journalists
are unable to criticize the government or address issues the authorities
disapprove of without risk of censorship or reprisal. Only a few private media
outlets exist in the country, and they are generally owned by persons close to
President Obiang; self-censorship is common. Foreign news is available to the
small minority with access to satellite broadcasts and the Internet; others have
access only to limited foreign radio programming.
Freedom of association and assembly are severely curtailed in Equatorial
Guinea, greatly limiting the effectiveness of civil society groups. The government
imposes restrictive conditions on the registration and operation of nongovernmental
groups. The country has no legally registered independent
human rights groups. The few local activists who seek to address human rights
related issues face intimidation, harassment, and reprisals.
Political Parties and Opposition
Only two political parties offered candidates independently in the May legislative
elections. The other 10 officially recognized political parties aligned with
the ruling party, which benefited from a virtual monopoly on power, funding,
and access to national media. The May vote, like prior elections in the country,
were marked by serious human rights violations and a denial of fundamental
freedoms, including arbitrary arrests and restrictions on freedom of assembly.
The National Election Commission is controlled by the ruling party and is headed
by the interior minister, a prominent member of the governing party.
Requests by political activists and opposition political parties to hold peaceful
demonstrations were denied. Protests planned for May and June were blocked
and the organizers of the May event were arrested. At least 10 activists were
arrested in May, following calls for a peaceful demonstration on May 15 to call
for government reforms and to protest a government decision denying registration
to a new political party, Partido Democrático de la Justicia Social
(Democratic Party for Social Justice). Clara “Lola” Nsegue Eyí and Natalia Angue
Edjodjomo, the party’s co-founders and coordinators of the demonstration,
were arrested on May 13 in Malabo and transferred to the city of Mongomo.
They were both released after three weeks, but Nsegue was subsequently rearrested
in Malabo and flown to Mongomo, an inland city, more than 200 miles
away, where she remained in custody without charge from late June until her
release in October.
Jerónimo Ndong, secretary general of the opposition party Unión Popular
(People’s Union), was arrested on May 13 and held for several days, also in connection
with the planned protest. He went into hiding after his release, but
turned himself in when the authorities arrested his wife and brother to force
him to emerge from hiding. Ndong was then rearrested and held for another
seven days.
A number of people were arrested on their way to the planned May 15 protest
and later released, including Salvador Bibang Ela, a leader of the Convergencia
Social Democrática Popular (CPDS, People’s Social Democratic Convergence)
opposition party. The protest was not held, due to these arrests and the heavy
presence of security forces in the streets.
In June, security forces surrounded the CPDS headquarters in Malabo and several
party leaders were briefly arrested in a successful effort to block a planned
demonstration against alleged election fraud. The party’s earlier request for a
permit for the protest was denied.
On September 22, Weja Chicampo, coordinador of the Movimiento para la
Autodeterminación de la Isla de Bioko (MAIB, Movement for the Self-
Determination of Bioko Island), was deported to Spain from the Malabo airport
as he returned from a visit to there. Chicampo had previously lived in exile in
Spain, following repeated arrests and prison terms in Equatorial Guinea, but
had moved back to Equatorial Guinea. He remained in Spain at time of writing.
Torture, Arbitrary Detention, and Unfair Trials
Due process rights are routinely flouted in Equatorial Guinea and prisoner mistreatment
remains common. Many detainees are held indefinitely without
knowing the charges against them. Some are held in secret detention. Lawyers
and others who have visited prisons and jails indicate that serious abuses continue,
including beatings in detention that amount to torture.
President Obiang exercises inordinate control over the judiciary, which lacks
independence. The president is designated as the country’s “chief magistrate.”
Among other powers, he chairs the body that oversees judges and appoints the
body’s remaining members.
Judicial processes are used to intimidate or punish those perceived as disloyal
to those in power. In July, Roberto Berardi, a business associate of Teodorín,
was convicted of theft of company property and given a two-and-a-half year
sentence, following a brief trial at which Berardi’s family said no evidence was
presented. Beradi had been in government custody in Bata since January.
According to his family, Berardi’s arrest came after he asked Teodorin about a
suspicious bank transfer to a US account. They also allege that he was held in
secret detention for several weeks and subjected to torture.
Eleuterio Esono, an Equatoguinean citizen who returned to the country from
exile in Sweden in early 2013, was held without charge in a Malabo jail from
March 12 until the end of April. He was arrested without warrant in connection
with an alleged conspiracy against the state.
Agustín Esono Nsogo, a teacher arrested in October 2012 for an alleged plot to
destabilize the country, remained in custody without charge or trial.
Key International Actors
The US is Equatorial Guinea’s main trading partner and source of investment in
the oil sector. The US government openly criticized the May legislative elections
in Equatorial Guinea, citing “serious concerns” about arbitrary detentions, limits
on free speech and assembly, and the opposition’s severely restricted ability
to access the media and the Internet-based social networks.
Spain, the former colonial power, also applied some pressure on Equatorial
Guinea to improve its human rights record by publicly criticizing the May vote.
In a speech during the G20 summit and subsequently, United Kingdom Prime
Minister David Cameron prominently used Equatorial Guinea as an example of
the so-called resource curse: a corrupt, poorly governed country with great
wealth that does not benefit the majority of its people.
President Obiang continued to seek international attention as a statesman,
hosting a summit with African and Latin American leaders in March and accepting
from North Korea in July the International Kim Jong-il Prize “for his commitment
to justice, development, peace and harmony.”
Eritrea
Eritrea is among the most closed countries in the world; human rights conditions
remain dismal. Indefinite military service, torture, arbitrary detention, and
severe restrictions on freedoms of expression, association, and religion provoke
thousands of Eritreans to flee the country each month. Among those fleeing
in 2013 were the minister of information—whose 85-year-old father, brother,
and 15-year-old daughter were immediately arrested—and the deputy head of
economic affairs of the People’s Front for Democracy and Justice (PFDJ),
Eritrea’s sole political party that controls most major domestic commercial
enterprises.
In October, more than 300 Eritrean refugees drowned when a boat bringing
them to Europe capsized near Lampedusa, Italy. According to the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), over 305,000 Eritreans
(more than 5 percent of the population) have fled during the past decade.
Eritrea has no constitution, functioning legislature, independent judiciary, elections,
independent press, or nongovernmental organizations; it does not hold
elections. All power is concentrated in the hands of President Isaias Afewerki,
in office since 1991.
In a rare sign of domestic dissent, on January 21, 2013, a group of soldiers with
tanks, led by a brigadier general and three colonels, briefly occupied the
Ministry of Information (“Forto”) and forced the director of government television
to read a statement demanding the release of political prisoners and
implementation of the 1997 constitution. The transmission was cut after a few
sentences and the protestors surrendered when other military units failed to
deliver expected support. According to credible reports, 60 or more high-level
alleged collaborators were arrested, several of whom are now dead, some by
suicide. Among them is said to be Abdella Jaber, PFDJ’s chief administrator.
Despite repeated requests, Eritrea denied the United Nation special rapporteur
on Eritrea, Sheila Keetharuth, a visa. In a 2013 report based on refugee interviews,
she concluded that “basic tenets of the rule of law are not respected.”
Following her report, the Council “strongly condemn[ed]” Eritrea’s “continued
widespread and systematic violations of human rights and fundamental
freedoms.”
Indefinite Conscription and Forced Labor
Eritrea conscripts all men and unmarried women into “national service.”
Although Eritrean law limits national service to 18 months, most conscripts
serve for much of their working lives. Conscripts are routinely used as forced
labor on essentially civilian jobs. In 2013, Human Rights Watch reported that
conscripts were used by a state-owned construction company, Segen
Construction Co., engaged by Canadian mining firm Nevsun Resources, to build
infrastructure at its Bisha gold mine. Former conscripts described working long
hours for minimal food rations, primitive lodging, and wages too low to sustain
themselves, much less their families. They were not allowed to leave the work
site.
Children as young as 15 are inducted and sent for military training, according to
recent interviews by refugee agencies. They and other recruits are regularly subject
to violence and ill-treatment for raising questions or for other perceived
infractions. Beatings, torture, and prolonged incarcerations are common.
Women are subject to sexual violence from military commanders, including
rape. No mechanisms for redress exist.
Since mid-2012, all men in their 50s, 60s, and 70s are compelled to perform
militia duty: carrying military weapons; reporting for training; and going on periodic
patrols.
Arbitrary Arrest, Prolonged Detention, and Inhumane
Conditions
Thousands of ordinary citizens are arrested and incarcerated without charge,
trial, or opportunity to appeal, and without access to family, lawyers, or independent
prison monitoring organizations. While some are freed without explanation
and warned not to speak about their detention, most prisoners remain in
jail indefinitely. Until the “Forto” incident in January 2013, the most prominent
prisoners were 21 government officials and journalists arrested in September
2001 and still held incommunicado 12 years later. None have been formally
charged, much less tried; former guards who have left Eritrea report that half of
them have died.
Former detainees describe brutal detention conditions. Death in captivity is not
unusual. Many prisoners disappear, their whereabouts and health unknown to
their families. Former prisoners describe being confined in vastly overcrowded
underground cells or shipping containers, with no space to lie down, little or no
light, oppressive heat or cold, and vermin. Medical treatment is poor or nonexistent.
Food consists of a piece or two of bread a day, occasional servings of
lentils or beans, a cup of tea, and insufficient water. Beatings and torture in
detention are common; wardens are able to impose any physical punishment
they devise. A former interrogator told Human Rights Watch he ordered beatings
of prisoners until they confessed to whatever they were accused of; they
were then beaten to implicate others.
Eritreans who were forcibly repatriated to Eritrea from Middle Eastern countries
and then fled again told Human Rights Watch in 2012 they had been incarcerated
in crammed cells and beaten shortly after their return. They displayed scars
from beatings and electric shocks. One escapee reported that several prisoners
in his group of returnees died from their beatings.
Freedom of Religion
Since 2002, the government has jailed and physically abused citizens for practicing
religions other than the four government-controlled or recognized religions—
Sunni Islam, Ethiopian Orthodox, Catholicism, and Lutheranism. Most
arrests occur in private houses but many also occur during private Quran or
Bible study at colleges or at national service training centers.
Some prisoners are offered release on condition that they sign statements
renouncing their faith. Three deaths during captivity were reported by foreignbased
religious monitoring groups in 2013, but given the difficulties of obtaining
information, the number may be higher.
The octogenarian Orthodox patriarch, whom the government deposed in 2007,
remains under strict house arrest.
Reprisals against Family Members
Family members of some draft evaders or national service deserters have been
punished by fines of Nakfa 50,000 (US$3,333) and by detention, in a country
with, according to the World Bank, per capita income in 2012 of $560.
Families are also punished when relatives living abroad fail to pay a 2 percent
tax on foreign income, retroactive to 1992, or to contribute “national defense”
fees. Punishments include revocation of resident families’ business licenses,
confiscation of houses and other property, and refusal to issue passports to
allow reunification of children and spouses with overseas parents or spouses.
Freedom of Expression and Association
The government maintains a complete monopoly on domestic sources of information
since it closed all local press outlets in 2001 and arrested their staff.
Telephone and Internet communications are monitored. Eritrea expelled the last
accredited foreign correspondent in 2008. Although foreign language transmissions
are accessible, the government jammed Al Jazeera in early 2013 and has
long jammed overseas transmissions from Eritrea diaspora stations. At least six
government journalists arrested in 2009 and 2011 remain in solitary confinement
without trial.
No independent civil society organizations are permitted. Labor unions remain
a government monopoly.
Key International Actors
Eritrea’s government has few allies. Relations with Ethiopia remain hostile following
the 1998-2000 border war and Ethiopia’s failure to implement an international
boundary commission’s ruling awarding disputed territory to Eritrea.
Eritrea has been under United Nations sanctions since 2009 because of its support
for armed Islamic insurgents in Somalia and its refusal to release Djibouti
prisoners of war captured during a 2008 invasion of Djibouti’s border territory.
A UN monitoring group reported in July 2013 that although Eritrea had made a
tactical decision to court the Somali government, it fostered regional destabilization
by “maintain[ing]close links to a network of warlords and other spoilers in Somalia,” including at least two Al-Shabaab leaders. Eritrea refuses to
acknowledge that it holds Djibouti prisoners of war although three escaped in
late 2011. Following the report, the UN Security Council retained sanctions and
renewed the monitoring group’s mandate for a year.
Eritrea’s relationship with Qatar, which had been mediating Eritrea-Djibouti border
issues, frayed in 2013 and Qatar apparently stopped funding a large Red
Sea resort. The Yemeni Foreign Ministry complained that Eritrea seized Yemeni
fishing vessels in international waters and detained their crews. In October,
Eritrea released 81 Yemeni fishermen held for 18 months without trial; Yemen
claims another 519 remain jailed.
In June 2013, Canada expelled Eritrea’s Toronto consul for continuing to solicit
“national defense” fees (and the 2 percent tax) from Eritrean expatriates
despite Canadian demands that he stop because the practice violated UN sanctions.
Eritrea has warmer relations with China. The Chinese government provided a
630 million Yuan ($10.3 million) loan in 2013 to construct canning, food coldstorage,
and PCV pipe manufacturing plants. The projects will be run by SFECO,
a Shanghai Construction Co subsidiary. SFECO bought a 60 percent share of the
Zara gold exploration site near Asmara in 2013 and has contracts to repair and
enlarge Asmara’s power plant. Lengthy power shortages occurred in 2013.
In earlier years, Eritrea expelled all nongovernmental aid agencies. In 2013, the
UN and Eritrea agreed on a four-year $188 million “cooperation framework.”
The UN will provide $50 million and attempt to raise the remaining $138 million
from donor countries for capacity building, food security, environmental
improvements, and social services. Providing assistance presents “acute coordination
challenges,” according to the UN Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, because of “access restrictions on international staff”
and the “absence of up-to-date information” from the government.
The Bisha mine, a major hard currency generator, was expected to earn less in
2013 as production shifted from gold to copper and copper prices fell. Eritrea
issues no budget; government finances are opaque and secret. President
Afewerki nevertheless complained in 2013 that “international organization” statistics
(ostensibly referring to the World Bank and International Monetary Fund)
“are based on speculation and aimed at serving vested political interests” and
“should be dismissed.”
Ethiopia
Hopes that Ethiopia’s new leadership would pursue human rights reforms following
Prime Minister Meles Zenawi’s death in August 2012 have been shattered;
there was no tangible change of policy in 2013. Instead, the Ethiopian
authorities continue to severely restrict the rights to freedom of expression,
association, and peaceful assembly, using repressive laws to constrain civil
society and independent media, and target individuals with politically motivated
prosecutions.
Muslim protests against perceived government interference in their religious
affairs were met by security forces with arbitrary arrests and detentions, beatings,
and other mistreatment throughout the year. The trial of 29 protest leaders
who were arrested in July 2012 has been closed to the public, media, and
family members since January. Others convicted under the country’s deeply
flawed antiterrorism law—including opposition leaders and four journalists—
remain in prison.
Ethiopia’s ambitious development schemes, funded from domestic revenue
sources and foreign assistance, sometimes displace indigenous communities
without appropriate consultation or any compensation. Security forces have
also used violence, threats, and intimidation to force some groups to relocate,
such as in the Lower Omo Valley where indigenous people continue to be displaced
from their traditional lands, which are earmarked for state-run irrigated
sugar plantations.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
Since early 2012, members of Ethiopia’s Muslim community—which constitutes
at least 30 percent of the country’s population—have organized regular public
protests. Demonstrations were triggered by perceived government interference
in the Supreme Council of Islamic Affairs and the Awalia mosque in Addis
Ababa.
The government has clamped down heavily on the protests, arbitrarily detaining
and beating protesters, including 29 prominent activists and leaders who were
arrested in July 2012 and charged in October 2012 under the Anti-Terrorism Proclamation. In January, the High Court closed those hearings to the public,
including media, diplomats, and family members. Some defendants have
alleged mistreatment in detention and the trials raise a number of due process
concerns, including lack of access to legal counsel for some defendants for
almost two months, and erratic access to relatives.
The government has also undermined the defendants’ presumption of innocence
by broadcasting inflammatory material and accusations against them on
state television. In February, the state-run Ethiopian Television (ETV) broadcast
a program called “Jihadawi Harakat” (“Jihad War”) that included footage of at
least five of the defendants filmed in pretrial detention. The program equated
the Muslim protest movement with Islamist extremist groups, casting the
protest leaders as terrorists.
Despite the arrests, protests continued throughout 2013. In early August,
protests were organized in the capital, Addis Ababa, as well as in other cities to
commemorate Eid al Fitr, the end of Ramadan. Witnesses described a heavy
police presence in Addis Ababa, and credible sources said that police used
excessive force to disperse the demonstrators and detained hundreds, at least
temporarily.
The Semayawi Party (“Blue Party”), a newcomer to Ethiopia’s political scene,
held a peaceful protest in June—the first large-scale protest organized by a
political opposition party in eight years. A planned protest in August was cancelled
when the Blue Party offices were raided by security forces, resulting in
the arrest of dozens of people and the confiscation of equipment. The Blue
Party had earlier been denied a permit by government to hold the protest.
Arbitrary Detention and Ill-Treatment
Arbitrary detention and ill-treatment in detention continues to be a major problem.
Students, members of opposition groups, journalists, peaceful protesters,
and others seeking to express their rights to freedom of assembly, expression,
or association are frequently detained arbitrarily.
Ill-treatment is often reported by people detained for political reasons, particularly
in Addis Ababa’s Federal Police Crime Investigation Center, known as
Maekelawi, where most individuals are held during pre-charge or pretrial detention. Abuse and coercion that in some cases amount to torture and other illtreatment
are used to extract information, confessions, and statements from
detainees.
Individuals are often denied access to legal counsel, particularly during precharge
detention. Mistreated detainees have little recourse in the courts and
there is no regular access to prisons and detention centers by independent
investigators. Although the government-affiliated Ethiopian Human Rights
Commission has visited some detainees and detention centers, there is no regular
monitoring by any independent human rights or other organizations.
In July, a delegation from the European Parliament was denied access to Kaliti
prison in Addis Ababa by Ethiopian authorities, despite having received prior
authorization.
Freedom of Expression and Association
Since 2009, when the Anti-Terrorism Proclamation and the Charities and
Societies Proclamation (CSO Law) were passed, freedoms of expression and
association have been severely restricted in Ethiopia. The CSO law is one of the
most draconian laws regulating nongovernmental activity in the world. It bars
work on human rights, good governance, conflict resolution, and advocacy on
the rights of women, children, and people with disabilities if organizations
receive more than 10 percent of their funds from foreign sources.
Ethiopia’s most reputable human rights groups have either dramatically scaled
down their operations or removed human rights from their mandates. Several of
the country’s most prominent human rights activists have fled the country due
to threats.
Ethiopian media remains under a tight government stranglehold, and many
journalists practice self-censorship. Webpages and blogs critical of the government
are regularly blocked, and foreign radio and TV stations are routinely
jammed. Journalists working for independent domestic newspapers continue to
face regular harassment and threats.
The Anti-Terrorism Proclamation has been used to target political opponents,
stifle dissent, and silence journalists. In May, the Supreme Court upheld the 18-
year sentence of journalist and blogger Eskinder Nega Fenta, who was convicted in July 2012 for conspiracy to commit terrorist acts and participation in a terrorist
organization. Eskinder received the PEN Freedom to Write award in 2012.
Reeyot Alemu Gobebo, a journalist for Feteh, was convicted on three counts
under the terrorism law for her writings. Her sentence was reduced from 14 to 5
years on appeal, but her appeal of the remaining five-year sentence was dismissed
in January. Reeyot was awarded the prestigious 2013
UNESCO/Guillermo Cano World Press Freedom Prize.
Journalists covering the Muslim protests were threatened and arbitrarily
detained. Solomon Kebede, chief editor of the now-defunct Yemuslimoch Guday
(“Muslim Affairs”), was arrested in January and charged under the Anti-
Terrorism Proclamation. Yusuf Getachew, his predecessor, was charged under
the same law in 2012. Several other journalists fled Ethiopia in 2013, making it
one of the top three countries in the world in terms of the number of journalists
in exile.
Forced Displacement Associated with Development Programs
Both the government of Ethiopia and the donor community have failed to adequately
investigate allegations of abuses associated with Ethiopia’s “villagization
program.” Under this program, 1.5 million rural people are being relocated,
ostensibly to improve their access to basic services. However, some of the relocations
in the first year of the program in Gambella region were accompanied
by violence, including beatings and arbitrary arrests, and insufficient consultation
and compensation.
On July 12, the World Bank’s board of executive directors approved the recommendation
of the Inspection Panel, the institution’s independent accountability
mechanism, to investigate a complaint from ethnic Anuak refugees alleging that
the bank violated its own safeguards in Gambella. The investigation was ongoing
at time of writing.
Ethiopia is proceeding with development of a sugar plantation in the Lower
Omo Valley, clearing 245,000 hectares of land that is home to 200,000 indigenous
peoples. Displaced from their ancestral lands, these agro-pastoralists are
being moved to permanent villages under the villagization program.
Key International Actors
Ethiopia enjoys warm relations with foreign donors and most of its regional
neighbors. Ethiopia has forged strong ties based on its role as the seat of the
African Union (AU), its contribution to United Nations peacekeeping, security
partnerships with Western nations, and its progress on some of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs). These strong relationships have contributed to the
international community’s silence on Ethiopia’s dismal human rights record.
The year 2013 saw Ethiopia continue to play a mediation role between Sudan
and South Sudan, while its troops maintained an uneasy calm in the disputed
Abyei region. Ethiopia continues to deploy its troops inside Somalia, but outside
the AU mission.
Ethiopia also continues to receive significant amounts of donor assistance—
almost US$4 billion in 2013. As partners in Ethiopia’s development, donor
nations remain muted in their criticism of Ethiopia’s appalling human rights
record and are taking little meaningful action to investigate allegations of abuses
associated with development programs.
Relations with Egypt worsened in 2013 due to Egyptian concerns that Ethiopia’s
Grand Renaissance Dam will divert valuable water from the Nile River. An estimated
85 percent of the Nile’s waters originate in the Ethiopian highlands and
Egypt is completely dependent on the Nile for all its water needs. At 6,000
megawatts of electricity, the dam will be Africa’s largest hydroelectric project.
Construction started in 2012 and the dam is scheduled to be completed in
2018.
In addition to Western donors, China, India, and Brazil are increasingly financing
a variety of large-scale development initiatives. Foreign private investment
into Ethiopia is increasing with agro-business, hydroelectric, mining, and oil
exploration all gaining prominence in 2013. Agro-business investment is coming
mainly from India, the Gulf, and the Ethiopian diaspora, attracted to very
low land prices and labor costs. As seen in several of Ethiopia’s other largescale
development projects, there is a serious risk of forced displacement of
people from their land when some of these programs are implemented.
Guinea
Uncertainty over the organization of long-delayed parliamentary elections, envisioned
to consolidate Guinea’s full transition from authoritarian to democratic
rule, dominated the political and human rights landscape and led to a worrying
increase in violence in 2013. Months of violent protests involving militants from
the opposition, the ruling party, and the security services left dozens dead and
over 400 wounded.
Parliamentary elections, not held since 2002, were to have taken place six
months after the largely free and fair 2010 election of Alpha Condé as president.
However, they were repeatedly delayed by opposition demands to
address technical concerns involving the electoral list and the right of the diaspora
to participate, among other issues. The delay exacerbated ethnic tensions,
deepened a concentration of power in the executive branch, and generated
considerable frustration within Guinean civil society and the country’s international
partners.
The vote finally took place on September 28 but, according to Guinean and
international observers, it was marred by organizational problems and irregularities
including ballot stuffing by supporters of the ruling party, voter intimidation,
and minors casting votes.
Endemic corruption, the chronically neglected judiciary, and the slow pace of
security sector reform undermined respect for the rule of law. Rising ethnic tensions
ignited political violence and led to communal clashes in the N’Zérékoré
region in July, which left at least 98 dead and 160 wounded.
Excessive use of force by security forces in response to political demonstrations
declined, but they were nevertheless implicated in numerous incidents of
excessive use of lethal force and unprofessional conduct as they responded to
the violent clashes between militants of opposing political parties. Attacks
against freedom of the press increased in 2013.
Guinea made some progress in ensuring accountability for past atrocities,
including the 2009 massacre of unarmed demonstrators by security forces, and
indictment of a few powerful political and military figures for the 2010 torture of members of the political opposition. There was little progress in attempts to
establish a reconciliation commission and an independent human rights body.
International actors—notably the United Nations Office of West Africa (UNOWA),
European Union, France, the United States, and the Organisation internationale
de la francophonie (OIF)—took proactive steps to resolve disputes over the
organization of parliamentary elections, but rarely spoke out on the need for
justice for past and recent crimes by state actors.
Accountability for the September 28, 2009 Massacre and
Other Crimes
More than four years on, the domestic investigation into members of the security
forces implicated in the September 2009 massacre of some 150 people and
the rape of over 100 women during the military regime of Moussa Dadis Camara
has yet to conclude. In 2010, the then-government committed to bringing the
perpetrators to justice, and a Guinean prosecutor appointed a panel of three
judges to investigate the crimes.
The panel has made important strides, having interviewed more than 300 victims
and charged at least eight suspects including several high-level members
of the security forces. However, progress continues to be stymied by insufficient
government backing and support, including the government’s failure to
place high-level suspects on leave from their government posts pending investigation
and to satisfactorily resolve the judges’ outstanding request to question
the former Guinean president, who is currently living in Burkina Faso. Some
suspects have been in pretrial detention longer than the two years Guinean law
permits.
Judiciary and Detention Conditions
Decades of neglect of the judiciary has led to striking deficiencies in the sector,
allowing perpetrators of abuses to enjoy impunity for crimes. The allocation for
the judiciary has for several years stood at around 0.5 percent of the national
budget. As a result, there continue to be severe shortages of judicial personnel
and insufficient infrastructure and resources, which, when coupled with unprofessional conduct, including corrupt practices, failing to show up in court, and
poor record-keeping, contributed to widespread detention-related abuses.
The indictment in 2013 of Conakry’s powerful governor and two high-level soldiers
for alleged torture committed during the run-up to the 2010 elections, as
well as the arrest and indictment of two suspects for the 2012 assassination of
Guinea’s treasury director, Aissatou Boiro, demonstrated progress in addressing
impunity. However, the judiciary failed to make progress in ensuring justice
for the 2012 killing of six men by members of the security forces in the village of
Zoghota in southeastern Guinea.
Prison and detention centers in Guinea are severely overcrowded, and inmates
and detainees lack adequate nutrition, sanitation, and medical care. The
largest detention facility—designed for 300 detainees—accommodates some
1,100. An estimated 75 percent of prisoners in Conakry are held in prolonged
pretrial detention. The failure of the Cour d’assises—which hears matters involving
the most serious crimes—to meet regularly contributes to the problem. The
government failed to establish the Superior Council of Judges, which is tasked
with discipline, selection, and promotion of judges. International and Guinean
legal aid groups helped ensure representation for the indigent.
Truth-Telling Mechanism and Independent Human Rights
Institution
During 2013, the “Reflection Commission,” created by presidential decree in
June 2011 to promote reconciliation, made no visible progress in fulfilling its
mandate. The interim co-presidents appeared to limit its mandate to promoting
reconciliation largely through prayer, while local human rights groups pushed
for a commission that could meaningfully address impunity.
Progress in setting up the independent human rights institution, as mandated
by Guinea’s 2010 constitution, was undermined by delays in holding legislative
elections; the constitution stipulates that the institution can only be established
through a law voted on by the national assembly.
While the Ministry for Human Rights and Civil Liberties, newly created in 2012,
lacked resources, the minister actively advocated for strengthening the judiciary,
an end to impunity for abuses, and respect for freedom of the press.
Conduct of the Security Forces
The government and military hierarchy made some progress in ensuring that
their subordinates responded proportionately to civil unrest and to ensure the
army remained in their barracks during protests. However, members of the
police and gendarmerie were implicated in numerous incidents of excessive
use of lethal force and unprofessional conduct as they responded to often-violent
protests and clashes between militants of opposing political parties, and
arbitrarily detained and beat others. Several security force members were
killed during the violent demonstrations.
On at least three occasions, members of the security forces attacked or failed
to protect members of the opposition or their family members from violence
meted out by ruling party militants. On several occasions, members of the security
forces engaged in theft, extortion, and other crimes directed at people living
in neighborhoods that largely supported the opposition. The police and gendarmes
also failed to equally protect people during violent street demonstrations,
including by standing by while protestors supporting the ruling party
attacked and at times robbed opposition supporters.
After 12 people were killed by the security forces in May, most by gunshot,
President Condé tasked the justice minister with opening an inquiry into the
violence and prosecuting those responsible.
Freedom of Media
Censorship measures were imposed in late 2012 by state media regulators
against three popular current affairs talk shows, stemming from commentary
critical of government officials. One debate program on the private Planète FM
station was suspended on December 13 for five weeks, and the program’s host
was banned for a week, based on a defamation complaint. Another station,
Espace FM, was formally warned for its coverage of deadly unrest in the southern
town of Guéckédou. Several journalists and news outlets covering political
unrest in the capital, Conakry, were attacked, detained, or threatened during
political unrest in 2013.
In mid-August, soldiers stormed Bate FM in Kankan, shutting it down for airing
President Condé being booed at a rally. At least three journalists were briefly detained. The station was later attacked and looted and one journalist was
assaulted in the process. The attackers were allegedly supporters of the president.
Key International Actors
Guinea’s key international partners, notably the United Nations, European
Union, Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), France, and the
United States, remained largely focused on ensuring progress in the longdelayed
parliamentary elections. However, they remained largely silent on the
need for those responsible for the September 2009 violence. While they made
frequent calls to end the violent exchanges between supporters of the opposition
and ruling party, they largely failed to condemn abuses by the security
forces or demand that they be held accountable for their crimes.
Despite having a full mission in Guinea, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) failed to consistently denounce abuses
by the security forces. OHCHR, together with the EU, and the UN
Development Programme (UNDP) took the lead in strengthening Guinea’s judicial
system. However, much of the EU’s development support was conditioned
on the conduct of transparent legislative elections. In a resolution adopted in
June, the Human Rights Council called on Guinea to further support the work of
the Panel of Judges, protect survivors, and compensate families of victims of
the 28 September massacre.
The UN Peace Building Commission (PBC) continued to fund programs supporting
security sector reform and reconciliation. In May, the International Monetary
Fund unlocked US$27 million in credits for Guinea, and in June Guinea benefitted
from €74 million of debt relief from France.
The International Criminal Court (ICC), which in October 2009 confirmed that
the situation in Guinea was under preliminary examination, visited the country
in January and June to assess progress made in national investigations.
Kenya
Kenya’s closely contested presidential election in March resulted in the election
of President Uhuru Kenyatta and Deputy President William Ruto, after the
Supreme Court rejected an opposition challenge. Both Kenyatta and Ruto face
crimes against humanity charges at the International Criminal Court (ICC) for
their alleged roles in post-election violence in 2007-2008.
Fears that the 2013 election would spark a repeat of the widespread violence of
2007-2008 did not materialize, but the run-up to the elections was marred by
pockets of ethnic and political violence, and police used excessive force to disperse
protests in Kisumu.
The slow pace of police reform, the lack of accountability for security force
abuses—including extrajudicial killings, torture, and other human rights violations
by the police— and the government’s failure to hold accountable perpetrators
of the 2007–2008 post-election violence remain key concerns.
The September 21 attack on Nairobi’s Westgate mall killed at least 67 people
and highlighted the security threat posed by the militant Islamist Somali group
Al-Shabaab both within Somalia and in Kenya, which hosts an estimated
500,000 Somali refugees. The Somali refugee community has frequently been
subjected to discrimination and reprisals in the wake of attacks in Kenya,
including a brutal police operation from November 2012 to January 2013 in
Nairobi’s Eastleigh neighborhood. The community did not immediately report
reprisals following the attack on Westgate mall, but there were reports of arbitrary
arrests and extortion by the police in the Eastleigh area of Nairobi in
October and November.
Lack of Accountability and the ICC
President Kenyatta, his deputy Ruto, and former radio journalist Joshua arap
Sang are facing charges of crimes against humanity at the International
Criminal Court (ICC) for their alleged roles in the 2007-2008 post-election violence.
Ruto and Sang’s trial began in September, while Kenyatta’s trial is now
expected to start in February 2014.
Kenya pledged to continue cooperating with the ICC, but since the election, the
new government has actively campaigned at the United Nations and the African
Union (AU) to have the cases dropped, deferred, or referred to a local justice
mechanism. In September, the National Assembly and the Senate approved a
motion calling on the Kenyan government to withdraw from the Rome Statute,
the treaty establishing the ICC, which Kenya signed in 2005. The government
has taken no steps to act on that motion, and any prospective withdrawal from
the Rome Statute would not affect the ongoing cases at the ICC.
The ICC intervened in 2010 and summoned six people alleged to bear the greatest
responsibility after parliament defeated a bill that would have established a
domestic tribunal to try those responsible for the violence in 2007-2008. In
2012, a committee appointed by the director of public prosecutions said there
was insufficient evidence in the 5,000 files it had reviewed, to proceed with
criminal prosecutions.
In 2012, the chief justice announced plans to set up an International Crimes
Division to deal with post-election violence and other related cases in the
future, but the Judicial Service Commission is still assessing the modalities of
setting up the division.
The ICC cases in Kenya have been marred by withdrawals of prosecution witnesses,
allegedly because of bribery and intimidation; the defendants have
also alleged evidence tampering or intimidation of witnesses. The ICC prosecutor
described the level of witness tampering in the Kenyan cases as “unprecedented.”
Extrajudicial Killings, Torture, and Other Abuses
by Security Forces
Over the past five years police have been responsible for hundreds of extrajudicial
killings but the perpetrators have not been prosecuted due to weak internal
accountability mechanism and nascent civilian oversight.
A survey by the Kenya National Commission on Human Rights found that police
had unlawfully killed 120 people between May and August 2013 under circumstances
that could have been avoided, and that police did not report the killings to the civilian oversight authority, the Independent Police Oversight
Authority (IPOA), for investigation as required under the law.
Police have also been implicated in the torture, disappearance, and unlawful
killing of alleged terrorism suspects and individuals of Somali origin, and
Somali refugees in Mombasa, Nairobi, North Eastern region, and other parts of
Kenya.
In August 2012, a Muslim cleric, Sheikh Aboud Rogo, whom Kenyan authorities
said they were investigating over links with terror networks in Somalia, was
shot dead by unknown people. Kenya police have denied allegations that they
were responsible for Aboud Rogo’s death. In September 2013, a Multi-Agency
Task Force appointed by the director of public prosecutions in 2012 to investigate
Aboud Rogo’s killing said in its report that it did not get adequate evidence
to identify the killers and recommended a public inquest. No police officer
has been held accountable for any of the crimes.
Reforms and Implementation of the 2010 Constitution
The 2010 constitution provides the framework for institutional reforms to
improve governance, accountability, and protection of human rights. Although
reforms to the judiciary, the electoral system, and parliament have proceeded
as outlined in the constitution, police reforms—including measures to improve
accountability for police abuses—have lagged.
Key civilian oversight bodies, such as the National Police Service Commission
and Independent Police Oversight Authority (IPOA), have been established, but
important measures such as restructuring of the police service and vetting of
officers—a process to remove those implicated in human rights violations from
the police force—have been delayed for over a year due largely to resistance
from senior officers.
Efforts to restructure the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission (EACC)
dragged in the face of allegations that the commission’s chair, Mumo Matemu,
was implicated in suspected corruption at his previous post at the Kenya
Revenue Authority. The restructuring is essential for investigations and important
accountability measures against those suspected of corruption to proceed.
Treatment of Refugees
Following a series of grenade attacks in Nairobi’s Eastleigh neighborhood in
November 2012, police responded with widespread abuses, including torture,
rape, and beatings of at least 1,000 people, mainly Somali refugees, as well as
significant extortion and looting during subsequent police operation in
Eastleigh. While several police units were involved, the paramilitary General
Service Unit (GSU) was responsible for many of the worst abuses.
Police responded with similar abuses against residents of the surrounding villages
following a grenade attack in Mandera in September 2012 and a gun
attack in Garissa in October 2012.
The Kenyan government also increased its hostile rhetoric against Somali
refugees in 2013, calling for the refugee camps to be closed and for Somalis to
return to Somalia, despite the ongoing conflict and insecurity in Somalia.
Civil Society and Human Rights Defenders
Civil society has come under increased pressure for advocating for justice for
the 2007-2008 post-election violence. During their election campaigns,
Kenyatta and Ruto accused civil society of manufacturing evidence against
them and coaching witnesses in the ICC cases; of receiving foreign funds and
furthering foreign interests; and of preventing the ICC cases from being tried in
Kenya or Tanzania.
In August 2013, Kenyan security officers in Moyale killed Hassan Guyo, a 40-
year-old human rights defender who had travelled from Wajir to Moyale to document
human rights abuses by security agents against villagers. The villagers
were protesting the sacking of a local chief.
In September, two prominent civil society activists—Maina Kiai, the former
head of the Kenyan National Commission for Human Rights and a UN special
rapporteur on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association,
and Gladwell Otieno, the director of AFRICOG—were threatened by supporters of
the president and his deputy for their role in the ICC cases. A group of youths
threatened to burn down Kiai’s rural home while unknown people send messages
to Otieno, threatening to kill members of her family if she did not stop
opposing the idea of ICC partly sitting in either Kenya or Tanzania.
New laws were introduced that, if enacted, would impose draconian restrictions
on the media and on nonprofit organizations, including by restricting the
amount of funds that organizations can receive from foreign sources. One such
law, the Public Benefits Organizations (PBO) Act, which was passed in January
2013, but yet to come into force, prohibits political campaigning by nongovernmental
organizations and introduces stricter accounting standards.
Key International Actors
The United States and European nations continued to call for accountability for
2007-2008 post-election violence and urged Kenya to cooperate with the ICC
following the coming to power of the Jubilee Alliance. US President Barack
Obama excluded Kenya from his second tour of Africa in June, but relations
appeared to warm following the Westgate attack in September, given the
increased attention to Kenya’s counterterrorism concerns and role in the region.
The new administration moved to strengthen relations with Russia and China,
with visits by President Kenyatta to both countries in August 2013. China
approved a development loan of US$5 billion in August 2013 and announced
the strengthening of trade ties with Kenya.
Kenya’s engagement with the UN Security Council and the AU have focused on
its bid to have the ICC cases terminated, deferred, or referred to a domestic
mechanism. Kenya is strengthening relations with the AU member states and
members of the East African community in the lead up to the next AU Heads of
State Summit in January 2014.
East and Horn of Africa allies—Tanzania, Uganda, Rwanda, and Ethiopia—continue
to be important players with regard to Kenya’s anti ICC campaign and,
together with Burundi, have all called for the Kenyan ICC cases to be dropped
or referred to a domestic mechanism. The ICC’s appeals chamber approved an
application by five African countries to be enjoined in the Kenyan cases as
friends of the court, in order to provide their views as to whether the deputy
president should be excused from appearing in person at trial, an issue currently
pending before the chamber.
Liberia
Longstanding deficiencies within the judicial system and security sector, as
well as insufficient efforts to address official corruption, continue to undermine
development and human rights in Liberia.
Ten years after the signing of a peace accord that ended over a decade of
armed conflict, Liberians and the country’s key international partners increased
pressure on President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf’s government to expedite reforms.
While President Sirleaf dismissed a number of high-ranking government officials
accused of corruption, her government, as in past years, failed to pursue
investigations into the alleged crimes, thereby undermining accountability
efforts.
Police Conduct
Widespread police indiscipline and corruption continue to compromise equal
and impartial justice and the establishment of the rule of law. Liberian police
officers routinely demand bribes and participate in extortion schemes.
Members of two armed units—the Emergency Response Unit and the Police
Support Unit—regularly engage in armed robbery and other criminal acts during
patrols.
Police officers operate with serious logistics shortages, including a lack of vehicles,
fuel, uniforms, and basic tools to carry out their duties.
The police made some effort to address the abuse, notably through the
Professional Standards Division (PSD), which receives and processes public
and internal complaints against officers. From January to June, the PSD received
299 cases, investigated 96, and acted upon 80. Despite this progress, many
Liberians are still unaware of the unit and its work.
Access to Justice
Persistent weaknesses in the judiciary undermined access to justice and due
process. Prolonged pretrial detention is prevalent; fair and speedy trials are
rare. The judiciary is able to conclude only a small number of cases every year.
Poor management of the judiciary and corrupt practices by judges, jurors, ministry administrators, and others also severely undermine the dispensation
of justice.
An estimated 80 percent of detainees are subjected to extended pretrial detention
as a result of the understaffing of the courts, inadequate funding for the
judiciary, and lack of coordination between the police and the courts. But
greater attention by both the government and donors led to some improvements
in this sector. Liberian officials, with external support, created a regional
hub system, which is intended to decentralize the security and justice sectors
by placing armed police officers, immigration units, and judges in five regional
centers outside of Monrovia. The first hub opened in Gbarnga, the capital city of
Bong County, in 2013.
Sexual Violence
Sexual violence against women and girls is rampant. Hundreds of cases were
reported to and documented by the Ministry of Gender and Development. The
number of successful sexual violence prosecutions remains low due to poor
evidence gathering, the reluctance of witnesses to testify, and deficiencies in
the judicial sector. In large part because of these problems, the establishment
in 2008 of Criminal Court ‘E,’ a special court designed to fast-track cases of sexual
violence, has resulted in few prosecutions.
Truth and Reconciliation Commission and Accountability
The government made some progress in implementing the recommendations
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission has made since 2009. In June, the
government released a plan for promoting national peacebuilding and reconciliation,
and in October launched the National Palava Hut Program, envisioned to
foster reconciliation through community and grassroots dialogue. The plan
advocates for reparations, but ignores the commission’s call for prosecutions of
those responsible for war crimes committed during Liberia’s two armed conflicts,
for which there has still been no accountability.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Numerous members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) community
were, in 2013, subjected to verbal assaults, harassment, and stigmatization.
Although Liberian law already criminalizes same-sex conduct for both men
and women, the country’s legislature has been considering even more repressive
legislation. In February 2012, Liberia, like some other African countries,
sought to pass new laws that would further punish LGBT people. At time of writing,
there were two new bills pending before the legislature that, if passed,
would increase penalties for same-sex conduct and explicitly criminalize samesex
marriage.
In July 2012, Liberia’s upper legislative house, the Senate, passed the
Amendment to the Domestic Relations Law of Liberia bill, commonly known as
the “Anti-Same-Sex Marriage” bill. The proposed legislation criminalizes samesex
marriage with punishment of up to five years in prison.
At time of writing, another bill that seeks to criminalize same-sex practices was
before the Judiciary Committee of the House of Representatives.
Freedom of Expression
There has been some improvement in the protection of freedom of expression,
as evidenced by the creation of a number of independent media establishments
and the passage of a Freedom of Information Act into law.
Despite these gains, Liberia’s outdated and draconian defamation laws continue
to pose a serious risk to freedom of expression. The August 2013 arrest and
imprisonment for several weeks of editor Rodney Sieh, and the temporary closure
of his prominent investigative paper, FrontPage Africa, raised concerns
about the freedom of media to publish articles critical of government. Chris Toe,
a former government minister, won the libel case he brought against Sieh and
FrontPage Africa. The court ordered the defendants to pay Toe a judgment of
US$1.5 million. Under Liberian civil procedure law, a defendant can be imprisoned
for inability to pay a libel judgment. Sieh potentially faces a long prison
sentence.
There are few protections in Liberian law to ensure that defamation judgments
are not excessive. Furthermore, Liberia’s appeals process—including the use of disproportionate appeals bonds—effectively denies media centers and journalists
the right to appeal a defamation ruling.
Human Rights and Anti-Corruption Institutions
The Liberia Anti-Corruption Commission (LACC), which is empowered to investigate
and prosecute on its own initiative, has secured only two convictions since
it was established in 2008. The second conviction occurred in 2013 against former
Liberia National Police Inspector General Beatrice Munah-Sieh. The conviction
was appealed on the basis of jury errors. At time of writing, the case was
pending before the Supreme Court. In June, the Senate rejected a bill submitted
by President Sirleaf to give the LACC more freedom to prosecute corruption
cases. Currently, the LACC must submit its cases to the Ministry of Justice and
wait three months for the ministry to decide whether it will pursue its own case.
The General Auditing Commission (GAC), Liberia’s independent auditing
agency, has completed and issued dozens of reports in the last five years with
details of mismanagement and corruption. The Ministry of Justice has investigated
or pursued very few of these reports, but it announced in September 2013
it was reviewing past GAC reports for possible prosecution of government
malfeasance. That same month, the Senate began to hold public hearings on
past GAC audits.
The Independent National Commission on Human Rights, established in 2010
and empowered to investigate and consider human rights complaints, remains
ineffective and weak. While there was some progress—the commission dispatched
its first field monitors to Nimba, Bong, and Lofa—the commission has
yet to take meaningful steps toward fulfilling its mandate.
Key International Actors
Liberia’s international partners, including the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL), the United States, and the European Union were more outspoken in
2013 than in past years about the need to address corruption and weaknesses
in the security and justice sectors.
The UN Security Council extended the mandate of UNMIL until September 30,
2014. UNMIL began its plan to decrease the number of peacekeepers by halffrom over 8,000 to 3,750— between 2013 and 2015. In recognition of the lack of
readiness of the Liberia National Police to fully take over security, the UN secretary-
general decided to increase the number of UN police officers. The UN
Peacebuilding Support Office contributed $13 million to strengthen the rule of
law, notably by supporting the regional hub system.
Mali
An unexpected push south by Islamist armed groups in January 2013 provoked
a French-led military offensive that quickly dislodged the groups and largely
ended their abusive occupation of the north. During and after the offensive,
Malian soldiers committed numerous abuses, particularly against civilians and
rebel suspects in their custody.
Fears about the threat posed by Islamist armed groups linked to Al-Qaeda led
to considerable diplomatic efforts to resolve the crisis and stabilize Mali. The
French took the lead on military matters, the European Union on training and
security sector reform, and the United Nations, through the establishment of a
peacekeeping force, on rule of law and political stability. While most of these
actors criticized abuses by the Islamist groups, they were reluctant to publicly
criticize those by the Malian army.
Largely free, fair, and transparent presidential elections in August helped stabilize
the political situation. However, security was undermined by persistent
communal tensions, uncertainty about the status of Tuareg rebels; ongoing
attacks by Islamist groups, including suicide bombings; divisions within the
military; and rising criminality.
Malian authorities made little effort to investigate and hold accountable members
of the security forces implicated in abuses. However, in January, the prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) opened an investigation into
crimes allegedly committed in the three northern regions of the country. The
Ouagadougou Accord signed in June by the Malian government and two Tuareg
groups was ambiguous about whether those responsible for serious crimes
would be prosecuted.
The rule of law in the north was undermined by the slow return of members of
the judiciary and police to the north. Inadequate budgetary allocations for the
criminal justice system in general limited due process throughout the country.
Graft and corruption, endemic at all levels of government, further impeded
Malians’ access to basic health care and education.
Abuses by State Security Forces
Malian soldiers, in their campaign to retake the north, committed numerous
abuses, including summary executions, enforced disappearances, and torture.
The abuses, which targeted suspected Islamist rebels and alleged collaborators,
included at least 26 extrajudicial executions, 11 enforced disappearances,
and over 50 cases of torture or ill-treatment.
Detainees were severely beaten, kicked, and strangled; burned with cigarettes
and lighters; injected or forced to swallow an unidentified caustic substance;
exposed to simulated drowning akin to “waterboarding”; and subjected to
death threats and mock executions.
The mistreatment ceased after the detainees were turned over to gendarmes,
whom they sometimes bribed to secure their release. The presence of gendarmes,
French soldiers, and West African troops served as a deterrent to the
most serious abuses.
In August, the leader of the 2012 coup, Capt. Amadou Sanogo, was promoted to
the rank of lieutenant general, despite being directly implicated in torture and
enforced disappearances in 2012 and October 2013, when forces loyal to
Sanogo allegedly killed four and disappeared at least seven of his loyalists who
had mutinied. However, in August the interim president repealed a 2012 decree
appointing Sanogo as head of the committee to carry out reforms in the army.
Abuses by Armed Islamist Groups and Tuareg Rebels
Before being driven out of northern Mali, combatants with the Islamist groups—
Ansar Dine, the Movement for Unity and Jihad in West Africa (MUJAO), and Al-
Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM)—committed serious abuses against prisoners
and local residents. Enforcing their interpretation of Sharia, the groups
beat, flogged, and arbitrarily arrested those who smoked cigarettes, consumed
alcoholic beverages, or failed to adhere to the groups’ dress code. In January,
Islamist armed groups in Konna executed at least seven Malian soldiers.
AQIM continues to hold as hostages at least eight persons, including two
Frenchmen, a Dutchman, a Swede, a South African, and at least three Algerians.
AQIM claimed to have executed a Frenchman, Phillippe Verdon, on March 10 in
retaliation for France’s military intervention in northern Mali.
On June 1 and 2, forces of the Tuareg National Movement for the Liberation of
Azawad (MNLA), which still controls parts of the Kidal region, arbitrarily
detained about 100 people, most of them darker-skinned men from non-Tuareg
ethnic groups. The MNLA robbed, threatened, and, in numerous cases, severely
beat the men. On November 2, two French journalists were abducted in the
MNLA stronghold of Kidal and later executed by armed men allegedly linked to
AQIM. In September, the MNLA released some 30 prisoners being held by
Islamist groups in Kidal.
Accountability
War crimes and other serious abuses were committed by all sides during Mali’s
recent armed conflict. These abuses include the summary execution of up to
153 Malian soldiers in Aguelhok; widespread looting and pillage, and sexual
violence by the MNLA; the recruitment and use of child combatants, executions,
floggings, amputations, and destruction of religious and cultural shrines
by armed Islamist groups; and the summary execution, torture and enforced
disappearance by soldiers from the Malian army. Many health facilities in the
north were specifically targeted and looted.
In July 2012, the government of Mali, a state party to the ICC, referred “the situation
in Mali since January 2012” to the ICC prosecutor for investigation. On
January 16, 2013, the ICC prosecutor formally opened an investigation into
grave crimes allegedly committed in the northern three regions of Mali. At time
of writing, no arrest warrants had been issued.
The Malian government and military high command gave mixed signals regarding
abuses by Malian soldiers, at times flatly denying violations and at others
promising to hold alleged perpetrators to account. While Malian authorities
investigated a few incidents, including the enforced disappearance of five men
in Timbuktu in February and the September 2012 killing by soldiers of 16
Islamic preachers in Diabaly, numerous others have not been investigated, and
no soldiers implicated in recent abuses have been put on trial. There was
progress in justice for the enforced disappearance in May 2012 of at least 21
soldiers by forces loyal to Sanogo. In October, the judge investigating the case
charged and detained three security force members and summoned for questioning
17 others, including Sanogo, for their alleged role in the crimes.
Truth Telling and Reconciliation Mechanism
In March, the interim government established the Commission for Dialogue and
Reconciliation, but its efficacy was undermined by an unclear mandate and the
hasty appointment of commissioners by the interim government, which failed
to consult sufficiently with a wide variety of stakeholders. Because its mandate
and powers appear limited to promoting reconciliation, some Malians have
pushed for a commission that could address impunity for abuses and recommend
individuals for prosecution.
The Judiciary
Neglect and mismanagement within the Malian judiciary led to striking deficiencies
and hindered efforts to address impunity for the perpetrators of all classes
of crimes. Coupled with unprofessional conduct and corrupt practices, personnel
and logistical shortfalls within the justice sector contributed to violations of
the right to due process.
Because of the courts’ inability to adequately process cases, hundreds of prisoners
are held in extended pretrial detention in overcrowded jails and detention
centers. Very few of the estimated 250 men who were detained in relation
with the offensive to retake the north had legal representation, and several
died in custody as a result of inadequate medical care and poor detention conditions.
The interim justice minister did, however, replace many corrupt prosecutors
and made some progress in improving detention conditions.
Recruitment of Children and Child Labor
During their occupation of the north from April 2012 through February 2013,
Islamist armed groups recruited, trained, and used several hundred children in
their forces. Scores of children, some as young as 12, took part in battle, and
many were killed while fighting or by aerial bombardments. A number of
schools were destroyed by French bombings because Islamist groups were
using them as command centers.
Child labor in agriculture, domestic service, mining, and other sectors was common,
and often included dangerous work that Malian law prohibits for anyone
under the age of 18. Child laborers in artisanal gold mining were exposed to health risks from accidents and exposure to toxic mercury. More than two years
after its adoption, the government’s action plan on child labor remained largely
unimplemented.
Key International Actors
Mali’s partners, notably France, the European Union, the United States, and the
United Nations, issued numerous statements denouncing the offensive and
abuses by Islamist groups, but were reluctant to publicly condemn abuses committed
by the Malian army.
The establishment of a 6200-strong African-led International Support Mission
to Mali (AFISMA), authorized by UN Security Council Resolution 2085 in
December 2012, was envisioned to re-establish government control over northern
Mali in 2013. This mission was overtaken by events after Islamist rebels
attacked the government-controlled town of Konna in January. The attack
prompted a six-month military operation by up to 4,500 French soldiers, who
were assisted by African forces to re-establish government control of the north.
In recognition of the complex political and security challenges, the UN Security
Council in April adopted Resolution 2100, establishing the 11,200-strong
Integrated United Nations Mission for the Stabilization of Mali (MINUSMA). In
July, most AFISMA troops were re-assigned as UN peacekeepers.
Meanwhile, the African Union and ECOWAS took the lead in supporting negotiations
between armed Tuaregs and the Malian government, and in January the
AU Peace and Security Council (PSC) mandated the deployment of some 50
human rights observers to Mali. In February, the EU Foreign Affairs Council
launched the EU Training Mission in Mali (EUTM), mandated to train four battalions
of Malian soldiers and help reform the Malian army. In May, a donors’ conference
organized by the EU and France resulted in pledges of US$4.2 billion for
development efforts in Mali.
In February, the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights sent a
second fact-finding mission to Mali and surrounding countries. In March, the
UN Human Rights Council adopted a mandate for an independent expert.
Nigeria
Horrific abuses in the north by the militant Islamist group Boko Haram and the
Nigerian security forces’ heavy-handed response to this violence dominated
Nigeria’s human rights landscape in 2013. In May, President Goodluck Jonathan
imposed a state of emergency, which was extended for another three months in
November in the three states where Boko Haram is most active. The emergency
failed to curb atrocities and to sufficiently protect civilians. The prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court said that there was reason to believe Boko
Haram had committed crimes against humanity.
More than 400 people died in 2013 from violent inter-communal conflict in
Nigeria’s Middle Belt states, and scores were rendered homeless from the
clashes. Security forces throughout the country engaged in human rights abuses.
There were few investigations or prosecutions of these crimes.
The judiciary remained nominally free from interference and pressures from
other branches of government, but corruption did impede pursuit of justice.
Poverty and corruption continued to afflict the oil-rich Niger Delta, while the
weakness of anti-corruption institutions in government inhibited the realization
of social and economic rights and the fair and transparent functioning of the
public and private sectors.
Boko Haram Violence
The four-year insurgency by Boko Haram, which seeks to impose a harsh form
of Sharia, or Islamic law, in northern Nigeria and end government corruption,
has killed more than 5,000 people. Although the Nigerian government set up a
committee to develop an amnesty framework for Boko Haram, the group continued
to target government security agents, churches, and mosques.
Since 2012, Boko Haram has burned more than 300 schools in the north and
deprived more than 10,000 children of an education. In a particularly gory
attack in July, suspected armed Islamists killed 42 pupils and teachers and
burned down a government-owned boarding school in Mamudo village, Yobe
state.
The Nigerian government’s support for the formation of armed self-defense
groups, mostly young men to assist in the apprehension of Islamist insurgents, brought a new and alarming dimension to its anti-Boko Haram efforts. These
young men themselves became targets of Boko Haram attacks. In one August
incident in Borno state, Boko Haram killed 24 members of the “Civilian Joint
Task Force,” as the group is called. Thirty other members were declared missing.
Inter-Communal and Political Violence
Episodes of inter-communal violence in the Middle Belt states of Plateau,
Taraba, Benue, and Nasarawa left more than 400 people dead and scores of
houses destroyed. Federal and state authorities failed to hold accountable the
perpetrators of these crimes and break the cycle of violence. In response, ethnic
and religious groups in this region resorted to forming their own militias to
deliver justice and security. State and local government policies fed discontent
by discriminating against “non-indigenes”—people who cannot prove that they
are descendants of the original inhabitants of an area.
Conduct of Security Forces
Government security forces were implicated in various human rights violations
with regard to the Boko Haram insurgency. The large number of troops
deployed to enforce the state of emergency engaged in the indiscriminate
arrest, detention, torture, and extra-judicial killing of those suspected to be
supporters or members of the Islamist group. Security forces razed and burned
homes and properties in communities thought to harbor Boko Haram fighters.
In Baga, a town in Borno state, Nigerian troops destroyed more than 2,000
buildings and allegedly killed scores of people, apparently in retaliation for the
killing of a soldier by Boko Haram. The authorities have yet to bring anyone to
justice for these crimes.
The Nigerian police have also been involved in frequent human rights violations,
including extrajudicial killings, torture, arbitrary arrests, and extortionrelated
abuses. Despite the dismantling of many “road blocks” by the inspector
general of police, corruption in the police force remains a serious problem. The
police routinely solicit bribes from victims to investigate crimes and from suspects
to drop investigations. Senior police officials embezzle or mismanage police funds, often demanding monetary “returns” that their subordinates
extort from the public.
Government Corruption
The Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC) made little progress
combating corruption in the public sector. In a major setback in ending impunity
for corruption among political officeholders, President Goodluck Jonathan in
March 2013 “pardoned” Diepreye Alamieyeseigha, a former governor of Bayelsa
State, and the only governor to have served prison time in Nigeria for corruption.
Corruption cases against several dozen senior politicians, as well as oil marketers
for their alleged role in a fraudulent fuel subsidy scheme, had still not
been completed at time of writing. Executive interference with the EFCC, a weak
and overburdened judiciary, and the agency’s own missteps, including failing
to appeal tenuous rulings or prosecute senior politicians credibly implicated in
corruption, have continued to undermine its efficacy.
The country’s other prominent anti-corruption agency, the Independent Corrupt
Practices and Other Related Offences Commission (ICPC), established in 2000
to tackle corruption in the public sector, failed to file charges or achieve any
major convictions in 2013.
Violence and Poverty in the Oil-Producing Niger Delta
The federal government’s 2009 amnesty program—which saw some 26,000 militants,
youth, and gang members surrender weapons in exchange for amnesty
and monthly cash stipends—have reduced attacks on oil facilities in the Niger
Delta. The government has doled out these financial incentives—some US$400
million annually—from the additional oil revenue accruing to government following
the amnesty, but has still not addressed the region’s underlying causes
of violence and discontent, such as poverty, public sector corruption, environmental
degradation from oil spills, and impunity for politically sponsored violence.
In June, the government announced 2015 as the terminal date for the program
and acknowledged that its inability to secure jobs for the trained ex-militants or implement an orderly exit strategy may portend more danger for the
region.
Health and Human Rights
Widespread lead poisoning from artisanal gold mining in Zamfara State has
killed at least 400 children since 2010. The release of funds in February by the
federal government to clean up the environment allowed lead treatment programs
to be expanded to reach an additional 1,500 children.
In February, nine female polio vaccinators were shot dead by suspected Islamic
militants in Kano, and security for vaccinators remains fragile in the north.
Attacks on health workers threaten the realization of the right to health.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Nigeria’s criminal and penal codes punish consensual homosexual conduct
with up to 14 years in prison. Sharia penal codes in many northern states criminalize
consensual homosexual conduct with caning, imprisonment, or death by
stoning.
In May 2013, Nigeria’s House of Representatives passed the Same Sex Marriage
(Prohibition) Bill, earlier passed by the Senate in November 2012, and at time
of writing the bill was awaiting the president’s approval. Same-sex marriages or
civil unions, which could lead to imprisonment of up to 14 years, are so broadly
defined in the bill that they include virtually any form of same-sex cohabitation.
In addition, the bill seeks to impose prison sentences on lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, and intersex (LGBTI) people.
Human rights groups vocally opposed the bill because it would formalize discrimination
against LGBTI people and have wide-ranging effects on the constitutionally
guaranteed rights to dignity, personal liberty, freedom of speech,
association and assembly, and freedoms of thought, conscience, and religion.
In July, Nigeria’s Foreign Ministry announced that the country would not accredit
diplomats with same-sex spouses, confirming that, if the law comes into
effect, the country would extend to non-citizens its legal ban on LGBTI relationships.
Freedom of Expression and Media
Civil society and the independent media openly criticize the government and its
policies, allowing for robust public debate. Yet journalists are still subject to
arrest and intimidation when reporting on issues implicating Nigeria’s political
and economic elite. In August, the federal government arrested and charged the
political editor and political reporter of Leadership newspaper, Tony Amokeodo
and Chibuzor Ukaibe, respectively, for reporting on a story based on documents
allegedly issued by the president. In September, Tukur Mamu, the publisher of
Desert Herald, was arrested and detained allegedly for publishing a book criticizing
the Minister of the Federal Capital Territory.
In January, Ikechukwu Udendu, the editor of Anambra News, a monthly newspaper
in southeastern Anambra state, was gunned down in Onitsha. In
September, the mutilated body of Aisha Usman, a reporter with the news magazine
Mahangar Arewa in Zaria, was found on a highway in Kaduna state. The
causes of these deaths remained unknown at time of writing.
Key International Actors
Nigeria’s roles as a regional power, Africa’s leading oil exporter, and a major
contributor of troops to United Nations peacekeeping missions have made foreign
governments reluctant to exert meaningful pressure on the country over its
disappointing human rights record.
The British government in July designated Boko Haram as a foreign terrorist
organization, aimed at preventing it from operating in the UK and blocking
British-based support for the group. The UK continues to provide substantial
foreign aid to Nigeria, including security sector assistance. It has not, however,
openly demanded accountability for government officials or security force members
implicated in corruption or serious human rights abuses.
The US government in November designated Boko Haram and its affiliate,
Ansaru, as foreign terrorist organizations. The United States in 2013 restricted a
Nigerian army battalion operating in Mali as part of an African force from receiving
non-lethal equipment under a foreign aid law, which bars the US from providing
training or equipment to foreign troops or units that commit gross human
rights violations.
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay consistently
warned that Boko Haram’s attacks might constitute crimes against humanity.
The International Criminal Court continued its “preliminary examination” of the
situation in Nigeria, with a focus on assessing the gravity of crimes committed
and the extent to which national authorities are investigating and prosecuting
them.
Rwanda
Rwanda adopted a number of new laws, including media laws and a revised law
on genocide ideology. The country continued to make impressive progress in
the delivery of public services, such as health care, but freedom of expression
and association remain tightly controlled. The government obstructed opposition
parties and independent civil society organizations, and threatened its critics.
Parliamentary elections resulted in an overwhelming majority for the ruling
party, with no meaningful challenge. The leadership of one of the last remaining
independent human rights organizations was taken over by pro-government
elements.
Despite mounting international concern, Rwanda provided significant military
support to the M23, an armed group responsible for serious abuses against
civilians in eastern Democratic Republic of Congo. In November, the M23 was
defeated by the Congolese army and UN peacekeepers, after Rwanda appeared
to withdraw its support for the M23 during military operations.
Political Parties
The ruling Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) won parliamentary elections in
September with more than 76 percent of the vote. The only other parties that
presented candidates were those broadly supporting the RPF.
The opposition Democratic Green Party of Rwanda, which had been trying to
register as a party for almost four years, was finally granted registration by the
government in August, on the day before the deadline for parties to submit
their lists of election candidates. As a result, it decided not to take part in the
polls.
Two opposition party leaders arrested in 2010—Victoire Ingabire of the FDUInkingi
and Bernard Ntaganda of the PS-Imberakuri—remained in prison, serving
sentences of respectively eight and four years, Ntaganda for endangering
national security and divisionism, and Ingabire for conspiracy to undermine the
government and genocide denial. Appeal hearings for Ingabire, who was sentenced
in 2012, concluded at the High Court in Kigali on July 31. The judgment is
expected in December.
Sylvain Sibomana, secretary general of the FDU-Inkingi, and Dominique
Shyirambere, another party member, were arrested on March 25, after a confrontation
with police outside the courtroom where Ingabire’s trial was taking
place. They were charged with contempt of public officials, illegal demonstration,
and inciting insurrection or public disorder. Police and judicial officials
questioned them about the possession of T-shirts bearing the slogan “democracy
and justice” and badges calling for Ingabire’s release. On November 22,
Sibomana was found guilty of the first two charges and sentenced to two years
in prison; Shyirambere was sentenced to five months.
Sibomana also faced charges in a second case linked to the prosecution of
eight other FDU-Inkingi members in Karongi, arrested in September 2012 on
charges of inciting insurrection or public disorder after allegedly holding illegal
meetings. On July 11, seven of the original defendants were each sentenced to
two years in prison. Sibomana’s case has since been joined to that of the
eighth, Anselme Mutuyimana. At time of writing, the verdict in Sibomana and
Mutuyimana’s trial had not yet been handed down.
Civil Society Organizations
Government officials were openly hostile toward independent nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) working on human rights. The pro-government media
echoed these views with public attacks on international human rights organizations
and other perceived critics.
In August, the last effective independent Rwandan human rights organization,
the Rwandan League for the Promotion and Defense of Human Rights (LIPRODHOR),
was taken over by members believed to be sympathetic to the government.
On July 21, these members ousted the organization’s leaders and voted
in a new board, violating the organization’s internal statutes and Rwandan legislation
governing NGOs.
Three days later, the Rwanda Governance Board—the state body with oversight
of national NGOs—recognized the new board. LIPRODHOR, through its ousted
president, has taken the case to court. The case was pending at time of writing.
During the forced handover between the old and new boards, police threatened
LIPRODHOR staff with imprisonment if they did not cooperate with the new
board.
Freedom of Media
New media laws adopted in February appeared to increase the scope for independent
journalism, for example by enshrining journalists’ rights to freedom of
opinion and expression and by introducing media self-regulation. Some radio
stations broadcast call-in programs in which listeners posed critical questions
to political leaders. However, most print and broadcast media continued to be
heavily dominated by pro-government views. Most journalists were unable or
unwilling to engage in investigative reporting on sensitive issues and rarely criticized
government policies, as a result of intimidation, threats, and prosecutions
in previous years.
Saidati Mukakibibi, journalist with Umurabyo newspaper, arrested in 2010, was
released on June 25 after serving a three-year sentence, reduced from seven
years on appeal in 2012. The newspaper’s editor, Agnès Uwimana, whose sentence
had been reduced from seventeen to four years, remained in prison.
On March 25, the High Court in Kigali upheld the conviction of Stanley Gatera,
editor of Umusingi newspaper, who was found guilty of discrimination and sectarianism
in 2012. He was released on July 26 after serving a one-year prison
sentence.
Justice for Genocide
The trial of Léon Mugesera, a former government official extradited from Canada
to Rwanda in 2012 and accused of planning and incitement to genocide, took
place in the High Court in Kigali. It was ongoing at time of writing.
In July, the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) transferred genocide
suspect Bernard Munyagishari to face trial in Rwanda. After preliminary
hearings, the trial of Jean Bosco Uwinkindi, the first such case to be transferred
by the ICTR to Rwanda in 2012, was postponed and had not begun in substance
at time of writing.
Criminal trials of Rwandan genocide suspects on the basis of universal jurisdiction
took place in the national courts of Norway, Sweden, and the Netherlands,
leading to convictions and prison sentences.
A United States court convicted a Rwandan of immigration fraud for concealing
her role in the genocide, stripped her of US citizenship and sentenced her to 10
years’ imprisonment. A genocide suspect in Norway was extradited to Rwanda
while two others in Sweden and Denmark lost their appeals against extradition.
Extradition cases were pending in several other countries, including the UK,
Netherlands, and France.
Genocide Ideology Law
A revised version of the 2008 law on genocide ideology was promulgated in
October. It contains several improvements to the 2008 law, including a more
precise definition of the offense and the requirement to demonstrate intent
behind the crime, thereby reducing the scope for abusive prosecutions.
However, several articles retain language that could be used to criminalize free
speech. The new law reduces the maximum prison sentence from 25 to 9 years.
Unlawful Detention, Torture, and Ill-Treatment
In a trial of 20 people that began in 2012 and concluded in September 2013, a
court in Gasabo, Kigali, failed to investigate claims by defendants that they had
been held in illegal detention centers and tortured. Several defendants,
accused of stealing televisions and other goods, said they had been held
unlawfully, in two unofficial detention centers known as Chez Kabuga and Chez
Gacinya. They stated in court that the police had tortured them to force them to
confess or incriminate others. The judge dismissed their allegations of torture,
saying the detainees had no evidence. The court acquitted 7 defendants and
sentenced the remaining 13 to prison terms of between 3 and 10 years.
Dozens of defendants charged with endangering state security in several group
trials in Musanze claimed they had been detained unlawfully in military camps
or other unrecognized detention centers. Some said they had been tortured.
Many defendants spent lengthy periods in pretrial detention—in some cases,
more than two years—before they were tried in 2013. Some were tried and convicted
without a defense lawyer.
Refugees from Rwanda
Some Rwandan refugees and asylum-seekers faced security threats in their
country of asylum, particularly in Uganda. Joel Mutabazi, a former presidential
bodyguard in Rwanda with refugee status in Uganda, was abducted on August
20 by armed men from a safe-house in a suburb of the capital Kampala where
he had been staying since escaping an attempt on his life in Uganda in July
2012. He was released the same day, thanks to an intervention by the Ugandan
police. On October 25, he went missing from another location where he was living
under 24-hour Ugandan police protection. His whereabouts were unknown
for six days. On October 31, the Rwandan police confirmed he was detained in
Rwanda but refused to disclose where he was held. On November 13, he
appeared before a military court in Kigali with 14 co-accused, charged with terrorism
and other offenses. The Ugandan government claimed that a Ugandan
police officer had erroneously handed Mutabazi to the Rwandan police, without
following correct legal procedures.
Another Rwandan, Pascal Manirakiza, who had fled to Uganda after escaping
from the M23 in eastern Congo, was reported missing in August. He was found
alive but unconscious, with serious injuries, near Kampala.
Rwanda’s Involvement in the DRC
Rwanda provided military support to the M23, a Congolese armed group
responsible for killings of civilians, rape, and recruitment of child soldiers in
eastern Congo. This support included supplies of weapons and ammunition;
the recruitment in Rwanda of young men and boys, some under 16, to fight with
the M23 in Congo; training of M23 recruits by Rwandan military officers; and the
deployment of Rwandan troops in Congo to assist the M23. As in 2012, the
Rwandan government denied providing any support to the M23. In November,
the M23 was defeated by the Congolese army and UN peacekeepers after
Rwanda appeared to stop supporting the group during military operations.
Around 700 M23 fighters fled to Rwanda in March after infighting in the M23,
and additional fighters fled in November when the M23 was defeated. They
included several individuals implicated in serious abuses in eastern Congo, including four named on UN and US sanctions lists. Rwanda has yet to take
steps to investigate alleged abuses by M23 fighters who fled to Rwanda.
M23 leader Bosco Ntaganda, who had long been backed by Rwanda until the
M23 split into two factions in early 2013, surrendered to the US embassy in
Kigali in March and was transferred to the International Criminal Court (see
chapter on Democratic Republic of Congo).
Key International Actors
Several governments and other international actors expressed renewed concern
for Rwandan military support to the M23. Some donors who had suspended or
delayed parts of their assistance to Rwanda in 2012 in response to its support
for the M23 resumed aid but channeled it to different sectors.
The United Kingdom decided not to resume general budget support and redirected
its assistance to education and poverty alleviation programs instead. In
October, the US government suspended military assistance to Rwanda under
the Child Soldiers Protection Act, because of Rwanda’s support to the M23,
which uses child soldiers.
Somalia
Civilians continue to suffer serious human rights abuses as the new Somali
government struggled to extend its control beyond the capital, Mogadishu, and
to some key towns in south-central Somalia in 2013. Parties to Somalia’s longrunning
armed conflict were responsible for serious violations of international
law; abuses include indiscriminate attacks, sexual violence, and arbitrary
arrests and detention.
The Islamist armed group Al-Shabaab maintains control of much of southern
Somalia, and the group increased attacks on high-profile civilian locales in
Mogadishu, including the courthouse, a popular restaurant, and the United
Nations compound, killing scores of civilians. Those fighting against Al-
Shabaab—a combination of Somali government armed forces, the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), Ethiopian government troops, and allied militias—
have also committed abuses.
The new government’s human rights record has been mixed. Despite public
pledges to tackle rights violations, implementation has been poor. The government
and its security forces undermined these commitments, for example, in
February, by arresting a woman who alleged rape by government forces and
also a journalist who interviewed her. They were convicted of tarnishing state
institutions but eventually acquitted after significant international criticism.
The government gave priority to justice and security sector reform, essential to
improving human rights, but insecurity in Mogadishu and other governmentcontrolled
areas remains a serious challenge. The unresolved implementation
of the proposed federalism plan led to open conflict and abuses, notably in the
contested port town of Kismayo, where fighting broke out in June between rival
militia.
Abuses in Government-Controlled Areas
Civilians were killed and wounded by crossfire, including during infighting
between government soldiers over control of roadblocks.
In June, fighting between rival clan militias in Kismayo and apparently indiscriminate
attacks on civilian buildings caused dozens of civilian casualties. On June 8, three children were killed when a shell struck their house and a local
health clinic was damaged.
In government-controlled areas, targeted killings including of traditional elders,
civilian officials, and journalists increased. The perpetrators are frequently
unknown, although Al-Shabaab is often believed to be responsible. On April 26,
Deputy State Attorney Ahmad Shaykh Nur Maalin was killed in Mogadishu.
In addition, the government’s military court sentenced at least six people—two
civilians allegedly linked to Al-Shabaab and four soldiers—to death and executed
them in Mogadishu and Beletweyne between July and August following trials
that raise serious due process concerns.
In the run-up to council elections in the semi-autonomous region of Puntland,
which were subsequently postponed, one journalist and two human rights
defenders were killed. There were also executions by Puntland’s military court.
Abuses by Al-Shabaab
Access to, and information about, Al-Shabaab areas is severely restricted, but
credible reports indicate that Al-Shabaab has committed targeted killings,
beheadings, and executions, particularly of individuals it accused of spying. Al-
Shabaab continues to forcibly recruit adults and children, administer arbitrary
justice, and restrict basic rights.
Al-Shabaab supporters carried out attacks with improvised explosive devices
and grenades and suicide bombings that targeted civilians, particularly in
Mogadishu. On April 14, Al-Shabaab attacked Mogadishu’s main court complex
leaving at least 30 civilians dead, including three lawyers and a judge. A June
attack on the UN compound in Mogadishu killed at least 14 people. On
September 7, at least 15 people were killed in an attack on Village restaurant,
popular among journalists and politicians, for the second time in under a year.
In its most high-profile attack outside Somalia, Al-Shabaab claimed responsibility
for a major attack on the Westgate shopping mall, an upscale shopping
center in Nairobi, Kenya, on September 20 that killed 67 people (see Kenya
chapter).
Sexual Violence
Women and girls face alarming levels of sexual violence throughout the country.
Internally displaced women and girls are particularly vulnerable to rape by
armed men including government soldiers and militia members. In January, a
displaced woman, who alleged that she was raped by government soldiers, and
a journalist who interviewed her were prosecuted in a deeply flawed and politicized
judicial process. Security forces have also threatened individuals who
have reported rape, and service providers.
Reports of sexual exploitation and abuse by AMISOM increased. In a March
2013 resolution, the UN Security Council called on AMISOM to take measures to
prevent sexual abuse and exploitation and address allegations of abuse. In
August, a woman alleged that she was abducted by soldiers and then transferred
to AMISOM soldiers who raped her. A joint Somali and AMISOM highlevel
task force was established to investigate, during which AMISOM publicly
denied the allegations. The alleged victim and witnesses were intimidated by
government intelligence agents during the investigation.
Recruitment of Children and Other Abuses
All Somali parties to the conflict continue to commit serious abuses against
children, including recruitment into armed forces and arbitrary detentions. Al-
Shabaab in particular has targeted children for recruitment and forced marriage,
and attacked schools.
Government authorities committed to implementing a July 2012 action plan
against child recruitment but discussions about implementation were ongoing
at time of writing.
Displaced Persons and Access to Humanitarian Assistance
According to the UN, at least 870,000 people, many of them displaced persons,
are still in need of emergency humanitarian assistance. Tens of thousands of
displaced people remain in dire conditions in Mogadishu and are subjected to
rape, forced evictions, and clan-based discrimination at the hands of government
forces, allied militia, and private individuals including camp managers known as “gatekeepers.” Gatekeepers and militias controlling the camps have
also diverted and stolen food aid intended for internally displaced persons.
In January, the government announced plans to relocate the capital’s displaced
population to new camps in the Daynile district, where Al-Shabaab retains a
significant presence, prompting concerns that the new camps would lack basic
security and protection, as well as services. Meanwhile, forced evictions of the
displaced continue including from camps planned for relocation.
Humanitarian agencies face challenges accessing populations in need due to
ongoing attacks and restrictions imposed by parties to the conflict. On April 14,
a car bomb exploded on the airport road in Mogadishu hitting cars carrying
Turkish aid workers. On August 14, Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) ended its
22-year operation in Somalia, citing continuing attacks by armed groups and
civilian leaders on health workers. Before its departure, MSF had treated about
50,000 people per month and the World Health Organization estimates that 1.5
million people may now lack access to health care.
Attacks on Media
Somalia remains one of the most dangerous countries in the world to be a journalist.
Five journalists and media workers were killed in 2013, four of them in
Mogadishu. On April 21, Mohamed Ibrahim Raage, a journalist working for the
governmental Radio Mogadishu and Somali National Television who had
recently returned to Mogadishu from exile in Uganda, was killed outside his
home. A number of other journalists were also attacked, including in the town
of Kismayo.
Impunity for these killings prevails. One individual was sentenced to death in
March for the September 2012 killing of journalist Hassan Yusuf Absuge, and
then executed in August after a trial that did not meet international due process
standards.
The Puntland authorities temporarily closed media outlets and banned rebroadcasting
of certain international programs. In April, the Ministry of Information
banned Radio Daljir, One Nation, and Codka Nabada (Voice of Peace).
In June, a Somaliland court suspended the popular daily Hubaal upon request
of the attorney general. The ban was lifted in August after a presidential pardon. The newspaper’s leadership has been intimidated and harassed, and the
editor and managing director were convicted on criminal defamation charges in
July.
Key International Actors
In a series of high-profile pledging conferences hosted by the United Kingdom
and the European Union in May and September, international donors pledged
significant funds to the new government’s reform agenda. The plans included
human rights components but no rights monitoring framework.
In November, the UN Security Council authorized the African Union to increase
the number of AMISOM forces from 17,731 to 22,126 and approved the provision
of non-lethal support to the Somali forces. Following the September attack
on Kenya’s Westgate mall, the United States claimed responsibility for at least
one operation against Al-Shabaab inside Somalia.
In addition to their large military presence in Somalia, Kenya, and Ethiopia
trained and provided military support to government-affiliated militia. Both
focused on the status of border areas such as Lower Juba and Gedo, where they
have been particularly involved in tense negotiations over the creation of the
Jubaland region. Ahmed Mohamed Islam, known as “Madobe,” a Kenyan ally,
was chosen as the head of the interim administration.
The UN established a new country presence, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), which includes a human rights monitoring and
reporting mandate.
Host countries of Somali refugees, particularly Kenya, seized on the apparent
improvement of security in Mogadishu and the takeover of certain towns by
AMISOM and government forces as grounds for potentially returning Somalis to
their country. Furthermore, some EU member countries returned failed Somali
asylum seekers to Mogadishu, contending that apparent improvements in
Mogadishu meant they no longer needed protection on human rights grounds.
The ongoing internal armed conflict in south-central Somalia means EU countries
should carefully examine, on a case-by-case basis, whether returning a
person to Mogadishu would pose a serious threat to that person.
In September, the European Court of Human Rights declared inadmissible a
claim by a rejected Somali asylum seeker, paving the way for his return by
Sweden to Somalia. The court failed to give sufficient weight to the ongoing displaced
person crisis in Mogadishu and the volatile security situation, both of
which could place anyone returned to the capital in serious jeopardy.
South Africa
South Africa continues to struggle with the legacy of apartheid and the challenges
relating to addressing increasing demands from its citizens for the realization
of economic and social rights as well as respect for fundamental civil
and political freedoms. Although the government has been relatively successful
in the provision of social services, financial mismanagement, and corruption—
especially at the local government level—have seriously undermined progress
in effective and efficient delivery of social and economic services.
Growing disaffection with local government, increasing poverty levels, and
unemployment contributed to a resurgence of threats of violence against, and
attacks on, property belonging to refugees, asylum-seekers, and migrants in the
Eastern Cape and Gauteng provinces.
Xenophobic Attacks
In May and June, xenophobic attacks on the businesses and homes of refugees,
asylum-seekers and migrants displaced hundreds of people in Gauteng. More
than 60 foreign-owned shops were forced to close following violent looting and
destruction by community members in the Orange Farm and Diepsloot areas of
Gauteng. In June and September, similar attacks against Somali nationals in
KwaZakhele and New Brighton in Port Elizabeth, in the Eastern Cape Province,
left several shops looted and burnt. Due to the level of xenophobic violence,
police had to relocate some of the foreign nationals to temporary shelters.
At time of writing no one had been arrested and charged with xenophobic violence.
Instead, police arrested 21 people in Gauteng and charged them with
public violence and arrested about 100 others in connection with the violence
in Port Elizabeth. Official statements by members of both local and central governments
have denied that violence against foreign nationals has been motivated
by xenophobia or other forms of intolerance. Such statements have undermined
the development of an effective, long-term strategy by the police to prevent
xenophobic crimes by dealing with its root causes. On the other hand,
some intervention strategies planned by local authorities in the affected areas,
such as awareness campaigns and peace dialogues, sought to address xenophobia.
Inquiry into Killing of Marikana Miners
The investigation into the deaths of 44 people including the police killing of 34
miners between August 11 and 16, has been obstructed by delays of the work of
the Farlam Commission of Inquiry, created to investigate the killings. The commission
was asked by the government to conclude its investigation in four
months, but its work slowed due to loss of vital documents (including video evidence),
the deaths of witnesses, and an ongoing legal battle over state funding
for lawyers representing the families of the miners killed, injured, and arrested.
The commission, which adjourned in May, resumed in July, but lawyers representing
the injured and arrested miners requested another postponement, as
they called on the government to cover the miners’ legal fees. The presidency
and minister of justice opposed the application for funding and the lawyers
took their case to the North Gauteng High Court. In July, the High Court rejected
the application for state funding, with Judge Raulinga ruling that the right to
state funding was not absolute for the Marikana miners. Delays in submission
of video evidence led to another extension of the inquiry to October 30. On
October 31, President Jacob Zuma extended the term of the Farlam Commission
to April 30, 2014.
Serious concerns remain about the ongoing conduct and capacity of the South
African Police Services (SAPS), both in terms of the use of force in general, as
well as the ability to deal with riots in a rights-respecting manner.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
South Africa played an important but inconsistent role in advancing the human
rights of LGBT people internationally. On the domestic front, South Africa faced
challenges in responding to widespread violence (including rape and murder)
against lesbians and transgender men in the country.
In 2011, South Africa was instrumental in introducing a precedent-setting resolution
at the United Nations Human Rights Council on combating violence and
discrimination against individuals on the basis of sexual orientation and gender
identity, but has not played a decisive leadership role on this issue at the
UN since then.
In May 2011, the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development established
a National Task Team to address gender and sexual orientation-based
violence against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) persons.
The Task Team, with representatives from government departments, independent
bodies, and civil society, was tasked with developing, implementing,
and monitoring a joint intervention strategy to address gender- and sexual orientation-
based violence against LGBTI persons, especially in the courts and the
criminal justice sector.
The Task Team became dormant and ineffectual, but has been moved to the
Constitutional Development Branch of the Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development and reinvigorated with new leadership, additional
resources, the adoption of clear terms of reference, and the development of a
national coordinated strategy to combat hate crime and ensure that bias crimes
against LGBTI people are monitored and fast-tracked through the criminal justice
system. If effective, this will go a long way to demonstrate the government’s
commitment to fight sexual and gender-based violence by conducting
genuine and timely investigations and prosecutions of perpetrators of such violence.
Freedom of Expression
The controversial Protection of State Information Bill (the Secrecy Bill) remains
a major concern in light of its restrictions on freedom of expression, freedom of
information, press freedom, and democratic accountability. The bill, introduced
in March 2010, has been criticized as inconsistent with South Africa’s constitution
and international human rights obligations. In April 2013, the bill was
amended, and a slightly modified new version was adopted by the National
Assembly. However, major concerns remain about the bill, as well as the lack of
protection for whistleblowers and journalists exposing information as a matter
of public interest. Under the new version of the bill, journalists or whistleblowers
can potentially be arrested for reporting information deemed classified by
the government that exposes corruption, mismanagement, or malfeasance—
even in the face of a compelling public interest.
On September 10, President Zuma said he would not sign the Secrecy Bill,
which he returned to parliament for redrafting. Zuma cited concerns with section 42 that relates to failure to report possession of classified information, and
section 45 that relates to proper classification of information, stating that these
lacked coherence and clarity and were therefore unconstitutional. Civil society
groups welcomed the development but urged the government to address other
draconian aspects of the bill including sections that provide harsh sentences
and penalties for possession of information deemed by the government as classified.
Local civil society groups called on the government to amend the bill to ensure
that it conformed to international standards on freedom of expression, including
by providing a public interest defense. On November 12, parliament adopted
a revised version of the bill but failed to address civil society concerns on its
other draconian aspects. The bill was returned to the president for assent. At
time of writing, he had not signed the bill.
Women’s Rights
The controversial Traditional Court’s Bill that was withdrawn from parliament in
2012 went through a new consultation process during the first half of 2013.
Following public hearings on the draft bill, the government sent the report of
the consultation to South Africa’s nine provinces to determine whether they
supported the bill. The bill has been criticized for giving traditional leaders the
authority to enforce controversial versions of customary law that infringe upon
women’s rights such as the practice of ukutwala (forced marriage), as well as
discriminatory social and economic practices, such as denial of access to land,
and inheritance.
Disability Rights
Despite progressive legislation on disabilities and ratification of the Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, children with disabilities, especially
those living in institutions in rural areas, have limited access to mainstream
education and are particularly vulnerable to physical and sexual abuse.
Disability advocates have raised serious concerns about the quality of institutional
care provided to children with disabilities and the lack of government
oversight.
Rights of Asylum Seekers
In defiance of court orders, the Department of Home Affairs refused to reopen
three of its seven Refugee Reception Offices, closed in 2011. The closures,
which were part of the department’s plan to move asylum-processing to the
country’s borders, have limited asylum seekers’ access not only to the asylum
procedure, but also to work permits, adequate shelter, and assistance while
their refugee claims are pending. On June 20, the Eastern Cape High Court once
again ordered the government to reopen the Port Elizabeth Refugee Reception
Centre and ensure that it was fully functional by October 1. At time of writing,
the reception center had not been reopened.
South Africa’s Foreign Policy
South Africa since the end of apartheid has been an important and influential
voice in debates over international responses to human rights issues in Africa
and globally. It has twice been elected non-permanent member of the United
Nations Security Council; it is a member of the trilateral forum, IBSA, composed
of India, Brazil, and South Africa; and the BRICS grouping of emerging
economies of Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa. Its role in the
African Union (AU) and as a mediator and contributor to peacekeeping forces
on the continent has also grown rapidly. In November, South Africa was elected
to the UN Human Rights Council.
The post-apartheid South African government has successfully created domestic
standards based on the ideals of fairness, justice, and human rights that
have to a greater extent shaped the country’s approach to its foreign policy.
South African foreign policy has consistently reflected a desire to fully integrate
the country into the global system. At the same time, its foreign policy remains
sensitive to the country’s apartheid history, leading to the country’s desire to
be seen as an internationally responsible actor, a bridge between developed
and developing countries, and a representative of Africa’s interests in global
affairs.
South Africa’s history has also led it to view foreign policy through the lens of
its own history of achieving locally informed, negotiated solutions to political situations and conflicts where the achievement of peace and justice were
sought as mutually reinforcing imperatives.
These different competing strands of foreign policy have often manifested in an
inconsistent and sometimes contradictory application of South Africa’s foreign
policy ideals, and a failure to consistently align foreign policy with the human
rights principles articulated in the country’s constitution.
In the past year, South Africa took positions on political crises in various countries
that have at times been at odds with its human rights principles. In
August, South Africa, which played a key role in mediating the political crisis in
Zimbabwe, endorsed Zimbabwe’s flawed July elections which led to President
Robert Mugabe winning a seventh term.
In Syria, South Africa’s expressions of concern at the political situation and
escalation of violence, including the use of chemical weapons by the Syrian
government, have been tempered by reluctance to condemn abuses committed
by President Bashar al-Assad against his own citizens. Instead, South Africa
has repeatedly emphasized the importance of all parties involved in the Syrian
conflict engaging in an inclusive national dialogue to reach a negotiated settlement.
Conversely, South Africa has strongly condemned the July military
takeover of power in Egypt and ongoing abuses by the military. South Africa has
also strongly supported the AU’s decision to suspend Egypt from the regional
body for an “unconstitutional change of government.”
South Africa has consistently worked to bring about peace and stability and an
end to abuses in the Democratic Republic of Congo, with the deployment of
South African forces to the intervention brigade under the auspices of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO) in the eastern DRC. South Africa has also played key
roles in peace and reconstruction initiatives and the restoration of rights in
South Sudan and Somalia.
South Sudan
South Sudan’s second year as an independent nation was marked by political
and economic uncertainty, violence in the eastern state of Jonglei, and ongoing
repression of civil and political rights.
South Sudan and Sudan signed a series of agreements to resolve various outstanding
issues in September 2012, but the relations between the two governments
remain tense. Southern oil began flowing again through Sudan in April
after a 2012 shutdown by South Sudan, but in June Khartoum threatened to
stop transportation, accusing Juba of supporting rebels in its territory.
In July, President Salva Kiir dismissed his entire cabinet and appointed a new
vice president and 21 new ministers, downsizing the cabinet from 28 ministries.
In Jonglei state, an abusive government anti-insurgency operation against a
rebel group in the area worsened brutal ethnic violence in 2013.
The government has not adequately responded to unlawful killings, arrests and
detentions, and other human rights violations by its security forces. Lack of
capacity and inadequate training of police, prosecutors, and judges give rise to
numerous human rights violations in the administration of justice.
Legislative Developments
The South Sudan Legislative Assembly (SSLA) passed three media bills in July,
including a Right of Access to Information bill, more than six years after the
bills were drafted. President Kiir had yet to sign the bills into law at time of writing.
Journalists hope the legislation will reduce unlawful arrests and harassment
of media workers, including by officers from the National Security Service
(NSS) who continue to operate without legal authority.
Kiir’s cabinet endorsed the ratification of seven core international human rights
instruments in early 2013, including the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights. The SSLA ratified the African Charter on Human and Peoples’
Rights and the AU Convention Governing Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems
in Africa, the UN Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the Convention on the Rights of the
Child in late 2013, but others were still pending approval at time of writing.
South Sudan’s first elections since independence are due in 2015, but preparations
have lagged. The mandate of the National Constitution Review
Commission, tasked with conducting broad consultation ahead of drafting a
new constitution by January 9, 2013, was extended to December 31, 2014. At
time of writing, President Kiir had not sworn in members of the political parties’
council, delaying registration and re-registration of all political parties, required
under the 2012 Political Parties Act. Parties cannot conduct any political work or
other activities until registered.
Weaknesses in the justice system give rise to human rights violations, including
prolonged periods of pretrial detention, lack of defense counsel, and poor
detention conditions. Although South Sudan voted in favor of the UN General
Assembly moratorium on the use of the death penalty in December 2012, at
least four people were reported to have been executed in November.
South Sudan’s laws on marriage, separation, divorce, and related matters
requires urgent reform, as almost half of South Sudanese girls between 15 and
19 are married, some as young as 12. South Sudan has no legislation that clearly
sets 18 as the minimum age of marriage. Lack of a national plan of action
that sets out comprehensive strategies to address child marriage has undermined
efforts to curb the practice. Marital rape is also still not recognized as a
criminal offense.
Anti-Insurgency Abuses and Ethnic Conflict in Jonglei State
Conflict between South Sudan’s army and a rebel group largely drawing support
from the Murle ethnic group continued in 2013. Inter-ethnic conflict has intensified
in recent years in Jonglei, with thousands killed.
An abusive 2012 government disarmament campaign helped reignite an earlier
Murle insurgency. During its counterinsurgency the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army (SPLA) committed serious violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law, especially in Murle areas. Soldiers unlawfully targeted and
killed Murle civilians and caused thousands to flee their homes out of fear of
attack. Soldiers also looted or destroyed homes, schools, churches, and the
compounds of aid agencies, deepening Murle perceptions of persecution. At
least three health facilities in Murle areas were looted and almost completely
destroyed by government soldiers and rebels.
The government is conducting the anti-insurgency operation amid intense interethnic
fighting between Lou Nuer, Murle, and Dinka groups, often provoked by
cattle raids and other attacks. The government has repeatedly failed to protect
communities from these clashes or arrest or prosecute those responsible.
In revenge for Murle attacks on Lou Nuer in 2012 and in February 2013 in which
at least 85 people were killed, thousands of armed Lou Nuer attacked Murle
areas in July, killing over 300 Murle according to local government officials. The
army did not attempt to protect Murle civilians, many of whom had fled towns
to the bush because of army abuses. Credible allegations that the Lou Nuer
were given ammunition by South Sudan’s army have not been fully investigated.
An investigation committee established by the government in 2012 to
research human rights abuses and causes of violence in Jonglei state has still
not received funds to begin its work.
Abuses by Security Forces
Soldiers detained, beat, and attacked civilians and civilian property in various
locations across the country during 2013.
Citing worsening criminality including armed robbery and inter-clan attacks, the
president in January replaced the elected governor of Lakes state with military
strongman Matur Chuot Dhuol. Dhuol sidestepped the courts, police, and the
prisons service and ordered the army to arrest and detain suspects. Soldiers
rounded up dozens of men in February and March 2013, often detaining others
from the same village if they could not find the suspects, and held them in military
facilities in extremely harsh conditions for weeks or months and subjected
many to severe beatings.
In Eastern Equatoria, soldiers reportedly killed six civilians when soldiers
attacked Orema village on April 15, 2013, apparently in revenge for the killing of
security forces by armed civilians during an earlier cattle raiding incident.
Soldiers continue to occupy schools, and 26 schools were occupied at some
point in 2013, mostly in Jonglei and Eastern Equatoria states. On August 14, the
army announced a zero tolerance policy of child recruitment or the occupation
of schools.
Freedom of Expression and Association
Authorities have not fully investigated the killings of eight peaceful protesters
in Wau in December 2012 by security forces or dozens of unlawful arrests of
others, many from the Fertit ethnic group, who openly opposed the decision of
the governor of Western Bahr el Ghazal state’s to move a county headquarters.
The courts conducted trials of individuals accused of ethnically-motivated
crimes and perceived government opponents on a variety of charges. None of
the cases brought before the court related to the protester shootings.
In January, three NSS officers arrested a journalist at gunpoint in Juba, slapped
him in the face, and held him overnight in an NSS detention center. A radio
journalist and two public commentators fled South Sudan after receiving
threats in early 2013, including from government officials. In May, the editor
and managing editor of the Juba Monitor were arrested, detained, and subsequently
released for allegedly defaming the deputy minister of the interior. A
government investigation into the killing on December 5, 2012, of a well-known
commentator and journalist, Isaiah Abraham, by unidentified gunmen outside
his home in Juba has stalled.
Two lawyers from South Sudan’s Law Society received death threats after
launching a legal challenge against a presidential decree that forbade Pagan
Amum, former secretary general of South Sudan’s leading Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement (SPLM) political party, from speaking to media.
Political Instability
Power plays within the ruling SPLM continued with Vice President Riek Machar
announcing on July 4 that he will contest South Sudan’s presidency in 2015. In
mid-April, President Kiir, by presidential decree, withdrew executive powers delegated
to Machar and replaced him with Archbishop Daniel Deng as head of the
national reconciliation process.
In a sweeping move on July 23, President Kiir fired Machar and all national ministers
and undersecretaries by presidential decree. He then appointed James
Wani Igga as vice president and appointed a new, smaller cabinet of ministers.
Kiir also sacked Pagan Amum on the same day for insubordination, including
using public media to discredit the party.
Kiir removed governors of Unity and Lakes states in 2013, appointing new governors
without holding fresh elections, as required under South Sudan’s transitional
constitution, triggering complaints of presidential heavy-handedness by
some members of civil society.
Meanwhile, South Sudan’s relations with Sudan remained tense. Both countries
accused the other of supporting rebel groups in their territory. South
Sudan halted oil production in February 2012 after a row between the two countries
over oil transportation fees through Sudan’s territory. A September 2012
agreement paved the way for the resolution of outstanding issues including oil
flows, but implementation has been troubled with both sides threatening to cut
oil flow and disagreements over the status of Abyei.
Key International Actors
The United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) has a mandate to use
force to protect civilians under imminent threat of serious harm, but its failure
to intervene against a clear pattern of unlawful killings and other serious violations
by South Sudan’s army in Murle areas of Pibor state has undermined public
confidence in the peacekeepers.
In addition, the mission failed to publicly report on violations by security forces
in Jonglei and other locations where serious abuses occurred in 2012 such as in
Wau and Rumbek, reinforcing a perception that the mission values its relationship
with the government over holding authorities to account for violations.
South Sudan’s army shot down an UNMISS helicopter in December 2012 in
Jonglei, and peacekeepers have been attacked there several times by unknown
attackers. On April 9, unknown gunmen killed five peacekeepers and seven
civilian staff in Pibor county.
The mandate for the UN Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) peacekeeping
force was renewed on May 29, increasing its authorized force number from
4,200 to 5,326 troops.
The United States, United Kingdom, and other western supporters of South
Sudan’s government were critical of the government’s human rights record and
especially violations in Jonglei state. The African Union continued to play a
mediation role between Sudan and South Sudan.
Sudan
Fighting between Sudanese forces and rebel groups continued in Sudan’s wartorn
peripheries and was marked by serious violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law.
In Darfur, authorities failed to protect people from intensified inter-communal
clashes, particularly between Arab pastoral groups. Sudanese forces also
attacked communities presumed to support rebel groups. In Southern Kordofan
and Blue Nile, Sudan’s indiscriminate bombing and ongoing clashes with
rebels, and the obstruction of humanitarian assistance to rebel-held areas
since the outbreak of conflict in June 2011, have displaced tens of thousands
within those states and elsewhere in Sudan and forced more than 225,000 to
flee to refugee camps in South Sudan and Ethiopia.
Sudanese security forces continued to arrest and detain activists, opposition
party members, and people suspected of links to rebel groups. Authorities also
censored the media and restricted space for civil society, stepping up at the
end of 2012 the harassment of groups that receive foreign funding.
In September, protests, some of them violent, swept the country in response to
hikes in the price of fuel and other basic commodities. Sudanese forces
responded to the protests with live ammunition, and are implicated in the
killing of more than 175 protesters. Security officials detained hundreds of protesters
and opposition members and activists, many for weeks without charge,
and stifled media coverage of the protests.
Conflict and Abuses in Darfur
More than 500,000 people were displaced by conflict in 2013, a number far
exceeding previous years. The vast majority of Darfur’s displaced population,
estimated around 2.5 million people, remain in camps in Darfur and Chad.
Communal violence, especially between Arab pastoralist groups, significantly
increased in 2013. Sudanese government forces were unwilling or unable to
protect civilians and in some cases participated in the fighting. In April, Ali
Kosheib, a known militia leader who is wanted by the International Criminal
Court (ICC) for alleged crimes in Darfur, participated in large-scale attacks on ethnic Salamat villages in Central Darfur, before being seriously wounded in
May.
Government forces and allied militia carried out large-scale attacks, including
aerial bombing, on locations believed by the government to be controlled by
rebel groups. In February, government forces attacked Golo and Guldo in eastern
Jebel Mara, killing an unknown number of civilians and forcing tens of thousands
to flee to safer areas. In early April, government forces bombed and
attacked the towns of Labado and Muhajariya and several other villages in
South Darfur, and reportedly burned and looted homes and killed dozens of
civilians and displaced tens of thousands.
Sudan continued to deny peacekeepers from the African Union-United Nations
Mission in Darfur (UNAMID) access to much of Darfur. Insecurity also undermined
UNAMID’s work. Armed attackers in Darfur killed 12 peacekeepers and
injured many more between July and October alone.
Authorities have not prosecuted the vast majority of serious crimes committed
in violation of international humanitarian and human rights law during the
Darfur conflict. Although some pro-government media outlets reported that the
government’s special prosecutor investigated numerous cases, few if any
Sudanese government forces or militia have been prosecuted, and Sudan has
failed to implement justice reforms recommended in a 2009 report by the AU
High-Level Panel on Darfur, the lead mediation body.
Sudan has not cooperated with the ICC; arrest warrants or summonses for six
men, including President Omar al-Bashir, on charges of genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes remain outstanding. A case involving alleged
war crimes committed by one rebel leader proceeded at the ICC, while proceedings
against a second rebel leader were terminated following his death.
Conflict and Abuses in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile
In Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile, Sudanese government forces continued to
fight with the Sudan Revolutionary Front (SRF), a rebel coalition formed by the
Sudan People’s Liberation Army-North (SPLA-North) and Darfur rebel groups in
2011. In April, fighting spread to North Kordofan, displacing tens of thousands.
The conflict remains marked by serious violations of international human rights
and humanitarian law, including indiscriminate bombing that has killed and
maimed scores of people; destroyed schools, clinics, and other civilian buildings;
and instilled fear in the population.
More than a million people have been forced to flee from their homes; at least
230,000 live in refugee camps in South Sudan or Ethiopia. Sudan obstructed
humanitarian access to tens of thousands displaced in areas controlled by the
SPLA-North.
Sudanese government forces have also carried out mass detentions and prosecutions
in the two states. From November 2012 until May 2013, authorities
detained 32 ethnic Nuba women from Southern Kordofan without charge
because of their suspected affiliation with the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement-North (SPLM-North), the opposition party Sudan banned in 2011.
Authorities have also brought charges against dozens of men from Blue Nile
state in an anti-terrorism court on the basis of their presumed links to the rebel
movement.
Restrictions on Freedom of Assembly, Association
In September, government security forces shot tear gas, rubber bullets, and live
ammunition at protesters during sometimes violent mass protests, using excessive
force. Sudanese human rights groups reported that more than 175 people,
most of them teenagers or in their early twenties, were killed by shooting during
the protests.
Security forces also shot and killed at least seven people including two children
in Nyala, South Darfur, during September protests over the killing by militia of a
prominent businessman. Government forces have also violently dispersed student
protests on several other occasions across the country during the year. In
May, security forces shot at students at El Fashir University, North Darfur, injuring
eight.
Sudanese authorities targeted and harassed, intimidated, and closed some
civil society organizations, in particular several that had received foreign funding.
In December 2012, security officials shut down three civil society groups
and one literary forum, and summoned leaders of other groups for questioning.
Authorities have obstructed groups from legally registering and refused permission
for or cancelled public activities in towns across Sudan.
In early 2013, authorities also shut down Nuba and Christian groups, arresting
staff and confiscating property. Church leaders were questioned about sources
of funding, and the government deported or otherwise forced to leave Sudan
more than 170 foreign church members.
Politically Motivated Arrest and Detention
After a cut in fuel subsidies sparked mass demonstrations in September,
National Intelligence and Security Service (NISS) officials detained hundreds of
protestors and opposition party members and activists, arresting many from
their homes. NISS detained hundreds without charge, many of them for several
weeks.
In January, security officials detained six leading members of Sudan’s political
opposition parties, apparently for attending a meeting of opposition groups
that signed an opposition agreement known as the New Dawn Charter, and held
them without access to lawyers or appropriate medical care for at least 10
weeks before their release without charge.
Despite a pledge in April by President al-Bashir to release all political prisoners,
scores remained in detention without charges, many from conflict-affected
parts of the country. In July, authorities arrested more than 24 people, including
ethnic Nuba and Darfuri student activists, for their perceived links to rebel
groups.
Restrictions on Press Freedom
Despite a pledge in May to halt prepublication censorship of newspapers,
whereby security officials remove articles before a newspaper goes to print,
authorities have continuously censored media. They have suspended publication
of some papers, confiscated printed editions, suspended individual journalists,
blocked websites, and harassed and threatened journalists with prosecution
for criticizing the government
In September, authorities tightened restrictions on media to prevent coverage
of the protests. Security officials instructed newspaper editors not to publish articles related to the protests, confiscated editions of three newspapers, summoned
several journalists for questioning, jammed the reception of international
TV stations, and blocked the Internet for one day. Most newspapers and the
TV stations have resumed, but remain under tight scrutiny.
Stalled Law Reform
Sudan has yet to pass a new permanent constitution, despite the end of the
transition period in the 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement, during which it
had adopted an Interim National Constitution, and the secession of South
Sudan.
The National Security Act of 2010 and many other laws contravene basic human
rights norms. Authorities continued to apply Shari’a law sanctions that violate
international prohibitions on cruel, inhuman, or degrading punishment. On
February 14, Sudan implemented a penalty of cross-amputation, the amputation
of the right hand and the left foot. Women and girls continue to be subjected
to flogging and other humiliating punishments under discriminatory public
order laws.
In July, parliament passed amendments to the Sudan Armed Forces Act of 2007
that subject civilians to the jurisdiction of military courts for a range of broadly
defined offences such as undermining the constitutional system, leaking classified
information, and the publication of “false news.”
Key International Actors
Sudan’s relations with South Sudan remained tense in 2013, with both countries
accusing the other of support to rebel movements. Implementation of a
September 2012 agreement signed by Sudan and South Sudan was slow. The
agreement addresses a range of outstanding issues, including oil production,
debt, the status of the nationals of one country resident in the other, border
security, and resolution of border disputes. The status of the contested area of
Abyei remains unresolved.
The United Nations, African Union, and key nations involved in Sudan continued
to press for implementation of the September 2012 agreement but made little progress addressing Sudan’s internal armed conflicts or human rights
record.
In September, the AU extended the mandate of its High-Level Implementation
Panel to December 2014. The UN extended the mandates of the peacekeeping
missions in Darfur and Abyei, while the UN Human Rights Committee extended
the mandate of the independent expert on Sudan.
Efforts by advocacy groups in relation to the ICC arrest warrant for President al-
Bashir’s appeared to again restrict his international travel. He cut short a July
trip to Nigeria and cancelled September plans to attend the UN General
Assembly.
In October, the European Parliament adopted a strong resolution on the human
rights situation in Sudan urging the Sudanese Government “to cease all forms
of repression against those who exercise their right to freedom of expression,
both online and offline, and to protect journalists.”
Uganda
After 27 years in office, President Yoweri Museveni’s government increasingly
suppresses freedom of assembly, expression, and association while escalating
threats to civil society. Two media houses faced temporary closure in 2013 for
publishing articles suggesting that Museveni is grooming his son to take over
the presidency. Debate around presidential succession, accountability of public
resources, governance, and other politically sensitive topics is increasingly constrained.
Activists who provide public information about government expenditure
and corruption are obstructed from demonstrating and sometimes face
criminal charges such as inciting violence, while opposition politicians are regularly
prevented from holding public rallies.
Freedom of Assembly and Expression
After two years of sporadic debate, Parliament passed the Public Order
Management bill in August 2013 and the president assented shortly after, further
restricting space for dissent and public critiques of governance. The controversial
bill was considerably amended just before passage, but it remains
vague, making it open to abusive application. The law still grants police wide
discretionary powers to permit or disallow public meetings.
Throughout the year opposition politicians faced arrest, detention, and criminal
charges for holding public assemblies in Uganda. In July, seven opposition
politicians were charged in a Kampala court for belonging to and managing an
“unlawful society,” Activists for Change (A4C), a political pressure group the
government had banned in 2012 on spurious grounds. Earlier, in February, 15
people, including the mayor of Kampala and then-opposition leader Kizza
Besigye, were charged with organizing an unlawful assembly. Both cases were
pending at time of writing.
The government continues to be hostile to independent media publishing politically
sensitive articles. On May 7, the Daily Monitor newspaper detailed an
alleged conspiracy to frame or eliminate high-ranking members of the government
who do not support the plan for Museveni’s son to take over when his
father steps down. On May 20, more than 50 uniformed police sealed off the
Daily Monitor’s premises after it published a letter allegedly written by Uganda’s coordinator of intelligence service, Gen. David Sejjusa. Two radio stations
located in the same compound were also forced off air by the Uganda
Communications Commission. The same day, police closed the Red Pepper,
another newspaper, on similar grounds. Three days later, the court withdrew
the search warrant but police defied the orders and increased their presence.
Two journalists and eight civil society members protesting the closures were
arrested, beaten, and detained by police. They were charged with inciting violence
before being released. The newspapers and radio stations were opened
10 days later when the minister of internal affairs ordered the police to vacate
the premises. The charges were still pending at time of writing.
Corruption
Corruption in Uganda remains pervasive at both low and high levels of public
administration. Bribery, nepotism, and misuse of official positions and
resources are widespread in spite of continuous assurances from the president
that corruption will be eradicated. Major corruption scandals have surfaced
repeatedly in the last few years, though no high-ranking officials have served
prison sentences for corruption-related offences. Scandals have rocked the
health services, particularly regarding the misuse of funds intended for the provision
of immunizations and essential medicines to fight HIV, tuberculosis, and
malaria.
The embezzlement in 2012 of US$12.7 million in donor funds from the Office of
the Prime Minister, which was designated for the rehabilitation of the war-ravaged
areas of northern Uganda, led donors to withdraw their budget support in
February. Donors, who fund about 25 percent of Uganda’s budget, demanded
repayment when the auditor general discovered the misappropriation of the
funds. The principal accountant in the Prime Minister’s Office was convicted of
abuse of office and forgery, but other officials implicated in the scandal were
never charged.
Police have silenced and obstructed activists working to raise corruption issues
and educate citizens about public sector accountability. Members of 50 civil
society groups have come together in solidarity and wear black every Monday
to raise awareness of corruption issues. Known as the Black Monday
Movement, the campaign publishes and distributes monthly newsletters that highlight the impact of corruption on various sectors, such as education and
health, and protests the impunity that government officials enjoy.
In the first 10 months of 2013, police arrested and charged at least 28 individuals
handing out Black Monday materials. Nineteen were charged with inciting
violence; five with possession of prohibited publications; and three with
spreading harmful propaganda. Most of the 28 were stopped from distributing
Black Monday materials and were detained for between three and ten hours by
police before being released without charge.
Illegal Arrest and Detention
The Ugandan government continues to grapple with the Allied Democratic
Forces (ADF) rebels based in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), a group
composed predominantly of Ugandan Muslims of the Salaf sect. In 2013,
Human Rights Watch documented over two dozen cases of illegal arrest and
detention of Salaf Muslims. Those arrested were detained for between one
week and four months, often moved to various detention locations, then
released without charge or brought before a court. Family members often could
not identify where their relatives had been detained, and police often denied
knowledge of the arrests.
Accountability for Past Abuses
In 2009 and 2011, police and military police killed at least 49 people, but police
have not conducted serious or meaningful investigations into these killings.
Relatives continue to search for justice through civil cases against the government.
The Uganda Human Rights Commission ordered compensation for two
families for the deaths of their children at the hands of security forces, but the
money was never paid. In December 2011, police disbanded its Rapid Response
Unit but there have been no investigations into the killings or torture by officers
in the unit. Similarly, no inquiries have been made by the Ugandan army into
cases of people who were tortured or died in the custody of the Joint Anti-
Terrorism Task Force (JATT).
The Lord’s Resistance Army
The Ugandan rebel group the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) was active across
the Central African Republic, southern Sudan, and northern Democratic
Republic of Congo (DRC), with allegations of killings and abductions, though on
a much lesser scale than previous years.
Warrants issued in 2005 by the International Criminal Court (ICC) for LRA leaders
remain outstanding. Former LRA fighter Thomas Kwoyelo, charged with willful
killing, taking hostages, and extensive destruction of property, has been
imprisoned in Uganda since March 2009 but his trial has not begun. The
Supreme Court has not yet heard the state’s 2012 appeal of the High Court ruling
ordering Kwoyelo to be granted amnesty and released.
In May, Uganda’s parliament reinstated legislation for another two years granting
amnesty to members of armed groups who surrender, though those wanted
on ICC warrants were explicitly not eligible. Sections of the Amnesty Act had
been allowed to lapse in May 2012, and through the new extension of the powers
of the Amnesty Commission, those who were not eligible during the interim
period now will now in theory qualify for amnesty.
Bills Violating Human Rights Law
The Anti-Homosexuality Bill, which proposes the death penalty for some consensual
same-sex activities, and the HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Act,
which criminalizes intentional or attempted transmission of HIV, are before parliamentary
committees and could still be tabled for debate and vote at any
time. Both have been pending since 2009.
Key International Actors
Following the October 2012 US$12.7 million corruption scandal in the Office of
the Prime Minister, the governments of Denmark, Ireland, Norway, Sweden, and
the United Kingdom suspended budget support. Donors reported that the government
needed to take action to restore confidence before financial support
would resume. The World Bank suspended the ninth Poverty Reduction Support
Credit in December 2012 but eventually released it in June 2013. While the bank
will not proceed with the tenth, it indicated it is open to using budget support in exceptional cases to support governance or sectoral reforms. Since then,
most have turned to project support and reduced or stopped direct budget support.
For international development assistance to address corruption, Uganda’s
donors should significantly increase the focus on accountability at the highest
levels of government, and ensure that any reengagement is based on substantive
changes to Uganda’s anti-corruption structures. External donors should
also actively and vocally support civil society working to document and raise
awareness of corruption, by both financially supporting their work and publicly
denouncing arrests and harassment of activists.
International bilateral donors continue to press the government to respect lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender, and intersex (LGBTI) rights including pushing
police leadership to meet with LGBTI activists and improve communication and
response to threats to members of the LGBTI community.
In contrast, there continues to be minimal criticism of security force conduct,
such as the killings during protests in 2009 and 2011 and past and current torture
cases. The army continues to receive logistical support and training from
the US for counterterrorism, its leading role in the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), and counter-LRA operations in the Central African Republic
(CAR).
Zimbabwe
National elections in July ended a five-year power-sharing coalition, retained
Robert Mugabe as president, and gave his Zimbabwe African Union–Patriotic
Front (ZANU-PF) over two-thirds parliamentary majority. Although the election
was peaceful, the electoral process had major flaws, including highly partisan
statements by the leadership of the security forces, restrictions on and intimidation
of journalists and civil society activists, and a skewed voter registration
process.
The opposition party, Movement for Democratic Change (MDC), and key international
actors including the United Kingdom, the United States, the European
Union, and Australia criticized the electoral process, differing with the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) and the African Union (AU), which
endorsed the elections. The discord among key actors diminished international
pressure to address the disputed election and help resolve Zimbabwe’s pressing
human rights and governance issues, which ZANU-PF has been unwilling to
seriously address.
National Elections
A generally peaceful environment characterized the build-up to the holding of
presidential, parliamentary, and local government elections on July 31.
However, the elections were marred by widespread irregularities raised by local
monitors, including reports of voter intimidation by Zimbabwe’s security forces,
traditional leaders coercing villagers to vote for ZANU-PF, a high number of
“ghost” or duplicate voters present on the voters’ roll, and credible reports that
large numbers of people were unfairly turned away from polling stations. The
Zimbabwe Electoral Commission (ZEC) failed to make available the voters’ roll
to political parties in advance of elections as required by law.
State-owned media openly aligned with, and campaigned for ZANU-PF, while
vilifying the MDC. State media also failed to offer equal and impartial coverage
to all political parties participating in the elections. These irregularities call into
question the credibility and fairness of the election. The build-up to the elections
was also marked by the failure of the former coalition government, made up of ZANU-PF and the two MDC factions, to implement needed human rights
reforms.
The MDC presidential candidate, Morgan Tsvangirai, challenged in court the
validity of the election in which Robert Mugabe won the presidential vote with
his ZANU-PF party winning over two thirds of the parliamentary vote. When the
court refused to compel ZEC to provide material that could be used to electoral
malpractices and irregularities, Tsvangirai withdrew his court petition paving
the way for Mugabe to be sworn as president on August 22.
The New Constitution
The enactment of a new constitution has not resulted in improving the human
rights environment, largely due to ZANU-PF’s failure to implement the rights
provisions in the new constitution. The government has neither taken steps to
enact new laws to operationalize the constitution, nor has it amended existing
laws as necessary to bring them in line with the new constitution’s provisions.
The government also needs to fully and impartially enforce domestic laws by
holding accountable all those responsible for human rights abuses and politically
motivated violence.
Under the new constitution, political parties are able to propagate their views
and canvass for support, free of harassment and intimidation. It enshrines
respect for the rule of law, and commits the government to fully implement and
realize the rights to freedom of association, assembly, expression, and information.
While the establishment of an independent and credible human rights commission
is set out in the new constitution, there are significant concerns with the
commission. The law establishing the commission states that it can only investigate
alleged human rights abuses since February 2009. This prevents the
commission from investigating previous serious crimes, including electionrelated
violence in 2002, 2005, and 2008; the massacre of an estimated
20,000 people in the Matebeleland and Midlands provinces in the 1980s; and
the government-led mass demolitions of homes and evictions of 2005. At time
of writing, the human rights commission had no substantive chairperson,
lacked sufficient resources, and had no support staff.
Conduct of Security Forces
The security forces have a long history of partisanship on behalf of President
Mugabe and the ruling ZANU-PF party. The partisanship of the security forces’
leadership has translated into abuses by these forces against MDC members
and supporters, and civil society organizations.
Although the new constitution obligates the security forces to be politically
neutral and impartial, this constitutional requirement has been disregarded.
Beyond the open endorsement of ZANU-PF, in advance of the 2013 elections,
security forces intimidated, beat, and committed other abuses against
Zimbabweans perceived to be supporting the MDC or critical of the government.
Members of the security forces have committed these abuses with almost
absolute impunity.
Freedom of Expression, Association, and Assembly
Both the power-sharing government prior to August 2013 and the new administration
have failed to amend repressive laws, such as the Access to Information
and Protection of Privacy Act (AIPPA), the Public Order and Security Act (POSA),
and the Criminal Law Codification and Reform Act, which severely curtail basic
rights through vague defamation clauses and draconian penalties. Failure to
amend or repeal these laws and to address the partisan conduct of the police
severely limits the rights to freedom of association and assembly.
Sections of AIPPA and POSA that provide criminal penalties for defamation, or
for undermining the authority of, or insulting the president, have routinely been
used against journalists and human rights defenders. Police often misuse
provisions of POSA to ban lawful public meetings and gatherings. Activists and
journalists continue to be wrongly prosecuted and charged under these laws.
For instance, on May 7, police arrested Dumisani Muleya, editor of the
Zimbabwe Independent, and Owen Gagare, its chief reporter, following the
publication of an article on the security forces. The two were detained for eight
hours, then charged with “publishing or communicating false statements
prejudicial to the State.”
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Attacks against lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) individuals and
rights activists continue to emanate from the highest level of government.
During his election campaign in July, President Mugabe (who has a long history
of making homophobic statements) reiterated that LGBT citizens are “worse
than dogs and pigs,” and threatened to behead them. The new constitution
does not explicitly recognize LGBT rights, and in his inauguration speech on
August 22, Mugabe attacked same-sex marriage, which the new constitution
prohibits, saying it was a “filthy, filthy, filthy disease.”
These attacks on LGBT people, arbitrary arrests of LGBT activists by the police,
and the harassment by state agents of the Gays and Lesbian of Zimbabwe
(GALZ) nongovernmental organization in previous years, have driven many LGBT
people underground.
Human Rights Defenders
A campaign of politically motivated abuses against civil society by the police
began in December 2012 under the coalition government, and continues under
the new administration. Police repeatedly arrested members of Women of
Zimbabwe Arise as they peacefully protested human rights violations and the
economic situation.
Other attacks included the arbitrary arrest on March 17 and eight-day detention
of human rights lawyer Beatrice Mtetwa, on charges of obstructing justice
despite a High Court order for her release. In the lead-up to the July elections,
police charged a number of civil society leaders, including Jestina Mukoko,
director of the Zimbabwe Peace Project, Okay Machisa, director of Zimbabwe
Human Rights Association, and Abel Chikomo, director of Zimbabwe Human
Rights NGO Forum, with alleged violations of various laws under what appeared
to be politically motivated attempts to curtail the human rights work of civil
society organizations. Chikomo was required to report to the Harare police station
on numerous occasions throughout the year and was eventually summoned
to stand trial on August 1. At time of writing, Chikomo and Mtetwa’s trials
were ongoing.
Key International Actors
Through its facilitation team, South Africa, appointed by SADC as mediator in
Zimbabwe’s political negotiations, strongly pushed for key reforms ahead of
elections. However, South Africa eventually succumbed to pressure from
Mugabe and ZANU-PF to stop raising concerns about electoral and human
rights conditions ahead of the elections. ZANU-PF directed particularly venomous
attacks at Ambassador Lindiwe Zulu, a vocal member of the Facilitation
Team. Initially, South Africa did not comment on the elections, but eventually
made an about-turn and congratulated Zimbabwe on holding “successful elections,”
while refraining from commenting on the credibility or fairness of the
elections and the lack of the key reforms it had been pushing for.
SADC also failed to press Mugabe and ZANU-PF to implement key human rights
and institutional reforms ahead of the elections, as its recommendations were
repeatedly ignored by ZANU-PF. Subsequently, SADC and the AU endorsed the
July elections, describing them as “free, peaceful, and generally credible,”
ignoring widespread electoral flaws that violated SADC’s elections standards.
Regional endorsement has emboldened the government of Zimbabwe to ignore
pressing human rights and governance concerns.
The European Union welcomed the generally peaceful and orderly manner in
which the elections were conducted but raised concerns about “alleged irregularities
and reports of incomplete participation, as well as the identified weaknesses
in the electoral process and a lack of transparency.” Similarly the UK
commended Zimbabwe on holding peaceful elections while expressing “grave
concerns over the conduct of the election.” The US said the Zimbabwe election
was deeply flawed, while Australia called for a rerun of the election.
The ability of key international actors to apply pressure on Zimbabwe for a
resolution of the election dispute, and for improvements in human rights and
governance, was largely nullified by SADC and the AU’s endorsement of the July
elections. On Zimbabwe, the EU, the UK, and the US had previously deferred to
SADC and the AU, whose response to the flawed July elections weakened
international efforts to ensure restoration of the rule of law and respect for
human rights.
Argentina
In 2013, President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner secured passage of legislation
that severely undermined judicial independence, although the Supreme
Court subsequently struck down some of its key aspects. A vibrant but increasingly
polarized debate exists in Argentina between the government and its critics.
However, the Fernández administration has sanctioned individuals for publishing
unofficial inflation statistics challenging official ones, and has failed to
adopt rules regarding the distribution of public advertising funds. There is no
national law regulating access to information.
Other ongoing human rights concerns include police abuse, poor prison conditions,
torture, and failure to protect indigenous rights.
Argentina continues to make significant progress on LGBT rights and in prosecuting
officials for abuses committed during the country’s “Dirty War” (1976-
1983), although trials have been subject to delays.
Judicial Independence
In April 2013, President Fernández put forward legislation to revise Argentina’s
justice system, which Congress swiftly approved. It included a bill to limit individuals’
ability to request injunctions against government acts, and another
that granted the ruling party an automatic majority in the Council of the
Judiciary, which selects judges and decides whether to open proceedings for
their removal, thereby granting the ruling party powers that undermined judicial
independence. In June, the Supreme Court struck down critical aspects of the
latter bill, including norms regarding the composition and selection of the
Council of the Judiciary.
Fernández accused those who defended the role of the judiciary as a check on
other branches of government of being a “check on the people.”
Freedom of Expression
In 2009, Congress approved a law to regulate the broadcast media, which
includes provisions to increase plurality in media. The federal authority in
charge of implementing the law has yet to ensure a diverse range of perspectives in state-run media programming. Argentina’s largest media conglomerate,
the Clarin Group, had challenged the constitutionality of articles of the law
requiring companies to sell off broadcast outlets that exceed the new limits of
outlets that can be owned by a media company, and obtained an injunction
that suspended their implementation during the trial. In October 2013, the
Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the law, lifted the injunction, and
ordered Clarin to comply with the law. The court also established clear parameters
regarding how the law should be implemented to ensure the right of free
expression is effectively protected.
Fernández accused the media in August 2013 of using “bullets of ink” to “overthrow
elected governments.” The president’s general secretary called a journalist
who aired several shows alleging government corruption of being a “media
hit man.”
High fines and criminal prosecutions undermine the right to freely publish information
of public interest. In 2011, the Ministry of Commerce imposed a fine of
500,000 pesos on 11 economists and consulting firms for publishing unofficial
inflation statistics challenging the accuracy of official ones. While the Supreme
Court overturned some of the fines in October 2013, others remained pending
at time of writing. Three of the fined economists were also being criminally
investigated for allegedly “defrauding commerce and industry.” In September, a
judge charged the minister of commerce with “abuse of authority” for having
imposed the fines.
The absence of transparent criteria for using government funds at the federal
level and in some provinces to purchase media advertisements creates a risk of
discrimination against media outlets that criticize government officials. In two
rulings in 2007 and 2011, the Supreme Court found that while media companies
have no right to receive public advertising, government officials may not apply
discriminatory criteria when deciding where to place advertisements.
Argentina does not have a national law ensuring public access to information
held by government bodies. An existing presidential decree on the matter only
applies to the federal executive branch, and some provincial governments have
adopted regulations for their jurisdictions.
Transnational Justice
At time of writing, no one had been convicted for the 1994 bombing of the
Argentine Israelite Mutual Association (AMIA) in Buenos Aires that killed 85
people and injured over 300. Judicial corruption and political obstruction hindered
criminal investigations and prosecutions from the investigation’s outset.
Iran, which is suspected of ordering the attack, has refused Argentina’s
requests for the extradition of former Iranian President Ali Akbar Hashemi-
Rafsanjani and seven Iranian officials suspected of participating in the crime.
In January 2013, Argentina and Iran signed a memorandum of understanding
(MoU) that creates an international commission of jurists with powers to review
evidence against Iranians accused by Argentine judicial authorities of being
responsible for the bombing, and to interrogate some of the suspects.
Legislators from Fernandez’s party ratified the agreement in February. In Iran, it
was ratified by the Council of Ministers, but it is unclear from the agreement’s
vague terms whether it can be implemented without Iranian parliamentary
approval, or if the Iranians’ statements will be admissible as evidence in
Argentine criminal proceedings. In September 2013, President Fernández de
Kirchner called on Iran to ratify the agreement during her speech before the
United Nations General Assembly. A legal challenge to the agreement filed in
April by Jewish community leaders before Argentine courts remained pending at
time of writing.
Confronting Past Abuses
Several cases of human rights violations committed during Argentina’s military
dictatorship (1976-1983) were reopened in 2003 after Congress annulled existing
amnesty laws. The Supreme Court subsequently ruled that the amnesty
laws were unconstitutional, and federal judges struck down pardons favoring
former officials convicted of, or facing trial for, human rights violations.
By September 2013, out of 2,316 persons investigated by the courts for crimes
against humanity, 416 had been convicted and 35 had been found not guilty,
according to the Center of Legal and Social Studies (CELS). There are 11 ongoing
oral trials involving multiple victims and suspects.
In December 2012, for example, a federal court convicted Jaime Smart, a minister
of Buenos Aires province during the dictatorship, for the torture and subsequent
death of one individual, and the illegal detention and abuse of 43 others.
The first civilian government official convicted for these crimes, Smart was
given life in prison. The tribunal also convicted 22 security officials for the same
abuses, and requested the investigation of a prosecutor, members of the judiciary,
and the Catholic Church for their alleged involvement.
Given the large number of victims, suspects, and cases, prosecutors and judges
face challenges bringing those responsible to justice while respecting the due
process rights of the accused. Other concerns include significant delays in trials;
that three convicted military officers who escaped in July 2013 remain at
large; and the unresolved fate of Jorge Julio López—a former torture victim who
disappeared in September 2006, a day before he was due to attend the trial of
one of his torturers.
In July 2013, President Fernández requested that Congress promote General
César Milani, the head of the armed forces, to lieutenant general. After widespread
criticism from human rights organizations and victims, who accused
Milani of having participated in abuses during the dictatorship, the president
asked Congress to postpone Milani’s promotion until the end of the year.
Police Abuse
In April 2013, at least 100 officers from the Metropolitan Police Force of the city
of Buenos Aires used excessive force to disperse doctors, nurses, union leaders,
and lawmakers who were protesting the city government’s plans to demolish
a building at a hospital, according to the city Ombudsman Office. The police
intervention resulted in injuries to dozens of civilians, including patients and
journalists, according to media accounts. Seventeen police officers were also
injured in the clash. At time of writing, the case was under investigation by a
criminal judge.
Prison Conditions
Overcrowding, ill-treatment by prison guards, inadequate physical conditions,
and inmate violence continue to be serious problems in prisons. According to the National Penitentiary Office (Procuración Penitenciaria de la Nación), an
official body created by Congress, there were 86 deaths, including 41 violent
ones, in federal prisons between January 2012 and mid-2013. The office also
documented 429 cases of torture or ill-treatment in federal prisons in 2012, and
426 in the first seven months of 2013.
Indigenous Rights
Indigenous peoples in Argentina face obstacles in accessing justice, land, education,
healthcare, and other basic services.
Existing laws require the government to perform a survey of land occupied by
indigenous communities by November 2017, before which authorities cannot
lawfully evict communities. In May 2013, the Supreme Court urged the government
of Formosa province and the federal government to carry out the required
survey for the Qom indigenous group. Before the survey was conducted, authorities
opened criminal investigations against Félix Díaz, a Qom leader, for having
“usurped” lands where community members live, and for participating in a
2010 protest in which a community member died and dozens more were injured
due to excessive use of force by provincial security forces, according to CELS.
Women’s Rights
Argentina adopted a new law in March 2013 extending key protections to
domestic workers, the majority of whom are women and girls, including limits
to work hours, a weekly rest period, overtime pay, sick leave, and maternity
protections.
Abortion is illegal in Argentina, with limited exceptions, and women and girls
face numerous obstacles to reproductive health products and services, such as
contraception, voluntary sterilization procedures, and abortion after rape (one
of the few circumstances when abortion is permitted). These barriers mean that
women and girls may face unwanted or unhealthy pregnancies.
In a landmark ruling in March 2012, the Supreme Court determined that prior
judicial authorization was unnecessary for abortion after rape and urged provincial
governments to ensure access to legal abortions. As of March 2013, only 5 out of Argentina’s 23 provinces had adopted protocols that met the court’s
requirements, according to the Association for Civil Rights (ADC).
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In 2010, Argentina became the first Latin American country to legalize same-sex
marriage. The Civil Marriage Law allows same-sex couples to enter into civil
marriages and provides for equal rights and the legal protections of marriage
afforded to opposite-sex couples including, among others, adoption rights and
pension benefits.
In 2012, the Gender Identity Law established the right of individuals over the
age of 18 to choose their gender identity, undergo gender reassignment, and
revise official documents without any prior judicial or medical approval. The
surgical and hormonal reassignment procedures are covered as part of public
and private health insurance.
Key International Actors
In April 2013, the UN rapporteur on the independence of lawyers and judges
stated that the changes to the justice system proposed by the Fernández
administration “seriously compromise[d] the principles of separation of powers
and independence of the judiciary, which are fundamental elements of any
democracy.” The Fernández government reacted by accusing the rapporteur of
“lack of impartiality, restraint, and balance.”
As a returning member of the Human Rights Council, Argentina voted in favour
of a number of key resolutions addressing the human rights violations in countries
such as Sri Lanka, Iran, and Syria. Argentina could do more to speak out
and hold governments accountable for enforced disappearances given their priority
focus on this issue at the UN.
In March 2013, the Organization of American States General Assembly adopted
a resolution ending a process, begun in 2010, to strengthen the Inter-American
human rights system. Several countries, however, used the process to attempt
to undermine the independence of the Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights and its special rapporteurship on freedom of expression. At the end of
the March meeting, Argentina proposed language to adopt the final resolution by consensus, effectively opening the door to reinitiating a debate in which
amendments to the system could undermine the commission’s independence.
In May 2013, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights ruled that Argentina had
violated the rights to liberty and freedom from cruel and inhuman treatment of
five children who were sentenced to life in prison. The court ordered Argentina
to modify laws to eliminate life imprisonment of children and to review cases in
which others were serving similar sentences.
Bolivia
Long-standing problems in Bolivia’s criminal justice system, such as extensive
and arbitrary use of pre-trial detention and long delays in trials, undermine
defendant’s rights and contribute to serious overcrowding in prisons. Impunity
persists for serious human rights abuses committed during the country’s
authoritarian rule from 1964 to 1982.
The administration of President Evo Morales continued to launch verbal attacks
on the press, accusing critical journalists of politically motivated lies.
After several high-profile killings of women sparked public protests, the government
passed a comprehensive law in March 2013 to combat gender-based violence.
Accountability for Past Abuses
Bolivia has made little progress investigating and prosecuting human rights
violations committed under authoritarian governments between 1964 and 1982.
A contributing factor has been the unwillingness of the armed forces to provide
information that might clarify the fate or whereabouts of people killed or disappeared
during this period.
Plans to create a truth commission announced by the Morales administration in
2008 have not materialized. Bolivia has failed to fulfill commitments to compensate
victims of political violence during that period. A 2004 law budgeted
US$3.6 million in government funds for this purpose, which would only cover
about 20 percent of the proposed costs. The remaining funds were to be
obtained from private donors, but were never raised.
In April 2012, Congress passed a law announcing one-off payments equivalent
to roughly 20 percent of the compensation amounts approved in 2004. As of
December 2012, 1,418 of the 1,714 approved beneficiaries had received one of
these reduced payments, according to the government. Many additional potential
beneficiaries said they were rejected due to overly stringent documentary
evidence required by the government commission appointed to review claims.
Long delays in the trials of opposition leaders and government officials have
obstructed justice for victims of violent clashes in 2008 between supporters and opponents of President Morales. Repeated changes of jurisdiction and
prosecutorial inefficiency have also undermined the right of the accused to due
process and a prompt trial. As of August 2013, a La Paz court was still hearing
evidence in a case involving Leopoldo Fernández, former prefect of Pando
department, and five local officials, charged in 2008 for their roles in a
September 2008 massacre in which 13 people were killed. The judge repeatedly
suspended proceedings when defendants failed to appear.
Despite international concern, the government has not reopened an investigation
into the April 2009 killing of two Hungarians (one of Bolivian birth) and an
Irishman, whom the government alleged were mercenaries involved in a separatist
plot. Police shot them dead after storming their hotel rooms in Santa
Cruz. Reports by an Irish government pathologist and an independent forensic
consultant suggested that at least two of the victims may have been extrajudicially
executed.
Military Jurisdiction
In a landmark December 2012 decision, the Constitutional Court ruled that a
civilian court should have jurisdiction in the case of a conscript who died in
2011 following a combat training exercise—allegedly after instructors beat him
on the head and chest. The court urged lawmakers to reform Bolivia’s military
justice code to bring it in line with international human rights standards, which
affirm that all human rights violations should be handled in civilian jurisdiction.
Due Process Violations
The broad discretion that judges enjoy in ordering pretrial detention and lack of
access to public defenders have greatly undermined due process rights for
those accused of a crime, particularly among Bolivia’s poor. According to a
report published by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(UNHCR), as of September 2012, 84 percent of prisoners in Bolivia were awaiting
trial. Bolivian law allows up to three years in pretrial detention, a limit often
contravened in practice.
High-profile defendants have also suffered due process violations and judicial
harassment. In October 2013, José María Bakovic, a 74-year-old former director
of the National Road Service (SNC), died from a heart attack after prosecutors ignoring warnings from doctors that a journey to the high altitudes of La Paz
could endanger his life—ordered him to attend a hearing there. Bakovic, who
worked aggressively to eradicate corruption within the SNC while he was its
director, himself became the target of a corruption investigation after President
Morales took office in 2006. Before his death, he said that he had defended
himself in 72 cases filed in different parts of Bolivia, and was eventually sentenced
in August 2013 to three years in prison for economic damage to the
state.
Prison Conditions
Extended pretrial detention and trial delays have led to increased overcrowding
in Bolivia’s prisons. As of September 2013, the government reported there were
14,770 inmates in prisons with a capacity of under 5,000. Eighty percent of
those prisoners, President Morales said at the time, were being held due to
“delays of the justice system.”
Prison conditions are poor: most are dilapidated; food and medical attention
are inadequate; and internal control is often left to prisoners. At least 35
inmates were killed and more than 50 injured in a fire resulting from a clash in
August 2013 between rival gangs in Palmasola prison. The dead included an 18-
month-old who was spending the night in the prison with his father, who reportedly
died while trying to shield him from the flames.
In September, President Morales signed a decree that allowed the pardoning of
prisoners serving sentences of up to eight years for lesser sentences, while
those in pretrial detention for crimes with penalties of four years or less could
be released and have their charges dropped under a government amnesty.
While the government estimated this would affect roughly 2,000 prisoners, the
Bolivian Catholic Church estimated that only approximately 600 prisoners in
pretrial detention would be eligible for release, due to stringent eligibility
requirements.
Gender-Based Violence and Reproductive Rights
Women and girls in Bolivia are at high risk for gender-based violence.
According to police statistics reported in the press, in 2012 there were over 140
gender-based killings of women, and thousands of complaints filed for acts of gender-based violence. Public protests following several high-profile murders
of women in early 2013, including the fatal stabbing in February of journalist
Hanalí Huaycho by her husband—a former police officer—led the government to
pass a comprehensive law in March to combat gender-based violence. Prior to
her killing, Huaycho had repeatedly reported abuses by her ex-husband to
authorities.
The new law adds “femicide” to the criminal code (with a mandatory 30-year
sentence), establishes a task force to combat domestic violence, and mandates
the construction of women’s shelters, among other reforms.
In Bolivia, victims of sexual violence must receive judicial authorization before
they may access legal abortion services. Failure to do so may result in prosecution:
an indigenous woman served eight months in prison in 2012 after being
convicted for obtaining an abortion without judicial authorization after she
became pregnant from rape.
Freedom of Expression
While public debate is robust, on occasions President Morales or his ministers
have aggressively criticized the press, accusing journalists of lies and politically
motivated distortions. In August 2013, the minister of the presidency accused
the La Paz newspaper, Página Siete, of being “indecorous, malicious, deceitful
and mendacious,” and of having links with Chilean right-wing politicians. The
minister’s comments followed an Independence Day speech the same month in
which President Morales accused unnamed newspapers and television outlets
of having a pro-Chilean stance (Bolivia has a long-standing maritime dispute
with Chile). In August 2012, the government filed a criminal lawsuit against
Página Siete and two other outlets for “inciting racism,” by publishing a headline
it alleged distorted a presidential speech about food shortages. As of
September 2013, the case remained open.
As of October 2013, the National Assembly was debating a bill presented by the
government on transparency and access to public information. The National
Press Association criticized several of the grounds for confidentiality envisaged
in the bill, which grants a wide range of government authorities broad powers
determine exceptions to access.
Key International Actors
Bolivia supported a campaign by Ecuador to undermine the independence of
the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and limit the funding and
effectiveness of its special rapporteurship on freedom of expression. While they
were unable to win support for this effort at the March 2013 meeting of the
Organization of American States General Assembly, both governments, as well
as other members of the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas (ALBA), made
clear their intent to press for these changes in the future.
In June 2013, the Committee against Torture (CAT) urged Bolivia to adopt legislation
establishing torture as a crime in its own right as defined in the
Convention Against Torture and expressed concern at delays in investigations
into allegations of torture.
In October 2013, in a draft version of its concluding observations on Bolivia’s
third periodic report, the UN Human Rights Committee urged Bolivia to implement
alternatives to preventive detention and to strictly limit its duration, and
to eliminate the requirement of prior judicial authorization for therapeutic abortion
and abortion in cases of rape and incest, among other recommendations.
In April 2013, the UN Committee on Migrant Workers expressed concern at persistent
discrimination against migrant workers and refugees in Bolivia and the
absence of any record of compensation paid to migrant workers whose rights
had been violated.
Also in April, Bolivia became the second International Labour Organization
member state in Latin America to ratify the Domestic Workers Convention,
which provides critical protections for millions of domestic workers—mostly
women and girls—who perform essential household work in other persons’
homes.
Brazil
Brazil is among the most influential democracies in regional and global affairs,
and in recent years has emerged as an increasingly important voice in debates
over international responses to human rights problems. At home, the country
continues to confront serious human rights challenges, including unlawful
police killings, the use of torture, prison overcrowding, and ongoing impunity
for abuses committed during the country’s military rule (1964-1985).
Faced with high levels of violent crime, some Brazilian police units engage in
abusive practices with impunity. In recent years, the São Paulo and Rio de
Janeiro state governments have implemented measures aimed at improving
police performance and curbing abuses, yet police misreporting and other
forms of cover-up persist.
Beginning in June, hundreds of thousands of protesters participated in nationwide
demonstrations against inadequate public services and the high cost of
staging the World Cup and Olympics in 2014 and 2016 respectively, as well as
government corruption and other grievances. In multiple incidents, police used
teargas, pepper-spray, and rubber bullets disproportionately against the
demonstrators. In October, Rio de Janeiro police arrested more than 200 people
following a protest during which banks, stores, and buildings were destroyed.
The federal minister of justice and public security officials in Rio and São Paulo
states announced in November that they would work together more closely to
prevent and punish violence by protesters and police alike.
In August, President Dilma Rousseff signed a law creating a National
Mechanism to Prevent and Combat Torture that will consist of 11 experts and
have authority to conduct unannounced visits to civilian and military establishments
where individuals are deprived of their liberty.
Public Security and Police Conduct
Widespread violence perpetrated by criminal gangs and abusive police plague
many Brazilian cities. According to the Brazilian Forum on Public Security, a
nongovernmental organization (NGO) that gathers official data from state and
federal bodies, 1,890 people died during police operations in Brazil in 2012, averaging 5 people per day. In Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo states alone, police
were responsible for 362 killings in the state of Rio de Janeiro, and 165 killings
in the state of São Paulo in the first six months of 2013. Police routinely report
these deaths as the result of shoot-outs with criminals. While some police
killings result from legitimate use of force, others do not, a fact documented by
Human Rights Watch and other groups and recognized by Brazilian criminal justice
officials.
In an effort to prevent cover-ups of unlawful police killings, the São Paulo state
government issued a resolution in January 2013 prohibiting police from removing
victims’ corpses from the scenes of the shootings. Police killings in the
state subsequently fell by approximately 34 percent in the first six months of
2013, according to government figures. Yet significant obstacles to accountability
for unlawful killings in São Paulo persist, including the failure of police to
preserve crucial evidence, and the lack of sufficient staff and resources provided
to prosecutors responsible for investigating these cases.
In the state of Rio de Janeiro, 11,749 police officers and other public servants
received financial compensation in April 2013 for meeting reduction targets for
crimes and acts of violence, including police homicides. As of September, 34
Pacifying Police Units (UPP) had also been established in low-income communities
with the goal of providing a more effective police presence. The UPP program
came under sharp scrutiny when a resident of the Rocinha community,
Amarildo Dias de Souza, disappeared on July 14 after being arrested by UPP
police, who later claimed to have released him. On August 2, the national minister
of human rights called on the Rio government to ensure an adequate
investigation into Souza’s disappearance. Twenty-five police officers were subject
to criminal charges for torture in October in connection with Souza’s disappearance.
Seventeen of these officers were also accused of unlawfully concealing
Souza’s body.
Prison Conditions, Torture, and Ill-Treatment of Detainees
Many Brazilian prisons and jails are severely overcrowded and plagued by violence.
The country’s incarceration rate increased almost 30 percent over the
last five years, according to the Ministry of Justice’s Integrated System of
Penitentiary Information (InfoPen). The adult prison population now exceeds half a million people—43 percent more than the prisons were built for. An additional
20,000 children are currently serving prison sentences. Delays within the
justice system contribute to the overcrowding. Nearly 200,000 inmates are in
pretrial detention. In Piauí state, 66 percent of detainees are in pretrial detention,
the highest rate in the country.
Overcrowding and poor sanitation facilitate the spread of disease, and prisoners’
access to medical care remains inadequate. Torture is a chronic problem in
police stations and detention centers. The United Nations Subcommittee on the
Prevention of Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment reported
that it received “repeated and consistent” accounts from inmates of beatings
and other allegations of ill-treatment during police custody. In July 2013,
law enforcement officers in Paraná state allegedly beat, suffocated, and applied
electric shocks to four men to force them to confess to the rape and murder of a
14-year-old girl. In August 2013, security camera footage from the Vila Maria
prison complex in São Paulo state was leaked to the press showing prison
guards beating six children. The prison unit director and three other employees
allegedly involved in the incident were removed from their posts.
Law enforcement agents who commit abuses against inmates and detainees
are rarely brought to justice. In a notable exception, in August 2013, 48 police
officers were convicted of homicide for their participation in the 1992 killing of
111 detainees in the Carandiru prison in São Paulo state.
President Rousseff signed a law in August 2013 establishing the National
Mechanism to Prevent and Combat Torture. The body will consist of 11 experts
with power to conduct unannounced visits to civilian and military establishments
where people are deprived of their liberty, open investigations into possible
cases of torture, and make recommendations to public and private institutions.
It was not operational at time of writing.
Freedom of Expression
Dozens of journalists who covered the nationwide demonstrations in June were
injured or detained by state police. For example, during a protest in São Paulo
on June 13, a reporter and a photographer were hit in the eyes with rubber bullets
and seriously injured. Following this incident, the São Paulo military police
internal affairs unit opened an investigation into the police’s use of force against the journalists and federal authorities called on state governments to
ensure their police forces provided “special protection” for members of the
media.
Six journalists were killed in Brazil between January and November 2013. Two of
the victims worked for the Vale do Aço newspaper in Minas Gerais state, where
investigators concluded in August that police officers were involved in their
killings. The officers implicated were subsequently detained and charged with
aggravated homicide.
By November 2013, 16 out of 27 states had passed legislation to implement the
federal access to information law that went into force in 2012. The law establishes
that the public should have unfettered access to information regarding
violations of fundamental rights.
Reproductive Rights and Gender-Based Violence
Brazil’s criminal code prohibits abortion except in cases of rape or when necessary
to save a woman’s life. In 2012, the Supreme Court expanded the exceptions
to include cases of anencephaly, in which the fetus has a fatal congenital
brain disorder. Women and girls who obtain an abortion outside of these exceptions
may face sentences of up to three years in jail, while people who perform
abortions face up to four years imprisonment.
In August 2013, President Rousseff signed into law a bill that requires public
hospitals to provide comprehensive care for victims of sexual violence, including
“pregnancy prophylaxis” for rape victims and information on the right to
access abortion in cases where it is legal. Rousseff concurrently sent a draft law
to Congress clarifying that “pregnancy prophylaxis” consists of emergency contraception.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
The national Human Rights Ombudsman’s Office received more than 3,000
complaints of violence against lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT)
persons in 2012, 166 percent more than in 2011, when the Ombudsman’s Office
began to track these complaints through a hotline service.
In March 2013, the newly elected president of the Commission for Human
Rights and Minorities of the federal Chamber of Deputies, Pastor Marcos
Feliciano, proposed a legislative bill that would partially suspend a resolution
by the Federal Psychology Council prohibiting psychologists from treating
homosexuality as a disorder. The bill was withdrawn from voting in July following
extensive public criticism.
In May 2013, the National Council of Justice (CNJ) issued a resolution establishing
that notaries who refuse to perform same-sex civil marriages or convert stable
same-sex unions into marriages shall be referred to the judiciary’s internal
affairs unit for disciplinary action. The Supreme Court recognized equal rights
for same-sex couples in 2011.
Labor Rights
Federal government efforts to eradicate forced labor have resulted in more than
44,000 workers being freed from slave-like conditions since 1995, according to
official data. However, the Pastoral Land Commission, a Catholic NGO, received
complaints involving approximately 3,000 workers allegedly subject to forced
labor in 2012. Criminal accountability for offending employers remains relatively
rare.
In June 2013, the Constitution and Justice Commission in the Senate approved a
constitutional amendment that would permit the government to confiscate
properties where forced labor is used without providing compensation to the
owners. Final approval will require a full Senate vote.
Brazil adopted a constitutional amendment in March 2013 that entitles the
country’s estimated 6.5 million domestic workers to overtime pay, unemployment
insurance, pension, a maximum 8-hour workday, and 44-hour work week.
Rural Violence
Rural activists and indigenous leaders involved in conflicts over land continue
to face threats and violence. According to the Pastoral Land Commission, 36
people involved in land conflicts were killed and 77 were victims of attempted
murder throughout the country in 2012. Nearly 2,500 rural activists have
received death threats over the past decade.
In May 2013, several members of the Terena indigenous group were wounded
and one was fatally shot during a court-ordered eviction in the state of Mato
Grosso do Sul. The National Indian Foundation (FUNAI) had designated the
ranch as ancestral Terena land in 2010, but a state court ruled in 2012 that it
belonged to a rancher. According to the Indigenous Missionary Council of the
Catholic Church, 37 members of indigenous tribes were killed in Mato Grosso
do Sul in 2012, the highest number of all Brazilian states.
Confronting Military-Era Abuses
In May 2012, a national truth commission began investigating the systematic
human rights violations that occurred during military rule, from 1964 to 1985,
which included extrajudicial killings, forced disappearances, torture, arbitrary
detention, and the curtailment of free expression.
The perpetrators of these crimes have been shielded from justice by a 1979
amnesty law. In April 2010, the Brazilian Supreme Court reaffirmed lower
courts’ interpretation that the amnesty barred most prosecutions of state
agents for these cases. However, six months later, the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights ruled that this interpretation violated Brazil’s obligations under
international law, and that the amnesty should not be an obstacle to prosecuting
serious human rights violations committed under military rule.
In April 2013, São Paulo prosecutors filed criminal charges against a retired
army colonel and police investigator for concealing the body of a medical student
killed during military rule. A federal judge determined in August that he
will take this case to trial. In contrast, in June, a judge in Rio de Janeiro refused
to try state agents for their alleged involvement in the forced disappearance of
a journalist in 1970.
Key International Actors
In March 2013, the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention expressed concern
regarding prolonged periods of pretrial detention and the lack of adequate public
legal assistance for detainees. In June, the UN special rapporteur on adequate
housing called on local authorities to “refrain from forced evictions” as Brazil prepares to host the 2014 World Cup and 2016 Olympic Games and to
comply with international guidelines when evictions are justified.
During a visit to Brazil in July, Pope Francis condemned unlawful police killings
during a prayer with homeless children in Rio de Janeiro and urged state
authorities and civil society to use dialogue as an alternative to “selfish indifference
and violent protest.”
Brazil’s Foreign Policy
As a returning member to the Human Rights Council, Brazil maintained a positive
voting record, supporting the adoption of resolutions on a number of critical
human rights situations, including Iran and Sri Lanka. In June, for example,
Brazil voted in favor of two resolutions addressing the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Syria and also approved the submission of the final report of the
Independent Commission of Inquiry on Syria to the UN General Assembly.
However, the Brazilian delegation significantly lowered its profile in the council
proceedings and negotiations compared to its prominent engagement during its
previous membership.
At the UN General Assembly, Brazil abstained from a resolution in May condemning
violence in Syria and recognizing the opposition Syrian National
Coalition as “an effective representative interlocutor for a political transition.” It
also abstained in November from a resolution at the UN General Assembly Third
Committee expressing concern regarding ongoing human rights violations in
Iran such as torture and public executions. However, that same month Brazil
supported a resolution calling on all parties in Syria to immediately end all violations
and abuses of international human rights and humanitarian law.
In 2011, the Rousseff administration recalled its ambassador to the
Organization of American States after the Inter-American Commission on
Human Rights issued precautionary measures for Brazil due to an alleged failure
to consult with indigenous groups prior to beginning the construction of the
Belo Monte hydroelectric dam. Brazil has yet to restore the ambassador.
Following press reports in September that the United States and the United
Kingdom carry out massive surveillance of Brazilian citizens, companies and
political leaders, President Rousseff cancelled a state visit to the United States planned for October and announced in a speech to the UN General Assembly
that Brazil would seek to play a leading role in the development of a global
Internet governance mechanism to protect the right to privacy.
Previously, Brazil had expressed concern to UK authorities that a Brazilian citizen
was detained for questioning at Heathrow Airport in London apparently in
connection with US surveillance information leaked to the press by his partner.
In November, Brazil and Germany proposed a UN General Assembly resolution
calling on countries to take measures to end violations of the right to privacy
and ensure effective oversight of state surveillance of communications and collection
of personal data.
Chile
The administration of President Sebastián Piñera has taken several important
steps to strengthen human rights. Since September 2010, it has ended the
jurisdiction of military courts over civilians, reformed some of the most objectionable
parts of counterterrorism legislation, and promulgated a law to provide
redress for LGBT individuals who suffer discrimination.
However, current laws continue to allow military courts to exercise jurisdiction
over alleged human rights abuses committed by the Carabineros (police
responsible for public order and crime prevention), and vague counterterrorism
legislation remains subject to arbitrary enforcement. Police sometimes use
excessive force when responding to public protests.
While courts continue to prosecute individuals for abuses committed during the
Augusto Pinochet dictatorship (1973-1990), the Supreme Court has used its discretionary
powers in many cases to reduce sentences against human rights violators,
resulting in sentences that are incommensurate with the gravity of the
crimes. Abortion continues to be prohibited in all circumstances, even when the
mother’s life is at risk.
Police Abuses
Occupations and street protests by students calling for education reform frequently
end in violent clashes between demonstrators and police. Public
protests are not regulated by law, but rather by a 1983 decree dating from the
Pinochet dictatorship that gives wide discretion to local government officials to
deny permission for protests, as well as broad powers to the police to disperse
unauthorized gatherings.
Carabineros regularly use anti-riot equipment such as water cannons and teargas
to break up unauthorized marches. And when violence occurs at authorized
marches, the police response is sometimes indiscriminate or disproportionate.
The National Institute for Human Rights (INDH—Chile’s human rights ombudsman)
noted that while Carabineros had made efforts in 2012 to improve police
practices in response to authorized protests, they continued to use excessive
force “regardless of the behavior” of demonstrators. Of particular concern in 2013 was Carabineros’ lack of caution in firing paintball rifles at protesters,
which they justified as a means of identifying law-breakers. Five people were
hit in the eye by paintballs fired by police during a student demonstration in
April 2013, one of whom lost an eye.
The executive branch proposed legislation in 2012 and 2013 to criminalize violent
conduct in public protests. Some of the measures proposed, such as those
outlawing the use of hoods or garments protecting the face against tear gas,
would have increased the risk of arbitrary arrest and criminal prosecution of
people exercising a legitimate right to protest, but the Senate rejected the proposed
legislation in October 2013.
According to the INDH, courts have granted seven petitions since January 2012
asking them to protect individuals’ constitutional rights following alleged abusive
actions by police in Mapuche indigenous communities. The courts found
that police had been responsible for arbitrary arrest, ill-treatment, and excessive
use of force.
Military Jurisdiction
Legislation approved by Congress in September 2010 finally ended the jurisdiction
of military courts over civilians, a reform urged by the Inter-American Court
of Human Rights in its 2005 ruling in the Palamara Iribarne case. However, the
reform left untouched the jurisdiction of military courts over abuses committed
by Carabineros against civilians, and at time of writing the government had yet
to present legislation to ensure that Carabineros accused of human rights violations
are tried by civilian courts.
Military courts, which are composed of military officers on active service, lack
the independence and due process guarantees of ordinary criminal proceedings.
Investigations are secret, criminal proceedings conducted mainly in writing,
and lawyers representing victims of police abuse have limited opportunities
to cross-examine witnesses.
However, verdicts by military courts can be appealed to the Supreme Court. In
August 2012, the Corte Marcial (military appeals court) revoked the conviction
of a police officer responsible for the death of a Mapuche who had been participating
in a land occupation, basing its verdict solely on the testimony of the accused—who claimed to have fired in self-defense—and ignoring evidence
that showed that the victim had not fired a weapon. On appeal, in August 2013
the Supreme Court rejected the officer’s self-defense argument and gave the
officer a commuted sentence of three years for homicide due to unnecessary
force (sentences of three years or less can be served without imprisonment).
Counterterrorism Law
In September 2010, following a hunger strike by indigenous Mapuche prisoners
held on terrorism charges, the Piñera administration reformed the counterterrorism
law. Positive reforms allowed for the defense to cross-examine anonymous
witnesses and barred the law’s application to children.
However, the law’s overly broad definition of terrorism continues to allow for
the prosecution on terrorism charges of those allegedly responsible for unrelated
criminal acts such as arson and the destruction of private property, although
judges may later reject terrorism charges as unfounded. In addition, a provision
in the law allowing prosecution witnesses’ identity to be kept anonymous
makes it difficult for defense attorneys to obtain information relevant to witnesses’
credibility. Although the Piñera administration has invoked the terrorism
law against Mapuches engaged in land protests more selectively than its
predecessors, the risk of arbitrary terrorism prosecutions remains without clear
and appropriate legal criteria for its application.
Prison Conditions
In March 2013, the Ministry of Justice instituted a new data collection system to
measure and monitor overcrowding, a chronic problem in Chile’s prisons,
among other poor conditions. In July 2013, there were 47,515 prisoners in a
prison system with a capacity to hold just 38,088.
Confronting Past Abuses
In an interview prior to the 40th anniversary of the September 1973 military
coup, President Piñera acknowledged civilian complicity in abuses under the
Pinochet dictatorship, stating that “there are many who were passive accomplices
[of human rights violations], who knew and did nothing, or did not want to know.” The chief justice publicly acknowledged that the Supreme Court
failed during the dictatorship to act against human rights violations and to protect
victims. He announced in September that the appellate judges in Santiago
who are responsible for trying perpetrators of abuses committed during the dictatorship
would be ordered to dedicate themselves exclusively to these cases.
The chief justice stated in March 2013 that 1,104 cases of human rights violations
were under adjudication by the courts. According to the human rights program
of the Ministry of the Interior, a party to 837 of these cases, as of
September 2013 courts had convicted 355 perpetrators, 262 of whom had
received a final sentence. Sixteen of those convicted had held the rank of general
in the armed forces or police and 39 had been colonels before retirement.
Sixty-six were serving sentences in prison. Nevertheless, as of July 2013, only
33 cases of torture, a systematic practice under Pinochet, were under adjudication,
according to the Human Rights Observatory of Diego Portales University,
which monitors the progress of trials for dictatorship-era abuses.
In many cases, the Supreme Court has used its discretionary powers to issue
lenient sentences against officials who committed serious human rights abuses
by arguing that significant time has elapsed since the criminal act. In other
cases, the court commuted the sentences of others previously convicted for
such crimes. These practices raise concerns about Chile’s fulfillment of its obligation
to hold accountable perpetrators of crimes against humanity by imposing
appropriate punishments or sanctions.
In September 2013 President Piñera ordered the closure of the Cordillera military
prison, one of two built under previous administrations to house military
officers convicted of human rights violations. Its 10 prisoners, who were enjoying
privileges unavailable to ordinary prisoners, were transferred to Punta
Peuco, the other prison for military personnel convicted for human rights abuses.
Reproductive Rights
Chile is one of only four countries in Latin America (the other three being El
Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua) with an absolute prohibition on abortion,
even in the event of medical necessity or rape.
In April 2012, the Senate rejected three bills to legalize abortion in cases in
which the mother’s life was at risk or the fetus was unviable. In July 2013, the
widely publicized case of “Belén,” an 11-year-old who became pregnant after
being raped by her stepfather, brought renewed calls for legislation to allow
abortion for rape victims. Belén stated publicly that she wanted to have the
baby. However, due to the absolute prohibition of abortion, authorities cannot
provide accurate, complete, and unbiased information about reproductive and
sexual health to women and girls pregnant from rape, including youth-sensitive
and confidential counseling to children. As of November 2013, two new bills to
legalize abortion—one for medical reasons, and the other for medical reasons
and rape—presented in May and July respectively, were still under consideration
in committee in the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In May 2013, five senators tabled Chile’s first bill to achieve legal recognition of
the gender identity of transgender people. The bill would allow individuals to
change their name and legal gender on birth certificates and identity cards so
that official documents match their gender identity. Discrimination based on
gender identity was banned under an anti-discrimination law that entered force
in 2012, providing avenues of redress for victims. At time of writing, the Senate
was still discussing the bill.
Key International Actors
Following a visit to Chile in July 2013, the UN special rapporteur on the promotion
and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while combating
terrorism stated that the counterterrorism law had been “applied disproportionately
against Mapuche defendants,” and recommended that its use in connection
with Mapuche land protests should cease. In September, the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination expressed concern about
the “lack of objective legal criteria” for the application of the counterterrorism
law in Mapuche cases, which could violate the principles of legality, equality,
and freedom from discrimination.
In a landmark August 2013 decision, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights
found Chile violated the right to a hearing within a reasonable time of torture victim Leopoldo García Lucero, who was detained five days after the September
1973 military coup. It was the first ruling of the court on the case of a survivor of
human rights abuse during the Pinochet dictatorship.
While Chile played a positive role at the Human Rights Council by voting in
favor of key human rights resolutions such as those on Sri Lanka, Iran, and
Syria, the country could take its positive engagement further by speaking out
more often on other human rights situations that warrant UN attention.
Colombia
Colombia’s internal armed conflict continued to result in serious abuses by
irregular armed groups in 2013, including guerrillas and successor groups to
paramilitaries. More than 5 million Colombians have been internally displaced,
and upward of 150,000 continue to flee their homes each year, generating the
world’s second largest population of internally displaced persons (IDPs).
Human rights defenders, trade unionists, journalists, indigenous and Afro-
Colombian leaders, and IDP leaders face death threats and other abuses. The
administration of President Juan Manuel Santos has consistently condemned
threats and attacks against rights defenders, but perpetrators are rarely
brought to justice.
The Santos administration has adopted several measures that undermine
accountability for human rights violations. The government promoted constitutional
changes concerning transitional justice and the military justice system
that threaten to ensure impunity for egregious abuses by guerrillas, paramilitaries,
and the military. In proceedings before the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights, the government denied the military’s participation in atrocities
for which military members had already been convicted in national courts.
The Colombian government and Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC)
guerrillas have been engaged in peace talks in Cuba since 2012. Colombia’s
internal armed conflict has taken approximately 220,000 lives since 1958, 81.5
percent of whom were civilians, according to a report published in 2013 by the
government-created National Center for Historical Memory.
Guerrilla Abuses
The FARC and the National Liberation Army (ELN) continue to commit serious
abuses against civilians, including killings, threats, forced displacement, and
recruiting and using child soldiers. In September 2013, the government’s
human rights Ombudsman’s Office expressed alarm over the forced recruitment
of children from indigenous Paeces communities in Cauca department, allegedly
by the FARC.
The FARC and ELN continue to use antipersonnel landmines. The government
reported that landmines and unexploded munitions killed 13 civilians and
injured 107 between January and August 2013.
Top FARC and ELN commanders have been convicted in absentia to lengthy
prison sentences for a range of serious crimes, including murders, abductions,
and child recruitment.
Paramilitaries and Their Successors
Between 2003 and 2006, right-wing paramilitary organizations underwent a
deeply flawed government demobilization process in which many members
remained active and reorganized into new groups. Successor groups to paramilitaries,
largely led by members of demobilized paramilitary organizations, commit
widespread abuses against civilians, including killings, disappearances,
sexual violence, and forced displacement. According to the 2012 annual report
of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), these groups caused at
least as many deaths, threats, incidents of displacement, and disappearances
as the armed conflict between the FARC and government forces.
Despite notable gains in capturing their leaders, Colombian authorities have
failed to significantly curb the power of paramilitary successor groups: in May
2013, the police reported that the groups had 3,866 members operating in 167
municipalities, as compared to the police’s July 2009 estimate of 4,037 members
in 173 municipalities. One source of the groups’ ongoing power is the toleration
and collusion of local security force members.
Implementation of the Justice and Peace Law, which offers dramatically
reduced sentences to demobilized paramilitaries who confess their atrocities,
has been very slow. As of July 2013, eight years after the law was approved,
special Justice and Peace unit prosecutors had obtained convictions against
only 18 individuals. In 2013, the unit adopted a new investigative method that
has accelerated its progress bringing charges against paramilitaries.
Since the “parapolitics” scandal erupted in 2006, more than 55 current and
former members of Congress have been convicted for conspiring with paramilitaries.
In August 2013, the Supreme Court ordered the arrest of Luis Alfredo Ramos, Senate president from 2002-2003, governor of Antioquia from 2008-
2011, and a presidential hopeful for the 2014 elections.
The Inspector General’s Office, which conducts disciplinary investigations of
public officials, has made significantly less progress in sanctioning members of
Congress for collaborating with paramilitaries. The office has cleared several
former Congressmen who had previously been found guilty of such collaboration
in criminal proceedings.
Former President Álvaro Uribe (2002-2010) and his inner circle faced an
increasing number of allegations of paramilitary ties. In 2013, prosecutors
reopened a preliminary investigation into alleged links between Uribe and paramilitaries.
Uribe denies the allegations. Prosecutors also questioned Uribe’s
brother, Santiago Uribe, in relation to Santiago’s alleged role in creating a paramilitary
group and a killing in Antioquia department in the 1990s.
In October 2013, prosecutors formally identified Uribe’s security chief while
president, retired police Gen. Mauricio Santoyo, as a suspect in an investigation
into the forced “disappearances” of two human rights activists in 2000. In
2012, Santoyo pled guilty in United States federal court for collaborating with
paramilitaries between 2001 and 2008.
Abuses by Public Security Forces
During the Uribe administration, the Colombian army executed an alarming
number of civilians, particularly between 2004 and 2008. In many cases—commonly
referred to as “false positives”—army personnel killed civilians and
reported them as combatants killed in action, apparently in response to pressure
from superiors to boost body counts. There has been a dramatic reduction
in cases of alleged unlawful killings attributed to security forces since 2009;
nevertheless, some isolated cases were reported in 2012 and 2013.
The government does not keep statistics for cases of “false positives” as a separate
category of crimes distinct from other types of unlawful killings. However,
as of June 2013, the Human Rights Unit of the Attorney General’s Office had
been assigned investigations into 2,278 cases of alleged unlawful killings by
state agents involving nearly 4,000 victims, and had obtained convictions for
189 cases. The convictions covered 605 army members, of whom 91 were (mostly junior) officers. More than 40 army colonels and lieutenant colonels
were under investigation, but just four had been convicted at time of writing.
In 2012 and 2013, in cases before the Inter-American Court of Human Rights,
the government denied the military’s participation in human rights violations
for which military members had already been convicted in national courts. The
government claimed the FARC killed 17 civilians in Santo Domingo, Arauca in
1998, despite multiple judicial rulings in Colombia establishing the air force’s
responsibility for the massacre. The court rejected Colombia’s arguments and
held the state responsible. Similarly, in proceedings before the court concerning
the 1985 Palace of Justice siege, the government did not accept that the
army participated in enforced “disappearances” for which an army general had
already been convicted.
Reforms Promoting Impunity
In July 2012, the government enacted the Legal Framework for Peace constitutional
amendment, which paves the way for widespread impunity for atrocities
by guerrillas, paramilitaries, and the military if a peace agreement is reached
with the FARC. The amendment empowers Congress to limit the scope of prosecutions
of atrocities to individuals found “most responsible,” and provide
statutory immunity to others who planned, executed, and covered up the same
crimes but are not deemed “most responsible,” a category the amendment did
not define.
Furthermore, it gives Congress the authority to exempt from criminal investigation
entire cases of atrocities—such as rapes or enforced “disappearances”—if
they did not form part of a systematic attack. Lastly, the amendment enables
Congress to fully suspend prison sentences for all guerrillas, paramilitaries,
and military personnel convicted of heinous abuses, including those found
“most responsible” for Colombia’s worst crimes.
Colombia’s Constitutional Court reviewed the Legal Framework for Peace and
declared it constitutional in August 2013. However, the court corrected a major
flaw in the amendment by prohibiting full suspension of penalties for those
“most responsible” for atrocities, according to a press release summarizing the
court’s ruling, which was not public at time of writing.
In December 2012, the Santos administration enacted a constitutional change
to the military justice system that created a serious risk that “false positive”
investigations would be transferred from civilian prosecutors to military courts,
which have long failed to hold perpetrators accountable.
In June 2013, as a result of the amendment, the case of an army colonel facing
trial for two alleged false positive killings was transferred to the military justice
system. In addition to opening the door to the transfer of false positive cases,
the amendment’s implementing law, which Congress approved in June 2013,
also authorized security forces to use lethal force in a dangerously broad range
of situations. In October 2013, the Constitutional Court struck down the change
to the military justice system on procedural grounds; however, President
Santos announced the government would resubmit a new draft of the exact
same amendment to Congress in 2014.
Internal Displacement and Land Restitution
More than 5 million Colombians have been internally displaced since 1985,
according to newly revised government figures. The government registered
more than 150,000 newly displaced people in 2012, while CODHES, a respected
Colombian nongovernmental organization (NGO), reports nearly 260,000
Colombians were displaced that year. Displacement levels are particularly high
along the Pacific Coast, such as in the predominantly Afro-Colombian city of
Buenaventura, where paramilitary successor groups caused the forced displacement
of more than 2,500 people during the first week of November 2012.
The Colombian government has made limited progress implementing its land
restitution program under the Victims Law, which was enacted in 2011 to
restore millions of hectares of stolen and abandoned land to displaced people.
The Agricultural Ministry estimated that by the end of 2014 there would be judicial
rulings in nearly 80,000 land restitution cases under the Victims Law; however,
as of September 2013, the government had obtained rulings ordering
restitution for 666 of the more than 45,000 land claims it had received. By
September 2013—more than two years since the Victims Law was enacted—the
government reported just three families had returned to live on their land due
to rulings under law.
IDPs face threats and violence for attempting to reclaim their land. Between
January 2012 and September 2013, more than 700 displaced land claimants
and their leaders seeking land restitution through the Victims Law reported to
authorities that they had received threats. Prosecutors have not charged a single
suspect in any of their investigations into such threats. As of August 2013,
the Attorney General’s Office reported that it was investigating 43 cases of
killings of “leaders, claimants, or participants in land restitution matters” committed
since 2008.
Gender-Based Violence
Gender-based violence (GBV) is widespread in Colombia. Lack of training and
poor implementation of protocols create obstacles for women and girls seeking
post-violence care, with the result that victims may face delays in accessing
essential medical services. Perpetrators of GBV crimes are rarely brought to justice.
Violence against Human Rights Defenders, Journalists, and
Trade Unionists
Rights advocates and journalists continue to be targeted for threats and
attacks. On May 1, unidentified gunmen opened fire against Ricardo Calderón, a
leading investigative journalist who had just exposed in Semana magazine how
army members convicted of atrocities were enjoying extravagant privileges at
the Tolemaida military detention center. Calderón escaped the attack without
injuries.
The National Labor School (ENS), Colombia’s leading NGO monitoring labor
rights, continues to report killings of trade unionists, though the annual number
of cases remains on the decline. Threats against trade unionists are common.
The Interior Ministry runs a protection program that covers thousands of at-risk
members of vulnerable groups, including human rights defenders, trade unionists,
and land restitution claimants.
Key International Actors
The United States remains the most influential foreign actor in Colombia. In
2013, it provided approximately US$473 million in aid, 59 percent of which
went to the military and police. A portion of US military aid is subject to human
rights conditions, which the US Department of State has not enforced. In
September 2013, the State Department certified that Colombia was meeting
human rights benchmarks, even though its military justice system reform directly
contradicted the condition requiring that civilian authorities investigate and
try all alleged human rights violations.
The UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) is active in
Colombia. In April, the government announced it would renew the OHCHR country
office mandate through 2016, but three months later, following a statement
by the office calling for an investigation into the police’s possible excessive use
of force, President Santos said he had not decided if he would extend the mandate.
The government ultimately extended the mandate through October 2014.
The ICRC is also active in Colombia, where its work includes providing assistance
to IDPs. The office of the prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) continued to monitor local investigations into crimes that may fall within
the ICC’s jurisdiction. In July 2013, the ICC’s chief prosecutor sent a letter to the
Constitutional Court stating that full suspension of penalties for those most
responsible for crimes against humanity and war crimes could trigger an investigation
by the international body.
Cuba
In 2010 and 2011, Cuba’s government released dozens of political prisoners on
condition they accept exile in exchange for freedom. Since then, it has relied
less on long-term prison sentences to punish dissent and has relaxed draconian
travel restrictions that divided families and prevented its critics from leaving
and returning to the island.
Nevertheless, the Cuban government continues to repress individuals and
groups who criticize the government or call for basic human rights. Officials
employ a range of tactics to punish dissent and instill fear in the public, including
beatings, public acts of shaming, termination of employment, and threats of
long-term imprisonment. Short-term arbitrary arrests have increased dramatically
in recent years and routinely prevent human rights defenders, independent
journalists, and others from gathering or moving about freely.
Arbitrary Detentions and Short-Term Imprisonment
The government continues to rely on arbitrary detention to harass and intimidate
individuals who exercise their fundamental rights. The Cuban Commission
for Human Rights and National Reconciliation—an independent human rights
group the government views as illegal—received over 3,600 reports of arbitrary
detentions from January through September 2013, compared to approximately
2,100 in 2010.
The detentions are often used preemptively to prevent individuals from participating
in events viewed as critical of the government, such as peaceful marches
or meetings to discuss politics. Many dissidents are beaten and threatened
when detained, even if they do not try to resist.
Security officers virtually never present arrest orders to justify detentions and
threaten detainees with criminal sentences if they continue to participate in
“counterrevolutionary” activities. In some cases, detainees receive official
warnings, which prosecutors may later use in criminal trials to show a pattern
of delinquent behavior. Dissidents said these warnings aim to discourage them
from participating in activities seen as critical of the government.
Victims of such arrests may be held incommunicado for several hours to several
days. Some are held at police stations, while others are driven to remote areas
far from their homes where they are interrogated, threatened, and abandoned.
On August 25, 2013, more than 30 women from the Damas de Blanco (Ladies in
White)—a group founded by the wives, mothers, and daughters of political prisoners
and which the government considers illegal—were detained after attending
Sunday mass at a church in Santiago, beaten, forced onto a bus, and left at
various isolated locations on the city’s outskirts. The same day, eight members
of the group in Havana and seven more in Holguín were arbitrarily detained as
they marched peacefully to attend mass.
Political Prisoners
Cubans who criticize the government may face criminal prosecution. They do
not benefit from due process guarantees, such as the right to fair and public
hearings by a competent and impartial tribunal. In practice, courts are “subordinated”
to the executive and legislative branches, denying meaningful judicial
independence. Political prisoners are routinely denied parole after completing
the minimum required sentence as punishment for refusing to participate in
ideological activities, such as “reeducation” classes.
The death of political prisoner Orlando Zapata Tamayo in 2010 after his 85-day
hunger strike and the subsequent hunger strike by dissident Guillermo Fariñas
pressured the government to release the remaining political prisoners from the
“group of 75” (75 dissidents sentenced to long prison terms in a 2003 crackdown).
Yet most were forced to choose between ongoing prison sentences and
forced exile. The overwhelming majority accepted relocation to Spain in
exchange for their freedom.
Dozens of political prisoners remain in Cuban prisons according to local human
rights groups, which estimate that there are more political prisoners whose
cases they cannot document because the government prevents independent
national or international human rights groups from accessing its prisons.
Luis Enrique Labrador Diaz was one of four people detained in January 2011 for
distributing leaflets in Havana with slogans such as “Down with the Castros” and was subsequently convicted in May 2011 for contempt and public disorder
in a closed, summary trial. He was still in prison at time of writing.
Freedom of Expression
The government controls all media outlets in Cuba and tightly restricts access
to outside information, severely limiting the right to freedom of expression.
Only a tiny fraction of Cubans are able to read independent websites and blogs
because of the high cost of and limited access to the Internet. A May 2013 government
decree directed at expanding Internet access stipulates that it cannot
be used for activities that undermine “public security, the integrity, the economy,
independence, and national security” of Cuba—broad conditions that could
be used to impede access to government critics.
A small number of independent journalists and bloggers manage to write articles
for websites or blogs, or publish tweets. Yet those who publish information
considered critical of the government are sometimes subject to smear campaigns,
attacks, and arbitrary arrests, as are artists and academics who
demand greater freedoms.
After jazz musician Roberto Carcasses called for direct elections and freedom of
information in a nationally televised concert in Havana in September 2013, officials
told him that his words benefitted “the enemy” and that he would be
barred from performing in state-run venues. The government lifted the ban—
widely reported in the international press—a week later. In May, the director of
the government-run Casa de las Americas cultural institute, Roberto Zurbano,
published an article in the New York Times highlighting persistent inequality
and prejudice affecting Afro-Cubans. He was subsequently attacked in the government-
controlled press and demoted to a lesser job at the institute.
Human Rights Defenders
The Cuban government refuses to recognize human rights monitoring as a legitimate
activity and denies legal status to local human rights groups. Meanwhile,
government authorities harass, assault, and imprison human rights defenders
who attempt to document abuses.
Travel Restrictions and Family Separation
Reforms to travel regulations that went into effect in January 2013 eliminate the
need for an exit visa to leave the island, which had previously been used to
deny the right to travel to people critical of the government and their families.
Nearly 183,000 people traveled abroad from January to September 2013,
according to the government. These included human rights defenders, journalists,
and bloggers who previously had been denied permission to leave the
island despite repeated requests, such as blogger Yoani Sanchez.
Nonetheless, the reform establishes that the government may restrict the right
to travel on the vague grounds of “defense and national security” or “other reasons
of public interest,” which could allow the authorities to deny people who
express dissent the ability to leave Cuba. The government also continues to
arbitrarily deny Cubans living abroad the right to visit the island. In August, the
Cuban government denied Blanca Reyes, a Damas de Blanco member living in
exile in Spain, permission to travel to Cuba to visit her ailing 93-year-old father,
who died in October before she could visit him.
The government restricts the movement of citizens within Cuba through a 1997
law known as Decree 217. Designed to limit migration to Havana, the decree
requires that Cubans obtain government permission before moving to the country’s
capital. It is often used to prevent dissidents traveling there to attend
meetings and to harass dissidents from other parts of Cuba who live in the capital.
Prison Conditions
Prisons are overcrowded, unhygienic, and unhealthy, leading to extensive malnutrition
and illness. More than 57,000 Cubans are in prisons or work camps,
according to a May 2012 article in an official government newspaper. Prisoners
who criticize the government or engage in hunger strikes and other forms of
protest are subjected to extended solitary confinement, beatings, restrictions
on family visits, and denial of medical care. Prisoners have no effective complaint
mechanism to seek redress.
While the government allowed select members of the foreign press to conduct
controlled visits to a handful of prisons in April, it continued to deny international human rights groups and independent Cuban organizations access to its
prisons.
Key International Actors
The United States’ economic embargo of Cuba, in place for more than half a
century, continues to impose indiscriminate hardship on the Cuban people and
has done nothing to improve the country’s human rights. At the United Nations
General Assembly in October, 188 of the 192 member countries voted for a resolution
condemning the US embargo.
In 2009, President Barack Obama enacted reforms to eliminate restrictions on
travel and remittances by Cuban Americans to Cuba put in place during the
administration of President George W. Bush in 2004. In 2011, Obama used his
executive powers to ease “people-to-people” travel restrictions, allowing religious,
educational, and cultural groups from the US to travel to Cuba.
The European Union continues to retain its “Common Position” on Cuba, adopted
in 1996, which conditions full economic cooperation with Cuba on the country’s
transition to a pluralist democracy and respect for human rights.
Former US Agency for International Development contractor Alan Gross
remained in prison despite a UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention report in
November 2012 that called for his immediate release. Gross was detained in
Cuba in December 2009 and later sentenced to 15 years in prison for distributing
telecommunications equipment to religious groups. The working group said
Gross’s detention was arbitrary and that Cuba’s government had failed to provide
sufficient evidence of the charges against him.
In May, Cuba underwent its second Universal Periodic Review at the UN Human
Rights Council. Several countries expressed concern with repression of human
rights defenders, increased arbitrary detentions, and lack of freedom of expression.
Cuba rejected many of these recommendations on the grounds that they
were “politically biased and built on false premises, resulting from efforts to
discredit Cuba on the part of those who, with their hegemonic ambitions, refuse
to accept the diversity and the right to freedom of determination of the Cuban
people.”
In November, Cuba was re-elected to a seat on the UN Human Rights Council,
defeating Uruguay for a regional position despite its poor human rights record
and consistent efforts to undermine the council’s work to respond to human
rights violators.
Ecuador
After being re-elected to a third term in February 2013, President Rafael Correa
promulgated a sweeping new Communications Law in June regulating broadcast
and print media, which undercuts press freedom. The Correa government continues
to subject members of the media to public recrimination. Prosecutors
use overly broad counterterrorism and sabotage offences against government
critics who engage in public protests.
Other ongoing problems include vaguely worded restrictions affecting civil society
organizations, and asylum application procedures that do not provide rigorous
safeguards that international standards require. Unable to obtain a legal
abortion, rape victims may resort to illegal and unsafe abortions that endanger
their life and health.
Freedom of Expression
The Communications Law that the National Assembly approved in June 2013
contains vague provisions that allow arbitrary prosecutions and censorship.
The law’s invocation of a constitutional right to information that is “verified,
contrasted, precise, and contextualized,” opens the door to censorship by giving
the government or judges the power to decide if information is truthful.
A government regulatory body, the Superintendent of Information and
Communication, may order media outlet directors to rectify and publicly apologize
for information deemed to be untruthful, impose fines for repeated incidents,
and pursue judicial action against them. Moreover, the law grants the
government extremely broad regulating powers that could severely limit free
speech by defining social communication through media as a “public service”
that should be provided with “responsibility and quality” and “contribute to the
good life of people.”
In addition, journalists responsible for “media lynching”—defined as persistent
critical reporting “with the purpose of undermining the prestige or credibility of
a person or legal entity” may be obliged to issue a public apology, and may
face criminal prosecution for other crimes.
In August, citing provisions of the law that define matters of public relevance
and the right to a correction for disseminating inaccurate information, the communications
minister ordered El Universo newspaper to publicly apologize for
publishing tweets he alleged undermined the president’s honor and reputation.
The minister accused El Universo of “quoting out of context” and “frivolity”
(ligereza), and of publishing information of no “public relevance.” El Universo
had published tweets by Correa explaining his decision to allow oil exploitation
in the Yasuní national park, and tweets by individuals to Correa opposing his
decision.
President Correa continues to use criminal defamation laws to target his critics.
In September 2013, the National Court of Justice upheld the conviction of opposition
legislator José Cléver Jiménez for slandering the president, sentenced
him to 18 months in prison, and ordered him to publicly apologize to the president
and pay him approximately US$140,000. Together with two union members
whose conviction the court also upheld, Jiménez had asked the attorney
general to investigate Correa’s responsibility for violence that led to five deaths
during a September 2010 police mutiny, accusing him of ordering an armed
assault on a hospital where civilians were present.
The attorney general—who had been Correa’s personal lawyer during part of his
first term of office—found that there was insufficient evidence to open an investigation
and, in May 2012, a judge dismissed the case. In August 2012, Correa
filed a complaint before the National Court of Justice accusing Jiménez and the
others of slander. A proposal to reform the Ecuadoran Criminal Code under
debate in the National Assembly as of October 2013 would eliminate several
defamation provisions from the current code, but retain the crime of slander.
The Correa government frequently requires private outlets to transmit official
broadcasts to refute information or critical opinions, which authorities argue is
necessary to fulfill the government’s obligation to refute media falsehoods and
distortions.
Judicial Independence
Corruption, inefficiency, and political influence have plagued Ecuador’s judiciary
for years. With a popular mandate following a 2011 referendum, the Correa
administration initiated an ambitious judicial reform process that included appointing a new National Court of Justice and hundreds of lower level judges.
In December 2012, government-invited observers from Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
Guatemala, Mexico, and Spain, published a report finding anomalies in the
judicial appointment process, including that of top justices. The observers
urged the passage of a law to regulate disciplinary procedures, defining faults
clearly in order to avoid the risk of judges being suspended or punished simply
for exercising their duties.
Disproportionate Criminal Charges against Protesters
The Criminal Code contains sweeping provisions on sabotage and terrorism,
which prosecutors have repeatedly applied inappropriately against participants
in public protests and other gatherings. Acts classified as terrorism in Ecuador
include vaguely defined crimes such as “crimes against the common security of
people or human groups of whatever kind or against their property,” by individuals
or associations “armed or not.” Such crimes carry a possible prison sentence
of four to eight years. A new draft of the criminal code that was under
congressional debate as of October 2013 would modify the existing definition
of terrorism, but the new definition could still allow prosecutors to bring terrorism
charges against participants in public protest.
In February 2013, a court sentenced ten people, known as the Luluncoto 10
(after the Quito neighborhood where they were detained), to one year in prison
for attempted sabotage and terrorism. Arrested in March 2012 while holding a
peaceful meeting to plan a public protest, most were held in pretrial detention
for nine months. Their lawyers maintained the only evidence against them consisted
of personal objects found in their homes, such as innocuous books,
clothing, and music. As of October 2013, their appeal alleging mistrial was still
pending.
Prosecutors have filed other serious charges against participants in public
protests that are disproportionate to alleged acts. In February 2013, 12 students
were charged for rebellion, a crime that carries a prison sentence of up to six
years, for their alleged participation in violent incidents during a protest in
Quito against the decision to change the name of their university. A judge later
dismissed the charges after the prosecutor was unable to substantiate them.
After Correa criticized the judge’s decision in his weekly TV broadcast, another prosecutor reopened the case. In a second trial in July, the 12 were convicted
and sentenced to 21 days in prison.
Accountability for Past Abuses
Efforts to hold to account those responsible for human rights violations committed
by governments from 1984 to 2008 made significant progress in 2013. In
2010, a special prosecutorial unit was formed to investigate 118 cases involving
456 victims (including 68 victims of extrajudicial execution and 17 of enforced
disappearance), which had been documented by a truth commission created by
the Correa administration. In 2012, the number of cases under investigation
rose to 138. In October 2013, two former government defense ministers and
eight retired military and police officers were charged with enforced disappearance
and torture in connection with the illegal arrest in 1985 and torture of
three people linked to a guerilla group. As of October 2013, work by a human
rights investigative unit attached to the Attorney General’s Office had led to
charges being filed against 36 government agents in three other cases from the
period covered by the Truth Commission report.
Reproductive Rights
Women and girls in Ecuador have the right to seek abortions only when their
health or life is at risk or when pregnancies result from the rape of an “idiot or
demented” woman. In October, as part of the drafting of the new criminal code,
the National Assembly was considering a change in terminology, substituting
“mental disability” for “idiot or demented.” The new language continues to
imply that women and girls with disability would be “unfit” mothers, and to prevent
all other victims of rape from accessing legal abortion. One in four women
in Ecuador have been victims of sexual violence, according to government figures.
Threat of criminal penalty drives some women and girls to have illegal and
unsafe abortions, and impedes health care and post-rape services for victims of
sexual violence. Fear of prosecution also hinders detection and prevention of
sexual and gender-based violence.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Private drug and alcohol rehabilitation centers continue to operate to “cure”
gay people of homosexuality, a practice Ecuador’s health minister has said is
illegal. Following the June 2013 escape by 22-year-old psychology student
Zulema Constante from confinement in one such center, the minister of health
announced a crackdown on clinics engaging in this practice. According to the
minister, from March 2012 to July 2013 authorities closed 15 clinics for alleged
human rights violations.
Human Rights Defenders and Civil Society Organizations
Correa’s government has routinely sought to discredit human rights defenders
by accusing them of seeking to destabilize the government. On at least two
occasions in 2013, the communications ministry interrupted programming on
the Ecuavisa channel to excoriate the nongovernmental press freedom group
Fundamedios after the station transmitted interviews with its director.
The Correa administration has issued sweeping executive decrees that allow
greater control over nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), some of which
have been outspoken critics of the government. In June 2013, Correa issued a
decree granting the government broad powers to intervene in NGO operations.
The decree’s vague language, which includes authority to dissolve Ecuadorian
groups for “compromis[ing] public peace,” provides scope for arbitrary application
and poses a threat to a robust civil society.
Refugees
As of August 2013, Ecuador had nearly 55,000 registered refugees, the largest
number of any Latin American country. Most are Colombians fleeing armed conflict.
Presidential Decree 1182, which Correa issued in May 2012 to regulate asylum
procedures, narrows the definition of who may be considered a refugee,
and establishes an unfair procedure to determine which asylum claims should
be deemed “manifestly unfounded.” It also allows officials to reject an asylum
application before a substantive review if well-founded reasons exist to believe
the applicant had committed a crime, without providing for rigorous procedural
safeguards that international standards require to ensure a full factual and legal assessment of the case. The decree also grants overly broad powers to
revoke refugee status.
These provisions are counter to international standards in the Convention
Relating to the Status of Refugees and its Protocol, the Cartagena Declaration
on Refugees, and guidelines adopted by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees.
Key International Actors
In March 2013, the Organization of American States (OAS) rejected proposals
led by Ecuador with the support of other members of the Bolivarian Alliance for
the Americas (ALBA) to block outside funding for the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights, including the special rapporteur on freedom of
expression. However, Ecuador, as well as other ALBA members, made clear its
intent to continue pressing for these changes.
In a speech to the OAS General Assembly in June, Ecuador’s foreign minister
complained that the funds available to the special rapporteur on freedom of
expression discriminated against OAS bodies dealing with other human rights
issues, and that the rapporteur’s 2012 report on Ecuador distorted information,
used biased sources, and was politically motivated. The special rapporteur continues
to play an important role in advocating for press freedom in Ecuador. In
October at an ALBA meeting in Cochabamba, Bolivia, President Correa said he
would “think seriously” about continuing to participate in the Inter-American
system of human rights protection if the changes that Ecuador advocated were
not implemented.
Guatemala
Former Guatemalan leader Efraín Ríos Montt was found guilty in May 2013 of
genocide and crimes against humanity, the first time that any head of state has
been convicted of genocide in a national court. The ruling was overturned on
procedural grounds days later, however, and a new trial is scheduled for
January 2015.
The Attorney General’s Office has made progress on other prominent human
rights cases, though impunity remains high. The mandate of the United Nations
International Commission against Impunity in Guatemala (CICIG), which since
2007 has supported efforts to investigate and prosecute organized crime, was
extended for two years in September. President Otto Pérez Molina has said that
this will be the commission’s final term.
President Pérez Molina has continued to expand the role of the Guatemalan
military in public security operations, despite its poor human rights record.
Guatemala hosted the 43rd General Assembly of the Organization of American
States in June 2013, where the main topic of discussion was drug policy reform.
The Pérez Molina administration has taken a leading role in promoting alternative
approaches to drug policy, arguing that regulating the trade, allowing limited
legal consumption and production of narcotics, could reduce violence and
abuses tied to organized crime.
Accountability for Past Atrocities
In a landmark ruling, former head of state Efraín Ríos Montt was found guilty in
May of genocide and crimes against humanity, and sentenced to 80 years in
prison. The retired general led a military regime from 1982 to 1983 that carried
out hundreds of massacres of unarmed civilians. However, the verdict was overturned
10 days later, when the Constitutional Court ruled that all proceedings in
the final three weeks of the trial had been invalid due to irregularities relating
to an incident in March, when Ríos Montt was briefly without his own defense
attorney. The case will likely have to be retried in full, with witnesses testifying
once more before a different criminal court. Proceedings are scheduled to begin
in January 2015. Representatives of the victims filed a petition before the InterAmerican Commission of Human Rights in November, accusing the Guatemalan
state of failing to provide justice in the case.
Ríos Montt’s defense has made repeated requests for the former leader to be
protected from prosecution under amnesty legislation.
In April, while the genocide trial was ongoing, President Pérez Molina
expressed his support for a public letter signed by a group of prominent politicians
that called genocide charges against members of the army a “fabrication,”
and said that the charges endangered peace.
Ríos Montt has been charged in a separate case involving a 1982 massacre in
the town of Dos Erres, in the Petén region, in which soldiers murdered more
than 250 people, including children. Proceedings, which are ongoing, have
been delayed by legal challenges from Ríos Montt’s lawyers.
Five former members of army special forces have received lengthy prison sentences
for their role in the Dos Erres massacre, while several high-level former
members of the security forces have been convicted in recent years of human
rights crimes committed in previous decades. They include former National
Police Chief Héctor Bol de la Cruz, who received a 40-year sentence in
September for ordering the disappearance of a student activist in 1984.
Public Security and the Criminal Justice System
Powerful criminal organizations engage in widespread acts of violence and
extortion. The intimidation and corruption of justice system officials, as well as
the absence of an effective witness protection program, contribute to high levels
of impunity. Frustrated with the lack of criminal enforcement, some communities
have resorted to vigilantism. According to the Human Rights
Ombudsman, 23 people were killed in lynchings in 2012, and another six by
February 2013.
Despite these challenges, prosecutors have made progress in cases of violent
crime, as well as torture, extrajudicial killings, and corruption—due in large part
to the work of Attorney General Claudia Paz y Paz, as well as the support of
CICIG.
In August, Víctor Hugo Soto Diéguez, a former head of Criminal Investigation of
the National Civil Police, was sentenced to 33 years in prison for forming part of a group that executed 10 prisoners from Pavón and El Infiernito prisons in 2005
and 2006, with the alleged participation of senior government officials.
In November 2012, the CICIG released a report accusing 18 judges of issuing
“illegal judicial decisions” to protect criminal networks and corrupt officials.
The prosecutor’s office launched proceedings to strip 13 of the judges of their
immunity, several of which have been rejected by the Supreme Court.
The Attorney General’s Office arrested eight soldiers and a colonel accused of
responsibility for the killing of six protesters in Totonicapán in October 2012.
Their case has been delayed by legal challenges, and at time of writing the trial
had not begun.
The progress made by the Public Prosecutor’s office and CICIG in bringing
charges against officials has been undercut by the dilatory practices of defendants’
lawyers, including the abuse of amparo protection appeals leading to
trial postponements of months or even years.
Use of Military in Public Security Operations
The government deployed more than 2,500 additional members of the military
in public security roles in 2013, including three newly created army units with a
total of 1,500 members.
The government declared a state of emergency in several municipalities in the
south of the country in May following violent clashes involving anti-mining protesters,
police, and the mine’s private security guards. The measure, lifted
before its 30 days were up, gave the military the power to carry out arrests without
a warrant, and suspended freedom of assembly and other basic rights.
Child Labor and Exploitation
A 2013 report, produced by the government with support from the International
Labour Organization, found that the proportion of children working below
Guatemala’s legal minimum working age of 14 had dropped more than onethird
between 2000 and 2011. The number was some 300,000, equivalent to
eleven percent of those aged 7 to 13. Twenty-one percent of these children carried
out work the government considers dangerous.
The exploitation of children in sexual tourism, pornography, and organized
crime is a widespread problem.
Gender-Based Violence
Violence against women and girls is a chronic problem in Guatemala and perpetrators
rarely face trial. According to official figures quoted by Guatemala’s
Human Rights Ombudsman’s Office, reported rapes and sexual assaults of
women and girls increased by more than a third between 2008 and 2011, while
in more than 9 of every 10 of these cases, those responsible were not punished.
Abortion is illegal, even in cases of rape, except where there is a threat to the
life of the woman.
Palliative Care
Palliative care is very limited in Guatemala, even though more than 10,000 people
die of cancer or HIV/AIDS each year, many in severe pain. Although the
introduction of immediate release morphine in 2012 was a positive development,
the country maintains some of the most restrictive regulations on opioid
medications in the world, effectively denying access to essential pain medicines
to thousands of patients each year.
Attacks on Human Rights Defenders, Trade Unionists,
and Journalists
Attacks and threats against human rights defenders are common, significantly
hampering human rights work throughout the country. Acts of violence and
intimidation against trade unionists endangers freedom of assembly and association,
and the right to organize and bargain collectively.
Journalists, especially those covering corruption and drug trafficking, also face
threats and attacks. The UN special rapporteur on freedom of opinion and
expression said in August that the level of aggression against the press had
reached a level not seen in a decade. In August President Pérez Molina promised
a thorough investigation into the attacks carried out in 2013, and said that the government would move forward with the creation of a UN-backed Program
to Protect Journalists, promised since 2012.
Key International Actors
The CICIG, established in 2007, plays a key role in assisting the Guatemala’s
justice system in prosecuting violent crime, working with the Attorney General’s
Office, the police, and other government agencies to investigate, prosecute,
and dismantle criminal organizations operating in Guatemala. The CICIG can
participate in criminal proceedings as a complementary prosecutor, provide
technical assistance, and promote legislative reforms. As of September 2013, it
had initiated 320 investigations, which resulted in 88 convictions.
The CICIG’s mandate was renewed in September 2013 for two additional years,
but President Pérez Molina has stated that it will not be renewed again when it
expires in 2015. Iván Velásquez Gómez, a prominent Colombian jurist, was
appointed to lead the CICIG following the resignation of the previous head.
Formerly an auxiliary magistrate on Colombia’s Supreme Court, Velásquez
played a leading role in investigating ties between politicians and paramilitary
groups in that country.
The UN High Commissioner for Human Rights has maintained an office in
Guatemala since 2005. The office monitors the human rights situation in the
country and provides policy support to the government and civil society.
In January, the Guatemalan government published a resolution restricting the
jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights to incidents that took
place after 1987, but withdrew the resolution later that month amid criticism.
The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights’ (IACHR) rapporteur on the
rights of indigenous peoples carried out a working visit to Guatemala in August
2013, and expressed concern that licenses for mining and hydroelectric plants
had been granted without properly consulting affected indigenous communities,
as required by international law.
Two former Guatemalan officials allegedly involved in a plan to execute prisoners
from Pavón and El Infiernito prisons in 2005 and 2006 are currently facing
criminal prosecution in Switzerland, and Spain, while a third former official was
acquitted in October by an Austrian court.
In October, Jorge Vinicio Sosa Orantes, a former Guatemalan soldier who
allegedly participated in the Dos Erres massacre, was found guilty by a US court
of lying about his role in the incident on his application for US citizenship,
which he received in 2008.
The Pérez Molina government has asked the US to lift military aid restrictions
established in 1990. Some military aid was restarted nearly a decade ago. In
April, the US donated 42 armored vehicles to a new military-police task force
operating close to the Mexican border.
Haiti
Election delays, natural disasters, and the persistence of a deadly cholera epidemic
continue to hinder the Haitian government’s efforts to meet the basic
needs of its people and address long-standing human rights problems, such as
violence against women and inhumane prison conditions.
Postponement of national and local elections originally scheduled for 2011 continued
to foster political uncertainty and undermine the right to political participation.
As of October, one-third of Senate seats remained vacant and the fate
of another third was uncertain due to conflicting interpretations of a 2008 electoral
law. At the local level, terms for elected posts in 129 of the country’s 140
municipalities also expired in 2011. The administration of President Michel
Martelly filled these posts with political appointees in 2012. With prompting by
the United Nations and other international actors, Martelly convoked a special
session of Parliament on November 22 to consider a draft electoral law for regulating
the overdue elections. At time of writing, the session had not met.
A wave of anti-government protests beginning in October led to confrontations
between protestors and Martelly supporters, which raised concerns about the
resurgence of political violence in the country.
As of June 2013, 280,000 internally displaced persons (IDPs) were living in
camps established in the aftermath of the 2010 earthquake, according to the
UN. The International Organization for Migration estimated that of 71,000 displaced
households, 57,000 have no prospect of IDP sites, while at least 21,000
could face eviction. Nearly 1,200 households were evicted between January and
June, often with the involvement of the police or other government entities.
The three-year-old cholera epidemic continues to claim lives, with an estimated
8,500 people killed and 694,000 infected since October 2010. Damage caused
by Hurricane Sandy in October 2012 and droughts affected harvests, contributing
to high levels of food insecurity.
Deficiencies in the Criminal Justice System and
Detention Conditions
Haiti’s prison system remains severely overcrowded, in large part due to high
numbers of arbitrary arrests and prolonged pretrial detentions. Public health
efforts by the government and the UN Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
reduced the rate of inmate deaths in the first half of the year, which had spiked
in 2012.
The weak capacity of the Haitian National Police (HNP) contributes to overall
insecurity in the country. While the government and MINUSTAH have made
reforming the police a priority, there have been difficulties training sufficient
numbers of entry-level cadets. Oversight and accountability within the HNP
remain weak, and investigations made by the Inspectorate General of the police
into human rights abuses by police made little progress.
Accountability for Past Abuses
Former President Jean-Claude Duvalier returned to Haiti in January 2011 after
nearly 25 years in exile. He was charged with financial and human rights crimes
allegedly committed during his 15-year tenure as president. From 1971 to 1986,
Duvalier commanded a network of security forces that committed serious
human rights violations, including arbitrary detentions, torture, disappearances,
summary executions, and forced exile.
In 2012, the investigating judge in the case found, contrary to international
standards, that the statute of limitations prevented prosecuting Duvalier for his
human rights crimes. An appellate court heard testimony in a challenge to the
ruling over several months beginning in February. Duvalier appeared in court on
February 28 and answered questions posed by the court and victims’ attorneys.
At time of writing, the court had not issued its ruling.
Violence against Women
Gender-based violence is a widespread problem. Draft revisions to Haiti’s criminal
code, which at time of writing were awaiting approval of the Council of
Ministers before introduction to Parliament, include acts of gender-based violence,
such as rape and sexual assault, not currently in the code.
Women seeking accountability for sexual violence crimes encounter multiple
obstacles, including reproach by members of the public or threats. In one highprofile
case, a woman pressed charges against a former justice minister, claiming
he had raped her in 2012. She subsequently reported receiving multiple
death threats, which led her to withdraw her criminal complaint.
Violence Based on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Public statements by religious leaders in June led to a spate of protests and violence
targeting lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and intersex (LGBTI) people.
The Haitian nongovernmental organization SEROvie documented 47 cases
violence targeting LGBTI persons between July 17 and 24, including attacks with
knives, machetes, cement blocks, rocks, and sticks. At least three victims were
hospitalized. On July 21, the Haitian government issued a statement condemning
homophobic violence. Investigations into crimes against LGBTI persons
rarely progress, however, and police and justice officials lack training on issues
related to sexual orientation and gender identity.
Children’s Domestic Labor
Use of child domestic workers—known as restavèks—continues. Restavèks, the
majority of whom are girls, are sent from low-income households to live with
wealthier families in the hope that they will be schooled and cared for in
exchange for performing light chores. Though difficult to calculate, some estimates
suggest that 225,00 children work as restavèks. These children are often
unpaid, denied education, and physically or sexually abused. Haiti’s labor code
does not set a minimum age for work in domestic services, though the minimum
age for work in industrial, agricultural and commercial enterprises is set
at 15.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders face threats of violence. Patrick Florvilus, a pro bono
lawyer, reported receiving death threats since representing two men injured
(one later died) during a police intervention in an IDP camp in April. In August,
the court in Port-au-Prince summoned Florvilus in connection with a criminal arson case against him, which he alleged is frivolous and meant to intimidate
him.
The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights issued precautionary measures
in October 2012 for human rights lawyer Mario Joseph and considered
measures for two other lawyers, André Michel and Newton Saint Juste. On
October 22, 2013, police detained Michel, who has filed corruption charges
against members of Martelly’s family. The following morning his supporters
stormed the Port-au-Prince courthouse where he was due to appear, freed him,
and brought him to the offices of the powerful Port-au-Prince Bar Association.
The attempted arrest sparked a lawyers’ strike preventing courts in the capital
from functioning.
In August, unknown gunmen shot into the home of Malya Villard Apollon, codirector
of the Commission of Women Victims for Victims (KOFAVIV). In
September and October, unknown assailants harassed and threatened activists
working at KOFAVIV, and poisoned Apollon’s two dogs. In November, three
armed men attacked the offices of the LGBTI organization Kouraj, assaulted two
of its members, and stole computers and files containing confidential information
about people in the group. The incident followed months of anonymous
threats instructing organization leaders to cease advocacy on behalf of LGBTI
persons.
Key International Actors
The UN mission, MINUSTAH, has been in Haiti since 2004 and has contributed
to efforts to improve public security, protect vulnerable groups, and strengthen
the country’s democratic institutions.
In October 2010, allegations surfaced that a contingent of UN peacekeepers
was the source of the cholera epidemic. A 2011 UN independent investigation
found that the outbreak was caused by a South Asian strain of the cholera bacteria,
but stopped short of identifying peacekeepers as the source. However, in
July 2013, scientists from the UN panel stated that evidence presented by
numerous scientific studies now supported the conclusion that MINUSTAH soldiers
most likely had introduced the strain.
The Ministry of Public Health and Population continues to document hundreds
of cases of the illness weekly, resulting in dozens of deaths monthly: in August,
it reported that cholera had killed 8,173 people and infected 664,282 since
October 2010, with 258 deaths and 28,800 infections in the first half of 2013.
The UN reports the number of humanitarian organizations participating in the
cholera response, as well as medical stocks needed to treat projected cases,
has fallen significantly since 2012.
In October 2013, UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay publicly
stated that cholera victims should be provided compensation, although she did
not specify who should be responsible for funding the reparation. Also in
October, the Institute for Justice and Democracy in Haiti and the Bureau des
Avocats Internationaux filed a class-action law suit against the UN in a US federal
court in New York. The claim calls for the UN to pay US$2.2 billion for a
cholera eradication program and an unspecified amount in damages for
679,000 individual victims. At time of writing, plaintiffs had not affected service
of notice of the complaint on the UN; therefore the UN had not responded to
the claim in court.
The Institute for Justice and Democracy in Haiti and the Bureau des Avocats
Internationaux filed a claim directly with the UN in November 2011 on behalf of
5,000 cholera victims, alleging that MINUSTAH was the proximate cause of their
illness. The claim sought the installation of a national water and sanitation system,
financial compensation for individual victims, and a public apology from
the UN. In February 2013, the UN informed the victims by letter that the claims
were not “receivable,” citing the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities
of the UN.
According to UN figures, at least 81 allegations of sexual abuse or exploitation
have been made against MINUSTAH personnel in the last six years, including 16
in 2013, as of mid-November.
The UN Security Council extended MINUSTAH’s mandate through October 15, 2014.
Honduras
Honduras suffers from rampant crime and impunity for human rights abuses.
The murder rate, which has risen consistently over the last decade, was the
highest in the world in 2013. Perpetrators of killings and other violent crimes
are rarely brought to justice. The institutions responsible for providing public
security continue to prove largely ineffective and remain marred by corruption
and abuse, while efforts to reform them have made little progress.
Journalists, peasant activists, and LGBTI individuals are particularly vulnerable
to attacks, yet the government routinely fails to prosecute those responsible
and provide protection for those at risk.
After it arbitrarily dismissed four Supreme Court judges in December 2012,
Congress passed legislation empowering itself to remove justices and the attorney
general, further undermining judicial and prosecutorial independence.
Police Abuses and Corruption
Impunity for serious police abuses is a chronic problem. Police killed 149 civilians
from January 2011 to November 2012, including 18 individuals under age
19, according to a report by Honduras’s National Autonomous University. Then-
Commissioner of the Preventive Police Alex Villanueva affirmed the report’s
findings and said there were likely many more killings by police that were never
reported. The government did not respond to calls by the university’s rector to
provide information on how many of those killings had been subject to investigations
or resulted in criminal convictions.
Compelling evidence in a May 2013 investigation by the Associated Press suggested
police involvement in at least five extrajudicial executions or disappearances
of suspected gang members in Tegucigalpa. Authorities have provided
conflicting reports of progress in efforts to weed out police corruption. Such
efforts have been protracted and inefficient. In April 2013, the then-chief of
Directorate for Investigation and Evaluation of the Police Career told Congress
that, of 230 police evaluated for corruption, 33 failed. However, only seven of
those who failed were suspended, and some were later reinstated.
Use of Military in Public Security Operations
In November 2011, Congress passed an emergency decree allowing military personnel
to carry out public security duties, which has since been extended periodically.
In August 2013, Congress passed a law authorizing the creation of a
military police force with powers to seize control of violent neighborhoods and
carry out arrests, among other duties, despite a history of abuse by the military
against civilians.
Judicial and Prosecutorial Independence
In December 2012, the Supreme Court’s Constitutional Chamber ruled that a
law governing police oversight, which had support from a majority in Congress
and the president, was unconstitutional. Shortly thereafter, Congress removed
four of the chamber’s five members for unsatisfactory “administrative conduct.”
Replacements were appointed in January 2013, and the Supreme Court rejected
a legal challenge by the dismissed judges in February. The Council of the
Judiciary, an independent body established by a 2001 constitutional reform to
appoint and remove judges, could help protect against political interference in
judicial processes, but at time of writing, its members had still not been
named.
In April 2013, Congress suspended Attorney General Luis Rubi and his chief
deputy, and appointed an intermediate commission to serve in their place,
pending an investigation into the office’s effectiveness and alleged corruption
within it, a power granted to Congress by a 2002 constitutional reform. Rubi
and his deputy resigned in June before the investigation was completed.
Lack of Accountability for Post-Coup Abuses
Following the June 2009 military coup, the de facto government suspended key
civil liberties, including freedom of the press and assembly. In the ensuing
days, security forces responded to generally peaceful demonstrations with
excessive force and shut down opposition media outlets, which caused several
deaths, scores of injuries, and thousands of arbitrary detentions. A truth commission
established by President Porfirio Lobo published a report in July 2011 that documented 20 cases of excessive use of force and killings by security
forces. Honduras made very little progress prosecuting the abuses in 2013.
Attacks on Journalists
Journalists in Honduras continue to suffer threats, attacks, and killings.
Authorities consistently fail to investigate these crimes effectively. According to
Honduras’s National Human Rights Commission (CONADEH) 36 journalists were
killed between 2003 and mid-2013, and 29 have been killed since President
Lobo took office. In June 2013, TV news anchor Aníbal Barrow was abducted
while driving in San Pedro Sula, and his dismembered remains found weeks
later. While several suspects have been charged in his kidnapping and murder,
none have been convicted.
Rural Violence
Over 90 people have been killed in recent years in land disputes in the Bajo
Aguán Valley, most of them since 2009, according to a March 2013 report by
CONADEH. Scores more have been victims of attacks and threats. The disputes
often pit international agro-industrial firms against peasant organizations over
the rightful ownership of lands transferred following a reform to the country’s
agrarian law. While most victims have been peasants, private security guards
have also been killed and wounded. None of the investigations into the killings
in the CONADEH report led to a conviction.
Violence against LGBTI Persons
Bias-motivated attacks on lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and intersex
(LGBTI) people are a serious problem in Honduras. According to local rights
groups, more than 90 LGBTI people were killed between 2009 and 2012, and
many more subjected to attacks and harassment. The alleged involvement of
Honduran police in some of these violent abuses is of particular concern. In
2011 and 2012, the government established special prosecutors units to investigate
these crimes, yet impunity remains the norm.
Prison Conditions
Inhumane conditions, including overcrowding, inadequate nutrition, and poor
sanitation, are systemic in Honduran prisons. The country’s jails, which can
hold a maximum of approximately 8,200 inmates, were holding more than
12,600 in May 2013, according to CONADEH. Corruption among prison officials
is widespread. An August 2013 report by the Inter-American Commission on
Human Rights (IACHR) found that the government had failed to allocate sufficient
resources to address these chronic problems, or to thoroughly investigate
disasters such as the 2012 fire at Comayagua prison that killed 362 people.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders continue to be subject to violence and threats. In July,
two international human rights observers who were accompanying activists
under threat for opposing a mining project in Nueva Esperanza said they were
abducted by armed men, threatened, and told they would be disappeared if
they did not abandon the community.
While the administration submitted draft legislation to Congress in August 2013
to protect human rights defenders, journalists, and legal practitioners,
Honduran human rights groups said the proposal fails to provide adequate
safeguards. The law had not been passed at time of writing. Similarly, the government
has not fulfilled its pledge to create a national protection mechanism
for human rights defenders and journalists at risk, which in February 2013 it
told the IACHR was “in the consultation phase.”
Key International Actors
The United States allocated over US$50 million in security aid to Honduras from
2010 to 2012, and continues to provide assistance through the Central America
Regional Security Initiative (CARSI). US legislation granting military and police
aid to Honduras states that 20 percent of the funds will only be available if the
US State Department reports that the Honduran government has met several
human rights requirements.
In its 2012 report on those requirements, the US State Department released the
conditioned funds, but stipulated that no aid be directed to the chief of Honduras’s National Police, Juan Carlos Bonilla, or anyone under his direct
supervision, due to an investigation into previous abuses. However, press
reports suggest that US assistance continues to flow to police officers who
report to Bonilla. In a November 2013 Associated Press interview, Bonilla said
that he receives ongoing logistical support from the US Embassy for police
operations. At time of writing, the US Congress was withholding approximately
$10 million of 2012 funding pending investigations of serious abuses.
In January 2013, the United Nations special rapporteur on the independence of
judges and lawyers called the dismissal of four Supreme Court justices on
administrative grounds a violation of international norms and “a grave threat to
democracy.”
In February, the UN Working Group on the use of mercenaries stated the government
had failed to properly regulate private security firms and expressed concern
regarding their “alleged involvement … in widespread human rights violations
including killings, disappearances, forced evictions, and sexual violence.”
In April 2012, the ombudsman of the International Finance Corporation (IFC),
the private-sector lending arm of World Bank group, initiated an investigation
into a 2008 loan to Corporación Dinant, a Honduran palm oil and food company.
The IFC report, which had not been released at time of writing, will examine
whether the IFC adequately followed its own policies regarding security and
human rights in relation to the loan, including whether it responded adequately
to “intensifying social and political conflict” after issuing the loan.
Mexico
Upon taking office in December 2012, President Enrique Peña Nieto acknowledged
that the “war on drugs” launched by predecessor Felipe Calderón had
led to serious abuses by the security forces. In early 2013, the administration
said that more than 26,000 people had been reported disappeared or missing
since 2007—a problem it called a “humanitarian crisis”—and promulgated
broad legislation aimed at ensuring victims’ rights.
Yet the government has made little progress in prosecuting widespread killings,
enforced disappearances, and torture committed by soldiers and police in the
course of efforts to combat organized crime, including during Peña Nieto’s
tenure. Members of the military accused of human rights violations continue to
be prosecuted within the biased military justice system, ensuring impunity.
Some criminal suspects can be held for 80 days without charge under the arraigo
provision.
Disappearances
Mexico’s security forces have participated in widespread enforced disappearances
since former President Calderón (2006-2012) launched a “war on drugs.”
Members of all security force branches continue to carry out disappearances
during the Peña Nieto administration, in some cases collaborating directly with
criminal groups. In June 2013, Mexico’s National Human Rights Commission
(CNDH) said it was investigating 2,443 disappearances in which it had found
evidence of the involvement of state agents.
Prosecutors and police routinely fail to carry out basic investigative steps to
search for missing people or to identify those responsible for disappearances,
often blaming victims and telling their families to investigate. Families of the
disappeared may lose access to basic social services that are tied to the victim’s
employment, such as child care.
In February 2013, the Peña Nieto administration acknowledged that more than
26,000 people had been reported disappeared or missing since December
2006. In May, the government created a unit in the Federal Prosecutor’s Office
to investigate enforced and other disappearances, but at time of writing it had not demonstrated meaningful progress in criminal investigations or searches
for the victims. Mexico still lacks a national database for disappeared people,
and a national database of thousands of unidentified human remains, many of
which were found in mass graves.
Military Abuses and Impunity
Mexico has relied heavily on the military to fight drug-related violence and
organized crime, leading to widespread human rights violations. From
December 2006 to mid-September 2013, the CNDH received 8,150 complaints
of abuse by the army, and issued reports on 116 cases in which it found that
army personnel had committed serious human rights violations.
The soldiers who commit these abuses are virtually never brought to justice,
largely because such cases continue to be investigated and prosecuted in the
military justice system, which lacks independence and transparency. The
Military Prosecutor’s Office opened over 5,600 investigations into alleged abuses
by soldiers against civilians from January 2007 to mid-2013. However, as of
October 2012, military judges had sentenced only 38 members of the military
for human rights violations.
At time of writing, the Senate’s Justice Commission was considering a proposed
reform to the military justice code that would aim to ensure that abuses committed
by members of the military against civilians were handled in the civil
justice system.
Torture
Torture is widely practiced in Mexico to obtain forced confessions and extract
information. It is most frequently applied in the period between when victims
are arbitrarily detained and when they are handed to prosecutors, when they
are often held incommunicado at military bases or other illegal detention sites.
Common tactics include beatings, waterboarding, electric shocks, and sexual
torture. Many judges continue to accept confessions obtained through torture,
despite the constitutional prohibition of such evidence.
Justice officials rarely apply the Istanbul Protocol, a set of principles to assess a
potential victim of torture or ill-treatment. The Federal Prosecutor’s Office not demonstrated meaningful progress in criminal investigations or searches
for the victims. Mexico still lacks a national database for disappeared people,
and a national database of thousands of unidentified human remains, many of
which were found in mass graves.
Military Abuses and Impunity
Mexico has relied heavily on the military to fight drug-related violence and
organized crime, leading to widespread human rights violations. From
December 2006 to mid-September 2013, the CNDH received 8,150 complaints
of abuse by the army, and issued reports on 116 cases in which it found that
army personnel had committed serious human rights violations.
The soldiers who commit these abuses are virtually never brought to justice,
largely because such cases continue to be investigated and prosecuted in the
military justice system, which lacks independence and transparency. The
Military Prosecutor’s Office opened over 5,600 investigations into alleged abuses
by soldiers against civilians from January 2007 to mid-2013. However, as of
October 2012, military judges had sentenced only 38 members of the military
for human rights violations.
At time of writing, the Senate’s Justice Commission was considering a proposed
reform to the military justice code that would aim to ensure that abuses committed
by members of the military against civilians were handled in the civil
justice system.
Torture
Torture is widely practiced in Mexico to obtain forced confessions and extract
information. It is most frequently applied in the period between when victims
are arbitrarily detained and when they are handed to prosecutors, when they
are often held incommunicado at military bases or other illegal detention sites.
Common tactics include beatings, waterboarding, electric shocks, and sexual
torture. Many judges continue to accept confessions obtained through torture,
despite the constitutional prohibition of such evidence.
Justice officials rarely apply the Istanbul Protocol, a set of principles to assess a
potential victim of torture or ill-treatment. The Federal Prosecutor’s Office Prison Conditions
Prisons are overpopulated, unhygienic, and fail to provide basic security for
most inmates. Prisoners who accuse guards or inmates of attacks or other
abuses have no effective system to seek redress.
Approximately 65 percent of prisons are controlled by organized crime, and corruption
and violence are rampant, according to the CNDH. Some 108 inmates
had died in 2013, as of November.
Freedom of Expression
Journalists, particularly those who report on crime or criticize officials, face
harassment and attacks. At least 85 journalists were killed between 2000 and
August 2013, and 20 more were disappeared between 2005 and April 2013,
according to the CNDH. Authorities routinely fail to adequately investigate
crimes against journalists, often preemptively ruling out their profession as a
motive.
Journalists are often driven to self-censorship by attacks carried out both by
government officials and by criminal groups, while under-regulation of state
advertising can also limit media freedom by giving the government disproportionate
financial influence over media outlets.
Mexico created a special prosecutor’s office for Crimes against Freedom of
Expression in 2006, but to date it has obtained only one criminal sentence from
the 378 investigations it has opened. Legislation enacted in May 2013 gave the
Federal Prosecutor’s Office power to take over any investigation into attacks on
media.
Gender-Based Violence
Mexican laws do not adequately protect women and girls against domestic violence
and sexual violence. Some provisions, including those that make the
severity of punishments for some sexual offenses contingent on the “chastity”
of the victim, contradict international standards. Women and girls who have
suffered these types of human rights violations generally do not report them to
authorities, while those who do generally face suspicion, apathy, and disrespect. In January 2013, Mexico amended its law on violence against women to
expedite emergency protection measures for victims of gender-based violence.
Reproductive Rights
In August 2008, the Supreme Court affirmed the constitutionality of a Mexico
City law that legalized abortion in the first 12 weeks of pregnancy. Since that
time, 16 of Mexico’s 32 federal entities have legislated to recognize the right to
life from the moment of conception, limiting women’s ability to exercise their
right to health. In 2010, the Supreme Court ruled that all states must provide
emergency contraception and access to abortion for rape victims. However, in
practice many women and girls face serious barriers to accessing abortions
after sexual violence, including inaccurate information and intimidation by officials.
Marriage Equality
In August 2010, the Supreme Court recognized the right of same-sex couples in
Mexico City to adopt children and to marry, and ruled that all 31 Mexican states
must recognize same-sex marriages that take place in Mexico City. Yet the ruling
does not require that states recognize the right themselves, and many still
deny same-sex couples the right to marry. In December 2012, the Mexican
Supreme Court struck down a law in Oaxaca that defined marriage as being
between a man and a woman.
Access to Palliative Care
Tens of thousands of patients face major and often insurmountable obstacles
in accessing end-of-life care, even though Mexican law grants them a right to
such care. Health insurance schemes do not yet adequately address the health
needs of incurable patients; drug control regulations unnecessarily restrict
access to morphine, an essential medication for severe pain; and training in
palliative care for healthcare workers remains insufficient.
Migrants
Hundreds of thousands of undocumented migrants pass through Mexico each
year and many are subjected to grave abuses en route—such as disappearances
and sexual violence—at the hands of organized crime, migration authorities,
and security forces. Authorities have not taken adequate steps to protect
migrants, or to investigate and prosecute those who abuse them. Despite the
approval in 2011 of a new migration law ostensibly aimed at protecting
migrants’ rights, police continue to detain and harass undocumented migrants.
The staff of migrant shelters face threats and harassment from criminal groups
and officials, yet the government has failed to implement protective measures
granted to these centers by national and international human rights bodies. At
least three migrant centers were forced to close or saw staff forced to flee in
2013.
In September, the Federal Prosecutor’s Office authorized the creation of a team,
including international forensic experts, to identify more than 200 human
remains thought to belong to migrants.
Labor Rights
The dominance of pro-management unions continues to obstruct legitimate
labor-organizing activity. Independent unions are often blocked from entering
negotiations with management, while workers who seek to form independent
unions risk losing their jobs. A 2012 labor law failed to address the lack of
transparency and democracy in the powerful pro-management unions, and
failed to protect workers’ right to form independent unions and carry out collective
bargaining.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders and activists continue to suffer harassment and
attacks, often in the context of opposition to infrastructure or resource extraction
“mega-projects.” In many cases, there is evidence—including witness testimony
or traced cell phones—that state agents are involved in aggressions
against human rights defenders. Of 89 aggressions against human rights
defenders registered by the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights between November 2010 and December 2012, none resulted in a conviction.
In June 2012, Mexico enacted a law to protect human rights defenders and journalists.
At time of writing, the protection mechanism created by the law had not
been effectively implemented, with protective measures slow to arrive, insufficient,
or incomplete in some cases. The mechanism suffers from too few and
inadequately trained staff, delays in accessing funds, coordination failures with
state-level institutions, poor dissemination to those at risk, and a lack of public
support from high level government officials.
Key International Actors
The United States has allocated over US$2 billion in aid to Mexico through the
Merida Initiative, an aid package agreed upon in 2007 without a year cap, to
help Mexico combat organized crime. Fifteen percent of select portions of the
assistance can be disbursed only after the US secretary of state reports that the
Mexican government is meeting human rights requirements.
However, the impact of these requirements has been undermined by the fact
the US State Department has repeatedly reported to the US Congress that they
are being met, despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary, often citing
vague and incomplete progress towards meeting the requirements, leading
Congress to release the funds.
The UN special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions
conducted a fact-finding mission to Mexico in April-May 2013, and stated that
extrajudicial executions by security forces were widespread and often occurred
without accountability.
In October 2013, Mexico underwent its second Universal Periodic Review in the
United Nations Human Rights Council, where key recommendations included
placing human rights violations by the military under civilian jurisdiction, and
strengthening the protection mechanism for human rights defenders and
journalists.
Peru
In recent years, public protests against large-scale mining projects, as well as
other government policies and private sector initiatives, have led to numerous
confrontations between police and protesters, and resulted in the shooting
deaths of civilians by state security forces. While the number of deaths
declined significantly during the first nine months of 2013, there has been little
progress in investigating these cases or taking steps to ensure that police comply
with international norms on the use of lethal force.
Despite the landmark convictions in 2009 and 2010 of former President Alberto
Fujimori, his advisor Vladimiro Montesinos, several army generals, and members
of a government death squad, progress on cases involving abuses committed
under earlier administrations has been very limited.
Deaths in Protests
As of September 2013, 27 civilians had been killed during protests since
President Ollanta Humala took office in July 2011. The number of these fatal
shootings declined from 18 in the first eight months of 2012 to three in the
same period of 2013. The National Office for Dialogue and Sustainability, a government
body created in August 2012, has promoted dialogue to seek peaceful
resolution of social conflicts that drive protests. However, there has been little
progress determining the circumstances in which the deaths occurred and holding
to account police or military personnel who used force unlawfully.
Confronting Past Abuses
Peru’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission estimated that almost 70,000 people
died or were subject to enforced disappearance during the country’s armed
conflict between 1980 and 2000. Many were victims of atrocities by the Shining
Path and other insurgent groups; others were victims of human rights violations
by state agents.
Former President Fujimori was sentenced in 2009 to 25 years in prison for
killings and “disappearances” in 1991 and 1992. His intelligence advisor,
Vladimiro Montesinos, three former army generals, and members of the Colina Court ruling that public personalities must assume a greater burden of proof in
libel cases where a public interest is involved.
A bill that would replace such prison sentences for criminal defamation with
community service and fines is still awaiting a vote in the legislature. Although
Congress approved the bill in July 2011, former President García lodged objections,
and an amended version was never approved.
Reproductive Rights
Women and girls in Peru have the right to seek abortions only in cases of risk to
the health or life of the woman. However, the country lacks clear protocols that
enable health providers to determine in which specific circumstances an abortion
may be lawful. Multiple United Nations human rights monitoring bodies
have all called on Peru to establish such protocols, as well as to legalize abortion
in cases in which the pregnancy results from rape. At time of writing, the
government had failed to comply with these recommendations.
Disability Rights
Under Peru’s system of judicial interdiction, judges can determine that individuals
with certain intellectual or mental disabilities are legally “incompetent”
and assign them legal guardians, effectively suspending their basic civil rights,
including the right to vote. International and regional human rights bodies have
called on Peru to abolish judicial interdiction—or guardianship—because it is
incompatible with Peru’s obligations under the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities.
In December 2012, the General Law on People with Disabilities entered force,
but as of October 2013 the executive had yet to adopt its implementing
regulations. The law aims to bring existing national legislation into line with the
convention, protecting the right of people with disabilities to act in their own
interests, with appropriate support when necessary. However, a commission to
revise the civil code, created by the General Law on People with Disabilities,
had not been established as of October 2013. Peruvian law still permits
involuntary detention for treatment of people with disabilities who are under
guardianship.
Key International Actors
In March 2013, in its concluding observations on Peru’s fifth periodic report, the
UN Human Rights Committee recommended that Peru “effectively prevent and
eradicate the excessive use of force by law enforcement officials and members
of the security forces” and “intensify its efforts to eradicate torture.” It also
called on Peru to adopt legislation to prohibit discrimination on the basis of
sexual orientation and gender identity, to allow abortion in cases of rape, and
to “swiftly adopt a national protocol regulating the practice of therapeutic abortion.”
In September 2013, the UN Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment visited 26 prisons and
police stations in different parts of Peru. Peru ratified the Optional Protocol to
the Convention against Torture in 2006. The subcommittee’s chairperson
expressed hope that by the end of 2013, Peru would have instituted a national
prevention mechanism against torture and ill-treatment, and given it sufficient
funds to function effectively.
As a relatively new member of the UN Human Rights Council, Peru has played a
positive role in voting for a number of resolutions that address human rights
violations in countries like Sri Lanka, Belarus, and Iran. However, Peru took a
step back backwards by deciding to no longer sponsor country-specific resolutions
at the UN.
Venezuela
The April 2013 presidential election, held weeks after the death of President
Hugo Chávez, resulted in a narrow victory for Chávez’s hand-picked successor,
Nicolás Maduro, according to Venezuelan electoral authorities. The Supreme
Court and the National Electoral Council rejected appeals filed by the opposition
candidate, Henrique Capriles Radonski, challenging the results. The controversy
over the results touched off street demonstrations and counterdemonstrations,
which led to at least nine deaths and dozens of injured, as well as
excessive use of force and arbitrary detentions by security forces.
Under the leadership of President Chávez and now President Maduro, the accumulation
of power in the executive branch and the erosion of human rights
guarantees have enabled the government to intimidate, censor, and prosecute
its critics. While many Venezuelans continue to criticize the government, the
prospect of facing reprisals—in the form of arbitrary or abusive state action—
has undercut the ability of judges to fairly adjudicate politically sensitive cases,
and forced journalists and rights defenders to weigh the consequences of publicizing
information and opinions that are critical of the government.
In September 2013, the Venezuelan government’s decision to withdraw from
the American Convention on Human Rights took effect, leaving Venezuelans
without access to the Inter-American Court on Human Rights, an international
tribunal that has protected their rights for decades in a wide array of cases.
Police abuse, prison conditions, and impunity for abuses by security forces
remain serious problems.
Post-Election Violence
Security forces used excessive force and arbitrary detentions to disperse antigovernment
demonstrations after the April elections, according to local groups.
For example, the Forum for Life, a network of 18 Venezuelan human rights
organizations, reported that security forces had arbitrarily detained at least 62
individuals and injured 38 others in demonstrations in the state of Lara on April
15 and 16. The detainees reported that they were severely beaten, threatened
with sexual violence, and deprived of food for more than 24 hours.
According to official information, six “violent and aggressive” demonstrations
took place after the elections, in which 35 people were injured; and 15 health
centers, five headquarters of political parties, and one ombudsman’s office
were vandalized. Official sources reported that nine individuals were killed at
the time, although the circumstances in which the deaths occurred remain
unclear.
President Maduro and other high level officials have used the threat of criminal
investigations as a political tool, attributing responsibility for all acts of violence
during demonstrations to Capriles. The Attorney General’s Office has
investigated incidents involving victims who were government supporters, but
has failed to conduct thorough investigations into credible allegations of postelectoral
abuses by security forces.
Judicial Independence
Since then, President Chávez and his supporters in the National Assembly conducted
a political takeover of the Supreme Court in 2004, the judiciary has
largely ceased to function as an independent branch of government. Members
of the Supreme Court have openly rejected the principle of separation of powers,
publicly pledged their commitment to advancing the government’s political
agenda, and repeatedly ruled in favor of the government, validating the government’s
disregard for human rights.
Judge María Lourdes Afiuni remains under criminal prosecution as a result of a
2009 ruling against the government. In December 2009, Afiuni was detained on
the day she authorized the conditional release of a government critic who had
spent nearly three years in prison awaiting trial on corruption charges. Although
Afiuni’s ruling complied with a recommendation by international human rights
monitors—and was consistent with Venezuelan law—a provisional judge who
had publicly pledged his loyalty to Chávez ordered her to stand trial on charges
of corruption, abuse of authority, and “favoring the evasion of justice.” Afiuni
spent more than a year in deplorable conditions in a women’s prison, and over
two years under house arrest. In June 2013, she was granted conditional liberty,
but at time of writing remained bound by a court order forbidding her to make
any public statements about her case.
Freedom of Media
Over the past decade, the government has expanded and abused its powers to
regulate media. While sharp criticism of the government is still common in several
newspapers and some radio stations, fear of government reprisals has
made self-censorship a serious problem.
In 2010, the National Assembly amended the telecommunications law to grant
the government power to suspend or revoke concessions to private outlets if it
is “convenient for the interests of the nation.” It also expanded the scope of a
restrictive broadcasting statute to cover the Internet, allowing the arbitrary suspension
of websites for the vaguely defined offense of “incitement.” Previously,
amendments to the criminal code had expanded the scope and severity
of defamation laws that criminalize disrespect of high government officials.
The government has taken aggressive steps to reduce the availability of media
outlets that engage in critical programming. Venezuela’s oldest private television
channel, RCTV, which was arbitrarily removed from public airwaves in
2007, was then driven off cable TV in 2010.
The government subsequently pursued administrative sanctions against
Globovisión, which was for years the only major channel that remained critical
of Chávez. The broadcasting authority opened nine administrative investigations
against the channel. In one case, it imposed a fine of US$2.1 million for
allegedly violating the broadcasting statute when Globovisión aired images of a
prison riot in 2011. In April 2013, Globovisión was sold to government supporters
because, according to its owner, it had become politically, economically,
and legally unviable. Since then, it has significantly reduced its critical programming.
The government has also targeted other media outlets for arbitrary sanction
and censorship. For example, in a case brought by the ombudsman, a specialized
court to protect children fined El Nacional newspaper in August 2013 for
publishing on its front page a photograph of a dozen naked corpses in the Bello
Monte morgue in Caracas. The image accompanied an article about illegal arms
and violence, which are major public concerns in Venezuela. Since the picture
was printed in 2010, the court forbade the paper from publishing “images,
information and publicity of any type containing blood, arms, and messages of
terror, physical aggression, images with contents of war and messages about deaths that could alter the psychological well-being of boys, girls, and adolescents
in Venezuela.”
In November 2013, the broadcasting authority opened an administrative investigation
against eight Internet providers for allowing web sites that published
information on unofficial exchange rates, and threatened to revoke their licenses
if they did not immediately block the sites. Days later, it asked Twitter to
suspend accounts related to such websites.
Human Rights Defenders
The Venezuelan government has sought to marginalize the country’s human
rights defenders by repeatedly accusing them of seeking to undermine
Venezuelan democracy with the support of the US government. For example, in
July 2013, the minister of interior accused Rocío San Miguel, the director of the
nongovernmental organization Citizen Control, of being a “CIA operator in
Venezuela” who is conducting a “psychological campaign” against the government’s
security policies.
In 2010, the Supreme Court ruled that individuals or organizations that receive
foreign funding could be prosecuted for “treason.” In addition, the National
Assembly enacted legislation blocking organizations that “defend political
rights” or “monitor the performance of public bodies” from receiving international
assistance.
In October 2013, the National Assembly created a “special commission” to
investigate the sources of funding of “offices or organizations with political purposes
and groups that act with the purpose of destabilizing and generating
social commotion and coup d’etat[s] to undermine the constitutional order.”
Abuses by Security Forces
Violent crime is rampant in Venezuela. In May 2013, President Maduro
launched the “Secure Homeland Plan,” deploying 3,000 military officials to participate
in joint public security operations with police forces. Military officials
lack the training to perform these tasks.
Killings by security forces are a chronic problem. According to the most recent
official statistics, law enforcement agents allegedly killed 7,998 people
between January 2000 and the first third of 2009. In July 2013, military officials opened fire at a car in the state of Falcon, killing the driver and one of her
daughters, and injuring her two other children. After the case received widespread
media coverage, prosecutors charged 10 military officials for their
alleged responsibility in the killings. However, impunity remains the norm.
In April 2008, the government created the National Bolivarian Police (NBP) and
enacted measures to promote non-abusive policing proposed by a commission
comprised of government and NGO representatives. As of August 2013, there
were 14,478 NBP officers working in eight states.
In June 2013, the National Assembly passed a new Law to Prevent and Sanction
Torture and other Cruel or Inhuman Treatment, which penalizes the commission,
collaboration, cover up, and obstruction of criminal investigations into
these acts. The law, which has entered in force, imposes penalties of up to 25
years for these crimes.
Prison Conditions
Venezuelan prisons are among the most violent in Latin America. Weak security,
deteriorating infrastructure, overcrowding, insufficient and poorly trained
guards, and corruption allow armed gangs to effectively control prisons.
Hundreds of violent prison deaths occur every year. For example, in January
2013, at least 56 prisoners and one member of the National Guard were killed
during a clash between members of the National Guard and inmates in which
security forces used lethal force during a weapons search in the Uribana prison
in Lara state. Forty-six prisoners were hospitalized with serious injuries.
Labor Rights
Political discrimination against workers in state institutions remains a problem.
In April 2013, Minister of Housing Ricardo Molina called on all ministry personnel
who supported the opposition to resign, saying that he would fire anyone
who criticized Maduro, Chávez, or the “revolution.” The Human Rights Center of
the Catholic University Andrés Bello received complaints involving hundreds of
workers from public institutions —including the state oil company, the office in
charge of customs and taxes, and state electrical companies— who were
allegedly threatened with losing their positions for supporting Capriles, or for
not openly supporting the government, after the April elections.
Labor legislation adopted in April 2012 includes provisions that limit the full
freedom that unions should have to draft their statutes and elect their representatives.
In practice, the National Electoral Council (CNE), a public authority,
continues to play an excessive role in union elections, violating international
standards that guarantee workers the right to elect their representatives in full
freedom, according to conditions they determine.
Key International Actors
On September 10, 2013, the Venezuelan government’s decision to denounce
the American Convention on Human Rights entered into effect. Venezuelan citizens
and residents are unable to request the Inter-American Court of Human
Rights’ intervention when local remedies are ineffective or unavailable for any
abuses committed since that date.
As a member of the UN Human Rights Council, Venezuela has spoken out
against UN action to respond to human rights violations in places such as North
Korea. During the September 2013 session of the Human Rights Council, it was
the only country to vote against a resolution condemning human rights violations
committed against the Syrian people. For years, Venezuela’s government
has refused to authorize UN human rights experts to conduct fact-finding visits
in the country.
In June 2013, Venezuela became the pro-tempore president of Mercosur, a year
after joining the regional bloc. The Asunción Protocol on Commitment with the
Promotion and Protection of Human Rights of Mercosur states that “full respect
of democratic institutions and the respect of human rights” are essential for
regional integration, and that state parties will “cooperate for the effective promotion
and protection of human rights.” By not addressing the absence of an
independent judiciary in Venezuela, as well as the government’s efforts to
undermine human rights protections, the other Mercosur member states have
failed to uphold these commitments.
Venezuela supported a campaign by Ecuador to undermine the independence
of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, and limit the funding and
effectiveness of its special rapporteurship on freedom of expression. While they
were unable to win support for this effort at the March 2013 meeting
Organization of American States General Assembly, both governments, as well
as other members of the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas (ALBA), made
clear their intent to continue pressing for these changes in the future.
Afghanistan
Preparations for the end-2014 withdrawal of international combat troops continued
in 2013, with international troops largely departed, sequestered in bases,
and focused on the logistics of shipping military equipment out of the country.
The Afghan army and police stepped forward to lead the fight against the
Taliban and other insurgents, with mixed results.
The ability of Afghan security forces to hold government-held territory, let alone
retake insurgent-controlled areas, is unclear, and security concerns for much of
the population remain high. The United Nations recorded a 23 percent rise in
civilian casualties for the first six months of 2013 compared to 2012, most
caused by insurgents, with the Taliban explicitly targeting civilians they see as
supporting the government. The security concerns are reflected in the fact that
almost half of the 7,000 polling centers planned for the 2014 presidential election
face serious threats.
There was continued instability and declining respect for human rights in the
country over the past year. This was reflected in attacks on women’s rights,
growing internal displacement and migration, and weakened efficacy of the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission (AIHRC). Impunity for
abuses was the norm for government security forces and other armed groups.
These problems raised concerns about the fairness of the upcoming presidential
election.
Women’s Rights
With international interest in Afghanistan rapidly waning, opponents of
women’s rights seized the opportunity to begin rolling back the progress made
since the end of Taliban rule. A May parliamentary debate on the groundbreaking
Law on the Elimination of Violence Against Women (EVAW Law), passed by
presidential decree in 2009, was halted after 15 minutes after numerous lawmakers
argued for the law’s repeal and spoke out against legal protections for
women and girls. The law remains valid, but enforcement is weak. The EVAW
debate heralded, and perhaps triggered, subsequent attacks and setbacks
within the government during the year, including:
• A call by Abdul Rahman Hotak, a new AIHRC commissioner, to repeal
the EVAW Law;
• A decision by parliament to reduce the 25 percent of seats set aside for
women on Afghanistan’s 34 provincial councils;
• A revision by the Ministry of Justice to the new criminal procedure
code, adding a provision that bans family member testimony in criminal
cases that makes it extremely difficult to prosecute domestic violence
and child and forced marriage— and the law’s subsequent passage
by the lower house of parliament;
• The release from prison after just one year of the parents-in-law of
Sahar Gul, the 13-year-old bride of their son whom they had starved
and tortured for months. The in-laws had initially received a 10-year
sentence.
A string of physical assaults in 2013 against high-profile women highlighted the
danger to activists and women in public life. These included:
• July 5: Former parliamentarian Noor Zia Atmar revealed that she was
living in a battered women’s shelter due to attacks from her husband.
She later confirmed that she was seeking asylum abroad.
• August 7: Unknown attackers shot Rooh Gul, a parliamentarian in the
upper house, as she travelled by road through Ghazni province. She
and her husband survived, but her eight-year-old daughter and driver
were killed.
• September 4: A self-described Taliban breakaway group dragged
Sushmita Banerjee, an Indian woman married to an Afghan health
worker, from her house in Paktika province, shot her repeatedly, and
dumped her body outside a religious school.
• September 16: Lieutenant Nigara, the highest ranking female police
officer in Helmand province, was shot and killed on her way to work
less than three months after the July 3 assassination of her predecessor,
Lt. Islam Bibi.
Security Transition
Overall declining international interest in Afghanistan contributed to mounting
fears among Afghans for the country’s future.
Afghan security forces filled in many of the gaps left by departing international
forces. Some 400 Afghan security force members were killed each month during
the 2013 “fighting season,” and attrition rates reached 50 percent in some
units.
Preparations for the April 2014 presidential election were plagued with difficulties,
with voter registration off to a slow start; delays in the adoption of necessary
legislation; controversy over the membership of the Independent Election
Commission and the Electoral Complaints Commission; low rates of female
voter registration; and concerns about the ability of Afghan security forces to
provide adequate security on election day.
Candidacy by individuals implicated in serious human rights abuses raised
questions about the efficacy of vetting processes, and increased cynicism
among potential voters.
Internally Displaced Persons and Refugees
Deteriorating security and growing fears for the future contributed to an increasing
number of Afghans fleeing their homes for other parts of the country, other
countries, or choosing not to return home from overseas. The United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) documented an increase of over
106,000 in the number of internally displaced people from January through June
2013, bringing the total to over 583,000. The main causes of displacement were
armed conflict and diminished security.
The number of Afghans seeking safety outside the country also grew, with some
making dangerous journeys from Afghanistan through the mountains into Iran
toward Europe or by boat to Australia. The number of refugees returning to
Afghanistan from neighboring countries has fallen in recent years, according to
the UNHCR.
Afghans arriving in other countries often faced increasing hostility, including
draconian new policies in Australia diverting asylum seekers to third countries and governmental proposals in European countries, including the United
Kingdom and Norway, to deport unaccompanied Afghan children back to
Afghanistan.
Abusive Security Forces
In recent years, the government has largely denied documentation by the UN
and the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission that Afghan police
and the intelligence service tortured detainees. However, on February 10, 2013,
a government investigation that President Hamid Karzai ordered into allegations
of ill-treatment acknowledged widespread torture. Karzai followed up on
February 16 with a decree ordering anti-torture measures, including prosecuting
officials responsible for torture.
In September, Karzai issued an order creating a new government committee to
investigate prison conditions. However, at time of writing there was no indication
that torture prosecutions had advanced, or that Karzai’s actions had substantially
reduced torture and other ill-treatment in detention.
Abuses by the Afghan Local Police (ALP)—a network of local defense forces
established largely by the US military in cooperation with the Afghan government—
continued to be a serious problem. Designed to operate in areas with
limited Afghan police or army presence, the ALP has been plagued from its
beginnings in 2010 by structural problems that include poor vetting of recruits,
weak command and control structures, and lack of accountability mechanisms.
These problems persist, as do allegations of ALP involvement in murder, rape,
theft, extortion, and child recruitment.
Human Rights Defenders and Transitional Justice
Although praised globally as an effective human rights body, the AIHRC—the
independent government agency—was largely in limbo from December 2011
until June 2013 due to multiple commissioner vacancies that President Karzai
did not fill for a year-and-a-half.
However, after donors set a deadline for filling these positions as part of the
follow-up to the 2012 Tokyo Conference, at which donors pledged US$16 billion
in development aid in return for commitments by the Afghan government including support for human rights, Karzai in June 2013 filled all vacant seats,
albeit without the consultation with civil society that the Paris Principles on
national human rights commissions requires. Several of the five new
appointees had little or no experience in human rights or had expressed overt
hostility to the concept of universal human rights. Abdul Rahman Hotak, a former
member of the Taliban government, after his appointment publicly criticized
the EVAW Law. In June, the UN high commissioner for human rights took
the unusual step of raising “serious concerns” about the appointments and
called for the Afghan government “to reconsider the recent appointments and
re-open the selection process.”
One of the AIHRC’s key achievements in recent years was the completion of an
800-page report that maps war crimes and crimes against humanity in
Afghanistan since the communist era. Completed in December 2011, it will provide
a foundation for future steps to prosecute those implicated in past abuses.
However, at time of writing there was no planned release date for the report:
President Karzai has blocked the release with the encouragement of international
donors including the US and UK, which have argued that releasing the
report could be destabilizing in the current tense security environment since it
likely implicates a number of powerful figures.
Freedom of Expression and Association
The rights to freedom of expression and association of media and political parties,
hailed as one of Afghanistan’s clear human rights successes since 2001,
came increasingly under threat in 2013.
Two credible Afghan media organizations, Nai and the Afghanistan Journalists’
Safety Committee, compiled statistics demonstrating a rise in the risks faced by
journalists during 2013 as compared to 2012. Both groups documented around
40 attacks on journalists in the first six months of 2013, compared to around 20
attacks in the same period in 2012. The attacks included threats, armed
assaults, and kidnappings. Of particular concern was the growing number of
cases where the attacks implicated government officials, including members of
the Afghan security forces. There were also cases in which journalists who were
attacked sought help from the security forces but were denied assistance or
subjected to abuse by the security forces.
Key International Actors
International fatigue with Afghanistan among most countries that have contributed
troops or significant amounts of aid post-2001—particularly the US,
which has had the largest military and aid involvement—negatively impacted
human rights in 2013 by reducing political pressure on the government to
respect human rights, especially those of women.
While many countries are pledging continued aid to Afghanistan, political
engagement is waning sharply and the US is scaling back most forms of assistance.
A sense that involvement in Afghanistan is ending is palpable in discussions
with diplomats, and cuts in international aid are already leading to the
closure of some schools and health clinics.
The end-2014 deadline for the withdrawal of international military troops will
further hasten disengagement. Disagreements between the Afghan and US governments,
including over the opening of a Taliban office in Doha, Qatar,
delayed the pending Bilateral Security Agreement (BSA), expected to set out US
support for Afghanistan’s security post-2014. Similar agreements with other key
foreign partners were on hold pending resolution of the BSA. These delays have
increased the sense of uncertainty and instability in Afghanistan.
In April 2013, President Karzai admitted that the CIA had been dropping off
bags of cash, totaling tens of millions of dollars, at his office for more than a
decade. The acknowledgement led the ranking member of the US Senate
Foreign Relations Committee to put a temporary hold on certain assistance programs
while he sought more information.
Afghanistan remained under preliminary analysis by the prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, who since 2007 has been looking into allegations
of serious international crimes, including torture, recruitment of child soldiers,
attacks on humanitarian objects and the UN, and attacks on schools.
Australia
Australia has a strong record protecting civil and political rights, but has damaged
its record and its potential to be a regional human rights leader by persistently
undercutting refugee protections. In 2013, successive Australian governments
continued to engage in scare-mongering politics at the expense of the
rights of asylum seekers and refugees. The Labor government reintroduced offshore
processing, and the Liberal Party-led coalition government elected in
September continued and expanded these punitive resettlement policies,
repeatedly trumpeting their refusal to consider resettling in Australia even a
single additional asylum-seeker arriving by sea.
Australia also has been increasingly unwilling to publicly raise human rights
abuses in countries with which it has strong trade or security ties, fearing that
doing so would harm its relations with Asian governments. Such reluctance to
speak out validates the stance of those who mistakenly view raising human
rights as an act of diplomatic aggression rather than a normal part of principled
diplomacy, making it all the more difficult to use foreign relations as a means of
improving human rights protections globally.
Asylum Seekers and Refugees
Successive governments have prioritized domestic politics over Australia’s
international legal obligations to protect the rights of asylum seekers and
refugees, many of who have escaped from appalling situations in places like
Afghanistan and Sri Lanka. Too often, the government has attempted to demonize
those trying to reach Australia by boat and has insisted that officials refer
to all asylum seekers who do so as illegal maritime arrivals.
In October 2012, the Labor government introduced “enhanced screening” for Sri
Lankan asylum seekers arriving by boat, whereby immigration officials conduct
cursory interviews with asylum seekers, who often have no access to legal representation
or right to appeal. An unfavorable finding means the asylum seeker
is immediately deported back to his or her country of origin. This policy poses a
serious risk of refoulement, returning genuine refugees to face persecution and
threats to their life and liberty. At this writing, the government had returned at
least 1,191 Sri Lankans under this procedure.
In July 2013, the United Nations Human Rights Committee found that Australia
had breached the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and committed
143 human rights violations by indefinitely detaining 46 refugees on the
basis of Australian Security Intelligence Organisation “adverse security assessments.”
The committee directed Australia to provide the refugees with an effective
remedy, including release from detention, rehabilitation, and compensation.
So far, the government has yet to act on the committee’s recommendations.
Australia has continued the practice of mandatory detention for those arriving
in Australia without a visa. As of September 30, 2013, 6,403 people were in
secure immigration detention facilities (onshore and offshore), including 1,078
children; 106 people had been in detention for more than two years.
Another deterrent measure is the offshore processing of asylum seekers on
Manus Island, Papua New Guinea, and Nauru. Offshore processing was first
implemented in 2001 and subsequently abandoned in 2008, only to be reintroduced
by the Labor government in August 2012. In July and August 2013, the
Australian government concluded agreements with Papua New Guinea and
Nauru through which all asylum seekers who arrive in Australia by boat after
July 19, 2013, are to be transferred to offshore processing centers. The United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has repeatedly expressed
concern regarding the mandatory and indefinite detention of asylum seekers in
offshore centers, where conditions are harsh and unsatisfactory and individuals
get little help making their claims.
The new agreements mean that those found to be refugees, despite the limitations
of the offshore processing system, will never be eligible for resettlement
in Australia and instead will be permanently resettled in Papua New Guinea,
Nauru, or another country.
Upon taking office in September, Prime Minister Tony Abbott declared his intention
to expand the offshore processing and regional resettlement arrangements
and implement the government’s new “Operation Sovereign Borders” policy.
The policy empowers military commanders to turn around boats at sea “where
safe to do so.” The new government stopped referring asylum seekers to
refugee casework organizations. Abbott also announced the reintroduction of
temporary protection visas for the approximately 30,000 asylum seekers in Australia awaiting assessment of their refugee claims, though in December this
was blocked in the Senate.
Indigenous Rights
While some health and socioeconomic indicators are improving for indigenous
Australians, they still on average live 10-12 years less than non-indigenous
Australians, have an infant mortality rate almost two times higher, and continue
to die at alarmingly high rates from treatable and preventable conditions such
as diabetes and respiratory illness. Although they live in one of the world’s
wealthiest countries, many indigenous Australians do not have access to adequate
health care, housing, food, or water.
In March 2013, Parliament passed legislation recognizing indigenous
Australians as the first inhabitants of Australia, an important step toward constitutional
recognition and toward addressing Australia’s history of exclusion.
As part of his election campaign, Prime Minister Abbott promised to propose a
referendum on recognition within 12 months of taking office and to establish an
indigenous advisory council. In September, he established the council to focus
on “practical changes to improve the lives of Aboriginal people.” It is not clear
what role this council will play relative to the national representative indigenous
body, the Congress of Australia’s First Peoples.
Disability Rights
In July 2013, the government introduced the National Disability Insurance
Scheme, allowing people with disabilities to receive support based on their
needs and be actively involved in choosing the types of support they need.
Disability rights have also been a focal point in Australia’s international aid
programs.
In 2013, the Australian Law Commission launched an inquiry into barriers to
equal recognition before the law and legal capacity for individuals with disabilities.
Current laws promote guardianship, which strips people with disabilities
of their ability to make decisions about their lives instead of recognizing their
legal capacity on an equal basis as others, as required by the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD).
Alarmingly, Australian law allows women and girls with disabilities to be involuntarily
sterilized if the family court or a guardianship tribunal determines that
the procedure is in their best interests. A Senate committee review in 2013
merely recommended that the practice of involuntary sterilization be “regulated”
rather than banned. In September 2013, the UN Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities (CRPD Committee) urged the Australian government to
take immediate steps to prohibit involuntary sterilization and provide assistance
enabling people with disabilities to make decisions about their own lives
(supported decision-making).
Shackles and restraints are often still used on people with mental disabilities
in Australia, sometimes because of lack of beds in psychiatric wards in public
hospitals. According to local disability advocates, women with mental disabilities
experience a high rate of physical and sexual abuse, including in psychiatric
facilities. The CRPD Committee recommended that the government develop
more inclusive gender-based violence prevention programs and ensure
access for women with disabilities to an effective, integrated redress mechanism.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Cohabiting same sex couples are accorded de facto status and civil unions are
recognized in some states. Marriage, however, remains restricted to heterosexual
relationships under the federal Marriage Act.
The Australian Capital Territory became the first state or territory in Australia to
recognize same-sex marriage with the passage of the Marriage Equality Act in
October 2013. The Federal Government later signaled its intention to challenge
the new law in the High Court.
Long overdue amendments to the Sex Discrimination Act in August 2013 made
discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, gender identity, intersex status,
and relationship status unlawful in Australia. However, exemptions for religious
organizations mean that, for instance, religious schools can continue to
refuse to admit or expel LGBTI students.
Freedom of Media
In September 2013, the High Court rejected an appeal by three award-winning
journalists working for the Age newspaper who refused to comply with an order
to disclose their confidential sources in a defamation case for articles written in
2009. The journalists face charges of contempt of court, which could lead to
fines and imprisonment if they refuse to reveal their sources.
Since the publication of these articles, shield laws protecting journalistic
sources have been introduced in six of the nine legal jurisdictions in Australia.
In these jurisdictions, there is now a presumption that journalists do not have
to reveal their sources. The presumption can be overridden where the benefit of
disclosure would outweigh the harm. Whether these new shield laws will offer
adequate protection remains to be seen. No such protections exist in
Queensland, South Australia, and the Northern Territory.
Australia’s Foreign Policy
Australia held a two-year rotating seat on the UN Security Council starting in
2013. It used its presidency of the Security Council in September to push for a
resolution restricting the trade in and distribution of small arms and light
weapons and a presidential statement on humanitarian access in Syria. The
government continued its leadership role in international disarmament by presiding
over the successful final Arms Trade Treaty negotiations in New York.
Despite calls for a boycott over lack of war crimes accountability in Sri Lanka,
Australia sent a high-level delegation to the Commonwealth Heads of
Government Meeting (CHOGM) in Colombo in November 2013. Prime Minister
Abbott and Foreign Minister Julie Bishop repeatedly sidestepped or downplayed
the importance of accountability and respect for human rights. Most egregiously,
Abbott, addressing allegations of torture by Sri Lankan security forces,
defended the Sri Lankan government, saying “We accept that sometimes, in difficult
circumstances, difficult things happen.”
This rationalization of torture, which was endemic during the war years and
continues to be a serious problem in Sri Lanka today, seems to have been motivated
in part by the goal of enlisting Sri Lanka’s support in preventing asylum
seekers from leaving Sri Lanka for Australia, and, on the same visit, Abbott announced a gift of two patrol boats to the Sri Lankan navy to combat people
smuggling. The Australian government was seemingly oblivious to the role Sri
Lankan government abuses play in prompting outflows of ethnic Tamil asylum
seekers.
Abbott continued his predecessors’ foreign policy focus on the Asia-Pacific
region, declaring he would be an “Asia-first” prime minister. He also continued
the practice of turning a blind eye to human rights abuses in neighboring countries.
Abbott made Indonesia his first foreign visit as head of state in
September in order to seek cooperation on combatting “people smuggling,”
with no mention of the rights of those seeking asylum. Australian aid remained
focused on Asia and the Pacific, with Indonesia and Papua New Guinea the top
two aid recipients. In September, the government said it would slash
Australia’s aid budget by US$4.2 billion over the next three years, reducing foreign
aid spending from 0.37 percent to 0.32 percent of gross national income.
Bangladesh
Bangladesh tumbled backwards on human rights in 2013. The government led
by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, which has long claimed to be liberal and
democratic, engaged in a harsh crackdown on members of civil society and the
media. In August, it jailed prominent human rights defender Adilur Rahman
Khan on politically motivated charges. “Atheist” bloggers were arrested, as was
a newspaper editor. The government increasingly accused those who criticized
its actions or policies, ranging from the World Bank to Grameen Bank founder
and Nobel laureate Muhammad Yunus, of being involved in plots against it.
On many occasions the government employed violent and illegal measures
against protesters, including against followers of the Hefazat-e-Islami movement
and those demonstrating against deeply flawed war crimes trials which
ended in death sentences against many accused.
Dire conditions for workers in the garment and other industries remained largely
unreformed in spite of promises of improvements following the tragic collapse
of the Rana Plaza garment factory in April and the deaths of over 1,100
workers. The government finally dropped frivolous charges against several
labor rights leaders. The courts also ordered all charges to be dropped against
Limon Hossain, a young man wrongfully shot and maimed by security forces in
a botched operation in 2011.
Elections scheduled for January 2014 led to increased tensions. Although the
Awami League campaigned for a caretaker system while in opposition to guard
against fraud and manipulation, once in power it abolished the system, leading
to opposition party threats to boycott the elections and increasing the chances
of violent confrontations between security forces and protesters.
Crackdown on Civil Society, Media, and Opposition
In February, Bangladesh was gripped by large-scale protests, political unrest,
and violence after the International Crimes Tribunal (ICT) sentenced a leader of
the Jamaat-e-Islaami party, Abdul Qader Mollah, to life in prison instead of
death. Hundreds of thousands of people throughout Bangladesh took to the
streets in peaceful protests to demand that Mollah be hanged. The situation took a more violent turn after the ICT, on February 28, sentenced another
Jamaat leader, Delwar Hossain Sayedee, to death for war crimes. Following this
verdict, Jamaat supporters took to the streets. Jamaat supporters were responsible
for a number of deaths, but the security forces killed many more with
often indiscriminate attacks on protesters and bystanders.
At the same time, the government began a crackdown on critics. Several bloggers
who criticized the government for appearing to appease Islamic extremism
were arrested.
In April, the law minister announced that the government would increase its
control over social media, blogs, and online news websites. On February 16, the
Bangladesh Telecommunication Regulatory Commission shut down the Sonar
Bangla blog, known to be operated by Jamaat activists, for spreading “hate
speech and causing communal tension.” In a further attack on free speech, on
April 11 the police arrested Mahmdur Rahman, the editor of an opposition news
outlet, Amar Desh. Rahman was subsequently charged with sedition and unlawful
publication of a hacked conversation between the ICT judges and an external
consultant initially published by the Economist magazine. On April 14,
police raided the offices of another opposition newspaper, Daily Sangram, and
its editor was subsequently charged for printing Amar Desh.
In August, Adilur Rahman Khan of Odhikar, a leading human rights group, was
arrested under the Information and Communication Technology Act for allegedly
false reporting about killings by government security forces when they dispersed
the May 5-6 demonstration by Hefazat, a fundamentalist group demanding
greater adherence to Islamic principles. Police raided Odhikar’s offices on
the night of August 11, seizing computers which may contain sensitive information
on victims and witnesses. Khan was denied bail several times and kept in
prison for two months before being granted bail in October on appeal.
In October, parliament passed a bill amending the Information and
Communication Technology Act to increase the length of sentences, according
the police greater powers to arrest, and making certain offenses non-bailable.
War Crimes Trial
At time of writing, the ICT, set up to prosecute war crimes during the country’s
independence war in 1971, had handed down eight convictions, five of which
resulted in death sentences. While human rights organizations have long called
for fair trials of those responsible, the trials fell short of international human
rights standards. In December 2012, the Economist published damning evidence
of collusion between judges, prosecutors, and the government showing
that judges were instructing the prosecution on the conduct of the trials, the
questioning of witnesses, and written submissions. The revelations led to the
resignation of the ICT’s chief judge, but defense motions for retrials were rejected.
Although the ICT had the authority to order measures for victim and witness
protection, it summarily dismissed credible claims of witness insecurity. In the
Delwar Hossain Sayedee case, judges dismissed credible evidence that an
important defense witness was abducted from the courthouse gates and did
not order an independent investigation into the allegation. Contradictory statements
by key prosecution witnesses were not taken into account in several
cases, and judges severely limited the number of defense witnesses. The
Appellate Division of the Supreme Court reversed the life sentence given to
Abdur Qader Mollah and imposed the death penalty after the government
pushed through retrospective amendments to the ICT Act, in clear violation of
Bangladesh’s obligations under article 15 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights (ICCPR). The amendment allowed the prosecution to appeal
against the life sentence handed down by the trial judges, which the ICT Act
had not previously allowed.
Human Rights Watch and the Economist, journalists and television show guests
were issued orders by the ICT to show cause for contempt for critical remarks
and reporting on the tribunal.
Unlawful Violence Against Protesters
Bangladeshi security forces frequently used excessive force in responding to
street protests, killing at least 150 protesters and injuring at least 2,000
between February and October 2013. While large numbers of protesters were arrested, Bangladeshi authorities made no meaningful efforts to hold members
of the security forces accountable. At least 90 protesters were killed by security
force gunfire during the clashes among the Shahbagh movement, Jamaat-e-
Islaami supporters, and security forces in March and April.
In response to the May 5-6 Hefazat protests, the police, the paramilitary Rapid
Action Battalion (RAB), and the Border Guards Bangladesh (BGB) fired indiscriminately
into crowds and brutally and unlawfully beat protesters, leading to
approximately 50 deaths. At least a dozen members of the security forces and
police officers were also killed, as well as three members of the ruling Awami
League party.
Labor Rights and Conditions of Workers
Bangladesh has long had notoriously poor workplace safety, with inadequate
inspections and regulations. This issue was spotlighted in April, when the Rana
Plaza building, which housed five garment factories, collapsed. The building
had been evacuated the day before due to cracks in the structure, but the workers
had then been ordered back to work. More than 1,100 workers died.
Under domestic and international pressure, on July 15, 2013, the Bangladeshi
parliament enacted changes to the Labour Act. The amendments, which did
away with the requirement that unions provide the names of leaders to employers
at the time of registration and allow workers to seek external expert assistance
in bargaining, failed to lift a number of other restrictions on freedom of
association. The law also provided exemptions to export processing zones
where most garments are made. Even after Rana Plaza, Bangladeshi law
remains out of compliance with core International Labour Organization standards,
including Convention No. 87 on freedom of association and Convention
No. 98 on the right to organize and bargain collectively.
The government also undertook to have more regular inspections of factories in
2013, but inspections which were due to start in September remained stalled by
administrative delays.
In a welcome move, the authorities dropped charges against the leaders of the
Bangladesh Centre for Worker Solidarity, who had been hampered and
harassed in their work for years by frivolous criminal charges.
Tannery workers in the Hazaribagh neighborhood of Dhaka, one of the world’s
most polluted urban sites, continue to face highly toxic working conditions.
Some 150 leather tanneries operate in the area, producing leather primarily for
export and discharging 21 thousand cubic meters of untreated effluent into the
nearby Buriganga River each day. The government’s planned relocation of the
tanneries to a dedicated industrial zone, delayed numerous times since 2005,
was again put off in mid-2013.
The Department of the Environment fined two tanneries for their failure to treat
waste in 2013, the first time environmental laws have been enforced against
Hazaribagh tanneries. Enforcement of environmental and labor laws is otherwise
lacking, with negative consequences for the health and well-being of tannery
workers and local residents.
Women’s Rights
Leading human rights groups in the country had discussions with doctors to
revise medico-legal protocols for the treatment and examination of rape victims
to exclude degrading practices like the two-finger test to draw conclusions
about a woman’s “habituation to sex.” Such groups are challenging the practice
as a violation of the fundamental rights to life and health with dignity in the
High Court Division of the Bangladesh Supreme Court.
Key International Actors
India, Bangladesh’s most influential international interlocutor, remained largely
silent on the human rights situation. Bangladesh and India continued to hold
talks on issues linked to their shared border including illegal trade and the use
of excessive force by Indian border guards leading to deaths and injuries to
Bangladeshi and Indian nationals.
Bangladesh’s donors were more vocal, pressing the government to end its
crackdown on critics. Donors were swift in denouncing the arrest of Adilur
Rahman Khan, with members of the international community observing court
proceedings. However, donors were largely silent on the lack of fair trials at the
ICT.
Following the Rana Plaza collapse, over 70 European companies signed an
international accord designed to better protect Bangladeshi workers by requiring
regular inspections of factories and making the results public. However,
American buyers refused to join this accord and signed a separate agreement
which has been criticized for not allowing workers to freely form unions.
The government publicly agreed to allow international monitors to observe the
January 2014 elections. The international community, in particular the US, have
been vocal in calling for the various parties to come to an agreement well
beforehand in order to avoid contentious and potentially violent protests and a
non-credible election result.
Burma
Burma’s uneven reform process continued in 2013 with notable improvements
in some sectors, but serious problems continuing throughout the country. Basic
freedoms of assembly and association improved but laws were enforced inconsistently
and in several instances peaceful demonstrators still faced arrest.
Media freedoms continued to flourish in 2013, but at time of writing the government
was seeking new laws that could roll back important recent gains.
Burma released more than 200 political prisoners in amnesties in 2013, including
56 in October and 69 in November. Despite this progress, it still had an estimated
60 political detainees at time of writing. New arrests of peaceful political
activists continue to be reported.
The national parliament has proven to be a more robust venue for debate and
legislative reform than many observers predicted, with surprisingly open discussion
of issues such as land grabbing by the military, constitutional reform
that would reduce military representation, and rule of law initiatives.
Violence against Muslims
Communal violence against Muslim communities in central Burma spread during
2013, with a series of apparently coordinated attacks against Muslim communities
and property. In late March, Burmese Buddhist mobs attacked Muslim
communities in the central Burmese town of Meiktila. At least 44 people were
killed and 1,400 mostly Muslim-owned businesses and houses were destroyed.
Burmese police forces failed to intervene during much of the violence and in
most cases did not act to protect Muslim lives or property; in some instances
they actively participated in the anti-Muslim violence. More than 12,000 people
were displaced by the violence, and many remained in government-protected
displacement camps in the town at time of writing.
Similar outbreaks of violence were reported during the year in Pegu and Okkan
north of Rangoon, and in Lashio in Shan State. In October, attacks against
Kaman Muslims in southern Arakan State around the town of Thandwe killed at
least six people and destroyed nearly 100 houses. The attacks coincided with a visit to the region by President Thein Sein. Authorities arrested senior
Arakanese political party members accused of instigating the violence.
Legal proceedings against perpetrators of violence were initially asymmetrical,
with more Muslims tried and sentenced in more cases than Burman Buddhist
instigators. However, in June, 25 Buddhists involved in violence in Meiktila
were sentenced for murder and arson, in July, 6 suspects were arrested in connection
with the killing of Muslim pilgrims in 2012 that sparked violence in
Arakan State, and in September two men were sentenced to five years in prison
for arson and violence in Okkan. At time of writing, no members of the security
forces were known to have been disciplined or prosecuted for involvement in
violence.
In some cases, anti-Muslim violence and hate speech is being spread by
nationalist Buddhist monks such as U Wirathu, active proponent of the socalled
969 movement that has urged Buddhists to boycott Muslim businesses
and refrain from marrying Muslims and converting to Islam. U Wirathu has even
drafted legislation that would ban such marriages and conversions. Key political
leaders such as Aung San Suu Kyi did not publicly denounce this movement
in 2013, although in an important speech in April, President Thein Sein warned
that the rise in communal violence had the potential to derail the fragile reform
process.
During a country visit in August, the UN special rapporteur on human rights in
Burma, Tomas Ojea Quintana, was attacked in his car by Burman Buddhist
mobs in Meiktila; security forces in the vicinity failed to intervene.
Compounding their failure to adequately ensure Quintana’s safety, senior government
officials accused him of exaggerating the incident. Many in the
Burmese-language media also lambasted Quintana, a disturbing reflection of
rising Burman nationalism and backlash against international pressure to end
human rights abuses.
The condition of the displaced Rohingya Muslim minority in northern Arakan
State remained precarious in 2013, even with a considerable international
humanitarian response. At time of writing, an estimated 180,000 people, mostly
Muslims, remained in over 40 IDP camps throughout Arakan State, many living
in deplorable conditions. While more international assistance reached them
in 2013 than in 2012, serious concerns remain over restrictions on movement, lack of livelihoods, inadequate basic services, and continued threats from hostile
Arakanese. In Buthidaung and Maungdaw townships, local ordinances
reportedly prohibited Rohingya women from having more than two children;
when the policy became publicly known and met with international outrage,
national officials backtracked and claimed no such policy was in effect.
A government commission of inquiry report on the anti-Rohingya violence of
June and October 2012 in Arakan State failed to investigate cases or assign
responsibility for the violence, and made no recommendation for prosecution of
security forces involved in the violence. Human Rights Watch had found that
the attacks on Rohingya had amounted to a campaign of “ethnic cleansing”
and crimes against humanity. On several occasions in 2013, Rohingya IDPs
were abused for staging protests; in one incident in June, police shot and killed
three women protesters at an IDP camp.
The government continues to refuse to amend Burma’s draconian 1982
Citizenship Law that effectively denies citizenship to Rohingya, despite many
families having lived in Burma for generations. In July, the president ordered
the disbanding of the notoriously abusive and corrupt Na Sa Ka paramilitary
border security force, although doubts remain as to whether all personnel have
been withdrawn from Arakan State or reassigned to other agencies.
Laws on Basic Freedoms
Burma’s legislative reform process remains opaque and consultation with key
community groups uneven. Many longstanding repressive laws have not been
repealed or amended and some are still used to target activists. Several important
laws related to land rights and farmers rights were enacted in 2013, but
concerns remain that they will be insufficient to protect against mass land
grabs by the Burmese military and companies.
The Law on Peaceful Assembly and Peaceful Processions was applied haphazardly
in 2013, with the authorities permitting some demonstrations and denying
permission for others. An increasing number of public protests over land issues
were reported during the year, some of which turned violent with clashes
between communities and police. Long-time activist Naw Ohn Lah was sentenced
in August to two years in prison for leading a demonstration against the
Letpadaung mine project in Monywa; 11 Arakanese protesters were sentenced in September to three months in prison for demonstrating against a Chinese
pipeline project, although all were eventually pardoned in the November
amnesty. The government permitted a major gathering on August 8 to commemorate
the 25th anniversary of the 1988 democratic uprising.
A draft Association Law proposed in July contained numerous provisions that
would have severely restricted the establishment and activities of Burmese and
international NGOs. Following coordinated pressure from Burmese civil society,
including consultations with the parliament and government and public letters
by over 500 Burmese groups, a much improved draft was released in August,
albeit still with the potential to restrict the right to freedom of association.
The media in Burma continued to flourish in 2013, even as the government
pressed forward with proposed new laws such as the draft Printers and
Publishers Act that, if passed, would significantly curtail media freedom. The
nascent Burmese Press Council drafted its own version of the law, but the government
rejected it. In June, the government banned the sale of an issue of
Time magazine with a cover story on the nationalist monk U Wirathu.
A draft telecommunications law proposed in 2013 contained numerous provisions
that could imperil basic rights. Passage was pending at time of writing.
The governmental National Human Rights Commission continues to receive
numerous reports of alleged human rights violations but it has not adequately
investigated the reports. At time of writing, it had received approximately 4,000
cases since it was established in 2011. Chairman Win Mra said in early 2013
that the commission would not investigate any alleged Burmese army abuses in
Kachin State. A draft law to provide a stronger legislative basis for the commission’s
independence is pending.
Ethnic Conflict and Displacement
Although the government has concluded ceasefire agreements with about 15
non-state armed groups in Burma, serious human rights violations continued in
ethnic areas in 2013.
The government reached a shaky preliminary ceasefire agreement with the
Kachin Independence Army in March after nearly two years of fighting and displacement
of over 80,000 Kachin civilians. However, reports of Burmese army abuses against civilians persist. Humanitarian access to IDPs has been uneven
and insufficient, with some local Burmese army commanders denying access
that national-level authorities previously granted. No major returns of displaced
civilians had been reported at time of writing.
Conflict spread to parts of northern Shan State involving Kachin, Shan, and
Palaung rebels, with reports of civilian displacement and attacks against civilians
by both government and opposition forces.
At time of writing, an estimated 400,000 internally displaced persons remained
in eastern Burma, and another 130,000 refugees live in nine camps along the
Thailand-Burma border. Thailand, Burma, and the UN refugee agency have
agreed that conditions for the refugees’ return in safety and dignity are not yet
present.
Key International Actors
Most sanctions on Burma were lifted in 2013, including all relevant provisions
of the EU Common Position except its arms embargo. The United States suspended
many of its sanctions, but maintained bans on the importation of jade
and rubies as well as targeted financial sanctions on certain individuals implicated
in past human rights abuses. New human rights reporting requirements
for US investments in Burma took effect in May.
Burma continued its re-engagement with the international community by
expanding programs with the World Bank and Asian Development Bank, and
negotiating marked increases in humanitarian and development assistance
from the US, EU, UK, Australia, and Japan. Foreign investment increased, mainly
in the extractive and resource sectors.
President Thein Sein made visits to the United States, Europe, and Australia in
2013, pledging to continue the reform process. However, despite his public
pledges in November 2012 that the government would permit the establishment
of an office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights in Burma, the initiative
was repeatedly blocked by the Burmese government.
Burma continued desultory cooperation with the UN on a child soldier action
plan signed in 2012. Progress on demobilizing child soldiers and ending forced recruitment was slowed by government denials of access to military sites and
to government-controlled border militias.
The US announced tentative re-establishment of defense links with the
Burmese military, inviting Burmese officers in February to observe the Thailandbased
multilateral Cobra Gold exercises, and in July sending US military experts
to begin basic instruction in human rights norms. The chief of the UK defense
forces visited Burma in June and the governments later announced that Britain
would invite 30 Burmese military officers to attend a major defense conference
in the UK. The year also saw UK and Australian announcements that they would
station defense attachés in Burma for the first time since 1988, and the initiation
of a European Union police reform program in the country.
The US government included Burma in its list of four countries banned from
receiving certain forms of US military assistance in 2014 under the Child
Soldiers Prevention Act. Affected programs include International Military
Education and Training (IMET), which helps train foreign militaries, and Foreign
Military Financing (FMF), which funds the sale of US military material and
services.
In June, the UN Human Rights Council urged the Burmese government to take
immediate steps to stop violence and human rights violations committed in the
name of religion. It called on the government to take all necessary measures to
ensure accountability for such abuses and expedite the establishment of a UN
human rights office in Burma.
Cambodia
Cambodia became engulfed in a human rights crisis after national assembly
elections on July 28, 2013. Final results announced by the National Election
Committee (NEC), a body controlled by the ruling Cambodian People’s Party
(CPP), returned the CPP, in power since 1979, to a majority in the National
Assembly. The assembly then chose Hun Sen as prime minister, a post he has
held since 1985. Large-scale demonstrations ensued amidst credible allegations
that electoral irregularities and CPP control over election bodies affected
the final outcome. Security forces repeatedly used excessive force to suppress
post-election protests and social unrest, resulting in two deaths and many
injuries.
Although Cambodia’s rapidly growing social media sector remains largely unrestricted,
almost all state and private television stations and almost all print
media, domestic radio stations, and news websites are controlled by or are
loyal to the CPP. While many labor unions exist, strikes are often violently broken
up by the security forces.
National Elections
Cambodian King Norodom Sihamoni amnestied the leader of the opposition
Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP), Sam Rainsy, on July 14, 2013, making
it possible for Rainsy to return to Cambodia without facing imprisonment for
previous convictions on trumped-up charges. However, his right to vote and run
in the July 28 elections was not restored.
The CPP controls the media, security forces, and all election management bodies,
including the NEC and its provincial and local affiliates, and the
Constitutional Council. Voter registration in 2013 was marred by CPP-orchestrated
fraud and other irregularities. The NEC announced that the CCP won 68 seats
and the CNRP won 55 seats in the election, a much closer result than the CPP
expected, but it rejected CNRP demands for an independent investigation into
the irregularities.
In the run-up to elections, commanders of the army, gendarmerie, and police
openly campaigned for the CPP and Hun Sen. After the ballot, they proclaimed their support for the contested CPP victory. Hun Sen then ordered a massive
deployment of troops and police in Phnom Penh and elsewhere in an attempt to
prevent demonstrations. A security force lockdown of the capital, Phnom Penh,
on September 15 was accompanied by excessive force against social unrest following
the demonstrations, killing one person and injuring approximately two
dozen others.
On September 20 and 22, security force operations broke up small peaceful
protest vigils in Phnom Penh, on the second occasion deliberately attacking
human rights monitors and journalists along with protesters, injuring at least
20 people. On November 12, 2013, security forces again employed excessive
force, this time while obstructing a march by striking workers, shooting and
killing one person and wounding nine others.
Attacks on Civil Society and Imprisonment of
Human Rights Defenders
In the months before the July 28 elections, security forces violently broke up
peaceful gatherings by civil society groups, especially those protesting alleged
land-grabbing. Excessive force resulted in serious injuries to protesters. After
the elections, government-backed religious authorities threatened and in some
cases assaulted Buddhist monks in order to prevent them from joining opposition
demonstrations.
At time of writing, at least five human rights defenders were serving prison
terms and three others sentenced in absentia were facing prison if apprehended.
All were tried on politically motivated charges, mostly in connection with
defending land tenure rights. They included Bun Roatha, a key figure opposed
to land grabbing in Kratie province, who was sentenced in absentia to 30 years
in prison. Yorm Bopha, sentenced to prison on trumped up charges for leading
a protest against illegal evictions in Phnom Penh, was temporarily released on
November 22, 2013, when the Supreme Court referred her case to a lower court
for further review.
Impunity
Forces under Hun Sen and the CPP have committed frequent and large-scale
abuses, including extrajudicial killings and torture, with impunity. Instances in
2013 included the case of the CPP governor of Bavet municipality, Chhouk
Bandit: although convicted of “unintentional injury” on June 25, 2013, in connection
with his shooting of three women workers during a strike near the town
in February 2012, he was not detained for trial and was allowed to abscond
despite his guilty verdict. Disregarding considerable evidence implicating government
authorities, no one was convicted in a 2013 trial for the brutal murder
of journalist Hang Serei Udom in September 2012 after he published reports
alleging official involvement in illegal logging. No serious investigations were
carried out into the killing and injury of protesters and bystanders during postelection
protests and unrest in September and November 2013.
Those responsible for the 2004 killing of labor leader Chea Vichea remain at
large. After the killing, the government arrested and then instructed the courts
to convict Born Samnang and Sok Sam Oeun. The two were released in 2009
after the prosecution admitted that there was no evidence against them, but a
court later re-imprisoned them in 2012, sentencing them to 20 years in prison.
Under intense international pressure on the government, the Supreme Court
acquitted and released both men on September 25, 2013. The court, however,
refused their demand for compensation.
Land Rights
A government moratorium remained in place on the granting of Economic Land
Concessions (ELCs) for industrial-scale corporate agriculture on state lands.
Such ELCs have adversely affected hundreds of thousands of people.
Economically and politically powerful actors, however, continue to grab land to
which impoverished residents and cultivators have legitimate tenure claims,
provoking sometimes violent confrontations.
A program organized and run by Hun Sen in his own name to bestow land titles
on some people living within the peripheries of ELCs and other state lands
ended just before the elections with claims the program had benefited up to
360,000 needy households. While many indeed benefitted, in many places wealthy and powerful interests diverted the program to increase their landholdings.
Hun Sen suspended the program in the run-up to the election.
However, in November 2013, the government announced it would resume the program
shortly.
Arbitrary Detention
The authorities routinely detain alleged drug users, homeless people, “street”
children, sex workers, and perceived people with disabilities in “correction centers”
around the country holding at least 2,000 people each year without due
process, where the mainstays of ostensible “treatment” are exhausting physical
exercises and military-like drills. Guards and other staff whip detainees with
rubber water hoses, beat them with bamboo sticks or palm fronds, shock them
with electric batons, sexually abuse them, and punish them with physical exercises
intended to cause intense physical pain. Detainees from some centers are
forced to work on construction sites, including in at least one instance to help
build a hotel.
Khmer Rouge Tribunal
The United Nations-assisted Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia
(ECCC) continues to suffer the long-term effects of government obstruction of
and non-cooperation with efforts to bring leaders of the Khmer Rouge to justice
for genocide, crimes against humanity, and war crimes committed during their
rule from 1975 to 1979. The ECCC has fully tried and convicted only one person
since it was established in 2006, the head of the infamous Tuol Sleng torture
center. It is currently trying just two alleged Khmer Rouge senior leaders, Nuon
Chea and Khieu Samphan, both elderly and in ill-health, and only for a few of
the crimes for which the ECCC originally indicted them in 2010. Another ECCC
indictee, Leng Sary, died on March 14, 2013.
Government non-cooperation slowed UN investigations into five other suspects
begun in 2006, one of whom died in 2013. Popular interest and support for the
ECCC has greatly waned.
Key International Actors
The Cambodian government remained heavily dependent on foreign assistance.
Japan was the major aid donor, while China was the largest direct foreign
investor. Vietnam continued to maintain close connections at national and
local levels with government and security force agencies.
The United States provided some non-lethal military aid plus military training,
but was the most forthright foreign government in raising human rights concerns.
Meeting in September, the United Nations Human Rights Council extended
for two years the mandate for a special rapporteur on the human rights situation
in Cambodia.
China
Rapid socio-economic change in China has been accompanied by relaxation of
some restrictions on basic rights, but the government remains an authoritarian
one-party state. It places arbitrary curbs on expression, association, assembly,
and religion; prohibits independent labor unions and human rights organizations;
and maintains Party control over all judicial institutions.
The government censors the press, the Internet, print publications, and academic
research, and justifies human rights abuses as necessary to preserve
“social stability.” It carries out involuntary population relocation and rehousing
on a massive scale, and enforces highly repressive policies in ethnic minority
areas in Tibet, Xinjiang, and Inner Mongolia. Though primary school enrollment
and basic literacy rates are high, China’s education system discriminates
against children and young people with disabilities. The government obstructs
domestic and international scrutiny of its human rights record, insisting it is an
attempt to destabilize the country.
At the same time, citizens are increasingly prepared to challenge authorities
over volatile livelihood issues, such as land seizures, forced evictions, environmental
degradation, miscarriages of justice, abuse of power by corrupt cadres,
discrimination, and economic inequality. Official and scholarly statistics, based
on law enforcement reports, suggest there are 300-500 protests each day, with
anywhere from ten to tens of thousands of participants. Despite the risks,
Internet users and reform-oriented media are aggressively pushing censorship
boundaries by advocating for the rule of law and transparency, exposing official
wrongdoing, and calling for political reforms.
Civil society groups and advocates continue to slowly expand their work
despite their precarious status, and an informal but resilient network of
activists monitors and documents human rights cases as a loose national “weiquan”
(rights defense) movement. These activists endure police monitoring,
detention, arrest, enforced disappearance, and torture.
The Xi Jinping administration formally assumed power in March, and proposed
several reforms to longstanding policies, including abolishing one form of arbitrary
detention, known as re-education through labor (RTL), and changes to the
household registration system. It staged high-profile corruption investigations, mostly targeting political rivals. But it also struck a conservative tone, opposing
constitutional rule, press freedom, and “western-style” rule of law, and issuing
harsher restrictions on dissent, including through two legal documents making
it easier to bring criminal charges against activists and Internet critics.
Bo Xilai, once a rising political star, was sentenced to life imprisonment in
September after a show trial that captured public attention but fell short of fair
trial standards and failed to address widespread abuses of power committed
during his tenure in Chongqing.
Human Rights Defenders
China’s human rights activists often face imprisonment, detention, torture,
commitment to psychiatric facilities, house arrest, and intimidation.
One of the most severe crackdowns on these individuals in recent years
occurred in 2013, with more than 50 activists put under criminal detention
between February and October. Human rights defenders are detained for illdefined
crimes ranging from “creating disturbances” to “inciting subversion”
for organizing and participating in public, collective actions. In July, authorities
detained Xu Zhiyong, who is considered an intellectual leader of the New
Citizens Movement, a loose network of civil rights activists whose efforts
include a nationwide campaign that calls on public officials to disclose their
assets.
In September, Beijing-based activist Cao Shunli was detained after she was
barred from boarding a flight to Geneva ahead of the United Nations Human
Rights Council (HRC) review of China on October 22. Cao is known for pressing
the Chinese government to include independent civil society input into the
drafting of China’s report to the HRC under a mechanism called Universal
Periodic Review (UPR). Another activist, Peng Lanlan, was released in August
after she spent one year in prison for “obstructing official business” for her role
in the campaign.
Nobel Peace Prize winner Liu Xiaobo continues his 11-year jail term in northern
Liaoning province. His wife Liu Xia continues to be subjected to unlawful house
arrest. In August, Liu Xiaobo’s brother-in-law, Liu Hui, was given an 11-year sentence on fraud charges; it is widely believed the heavy sentence is part of
broader effort to punish Liu Xiaobo’s family.
Legal Reforms
While the government rejects judicial independence and prohibits independent
bar associations, progressive lawyers and legal scholars continue to be a force
for change, contributing to increasing popular legal awareness and activism.
The Chinese Communist Party maintains authority over all judicial institutions
and coordinates the judiciary’s work through its political and legal committees.
The Public Security Bureau, or police, remains the most powerful actor in the
criminal justice system. Use of torture to extract confessions is prevalent, and
miscarriages of justice are frequent due to weak courts and tight limits on the
rights of the defense.
In November, the government announced its intention to abolish re-education
through labor (RTL), a form of arbitrary detention in which the police can detain
people for up to four years without trial. There were about 160,000 people in
about 350 camps at the beginning of the year, but numbers dwindled rapidly as
the police stopped sending people to RTL. The official press, however, reported
that some of these facilities were being converted to drug rehabilitation centers,
another form of administrative detention. At time of writing it was unclear
whether the government would fully abolish administrative detention as a way
to deal with minor offenders, or whether it would instead establish a replacement
system that continued to allow detention without trial.
China continues to lead the world in executions. The exact number remains a
state secret, but experts estimate it has decreased progressively from about
10,000 per year a decade ago to less than 4,000 in recent years.
Freedom of Expression
Freedom of expression deteriorated in 2013, especially after the government
launched a concerted effort to rein in micro-blogging. The government and the
Party maintain multiple layers of control over all media and publications.
Internet censors shape online debate and maintain the “Great Firewall,” which
blocks outside content from reaching Internet users in China. Despite these restrictions, the Internet, especially microblog services known as “weibo” and
other social media tools, are popular as a relatively free space in which China’s
538 million users can connect and air grievances. However, those who breach
sensitive taboos are often swiftly identified and their speech deleted or disallowed;
some are detained or jailed.
In January, Southern Weekly, a Guangzhou-based newspaper known for its
boundary-pushing investigative journalism, was enveloped in a censorship row
after the paper’s editors found that their New Year’s special editorial was
rewritten on the censors’ orders and published without their consent. The original
editorial had called for political reform and respect for constitutionally guaranteed
rights, but the published version instead praised the Chinese
Communist Party. The paper’s staff publicly criticized the provincial top censor,
called for his resignation and went on a strike; the paper resumed printing a
week later.
In May, the General Office of the Chinese Communist Party’s Central Committee
issued a gag order to universities directing them to avoid discussions of “seven
taboos,” which included “universal values” and the Party’s past wrongs,
according to media reports.
Since August, authorities have waged a campaign against “online rumors.” The
campaign has targeted influential online opinion leaders and ordinary netizens.
The authorities have detained hundreds of Internet users for days, closed down
over 100 “illegal” news websites run by citizen journalists, and detained wellknown
liberal online commentator Charles Xue.
Also in August, the government official in charge of Internet affairs warned
Internet users against breaching “seven bottom lines,” including China’s
“socialist system,” the country’s “national interests,” and “public order.” In
September, the Supreme People’s Court and the Supreme People’s
Procuratorate (state prosecutor) issued a new judicial interpretation applying
four existing criminal provisions to Internet expression, providing a more explicit
legal basis for charging Internet users.
Freedom of Religion
Although the constitution guarantees freedom of religion, the government
restricts religious practices to officially approved mosques, churches, temples,
and monasteries organized by five officially recognized religious organizations.
It audits the activities, employee details, and financial records of religious bodies,
and retains control over religious personnel appointments, publications,
and seminary applications.
Unregistered spiritual groups such as Protestant “house churches” are deemed
unlawful and subjected to raids and closures; members are harassed and leaders
are detained and sometimes jailed.
The government classifies Falun Gong, a meditation-focused spiritual group
banned since July 1999, as an “an evil cult” and arrests, harasses, and intimidates
its members. After releasing a new documentary about a labor camp in
which Falun Gong practitioners were detained and tortured, filmmaker and photographer
Du Bin was detained in May. He was released after five weeks in
detention.
In April, a court in Henan province sentenced seven house church leaders to
between three and seven years in prison on charges of “using a cult to undermine
law enforcement;” evidence suggested they had only attended meetings
and publicized church activities.
Health and Disability Rights
The government has developed numerous laws, regulations, and action plans
designed to decrease serious environmental pollution and related threats to
public health, but the policies are often not implemented.
In February, a lawyer’s request under the Open Government Information Act to
reveal soil contamination data was rejected; according to the authorities, such
data was a “state secret.” Also in February, after years of denial and inaction,
the Ministry of Environmental Protection finally acknowledged the existence of
“cancer villages,” those with abnormally high cancer rates. Victims had long
pressed for justice and compensation and domestic media had written extensively
on the issue.
Despite a review in 2012 under the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (CRPD), protections of the rights of persons with disabilities remain
inadequate. These individuals face serious discrimination in employment and
education, and some government policies institutionalize discrimination.
In February, the State Council’s Legislative Affairs Office announced amendments
to the 1994 Regulations of Education of Persons with Disabilities in
China. While welcome, the amendments do not ensure that students with disabilities
can enroll in mainstream schools or mandate appropriate classroom
modifications (“accommodations”) enabling them to participate fully in such
schools.
In May, China’s first Mental Health Law came into effect. It filled an important
legal void but does not close loopholes that allow government authorities and
families to detain people in psychiatric hospitals against their will. In July, after
the law came into effect, Gu Xianghong was detained for five weeks in a Beijing
psychiatric hospital for petitioning the authorities about her grievances.
Women’s Rights
Women’s reproductive rights and access to reproductive health remain severely
curtailed under China’s population planning regulations. While the government
announced in November that Chinese couples will now be allowed two children
if either parent was a single child, the measure does not change the foundations
of China’s government-enforced family planning policy, which includes
the use of legal and other coercive measures—such as administrative sanctions,
fines, and coercive measures, including forced abortion—to control reproductive
choices.
The government’s punitive crackdowns on sex work often lead to serious abuses,
including physical and sexual violence, increased risk of disease, and constrained
access to justice for the country’s estimated 4 to 10 million sex workers,
most of whom are women. Sex workers have also documented abuses by
public health agencies, such as coercive HIV testing, privacy infringements, and
mistreatment by health officials.
In January, the Supreme People’s Court upheld a death sentence against Li Yan,
a woman convicted of murdering her physically abusive husband. Domestic violence
is not treated as a mitigating factor in court cases.
In May, Ye Haiyan, China’s most prominent sex worker rights activist, was
detained by police for several days after being assaulted at her home in
Guangxi province over her exposure of abusive conditions in local brothels.
Although the government acknowledges that domestic violence, employment
discrimination, and gender bias are widespread, it limits the activities of independent
women’s rights groups working on these issues by making it difficult
for them to register, monitoring their activities, interrogating their staff, and
prohibiting some activities.
Migrant and Labor Rights
The official All-China Federation of Trade Unions (ACFTU) continued to be the
only legal representative of workers; independent labor unions are forbidden.
Despite this limitation, workers have become increasingly vocal and active in
striving for better working conditions across the country, including by staging
protests and strikes. In September, Shenzhen dock workers went on strike to
demand better pay and working conditions. Ten days later, the workers accepted
a government-brokered deal that met some of their demands.
In May, the official All-China Women’s Federation issued a new report revealing
that the number of migrant children, including those living with their parents in
urban areas and those “left behind” in rural areas, had reached 100 million by
2010. Migrant workers continue to be denied urban residence permits, which
are required to gain access to social services such as education. Many such
workers leave their children at home when they migrate so that the children can
go to school, rendering some vulnerable to abuse.
Although China has numerous workplace safety regulations, enforcement is lax,
especially at the local level. For example, in June, a fire at a poultry farm killed
121 workers in Jilin province. Subsequent investigations revealed that the local
fire department had just days before the fire issued the poultry farm a safety
certificate even though it failed to meet a number of standards.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
The Chinese government classified homosexuality as a mental illness until
2001. To date there is still no law protecting people from discrimination on the
basis of sexual orientation or gender identity, which remains common especially
in the workplace.
Same-sex partnership and marriage are not recognized under Chinese law. In
February, a lesbian couple attempted to register at the marriage registry in
Beijing but their application was rejected.
On May 17, the International Day against Homophobia, Changsha city authorities
detained Xiang Xiaohan, an organizer of a local gay pride parade, and held
him for 12 days for organizing an “illegal march.” In China, demonstrations
require prior permission, which is rarely granted.
Tibet
The Chinese government systematically suppresses political, cultural, religious
and socio-economic rights in Tibet in the name of combating what it sees as
separatist sentiment. This includes nonviolent advocacy for Tibetan independence,
the Dalai Lama’s return, and opposition to government policy. At time of
writing, 123 Tibetans had self-immolated in protest against Chinese policies
since the first recorded case in February 2009.
Arbitrary arrest and imprisonment remains common, and torture and ill-treatment
in detention is endemic. Fair trials are precluded by a politicized judiciary
overtly tasked with suppressing separatism.
Police systematically suppress any unauthorized gathering. On July 6, police
opened fire in Nyitso, Dawu prefecture (Ch. Daofu), on a crowd that had gathered
in the countryside to celebrate the Dalai Lama’s birthday. Two people died
on the spot, and several others were injured. The government censored news of
the event.
In an apparent effort to prevent a repetition of the popular protests of 2008, the
government in 2013 maintained many of the measures it introduced during its
brutal crackdown on the protest movement—a massive security presence composed
largely of armed police forces, sharp restrictions on the movements of Tibetans within the Tibetan plateau, increased controls on monasteries, and a
ban on foreign journalists in the Tibetan Autonomous Region (TAR) unless part
of a government-organized tour. The government also took significant steps to
implement a plan to station 20,000 new officials and Party cadres in the TAR,
including in every village, to monitor the political views of all residents.
The government is also subjecting millions of Tibetans to a mass rehousing and
relocation policy that radically changes their way of life and livelihoods, in
some cases impoverishing them or making them dependent on state subsidies,
about which they have no say. Since 2006, over two million Tibetans, both
farmers and herders, have been involuntarily “rehoused”—through governmentordered
renovation or construction of new houses—in the TAR; hundreds of
thousands of nomadic herders in the eastern part of the Tibetan plateau have
been relocated or settled in “New Socialist Villages.”
Xinjiang
Pervasive ethnic discrimination, severe religious repression, and increasing cultural
suppression justified by the government in the name of the “fight against
separatism, religious extremism, and terrorism” continue to fuel rising tensions
in the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region.
In 2013, over one hundred people—Uyghurs, Han, and other ethnicities—were
killed in various incidents across the region, the highest death toll since the
July 2009 Urumqi protests. In some cases, heavy casualties appear to have
been the result of military-style assaults on groups preparing violent attacks, as
in Bachu prefecture on April 23, and in Turfan prefecture on June 26. But in
other cases security forces appear to have used lethal force against crowds of
unarmed protesters.
On June 28, in Hetian prefecture, police tried to prevent protesters from marching
toward Hetian municipality to protest the arbitrary closure of a mosque and
the arrest of its imam, ultimately shooting into the crowd and injuring dozens of
protesters. On August 8, in Aksu prefecture, police forces prevented villagers
from reaching a nearby mosque to celebrate a religious festival, eventually
using live ammunition and injuring numerous villagers. After each reported incident
the government ritualistically blames “separatist, religious extremist, and
terrorist forces,” and obstructs independent investigations.
Arbitrary arrest, torture, and “disappearance” of those deemed separatists are
endemic and instill palpable fear in the population. In July, Ilham Tohti, a
Uyghur professor at Beijing’s Nationalities University published an open letter
to the government asking for an investigation into 34 disappearance cases he
documented. Tohti was placed under house arrest several times and prevented
from traveling abroad.
The government continues to raze traditional Uyghur neighborhoods and
rehouse families in planned settlements as part of a comprehensive development
policy launched in 2010. The government says the policy is designed to
urbanize and develop Xinjiang.
Hong Kong
Despite the fact that Hong Kong continues to enjoy an independent judiciary, a
free press, and a vocal civil society, freedoms of the press and assembly have
been increasingly under threat since Hong Kong returned to Chinese sovereignty
in 1997. Prospects that election of the territory’s chief executive starting in
2017 would be genuinely competitive dimmed after Beijing indicated that only
candidates who did not “oppose the central government” would be able to run.
Hong Kong has witnessed slow erosion of the rule of law in recent years, exemplified
by increasingly strict police controls on assemblies and processions,
and arbitrary Immigration Department bans on individuals critical of Beijing,
such as members of the Falun Gong and exiled dissidents from the 1989
democracy spring.
Key International Actors
Most governments that have bilateral human rights dialogues with the Chinese
government, including the United States, European Union, and Australia, held
at least one round of those dialogues in 2013; most acknowledge they are of
limited utility for promoting meaningful change inside China.
Several of these governments publicly expressed concern about individual
cases, such as those of Xu Zhiyong or Liu Hui, or about trends such as restrictions
on anti-corruption activists. Ambassadors from the US and Australia, as well as the EU’s special representative for human tights, were allowed to visit
the TAR or other Tibetan areas.
None of these governments commented on the denial of Chinese people’s political
rights to choose their leaders during the 2012-2013 leadership transition,
and few successfully integrated human rights concerns into meetings with senior
Chinese officials.
China participated in a review of its compliance with the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities by the international treaty body charged with
monitoring implementation of the convention and a review of its overall human
rights record at the UN Human Rights Council, but it failed to provide basic
information or provided deeply misleading information on torture, arbitrary
detention, and restrictions on freedom of expression. There are eight outstanding
requests to visit China by UN special rapporteurs, and UN agencies operating
inside China remain tightly restricted, their activities closely monitored by
the authorities.
China’s Foreign Policy
Despite China’s continued rise as a global power and its 2013 leadership transition,
including the appointment of a new foreign minister, long-established foreign
policy views and practices remained relatively unchanged.
China has become more engaged with various United Nations mechanisms but
has not significantly improved its compliance with international human rights
standards or pushed for improved human rights protections in other countries.
In a notable exception, shortly after it was elected to the UN Human Rights
Council in November, China publicly urged Sri Lanka “to make efforts to protect
and promote human rights.”
Even in the face of the rapidly growing death toll in Syria and evidence in
August 2013 that the Syrian government used chemical weapons against civilians,
Beijing has continued to object to any significant Security Council measures
to increase pressure on the Assad regime and abusive rebel groups. It has
opposed referral of the situation to the International Criminal Court (ICC) and an
arms embargo against forces that commit widespread human rights or laws of
war violations. China has also slowed down Security Council-driven efforts to deliver desperately needed humanitarian assistance across the border to rebel
controlled areas in northern Syria.
In a minor change of tactics, if not of longer-term strategy, Chinese authorities
have become modestly more vocal in their public and private criticisms of North
Korea, particularly following actions by Pyongyang that increased tensions
between members of the six-party talks aimed at addressing security concerns
posed by North Korea’s nuclear weapons program.
Both private and state-owned Chinese firms continue to be a leading source of
foreign direct investment, particularly in developing countries, but in some
cases have been unwilling or unable to comply with international labor standards.
India
India took positive steps in 2013 by strengthening laws protecting women and
children, and, in several important cases, prosecuting state security force personnel
for extrajudicial killings. The impact of these developments will depend
in large part on effective follow-up by central government authorities. The year
also saw increased restrictions on Internet freedom; continued marginalization
of Dalits, tribal groups, religious minorities, sexual and gender minorities, and
people with disabilities; instances of remained marginalized and often without
redress; and persistent impunity for abuses linked to insurgencies, particularly
in Maoist areas, Jammu and Kashmir, Manipur, and Assam.
Widespread protests over the gang-rape and death of a female student in New
Delhi in December 2012 yet again drew international and domestic attention to
the need for institutional reforms to ensure human rights protections in India.
The government responded by enacting long-overdue reforms to India’s criminal
laws to better address gender-based violence. But new reports of violence
against women and girls exposed the wide gap between laws on the books and
their implementation.
The fact that the government responded to public outrage confirms India’s
claims of a vibrant civil society. An independent judiciary and free media also
acted as checks on abusive practices. However, reluctance to hold public officials
to account for abuses or dereliction of duty continued to foster a culture of
corruption and impunity.
Investigations into Extrajudicial Killings
In December 2012, the National Human Rights Commission told the Supreme
Court it had received 1,671 complaints of extrajudicial killings in the last five
years. Following his 2012 visit to India, the UN special rapporteur on extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions, Christof Heyns, stressed the need to end
impunity and bring perpetrators promptly to justice.
The courage and persistence of human rights activists and victims’ families
resulted in a number of court interventions and investigations into deaths at the hands of security forces. In many cases the authorities had falsely claimed
that the deaths occurred during armed exchanges or in self-defense.
In July 2013, the Supreme Court set up an independent panel led by a retired
judge after groups from Manipur state filed a public interest petition seeking an
investigation into 1,528 alleged extrajudicial executions between 1979 and
2012. The panel looked into six emblematic cases of alleged unlawful killings
and found all violated the law. It also observed that security forces were wrongly
being shielded by the Armed Forced Special Powers Act (AFSPA), which forbids
the prosecution of soldiers without approval of the central government.
Because officials rarely grant approvals, troops often enjoy effective immunity
from prosecution.
In January 2012, the Supreme Court ordered an independent panel led by a
retired judge to look into 22 alleged extrajudicial killings by police in Gujarat
state between 2002 and 2006. On Supreme Court orders, court martial proceedings
began in September 2012 against army officers accused by the
Central Bureau of Investigation in the extrajudicial executions of five villagers
from Pathribal in Jammu and Kashmir in 2000. The Armed Forces Special
Powers Act shielded the officers from prosecution in a civilian court.
In July 2013, the Central Bureau of Investigation filed charges against policemen
responsible for the 2004 killing of Ishrat Jahan, a young student, and three others
in a faked armed encounter. In September, D.G. Vanzara, a senior official
arrested along with 31 others from the Gujarat police for their alleged role in
extrajudicial killings, wrote a letter claiming the killings took place while they
were implementing Gujarat government policy.
Repeal of the AFSPA remained a core demand in northeast states and Jammu
and Kashmir, where it is in operation. However, despite calls from judicial
inquiries and national and international human rights bodies, the government
failed to abide by its promise to repeal the abusive law because of strong opposition
from the army.
Communal Violence
According to government estimates, 451 incidents of communal violence were
recorded in the first eight months of 2013, compared to 410 incidents in all of 2012. Among these were clashes between Hindu and Muslim communities in
August in Kishtwar town in Jammu and Kashmir, which killed three people and
injured many others. In Bihar, an August altercation at a roadside eatery led to
Hindu-Muslim clashes killing two people and injuring nearly a dozen. Over 50
people died in Hindu-Muslim violence in Muzaffarnagar in western Uttar
Pradesh state in September. There is a risk of more violence in the run-up to the
2014 elections as political interest groups exploit tensions between the two
communities.
Maoist Insurgency
Violence linked to an armed campaign in central and eastern India by the
Communist Party of India (Maoist), known as Naxalites, led to the death of 384
people, including 147 civilians, in 2013. In May, Maoists attacked a convoy in
Chhattisgarh, killing at least 20 people, including senior Congress Party politicians.
Tribal villagers and civil society activists, caught between the Maoists and the
police, remained at risk of arbitrary arrest and torture by government forces,
and of extortion and killings by Maoists.
Contrary to court orders, government security forces continued to occupy school
buildings as bases for operations in Maoist-affected areas, endangering students
and teachers, and depriving some of India’s most marginalized children
of access to education. Maoists continue to target schools in bombing attacks.
In 2013, members of a Dalit cultural group, charged in 2011 under India’s draconian
counterterrorism law, remained subject to prosecution for their alleged
support of Maoist militants. Courts have repeatedly ruled that ideological sympathy
alone does not justify criminal charges.
Freedom of Expression
Repeated abuse of section 66A of the Information Technology Act by police and
other state authorities to stifle Internet freedom led the central government to
issue an advisory in January 2013 making it mandatory for police to seek clearance
from high-ranking officials before making arrests under the law. While this was an improvement, the provisions are still subject to abuse and used to criminalize
free speech.
In April 2013, India started rolling out a Central Monitoring System to monitor
all phone and Internet communications raised further concerns of abuse since
current legal frameworks may not provide adequate oversight or safeguards for
the right to privacy. According to recent transparency reports from Google and
Facebook, India is second only to the United States in seeking private information
about users from these companies.
On occasion, state governments gave in to the demands of interest groups to
censor material such as books, talks, and film screenings.
Restrictions on Civil Society
India continued to use the Foreign Contribution Regulation Act (FCRA) to stifle
dissent by restricting access to foreign funding for domestic nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) that have been critical of the government. The government
targeted groups protesting against nuclear plants and big infrastructure
projects. Among groups that lost permission to receive foreign funds was Indian
Social Action Forum, a network of more than 700 NGOs across India.
Protection of Children’s Rights
Many children in India remained at risk of abuse and deprived of education.
Despite efforts to forbid any employment of children under 14, millions
remained in the work force, including the worst forms of labor. By some estimates
nearly half of India’s children under the age of five are malnourished.
Thousands of children remain missing, many of them trafficked within and outside
the country.
The 2009 Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act led to
increased enrollment. However, children from vulnerable communities, particularly
Dalits and tribal groups, faced various forms of discrimination, with many
dropping out and eventually becoming child workers.
Despite enacting a strong law in 2012, the government failed to embark upon
systemic reforms that are needed to ensure the protection of children from
sexual abuse.
Women’s Rights
After the uproar over the gang-rape and death of a student in New Delhi in
December 2012, the government instituted a three-member committee to propose
legal reforms to better address gender-based violence. Based on the commission’s
findings, parliament adopted amendments introducing new and
expanded definitions of rape and sexual assault, criminalizing acid attacks,
providing for a right to medical treatment, and instituting new procedures to
protect the rights of women with disabilities who experience sexual assault.
Despite these important reforms, key gaps remain. For example, Indian law still
does not provide adequate legal remedies for “honor killings,” or victim and
witness protection. Parliament disregarded opposition by rights groups and in
April 2013 expanded the scope of death penalty in rape cases.
In June, a local court ordered the reopening of the investigation into alleged
mass rapes in the villages of Kunan and Poshpora in Jammu and Kashmir’s
Kupwara district in 1991. Residents of the villages allege that soldiers raped
women during a cordon and search operation.
Hundreds of rapes were reported across the country in 2013. Protests renewed
in August after the gang rape of a journalist in Mumbai, accompanied by new
calls for greater safety measures for women in public spaces.
In April, India adopted the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace
(Prevention, Prohibition, and Redressal) Act 2013, which includes domestic
workers employed in homes, and sets out complaint mechanisms and the obligations
of employers to provide a safe working environment.
Palliative Care
After a series of positive steps in 2012 to address the suffering of hundreds of
thousands of persons with incurable diseases from pain and other symptoms,
progress on palliative care in India slowed considerably in 2013. The government
has so far not allocated a budget to implement India’s progressive national
palliative care strategy and parliament failed to consider critical amendments
to the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act that would dramatically
improve the availability of strong pain medications. More than 7 million people
in India require palliative care every year.
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
Even as India engages in a reform process to implement national disability and
mental health laws, activists remain concerned that these laws are not in line
with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which India ratified
in 2007.
Instances of violence against women and girls with mental or intellectual disabilities
including voluntary confinement, physical and sexual abuse, inhumane
or degrading treatment, and excessive electroshock therapy remained
particularly high in state-run and private residential care facilities, which lack
adequate oversight. Within the family and community, women and girls with
disabilities also experience violence, including involuntary sterilization.
Death Penalty
India ended its eight-year unofficial moratorium on capital punishment in
November 2012 with the hanging of Mohammad Ajmal Kasab, a Pakistani convicted
of multiple murders in the high-profile November 2008 attacks on luxury
hotels and the main railway station in Mumbai. In February 2013, the government
executed Mohammad Afzal Guru, convicted for a December 2001 attack
on the Indian parliament. Since taking office in July 2012, President Pranab
Mukherjee has rejected 11 clemency pleas, confirming the death penalty for 17
people.
Indian law permits the death penalty only in the “rarest of rare” cases, but in
November 2012 the Supreme Court ruled that this standard had not been
applied uniformly over the years and death penalty standards needed “a fresh
look.”
Key International Actors
Sexual violence against women in India drew international condemnation in
2013. After the notorious December 2012 New Delhi gang rape and murder, UN
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon called on India to take “further steps and
reforms to deter such crimes and bring perpetrators to justice.” Attacks on foreign
tourists led some countries such as the United States and the United
Kingdom to issue travel advisories telling women travelers to exercise caution.
Despite the enormity of India’s human rights problems, countries that normally
raise human rights issues in their foreign relations continued their low-profile
approach to the world’s largest democracy.
India’s Foreign Policy
India did not live up to expectations in promoting respect for democracy and
human rights in its foreign policy. Although the country aspires to a growing
role in world affairs and a permanent seat on the UN Security Council, it did little
to address some of most pressing problems confronting the world in 2013,
such as the crises in Syria and Egypt.
At the UN Human Rights Council, India has rarely supported human rights resolutions
on specific countries. While it usually opts for a policy of “non-interference
in the internal affairs” of other countries, India notably supported HRC resolutions
in 2012 and 2013 calling for accountability for alleged war crimes in Sri
Lanka. It has also backed restoration of an elected government in Nepal.
In bilateral engagements, India called on the Burmese government to promote
religious tolerance and harmony after attacks on Rohingya Muslims in Arakan
State and on Muslim communities in central Burma in several incidents during
2013.
India engaged in promoting stability and human rights in Afghanistan, pledging
nearly US$2 billion for the country’s rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts,
supporting education of girls, providing some police training, and granting asylum
to a number of activists fleeing Taliban threats.
Indonesia
Human rights showed little improvement in 2013, President Susilo Bambang
Yudhoyono’s last full year in office.
Although the president made public appeals for greater religious freedom and
tolerance, national authorities continued to respond weakly to growing violence
and discrimination against religious minorities. Other areas of concern include
new onerous restrictions on the activities of nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs), the proliferation of local decrees that violate women’s rights, and mistreatment
of the increasing number of refugees and migrants, including unaccompanied
migrant children, reaching Indonesia.
Forestry sector reforms made some headway in 2013, but timber concessions
on lands with pre-existing community claims continue to generate rural conflict
and abuse. Corruption and mismanagement deprive government coffers of billions
of dollars in forest revenues, and threaten Indonesia’s ability to deliver on
its “green growth” promises.
Conditions in Papua, still virtually off-limits to foreign journalists, remain
volatile, with security forces enjoying virtual impunity for abuses, including
excessive and at times lethal use of force against peaceful proponents of independence.
Meanwhile, the armed Free Papua Movement, though small and
poorly organized, continues to carry out attacks against government forces.
Local elections in Indonesia in recent years have resulted in the emergence of
young politicians, including Jakarta’s governor Joko Widodo, who have pledged
to break with traditional patronage-style politics by tackling corruption, poverty,
and crumbling infrastructure. National parliamentary and presidential elections
scheduled for 2014 will give an indication of whether these politicians reflect a
national trend.
Freedom of Expression
The Alliance of Independent Journalists documented 23 cases of violence
against journalists in the first six months of 2013. They included a March 2
attack on Normila Sari Wahyuni of Paser TV while she was covering a land dispute
in Rantau Panjang village in East Kalimantan. The assailants repeatedly kicked her stomach, prompting a miscarriage. Police later arrested a village
chief and village secretary as suspects in the assault. On March 27, supporters
of Gorontalo mayor, Adnan Dhambea, burned down the office of the local TV
station, TVRI Gorontalo, following Dhambea’s defeat in local elections. Two TVRI
journalists were assaulted during the arson attack.
On July 2, Indonesia’s parliament enacted a new law on NGOs that infringes on
rights to freedom of association, expression, and religion. The law imposes a
variety of vague obligations and prohibitions on NGO activities, severely limits
foreign funding of NGOs, and forbids NGOs from espousing atheism, communism,
Marxist-Leninism, beliefs deemed contrary to Pancasila, the state philosophy.
In a positive step, the government in August signaled a possible end to the
informal national taboo on public discussion of the army-led massacres of
between 500,000 and over a million communist party members and alleged
sympathizers in 1965-66 by allowing the release of the award-winning documentary
on the massacre, The Act of Killing, as a free Internet download.
Military Reform and Impunity
A military court in September sentenced 12 members of the Special Forces
Command (Komando Pasukan Khusus, Kopassus) to prison terms of between
several months and 11 years for their role in the well-orchestrated murder of
four detainees in a prison in Yogyakarta. The guilty verdicts marked an important
departure from the usual impunity enjoyed by soldiers implicated in serious
crimes, but the sentences imposed on the three most culpable soldiers
failed to match the gravity of their crimes.
Women’s Rights
A gender equality bill first submitted to parliament in 2009 remained stalled in
2013 due to opposition from Islamist politicians.
Meanwhile, discriminatory regulations continued to proliferate. An August
update by Indonesia’s official Commission on Violence against Women reported
that national and local governments had passed 60 new discriminatory regulations
in 2013. Indonesia has a total of 342 discriminatory regulations, including 79 local bylaws requiring women to wear the hijab. As of July, the
Ministry of Home Affairs had signaled its intention to revoke only eight of them.
These regulations include one banning women from straddling motorcycles—
only riding side-saddle is permitted—in Lhokseumawe, Aceh. In neighboring
Bireuen, a local regulation prohibits women from dancing. In Gorontalo,
Sulawesi Island, the government transferred its entire female support staff to
other offices in July, replacing them with men as part of an initiative to discourage
“extramarital affairs.”
In August, an education office in Prabumulih, southern Sumatra, cancelled
plans to have high school girls undergo mandatory “virginity tests” to tackle
“premarital sex and prostitution.” Despite a public outcry, plans are afoot to
introduce similar tests in Pamekasan, East Java.
Freedom of Religion
President Yudhoyono has repeatedly called Indonesia “a moderate Muslim
democracy.” On May 31, Yudhoyono said his government “would not tolerate
any act of senseless violence committed by any group in the name of the religion”
and on August 16 said he was “very concerned” about rising religious
intolerance and related violence.
Despite the rhetoric, the Yudhoyono administration has failed to enforce
Supreme Court decisions against local officials who have long blocked building
permits for the Christian churches in Bogor and Bekasi. It also maintains
dozens of regulations, including ministerial decrees on building houses of worship
and a decree against religious practice by the Ahmadiyah community,
which discriminate against religious minorities and foster intolerance.
According to the Jakarta-based Setara Institute that monitors religious freedom,
there were 264 attacks on religious minorities in 2012 and 243 cases in the first
10 months of 2013. The perpetrators were almost all Sunni militants; the targets
include Christians, Ahmadiyah, Shia, and Sufis.
On March 21, Bekasi authorities bowed to the demands of the local Islamic
People’s Forum and demolished a church built by the Batak Protestant
Christian Church. The church had fulfilled local requirements, but had been denied a building permit for five years running due to pressure from groups
opposed to all church construction in the area.
On June 20, a mob of more than 800 Sunni militants pressured local authorities
to evict hundreds of displaced Shia villagers from a stadium in Sampang,
Madura, where they had been living since August 2012 after more than 1,000
Sunni villagers attacked their homes, killing one resident. The displaced Shia
villagers were then forcibly driven to an apartment building that the government
had prepared in Sidoarjo, Java, three hours away.
On September 11, a long-simmering dispute between two Muslim communities
in Puger in East Java’s Jember regency boiled over into violence when a group of
30 machete-wielding militants vandalized the local Darus Sholihin Islamic
boarding school. More than 100 policemen at the scene failed to intervene. An
hour later, one of those militants, Eko Mardi Santoso, 45, was found dead on
the village pier with machete wounds to his face and torso after an apparent
revenge attack.
Papua/West Papua
Tensions heightened in Papua in 2013 following a February 21 attack on
Indonesian military forces by suspected Free Papua Movement rebels that
killed eight soldiers.
As of August, according to the “Papuans Behind Bars” website, 55 Papuans
were imprisoned for peaceful advocacy of independence. Indonesia denies
holding any political prisoners.
On April 30, police fired upon a group of Papuans who had gathered in Aimas
district, near Sorong, for a prayer gathering to protest the 1963 handover of
Papua to Indonesia from Dutch colonial rule. One account said police opened
fire when protesters approached police vehicles that had arrived at the scene.
Two men were killed on the spot; a third victim died six days later from gunshot
wounds. Police detained at least 22 individuals and charged 7 of them with
treason. The other 15 were subsequently released.
In May the Sydney Morning Herald reported that thousands of Papuan children,
mostly Christians, had been induced to leave Papua to attend Islamic schools
in Java for religious “re-education” over the last decade. The program has resulted in large numbers of Papuan children fleeing the schools and living destitute
in major cities.
Human rights abuses in Papua were in the spotlight during the Asia Pacific
Economic Cooperation summit in Bali on October 6 after three Papuan activists
scaled a wall and entered the Australian consulate. Markus Jerewon, Yuvensius
Goo, and Rofinus Yanggam demanded that Indonesia lift travel restrictions on
international visitors and release political prisoners.
Land Rights
In May, the Constitutional Court declared unconstitutional a provision of the
1999 Forestry Law that includes customary territories within state forests. The
landmark decision rebuked the Ministry of Forestry for allocating community
lands as concessions to logging and plantation companies.
Forestry sector corruption and mismanagement continued to bleed Indonesian
government coffers, the annual losses reaching US$2 billion, more than the
entire national health budget. Forest mismanagement fuels often violent land
disputes and taints Indonesia’s self-proclaimed image as a leader in sustainable
“green growth.”
Refugees and Asylum Seekers
Indonesia is a transit point to Australia for refugees and asylum seekers fleeing
persecution, violence, and poverty in countries including Somalia, Afghanistan,
Pakistan, and Burma. As of March 2013, there were almost 10,000 refugees and
asylum seekers in Indonesia, all living in legal limbo because Indonesia lacks
an asylum law. This number includes an unprecedented number of unaccompanied
migrant children; more than 1,000 such children arrived in Indonesia in
2012 alone.
While Indonesia delegates the responsibility for refugees and asylum seekers
to the office of United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), it
often refuses to release even UNHCR-recognized refugees from detention centers,
where conditions are poor and mistreatment common. Those who are
released face constant threat of re-arrest and further detention.
Key International Actors
On May 8, Germany approved the sale to Indonesia of 164 tanks, including 104
Leopard 2 battle tanks. On August 25, US Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel disclosed
a $500 million deal to sell eight Apache attack helicopters to Indonesia,
which he said was aimed at strengthening military ties as part of the US “pivot”
towards the Asia-Pacific.
On September 30, new Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott made Jakarta his
first foreign visit, seeking better trade relationships and cooperation over
migration and people smuggling. Abbott failed to raise human rights concerns
in discussions in Jakarta and, several days later, when three Papuan activists
entered the Australian consulate during the APEC summit in Bali, he took the
opportunity to denounce Papuans who “grandstand” against Indonesia and
then dangerously conflated an attempt to spotlight human rights violations
with Papuan separatism.
Indonesia signed a timber trade agreement with EU on September 30, requiring
that timber exported to the EU be certified as legally produced, an important
step in combatting illegal logging. The agreement, however, does not require
any assessment of whether the timber is produced in violation of community
land rights or rights to compensation, an important source of conflict and
human rights abuse.
A visit by the UN special rapporteur on freedom of expression, Frank La Rue,
scheduled for January 2013 was postponed over Jakarta’s objection to his plan
to visit Papua; no new date had been set at this writing.
Malaysia
Malaysia’s general election on May 5, 2013, resulted in historic losses for the
ruling Barisan Nasional (BN) coalition. Although the BN won 133 seats out of
222, it lost the popular vote to the opposition Pakatan Rakyat (PKR) coalition
amid widespread allegations of election irregularities. In an attempt to explain
away the election results, Prime Minister Najib Tun Razak blamed a “Chinese
tsunami” favoring the opposition, and raised concerns about ethnic and religious
fractures in multi-ethnic Malaysia.
The election was followed by a significant deterioration in human rights and the
apparent abrupt end to Prime Minister Najib’s oft-touted reform agenda.
Relevant developments in the second half of 2013 included passage of new and
revised laws again permitting administrative detention without trial, new
arrests of opposition activists for organizing peaceful protests, and repression
of political speech.
Administrative Detention
Following the May election, the government launched a major campaign against
an apparent rise in crime that some officials attributed to the June 2012 expiration
of the Emergency (Public Order and Crime Prevention) Ordinance 1969. The
home minister recommended that the ordinance be reintroduced and then
helped push through amendments to the Prevention of Crime Act 1959 that
reauthorize administrative detention without trial. The amendments empower a
five-person government-appointed panel to impose up to two years’ preventive
detention on certain criminal suspects, decisions that are not subject to judicial
review except on procedural grounds. Up to five years of restricted residence in
remote locations could follow, renewable for another five years as decided by
the home minister.
The government also has proposed electronic monitoring for felons who have
served out their sentences in violation of their basic rights.
Freedom of Assembly and Association
To protest alleged malfeasance during May 5 parliamentary elections, the opposition
PKR coalition organized “Black 505” rallies throughout Malaysia. The government
responded by arresting persons deemed to be rally organizers for failing
to notify the police 10 days in advance as required by the Peaceful
Assembly Act (PAA). To date, police have arrested at least 43 persons on such
charges. The PAA also requires that organizers negotiate with the police on conditions
for holding assemblies. At the so-called People’s Uprising Rally in Kuala
Lumpur on January 12, 2013, the police set 27 conditions and followed up by
investigating rule violations that were either trivial or protected under international
law, such as carrying placards with “inappropriate slogans.”
In Sabah, police ordered organizers of the February 22 “Idle No More Long
March” for indigenous rights and fair elections to apply for a permit, claiming
that it was not an “ordinary” march as defined under the PAA.
The government restricts the right to freedom of association by requiring that
organizations of seven or more members register with the Registrar of Societies
in order to legally function. The registrar, appointed by the Ministry of Home
Affairs, has broad authority to deny registration and has continually delayed or
denied registration to groups critical of the government and to opposition political
parties. During 2013, an application by the three opposition parties to register
as a coalition remained mired in bureaucratic requirements, and the registrar
forced a re-run of the opposition Democratic Action Party’s Central
Executive Committee elections on a technicality. The home affairs minister has
“absolute discretion” to declare a society unlawful.
Freedom of Expression
Despite pledges by Prime Minister Najib to revoke the Sedition Act, the government
uses sedition charges to silence and punish those who question government
policies. Police charged five prominent opposition activists with sedition
for their May 13 remarks at the Kuala Lumpur and Selangor Chinese Assembly
Hall about election fraud and popular dissatisfaction with the government. One
of the five, student activist Adam Adil Abd Halim, was detained for five days
and is suspended from the university until his trial is over. In April, the government charged opposition member of parliament Tian Chua with sedition for
alleging that the United Malays National Organisation (UMNO), the lead party in
the government coalition, was linked to the armed incursion at Lahad Duta in
Sabah in 2013.
Malaysian authorities maintain control over television and radio, printed newspapers,
magazines and books, and films and video. The Printing Presses and
Publication Act (PPPA) requires print publications to obtain a government
license that the home minister may revoke at any time. The Malaysian
Communications and Multimedia Act (MCMA) provides broad authority to act
against service providers that “provide content which is indecent … or offensive
in character with intent to annoy, abuse, threaten or harass any person.”
In January 2013, the government banned screening of the Tamil language movie
Vishwaroopam. In September, the police charged Lena Hendry, an NGO staff
member, with violating the Film Censorship Act by screening No Fire Zone, The
Killing Fields of Sri Lanka. The case was still pending at time of writing.
In May 2012, the Home Ministry banned the book Allah, Liberty & Love by
female Canadian author Irshad Manji. In September 2013, the High Court overturned
the ban on the Malay translation, but the Attorney General’s Chambers
planned an appeal. The publisher’s application for judicial review of his arrest
and prosecution under the Sharia Criminal Offenses (Selangor) Enactment 1995
was pending at time of writing, as was his effort to have the Federal Court
declare the law unconstitutional. The publisher also faces charges in the
Petaling Sharia Court. Although the High Court ruled in favor of Berjaya Books
(Borders Malaysia) that had stocked the book, criminal prosecution in the
Sharia court of a store salesperson for being in possession of the book was still
pending at time of writing. The English language version of the book is still
banned.
Police Abuses and Impunity
The Malaysia police force has been frequently faulted for use of excessive or
lethal force during apprehension of suspected criminals, and the torture of
detainees. During 2013, at least 12 persons died in suspicious circumstances in
police custody. In a particularly egregious case in May, truck driver N.
Dhamendran died in custody at Kuala Lumpur police headquarters—a postmortem examination found 52 injuries resulting from “sustained multiple blunt
force trauma.” In an exceptional development, five police officers have been
charged with murder. In other death-in-custody cases, police have flatly denied
any abuse, blamed illness for the deaths, resisted family-requested second
post-mortems, or relied on frequently inconclusive judicial inquests.
The government has rejected establishment of an Independent Police
Complaints and Misconduct Commission (IPCMC), an external oversight body
recommended in 2005 by a Royal Commission, which would have power to
receive and investigate complaints and to sanction those found guilty of misconduct.
The existing Enforcement Agencies Integrity Commission (EAIC) does
not have power to sanction misconduct.
Political Prosecution of Opposition Leader Anwar Ibrahim
The Malaysia government continued its politically motivated prosecution of
opposition leader Anwar Ibrahim for sodomy, appealing his January 2012
acquittal to the Court of Appeal. If convicted, Anwar faces up to 20 years in
prison and caning, and the loss of his seat in parliament.
Human Rights Defenders
Suara Rakyat Malaysia (SUARAM), a leading Malaysian human rights organization,
faced hostile government investigations throughout the year. The
Malaysian government investigated SUARAM under three different laws
between July 2012 and February 2013, under pressure from ministers who publicly
attacked SUARAM for receiving foreign funds. In August 2013, police questioned
a member of the SUARAM secretariat about a fund-raising dinner
SUARAM had held in support of its work on the Scorpene submarine corruption
case.
Police also harassed Samad Said, Malaysia’s 81-year-old poet laureate and cochair
of Bersih 2.0, the civil society coalition working for clean and fair elections.
Police detained him in September for reciting a poem in the presence of
pre-independence flags. A government civil suit against Bersih 2.0 steering
committee members, including Samad Said and co-chair Ambiga Sreenevasan,
was pending at time of writing.
Refugees, Asylum Seekers, and Trafficking Victims
Malaysian immigration law does not recognize refugees and asylum seekers.
The government is not a party to the 1951 Refugee Convention and lacks domestic
refugee law and asylum procedures. It takes no responsibility for migrant
children’s education. There is no evidence that an announced plan to allow
refugees to work legally had been implemented at time of writing.
The Anti-Trafficking in Persons and Anti-Smuggling of Migrants Act conflates
trafficking and people smuggling, and fails to provide meaningful protection to
victims of either crime. The government confines trafficking victims in sub-standard
government shelters without access to services until adjudication of their
legal case is complete.
Detention and Drug Policy
The Dangerous Drugs (Special Preventive Measures) Act authorizes administrative
detention without trial. The National Anti-Drug Agency maintains over 20
puspens (drug detention centers) where users are held for a minimum of two
years. Drug traffickers face mandatory death sentences, but the number of people
executed is not publicly available.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Discrimination against lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) persons
remains a persistent problem that is reinforced by government policy. In 2012,
Prime Minister Najib declared that LGBT activities do not “have a place in the
country.” In April 2013, Deputy Prime Minister Muhyiddin Yassin accused LGBT
rights activists of “poisoning” the minds of Muslims with “deviant practices.”
The Malaysian government led efforts to ensure that LGBT rights were excluded
from the ASEAN Human Rights Declaration adopted in November 2012.
Police regularly arrest transgender persons, especially Muslims who are considered
to be violating Sharia law provisions against cross-dressing, ridicule and
humiliate them, and jail them in lock-ups where they are subject to physical
and sexual abuse by police staff and male inmates.
The Malaysian government took no steps to repeal Penal Code article 377B,
which criminalizes consensual “carnal intercourse against the order of nature”
between persons who have reached the age of consent, or to replace article
377C on non-consensual sexual acts with a modern, gender-neutral rape law.
Key International Actors
Prime Minister Najib has announced Malaysia’s intention to seek a non-permanent
seat on the United Nations Security Council for the 2015-2016 term.
Malaysia is a member of the UN Human Rights Council but has not signed or
ratified most core human rights treaties.
The US plays an important role in Malaysia, strengthening mutual security ties
and promoting negotiations on the free trade Trans-Pacific Partnership
Agreement (TPPA), but says little publicly about Malaysia’s human rights
record. President Barack Obama was scheduled to visit Malaysia in October but
cancelled the trip due to a US budget impasse and partial government shutdown.
It would have been the first visit by a sitting US president since 1966. In
prepared remarks delivered at the time of the scheduled visit, Obama praised
Malaysia as a global model for “diversity, tolerance, and progress,” but said
nothing publicly about continuing human rights problems in the country.
Malaysia, which is a member of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and
has been positioning itself as a leading moderate Muslim state, also continues
to cultivate its ties with Middle Eastern states.
At the regional level, Malaysia has blocked efforts to reach a comprehensive
agreement to protect the rights of all migrant workers in ASEAN. Relations with
the Philippines were strained in 2013 when an armed group from the
Philippines calling itself the “Royal Security Forces of the Sultanate of Sulu and
North Borneo” tried to claim a portion of the eastern Malaysian province of
Sabah. The Philippines did not support the group but sought to negotiate their
return. Malaysian forces ultimately routed the militants.
Malaysia continues to deepen its ties with China, exemplified in 2013 by an
October state visit to Malaysia by new Chinese President Xi Jinping. The two
countries agreed to improve bilateral ties and to triple the volume of bilateral
trade by 2017.
Nepal
Elections held in November to elect the second Constituent Assembly were considered
free and fair by international observers. The United Communist Party of
Nepal (Maoist) suffered a significant loss in seats from 2008, while the more
centrist Congress and United Marxist Leninist parties gained significantly. But
the year saw little human rights progress and new setbacks to efforts to end
impunity for abuses committed by both government and Maoist forces during
the country’s 1996-2006 civil war. A decline of more than 5 million in the number
of registered voters since the last Constituent Assembly elections in 2008
raised concerns that millions of Nepalis were being disenfranchised.
A new Truth and Reconciliation Commission established to address the war
years is deeply flawed and, unless reformed, unlikely to answer repeated calls
for accountability and justice from victims, rights groups, and the international
community. At least 13,000 people were killed and over 1,300 subjected to
enforced disappearance during the decade-long conflict. Political leaders have
shown little interest in justice, with Maoist leaders even threatening an elderly
couple that went on hunger strike to demand an investigation into their son’s
2004 murder. An interim relief program providing financial compensation and
other benefits to individuals whose family members were killed or disappeared
during the conflict did not extend to victims of torture and sexual assault.
Nepal has made significant progress in protecting the rights of lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, and intersex (LGBTI) individuals in the last decade, but
2013 saw troubling instances of private actor violence and seemingly arbitrary
arrest of LGBTI activists. Women, migrant workers, people with disabilities, and
members of disadvantaged communities such as Dalits continue to be marginalized
and suffer discrimination.
Accountability for Past Abuses
Instead of taking steps to ensure the prosecution of those responsible for the
worst crimes committed during the country’s civil war, the cabinet pushed an
ordinance that could lead to amnesty for perpetrators. Nepal’s Truth,
Reconciliation and Disappearance Ordinance, signed into law by the president
in March 2013, calls for a high-level commission to investigate serious conflictrelated violations. The law does not define which crimes are eligible for
amnesty and which are excluded, giving commissioners potentially wide discretion
to make determinations. As a result, some perpetrators of torture, war
crimes, and crimes against humanity could win amnesties in contravention of
international law.
The high-level commission has yet to be formed, and in April the Supreme Court
suspended the ordinance pending further review.
In September, after mounting national and international pressure, the police
finally announced an arrest for the 2004 abduction and murder of Krishna
Adhikari. In August 2013, Adhikari’s parents had begun a hunger strike
demanding information about their son’s murder, allegedly at the hands of
Maoist forces. Threats by the Maoist leadership did not deter the fasting couple.
Women’s Rights
In December 2012, a female migrant worker returning from Saudi Arabia was
raped by an airport police constable in Kathmandu, sparking widespread
protests. On December 27, protesters gathered near the prime minister’s residence
beginning “Occupy Baluwatar,” a movement named after the neighborhood.
Due in part to intense public pressure, the police constable responsible
for the rapes was sentenced in April to five-and-a-half years in prison.
Women’s rights groups demanded fast-track courts to deal with cases of gender-
based violence, and a review of the 35-day limitation period on filing police
complaints, which restricts the ability of victims to seek redress. A government
review committee submitted a report in April on laws and policies related to
violence against women, but the government had not acted on its recommendations
at time of writing.
The government also has not yet investigated credible allegations of sexual violence
during the 1996-2006 conflict, and has not included sexual assault victims
in its interim relief compensation program.
Migrants’ Rights
As part of the Occupy Baluwatar movement, women’s groups called for a review
of Nepal’s migration policies, which currently lack adequate protections. Rights
groups demanded that the government revoke an August 2012 decree banning
women under age 30 from traveling to Gulf countries for work. The ban was
imposed to protect Nepali domestic workers from physical or sexual abuse, but
rights groups fear that it will push women to migrate through informal channels
and increase the risk of abuse.
Disability Rights
Although the government has ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities (CRPD) and is committed to inclusive education—whereby children
with and without disabilities attend school together in their communities—
it continues to maintain a system of separate schools for children who are
deaf, blind, or have physical and intellectual disabilities, and to put children
with disabilities in segregated classes in mainstream schools. The government
has taken steps to increase school scholarships for children with disabilities,
and has created a team tasked with developing a new national inclusive education
policy.
However, disability rights activists say they have been excluded from the political
process, and that recently enacted constitutional amendments have not
addressed their concerns.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
The government has advanced transgender and intersex rights in the last
decade by recognizing a third category on official documents. Nevertheless, the
government failed to prevent an escalation in threats and violent attacks on
LGBTI rights activists in 2013. In early February, four transgender women were
arrested under the Public Offense Act, a vaguely worded law that can result in
up to 25 days in detention and a fine amounting to more than US$300.
Authorities did little to investigate threatening phone calls and harassment of
members of the Blue Diamond Society, the national LGBTI umbrella organization.
It instead launched an investigation into the organization for alleged corruption, despite the fact it had passed third party audits and inspections. The
group’s 2012-2013 license renewal process was delayed and its bank accounts
frozen, temporarily halting its health and human rights work.
Statelessness
Nepal failed to reform its citizenship laws in 2013, leaving an estimated 2.1 million
people effectively stateless, unable to secure drivers’ licenses, passports,
bank accounts, or voting rights. The flawed citizenship law makes it particularly
difficult for women to secure legal proof of citizenship, especially when male
family members refuse to assist them or are unavailable to do so, and it denies
citizenship to children of non-Nepali fathers.
Tibetan Refugees
Nepal imposes strict restrictions on Tibetan refugees, forbidding protests and
gatherings. Two Tibetan monks in Nepal self-immolated in 2013 to protest
China’s rule over Tibet.
In April, Pushpa Kamal Dahal, also known as Prachanda, former prime minister
and chairman of the Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist), assured
China’s President Xi Jinping that Nepal will repress any “anti-China” activities
by Tibetan refugees.
Key International Actors
The international community, including India, the United Kingdom, United
States, and European Union pressed the government to announce and conduct
free and fair elections and end the political deadlock that has paralyzed governance
in Nepal.
China increased financial assistance to Nepal, but demanded that the government
curb protests by Tibetans and other “anti-China” activities.
In a positive move, in January 2013 the UK arrested a Nepali army colonel suspected
of torture during the civil war.
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay called for an independent
and impartial investigation into serious violations of international law during
the country’s 10-year conflict, and expressed concern that the Truth, Reconciliation and Disappearance Ordinance could allow perpetrators of serious
crimes to obtain amnesties. “Such amnesties would not only violate core
principles under international law but would also weaken the foundation for a
genuine and lasting peace in Nepal,” Pillay said.
North Korea
There has been no discernible improvement in human rights in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK or North Korea) since Kim Jong-Un assumed
power after his father’s death in 2011. The government continues to impose
totalitarian rule. In response to the systematic denial of basic freedoms in the
country, the United Nations Human Rights Council unanimously established a
commission of inquiry in April 2013 to investigate whether such abuses amount
to crimes against humanity and who should be held accountable.
Although North Korea has ratified four key international human rights treaties
and technically possesses a constitution with some rights protections, in reality
the government represses all forms of freedom of expression and opinion and
does not allow any organized political opposition, independent media, free
trade unions, civil society organizations, or religious freedom. Those who
attempt to assert rights, fail to demonstrate sufficient reverence for the party
and its leadership, or otherwise act in ways deemed contrary to state interests
face arbitrary arrest, detention, lack of due process, and torture and ill-treatment.
The government also practices collective punishment for supposed antistate
offenses, effectively enslaving hundreds of thousands of citizens, including
children, in prison camps and other detention facilities with deplorable conditions
and forced labor.
Torture and Inhumane Treatment
North Korean refugees living in exile—some of whom fled after Kim Jong-Un
took power—told Human Rights Watch that people arrested in North Korea are
routinely tortured by officials seeking confessions, bribes, and obedience.
Common forms of torture include sleep deprivation, beatings with iron rods or
sticks, kicking and slapping, and enforced sitting or standing for hours. Guards
also sexually abuse female detainees.
Executions
North Korea’s criminal code stipulates that the death penalty can be applied for
vaguely defined offenses such as “crimes against the state” and “crimes
against the people.” A December 2007 amendment to the penal code extended the death penalty to additional crimes, including non-violent offenses such as
fraud and smuggling, as long as authorities determine the crime is “extremely
serious.”
Political Prisoner Camps
North Korean refugees also confirm that persons accused of political offenses
are usually sent to brutal forced labor camps, known as kwan-li-so, operated by
North Korea’s National Security Agency.
The government practices collective punishment, sending to forced labor
camps not only the offender but also their parents, spouse, children, and even
grandchildren. These camps are notorious for horrific living conditions and
abuse, including induced starvation, little or no medical care, lack of proper
housing and clothes, continuous mistreatment and torture by guards, and executions.
Forced labor at the kwan-li-so often involves difficult physical labor
such as mining, logging, and agricultural work, all done with rudimentary tools
in often dangerous and harsh conditions. Death rates in these camps are
reportedly extremely high.
North Korea has never acknowledged that these kwan-li-so camps exist, but
United States and South Korean officials now estimate that between 80,000
and 120,000 people may be imprisoned in them, including in camp No. 14 in
Kaechun, No. 15 in Yodok, No. 16 in Hwasung, and No. 25 in Chungjin. During
the year, new satellite imagery indicated camp No. 22 in Hoeryung has been
closed; it is unclear what happened to the estimated 30,000 prisoners previously
held at the camp.
Freedom of Information and Movement
The government uses fear—generated mainly by threats of detention, forced
labor, and public executions—to prevent dissent, and imposes harsh restrictions
on freedom of information and travel.
All media and publications are state controlled, and unauthorized access to
non-state radio or TV broadcasts is punished. North Koreans are punished if
found with mobile media such as DVDs or computer ‘flash drives’ containing
unauthorized TV programs, such as South Korean drama and entertainment shows. Unauthorized use of Chinese mobile phones to communicate with people
outside North Korea is also harshly punished.
Refugees and Asylum Seekers
North Korea criminalizes leaving the country without state permission. Upon
Kim Jong-Un’s ascension to power, the government issued a shoot-on-sight
order to border guards to stop illegal crossing at the northern border into China.
Since then, the government has increased rotations of North Korean border
guards and cracked down on guards who turn a blind eye when people cross.
People seeking to flee North Korea have also faced greater difficulties making
the arduous journey from the North Korea border through China to Laos, and
then into Thailand from where most are sent to South Korea. In a sign of the
increased risks, the DPRK in May 2013 persuaded Laos to return nine young
defectors arrested in Vientiane, at least five of whom were children, to an
unknown fate in North Korea.
China continues to categorically label all North Koreans in China “illegal” economic
migrants and routinely repatriates them, despite its obligation to offer
protection to refugees under the Refugee Convention of 1951 and its 1967 protocol,
to which it is a state party. The certainty of harsh punishment upon repatriation
has led many in the international community to argue that North Koreans
fleeing into China should all be considered refugees sur place. Beijing regularly
denies the office of UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) access to
North Koreans in China.
Former North Korean security officials who have defected told Human Rights
Watch that North Koreans handed back by China face interrogation, torture, and
referral to political prisoner or forced labor camps. The severity of punishments
depend on North Korean authorities’ assessments of what the returnee did
while in China.
Those suspected of simple trading schemes involving non-controversial goods
are usually sent to work in forced labor brigades (known as ro-dong-dan-ryeondae,
literally labor training centers) or jip-kyul-so (collection centers), criminal
penitentiaries where forced labor is required. Harsh and dangerous working
conditions purportedly result in significant numbers of people being injured or
killed.
Those whom authorities suspect of religious or political activities abroad, especially
having any sort of contact with South Koreans, are often given lengthier
terms in horrendous detention facilities known as kyo-hwa-so (correctional,
reeducation centers) where forced labor is combined with chronic food and
medicine shortages, harsh working conditions, and regular mistreatment by
guards.
North Korean women fleeing their country are frequently trafficked into forced
de facto marriages with Chinese men. Even if they have lived there for years,
these women are not entitled to legal residence and face possible arrest and
repatriation. Many children of such unrecognized marriages lack legal identity
or access to elementary education.
Labor Rights
North Korea is one of the few nations in the world that still refuses to join the
International Labour Organization (ILO). Forced labor is essentially the norm in
the country, and workers are systematically denied freedom of association and
the right to organize and collectively bargain. The government firmly controls
the only authorized trade union organization, the General Federation of Trade
Unions of Korea.
In April, the North Korea government unilaterally shut down the Kaesong
Industrial Complex (KIC), close to the border between North and South Korea,
where 123 South Korean companies employ over 50,000 North Korean workers.
The KIC reopened in September after intensive negotiations to set up a joint
North Korea-South Korea committee to oversee the complex. However, there
was no change to the law governing working conditions, which fall far short of
international standards.
Key International Actors
North Korea’s record of cooperation with UN human rights mechanisms is
arguably among the worst in the world. It ignores all resolutions on the human
rights situation in North Korea adopted by the UN Human Rights Council (HRC)
and the UN General Assembly, and has never responded to requests for visits
from the UN special rapporteur on human rights in the DPRK.
The April HRC resolution establishing a UN Commission of Inquiry (COI) on
human rights in the DPRK constituted an important and warranted increase in
UN scrutiny of the government’s rights record. The COI is due to report to the
HRC in March 2014 on nine distinct areas of abuse “including the violation of
the right to food, the violations associated with prison camps, torture and inhuman
treatment, arbitrary detention, discrimination, violations of freedom of
expression, violations of the right to life, violations of freedom of movement,
and enforced disappearances, including in the form of abductions of nationals
of other States, with a view to ensuring full accountability, in particular where
these violations may amount to crimes against humanity.”
In an oral update given to the HRC on September 16, Michael Kirby, chair of the
COI, stated that “testimony heard thus far points to widespread and serious
violations in all areas that the Human Rights Council asked the Commission to
investigate” and to “large-scale patterns that may constitute systematic and
gross human rights violations.”
The COI has visited South Korea, Japan, Thailand, the United States, and United
Kingdom, but to date North Korea has refused to cooperate. China has also
declined to let the three COI commissioners visit the country to conduct investigations.
Two weeks before conservative Park Geun-hye was sworn-in as new president
of South Korea in February, North Korea conducted its third nuclear test in
seven years, earning widespread international condemnation, including from
its closest ally, China.
North Korean threats, canceling of family reunification visits, and the fivemonth
long shuttering of the Kaesong Industrial Complex, further contributed to
a chill in North-South relations. Six-party talks on denuclearizing the Korean
peninsula—involving North and South Korea, China, Japan, Russia, and the
US—remained moribund during the year.
Japan continues to demand the return of 17 Japanese citizens that North Korea
abducted in the 1970s and 1980s. Some Japanese civil society groups insist the
number of abductees is much higher. South Korea’s government expanded its
attention and efforts to press for the return of hundreds of its abducted citizens.
Pakistan
Pakistan had another violent year in 2013. Nawaz Sharif’s Pakistan Muslim
League won parliamentary elections in May and Sharif became prime minister
in June. The elections were marred by a bombing and targeted killing campaign
by the Taliban and their affiliates to sabotage the elections. The new government
replaced the Pakistan People’s Party-led government, in office since
2008. The constitutional transfer of power from one civilian government to
another was the first in Pakistan’s history.
While the military did not hinder the electoral process, it remained unaccountable
for human rights violations and exercised disproportionate political influence,
especially on matters of national security and counter-terrorism. The
deep-rooted security crisis in the country was underscored by the inability or
unwillingness of military and civilian institutions to end attacks on the population
by militant groups. Islamist militant groups continued to target and kill
hundreds of Shia Muslims—particularly from the Hazara community—with
impunity. In September, the Christian community experienced the deadliest
attack on its members in Pakistan’s history when 81 were killed in a bombing
on a church in Peshawar.
There has been a breakdown of law enforcement in the face of politically motivated
attacks particularly throughout the province of Balochistan and targeted
killings in Karachi. The police and other security forces have been responsible
for numerous abuses, including, torture and other ill-treatment of criminal suspects,
extrajudicial killings, and unresolved enforced disappearances of terrorism
suspects.
The country also faces acute economic problems, exemplified in 2013 by growing
electricity shortages and rising food and fuel prices, which hit the country’s
poor disproportionately.
At least 22 polio vaccination workers were killed, and 14 wounded in 2012 and
2013 in attacks for which the Taliban claimed responsibility.
Elections
During the election campaign, at least 130 people were killed and over 500
were injured by the Taliban and its affiliates, who declared elections “un-
Islamic” and warned voters to stay away from ruling coalition political rallies.
The European Union Election Observer Mission noted that “violence by nonstate
actors unbalanced the playing field and distorted the election process
considerably in affected areas,” but the political parties in the outgoing government
accepted the results. In September, President Asif Ali Zardari retired upon
completion of his term after overseeing an orderly democratic transition.
Sectarian Attacks
Sunni militant groups such as the ostensibly banned Lashkar-e Jhangvi (LEJ), an
Al-Qaeda affiliate, operate with virtual impunity across Pakistan, as law
enforcement officials either turn a blind eye or appear helpless to prevent
attacks.
In 2013, over 400 members of the Shia Muslim population were killed in targeted
attacks that took place across Pakistan. In Balochistan province, at least
200 Shias, mostly from the Hazara community, were killed in and around the
provincial capital, Quetta. In January, a suicide bomb killed 96 Hazaras and
injured at least 150. In February, at least 84 were killed and over 160 injured
when a bomb exploded in a vegetable market in Quetta’s Hazara town. The LEJ
claimed responsibility for both attacks. In March, at least 47 Shias were killed
and 135 injured in the port city of Karachi when a Shia-majority neighborhood
was targeted in a bomb attack. Some 50 apartments and 10 shops were
destroyed. Throughout the year, dozens of other Shia across Pakistan were targeted
and killed.
Religious Minorities
Abuses are rife under the country’s abusive blasphemy law, which is used
against religious minorities, often to settle personal disputes. Dozens of people
were charged with the offense in 2013. At least 16 people remained on death
row for blasphemy, while another 20 were serving life sentences at time of writing.
Aasia Bibi, a Christian from Punjab province, who in 2010 became the first woman in the country’s history to be sentenced to death for blasphemy, languished
in prison. Rimsha Masih, a 14-year-old Christian girl accused of blasphemy
and subsequently released in 2012, was granted asylum in Canada in
June. In March, several thousand Christians were forced to flee their homes in
Lahore after allegations of blasphemy against a local resident, Sawan Masih. A
mob of thousands then looted and burned some 150 homes and two churches
as police looked on. Sawan Masih remained in jail at time of writing.
In September, a suicide bombing during Sunday Mass at a church in Peshawar
killed 81 worshippers and wounded more than 130, the deadliest attack in
Pakistan’s history on the beleaguered Christian minority.
Members of the Ahmadiyya religious community continue to be a major target
of blasphemy prosecutions and are subjected to longstanding anti-Ahmadi laws
across Pakistan. In 2013, they faced increasing social discrimination as militant
groups accused them of illegally “posing as Muslims,” barred them from using
their mosques in Lahore, vandalized their graves across Punjab province, and
freely engaged in hate speech, inciting violence against them as authorities
looked the other way or facilitated extremists.
Women and Girls
Violence against women and girls—including rape, “honor” killings, acid
attacks, domestic violence, and forced marriage—remains a serious problem in
Pakistan.
There have been several thousand “honor” killings in Pakistan in the past
decade, with hundreds reported in 2013. Provisions of the Islamic Qisas and
Diyat law that allow the next of kin to “forgive” the murderer in exchange for
monetary compensation remain in force and continue to be used by offenders
to escape punishment.
Despite high levels of domestic violence, parliament failed in 2013 to enact
laws to prevent it and protect women who experience it. Efforts to raise the minimum
age of marriage to 18 remained stalled.
Judicial Activism and Independence
Pakistan’s judiciary remains an independent but controversial actor. Despite
the adoption of a National Judicial Policy in 2009, access to justice remains
poor, as case backlogs mount throughout the country. The courts are rife with
corruption.
Judges often use suo motu proceedings—the court acting on its own motion—to
help people gain access to justice. In other cases, the judiciary has used such
proceedings to interfere with legislative or executive powers, part of a longstanding
power struggle between Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry, the government,
and the army.
The Supreme Court was active in raising enforced disappearances and government
abuses in Balochistan in 2013, yet did not hold any high-level military officials
accountable, demonstrating the limits of judicial independence in a state
in which the military is the most powerful actor.
Judges also continued to muzzle media and other criticism of the judiciary
through threats of contempt of court proceedings. The judiciary’s conduct came
under severe criticism during the election campaign when judges tried to disqualify
political candidates in violation of Pakistan’s international human rights
commitments, using vague and discriminatory laws requiring candidates to be
pious Muslims, and although repealed in 2009, to be university graduates.
Chief Justice Chaudhry, who took a leading role in acting against those critical
of the judiciary, retired from office in December.
Balochistan
The human rights crisis in the mineral-rich province continues unabated. As in
previous years, 2013 saw enforced disappearances and killings of suspected
Baloch militants and opposition activists by the military, intelligence agencies,
and the paramilitary Frontier Corps. Baloch nationalists and other militant
groups stepped up attacks on non-Baloch civilians.
The government of Nawaz Sharif attempted to achieve reconciliation in the
province after the election of Baloch nationalist leader Malik Baloch as chief
minister. However, the military continued to resist government reconciliation
efforts and attempts to locate ethnic Baloch who had been subject to “disappearances.” Successive Pakistani governments have appeared powerless to
rein in abuses by the military and both sectarian and nationalist militant
groups. As a result, many members of the Hazara community and non-Baloch
ethnic minorities under attack by militants fled the province or country, while
Baloch nationalists have continued to allege serious abuses by the military.
Counterterrorism Abuses
Security forces routinely violate basic rights in the course of counterterrorism
operations, with suspects frequently detained without charge or convicted without
a fair trial. Thousands of suspected members of Al-Qaeda, the Taliban, and
other armed groups—who were rounded up in a nationwide crackdown in 2009
in the Swat Valley and the Tribal Areas—remained in illegal military detention at
time of writing; few had been prosecuted or produced before the courts.
The army continues to deny lawyers, relatives, independent monitors, and
humanitarian agency staff access to persons detained during military operations.
In July, Attorney General Munir Malik admitted that more than 500 “disappeared”
persons were in security agency custody.
Aerial drone strikes by the US on suspected members of Al-Qaeda and the
Taliban continued in northern Pakistan in 2013, though less frequently than in
2012. An estimated 25 strikes had been launched through late November.
Hakimullah Mehsud, leader of the Pakistani Taliban, was killed in such a strike
in November. As in previous years, many of the strikes were accompanied by
claims of large numbers of civilian casualties; a 2013 Amnesty International
report documented unlawful civilian casualties in several strikes, but lack of
access to the conflict areas largely prevented independent inquiries into their
scope, scale, and legality under international law.
Freedom of Expression
At least six journalists were killed in Pakistan in 2013 while reporting stories or
as a result of deliberate attacks. Three journalists, Mirza Iqbal Husain, Saif ur
Rehman, and Imran Shaikh, were killed in a suicide bombing targeting the
Hazara community in Quetta on January 10. In April, Aslam Durrani, news editor
of the Urdu-language Daily Pakistan, was killed in a suicide bomb attack during an election rally. In August, the mutilated body of Abdul Razzaq Baloch, a journalist
working for the Urdu-language Baluch nationalist newspaper Daily Tawar,
was found in Karachi. Razzaq had disappeared in March. In November, Salik Ali
Jafri, a producer with Geo TV, a television channel, was killed in a bomb attack
in Karachi that targeted Shia Muslims.
A climate of fear impedes media coverage of both state security forces and militant
groups. Journalists rarely report on human rights abuses by the military in
counterterrorism operations, and the Taliban and other armed groups regularly
threaten media outlets over their coverage. YouTube, banned by the government
since September 2012 for hosting “blasphemous content,” remained
blocked in 2013.
In May, the longtime New York Times Islamabad bureau chief, Declan Walsh,
was expelled from the country at the behest of the military because of his coverage
of Balochistan and militant groups. Pakistani and international journalists
protested his expulsion. The authorities had not allowed Walsh permission
to return at time of writing.
Key International Actors
The US remains the largest donor of development and military assistance to
Pakistan, but relations remained unsteady through 2013 despite a meeting
between US President Barack Obama and Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif in
October. Reasons include increasing public anger in Pakistan over US drone
strikes and US allegations of Pakistani support for the Haqqani network, a militant
group that US officials accuse of attacking US troops in Afghanistan.
Pakistan raised concerns about US drone strikes at the United Nations General
Assembly in September.
Despite a 2012 law authorizing creation of a national human rights commission,
Pakistan failed to constitute the commission in 2013. In March, during its quadrennial
“Universal Periodic Review” appearance before the UN Human Rights
Council, Pakistan accepted recommendations that it take measures against religious
hatred, prevent violence against religious minorities, and hold to account
those responsible for such violence. The government, however, had taken no
action to implement these commitments at time of writing. Despite the serious
problem of enforced disappearances in the country, Pakistan has not ratified the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance.
Historically tense relations between Pakistan and nuclear rival India remained
poor in 2013 despite a meeting between the prime ministers of the two countries
in September. Pakistan and China continued to deepen their already
extensive economic and political ties.
Papua New Guinea
Human rights conditions in Papua New Guinea (PNG) remain po0r. PNG’s significant
oil, gas, and gold reserves have continued to fuel strong economic
growth, but improving living standards remains a challenge with consistently
poor governance and endemic corruption. PNG’s corruption taskforce made
strides in investigating cases and initiating court action, but more concerted
efforts are needed given the scope of the problem.
Violence against women in PNG is rampant. A series of gruesome crimes involving
mob torture and murder of accused sorcerers was reported in 2013. Police
violence is also common; authorities have publicly condemned specific
instances of police violence, but impunity for perpetrators remains the norm.
Torture and Other Police Abuse
Physical and sexual abuse of detainees—including children—by police and
paramilitary police units is widespread. Two years after the UN special rapporteur
on torture issued a report on PNG, the government has failed to adequately
respond to his recommendations addressing police abuse and impunity.
In May, police beat and slashed the ankles of 74 men following a street brawl in
Port Moresby, the capital. Two police officers were charged with unlawful
wounding and five others investigated for the attack. A judge called for the
prosecution of other police implicated in the incident.
Other reported incidents of police violence during the year included beatings,
robberies, attempted murder, and the fatal shooting of a child. Although the
official response to police violence improved in 2013, there had been no reported
convictions of perpetrators in 2013 at time of writing.
Some of PNG’s notorious paramilitary police units (Mobile Squads) have been
deployed to Manus Island to assist with security issues at an Australian-funded
detention center for asylum seekers. In July, members of the squad beat a local
man to death on the island. Five members of the squad were charged with murder.
Violence against Women and Girls
In February, PNG Health Minister Michael Malabag reported that up to 68 percent
of women in PNG have suffered violence; up to a third have been raped. In
September, PNG’s parliament unanimously passed the Family Protection Bill
2013, which criminalizes domestic violence.
Accusations of sorcery are pervasive across the country and are routinely
invoked to justify violence. Most victims are women. In February, a mob in
Western Highlands Province accused a 20-year-old woman of being a witch and
burned her to death. Two people were charged in the incident. Local media
have reported that at least eight other women were victims of such attacks
between February and this writing in late 2013; police reportedly were investigating
the attacks.
The UN special rapporteur on violence against women, Rashida Manjoo, visited
PNG in 2012 and released her report in March 2013. The report calls for the
repeal of the 1971 Sorcery Act, which allows accusation of sorcery as a defense
to murder. In April, a UN human rights official renewed calls for a repeal of the
Sorcery Act and demanded an end to the extrajudicial killing of accused sorcerers.
The PNG government repealed the Sorcery Act in May.
Disability Rights
Children with disabilities in PNG face abuse, discrimination, exclusion, lack of
accessibility, and a wide range of barriers to education.
Death Penalty
In a step backwards, in May the parliament expanded the scope of crimes eligible
for the death penalty. Sorcery-related killings, aggravated rape, and armed
robbery are now predicate crimes. The amendment signals PNG’s intention to
resume executions after nearly 60 years (no executions have taken place since
1954). There are currently 10 prisoners on death row.
Corruption
Corruption remains a chronic problem in PNG. In September, the trials of 31
people charged in corruption cases began following investigations by PNG’s
anti-corruption task force. Also in September, task force Chairman Sam Koim
estimated that 40 percent of the national budget is misappropriated each year.
In November, the government introduced a bill to create an independent anticorruption
commission, a step that has been discussed for many years.
Extractive Industries
Extractive industries are an important engine of PNG’s economic growth, but
have given rise to serious human rights problems and environmental harm.
In 2011, Human Rights Watch documented gang rape and other violent abuses
by private security personnel at PNG’s Porgera gold mine, operated by Canadian
mining giant Barrick Gold. Along with other steps, Barrick has responded by
rolling out an ambitious remediation program to compensate victims of sexual
violence. That program has been dogged by controversy, but could be an important
global precedent if it succeeds.
The country’s $US19 billion Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) project, led by
ExxonMobil, is reportedly on track to begin production in 2014. LNG revenues
could have a transformative impact on the national economy but, without additional
safeguards, could also exacerbate corruption. Violent clashes related to
compensation claims marred construction for the project.
Key International Actors
Australia is the country’s most important international partner and provided
$469 million dollars in development assistance in 2012-2013.
In July, Australia announced a new agreement with PNG whereby Australia will
transfer to PNG some of the asylum seekers arriving irregularly by boat in
Australian waters. Under the agreement, PNG will undertake refugee status
determinations and individuals determined to be refugees will be settled permanently
in PNG or wait to be settled in a third country with no option to settle
in Australia. PNG has agreed to withdraw its seven reservations to the 1951 Refugee Convention—including refugee rights to wage-earning employment,
public education, and freedom of movement—but how and when this will take
place remains unclear. At time of writing, 780 asylum seekers were detained in
the Australian-funded processing center on PNG’s Manus Island.
In July, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) raised concerns about
PNG’s lack of capacity and expertise to determine refugee status, its mandatory
and arbitrary detention of asylum seekers in substandard facilities, and likely
resettlement difficulties facing non-Melanesians. The fate of LGBT asylum seekers
is particularly precarious because the PNG criminal code outlaws sex
“against the order of nature,” which has been interpreted to apply to consensual
homosexual acts.
The Australian government pledged to send 50 unarmed police officers to PNG
by the end of 2013 to act in advisory roles and help combat the surge in reported
violence in the country. This is a short-term engagement aimed at building
the capacity of PNG’s police force.
Philippines
As Philippine President Benigno Aquino III enters the second half of his six-year
term in office, there are growing doubts about his administration’s willingness
to deliver on many of its human rights commitments.
On January 18, 2013, Aquino signed a landmark law, Republic Act No. 10361,
designed to protect the rights of the country’s estimated 1.9 million domestic
workers. The Philippines also ratified the International Labor Organization’s
Domestic Workers Convention No. 189, which would help protect the rights of
the 1.5 million Filipino domestic workers abroad.
The Aquino administration, however, has not made significant progress on its
pledge to expedite the investigation and prosecution extrajudicial killings, torture,
and enforced disappearances, among other serious violations of human
rights. The number of extrajudicial killings has dropped significantly since
Aquino took office, but politically motivated killings are still frequently reported
and the murder of petty criminals by “death squads” in urban areas continues
unabated. Only two cases of extrajudicial killings have resulted in convictions
in the past three years, and even in those cases, the individuals believed most
responsible for the killings have not faced justice. The government took some
steps to set up an inter-agency committee in 2013 to help investigate and prosecute
high-profile extrajudicial killings, but it was not yet operational at time of
writing.
Harassment of and violence against leftist political activists and environmentalists
continues.
Insurgency and Ethnic Conflicts
In September, serious fighting erupted in the southern city of Zamboanga
between a faction of the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF), and the
Philippine military and police. A reported 161 civilians, MNLF fighters, and government
soldiers and police were killed in three weeks of fighting in
Zamboanga and neighboring Basilan. Nearly 120,000 people were displaced by
the fighting and remained homeless at time of writing. Many of those relocated
to evacuation centers are at risk due to overcrowding and poor sanitation.
The Islamist armed group Abu Sayyaf remains active and engages mainly in kidnappings,
including the abduction of two people in September.
The communist New People’s Army (NPA) conducted attacks against government
forces in various parts of the country. The latest proposal for peace talks
with the government collapsed in February 2013.
Attacks on Journalists and Criminal Defamation
The Philippines remains one of the most dangerous places in the world to be a
journalist. In 2013, seven journalists were killed, according to the Center for
Media Freedom and Responsibility, a Manila media advocacy group. Vergel
Bico, the 41-year-old editor of Kalahi, a weekly newspaper in Calapan City in the
central Philippines, had been writing on the drug trade, among other issues.
Motorcycle-riding assailants fatally shot him in the head on September 4.
Nanding Solijon, a broadcaster at radio station DXLS, was shot seven times by
two motor-riding assailants as he was crossing a street in Iligan City in
Mindanao on August 29. On August 1, gunmen entered the home of photojournalist
Mario Sy in General Santos City in Mindanao and shot him twice, killing
him. According to local monitors, 18 journalists have been killed since Aquino
became president.
Three journalists were convicted of criminal libel in 2013. The most recent, in
September, was Stella Estremera, editor-in-chief of Sun Star Davao who,
together with the paper’s former publisher, Antonio Ajero, was convicted for a
2003 story identifying people a police report said were suspects in the illegal
drug trade in Digos City. The previous month, a columnist for the Cebu City daily
the Freeman was convicted of libel for a 2007 column that criticized the governor
of Cebu province at the time, Gwendolyn Garcia. The defendants faced
prison. Free expression groups urged the Philippine government to decriminalize
libel. Several journalists have been imprisoned over the years for criminal
defamation.
Extrajudicial Killings and Enforced Disappearances
While there has been a notable decline in extrajudicial killings under the
Aquino administration, they remain a serious problem and rarely result in a
prosecution.
Killings by “death squads” in urban centers including Metro Manila, Davao City,
and Zamboanga City remain a serious problem. The victims are frequently petty
criminals, drug dealers and street children. By all accounts these killings largely
go uninvestigated and there are no reports of death squad members being
prosecuted.
In November 2012, the government announced that it would create a judicial
“superbody,” composed of various government and law enforcement agencies,
to give priority to the investigation and prosecution of extrajudicial killings.
However, the agency was not yet operational at this writing.
Abuses by Paramilitary Forces
Paramilitary forces controlled by the Philippine government and military committed
serious human rights abuses in 2013. Alleged militia members working
with the military murdered Benjie Planos, a tribal leader in Agusan del Sur
province, on September 13.
President Aquino has not fulfilled his 2010 campaign promise to revoke
Executive Order 546, which local officials cite to justify providing arms to their
“private armies.”
The trial in the Maguindanao Massacre case, in which 58 people linked to a
local politician and journalists were summarily executed by members of the
Ampatuan political clan in Maguindanao province, continued in 2013. However,
families of victims were increasingly impatient at the slow pace of the trial. Four
years after the killings, the court is still hearing the bail petitions of several of
the suspects. In August, five more suspects were arraigned, including the operator
of the backhoe that was used to bury the victims. Of 197 identified suspects,
107 have been arrested, all but 6 of whom have been indicted.
Children and Armed Conflict
A faction of the MNLF took children hostage and used them as human shields
during the fighting in Zamboanga City. Several children were killed and wounded.
A 15-year-old boy brought by his family to attend a “peace rally” was taken
by MNLF rebels when fighting broke out and was forced to help the rebels feed
their hostages. Two other children were arrested on suspicion that they were
MNLF rebels.
The Philippines government violated domestic and international law by detaining
children with non-family member adults for several days in extremely
cramped conditions.
Women’s Rights
The Supreme Court suspended implementation of the country’s landmark
Reproductive Health Law following a legal petition from individuals and lay
Catholic groups opposing the law. Hearings on the law were ongoing at time of
writing. Women’s rights advocates point out that the petition delayed government
funding for family planning services and reproductive rights education.
Key International Actors
The Philippines’ verbal conflict with China heightened in 2013, with increasingly
heated rhetoric from both sides over disputed territory in the South China Sea.
As a result of China’s alleged incursions into territory claimed by the Philippines,
the Aquino government turned for help to the United States, which promised to
help finance modernization of the Philippines’ antiquated naval defense system.
Several US senators sought to restrict military assistance to the Philippine
army because of continuing rights violations and lack of accountability.
Singapore
Despite controlling an overwhelming majority in Parliament, the Singapore government
continues to impose wide-ranging restrictions on core civil and political
rights.
On January 26, 2013, the opposition Workers Party raised its number of parliamentarians
to an all-time high of eight when it defeated the ruling People’s
Action Party in a by-election. Increasingly open debate in online blogs and news
portals is now echoed by more open parliamentary debate, but the government
still punishes speech and peaceful actions that it deems a threat to public
order, especially on matters of ethnicity and religion.
Freedom of Expression, Peaceful Assembly, and Association
The rights to freedom of expression, peaceful assembly, and association are
limited in Singapore in the name of security, public order, morality, and racial
and religious harmony. The restrictions are interpreted broadly.
In June, the government added restrictions on Internet news websites by requiring
submission of a S$50,000 (US$39,430) bond and annual licensing for any
website averaging at least one Singapore-related news article a week, and
receiving a monthly average of 50,000 unique visits from Singapore-based
users. Sites determined by the Media Development Authority (MDA) to meet the
criteria must, on notification, remove “prohibited content” or face forfeiture of
their bond. Any content in the article, or associated readers’ comments, which
the MDA decides violates broadly defined conceptions of public interest, public
security, or national harmony can trigger a take-down order that requires sites
to remove the content within 24 hours. Although the MDA said bloggers would
not be affected, it added that “if [blogs] take on the nature of news sites, we
will take a closer look and evaluate them accordingly.”
Printed materials continue to be regulated by the Newspaper and Printing
Presses Act, which requires all newspapers to renew their registration annually
and limits circulation of foreign newspapers which the government determines
“engage in the domestic politics of Singapore.” The two corporations that dominate
media regularly take a pro-government stance. Media Corp, owned by a government investment company, dominates broadcasting. Singapore Press
Holdings Limited (SPH) dominates print media, and although a private company,
the government controls appointment of its shareholders.
Singapore uses criminal defamation and contempt of court charges to rein in
criticism of the government and the ruling People’s Action Party. In July, Leslie
Chew, a cartoonist posting his work on “Demon-cratic Singapore,” his Facebook
page, was charged with “scandalizing the judiciary” for four cartoons that
authorities said implied the Singapore judiciary was not impartial or independent.
In exchange for dropping the charges, Chew apologized, took down the cartoons
and accompanying reader comments, and agreed not to “put up any post
or comic strip … that amounts to contempt of court.”
Under the Public Order Act 2009, Singapore requires a permit for any causerelated
assembly in any public place or to which members of the general public
are invited, or any procession of two or more persons. Grounds for denial of the
permit are broad and left largely to the discretion of police. They include the
likelihood that the assembly would cause disorder or a “public nuisance,” lead
to property damage, obstruct roads, “plac[e] the safety of any person in jeopardy,”
or cause enmity between different groups in Singapore. Demonstrations
and rallies are restricted to the city-state’s Speakers’ Corner, require advance
notice, can only be organized by Singapore citizens, and can only be attended
by citizens and permanent residents.
Associations with more than 10 members must seek approval to exist, and the
Registrar of Societies has broad authority to deny registration if he determines
that the group could be “prejudicial to public peace, welfare or good order.”
Yale-NUS College, a joint initiative of Yale University and the National University
of Singapore, opened its doors to its first classes in August 2013. College
President Pericles Lewis has said that students can express their views but will
not be allowed to organize political protests on campus or form partisan political
societies, thereby undermining human rights principles that are a crucial
part of a liberal arts education.
Criminal Justice System
Singapore authorities continue to use the Internal Security Act (ISA) and
Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions), which permit arrest and detention of suspects
for virtually unlimited periods of time without charge or judicial review. In
September 2013, Asyrani Hussaini was ordered to serve two years in detention
for attempting to take part in an armed insurgency in southern Thailand. In
September, Mustafa Kamal Mohammad, a member of the Moro Islamic
Liberation Front in the Philippines, was placed on a two-year Restriction Order.
Singapore made welcome legal reforms in 2012, granting judges some discretion
in setting punishments for certain crimes. Three people on death row for
murder, Fabian Adiu Edwin, Gopinathan Nair Remadevi Bijukumar, and Kho
Jabing had their death sentences commuted to life imprisonment accompanied
by caning, though prosecutors said they intended to appeal Kho Jabing’s commutation.
In drug cases, judges now have discretion to bypass the mandatory death
penalty and sentence low-level offenders to life in prison and caning in cases in
which prosecutors attest that the offenders have been cooperative.
In April, convicted drug trafficker Abdul Haleem bin Abdul Karim had his death
sentence commuted, and in November, following years of campaigning by antideath
penalty activists in Singapore and the region and prominent international
attention given to his case, Yong Vui Kong had his death sentence commuted.
Corporal punishment is common in Singapore. Judicial caning, an inherently
cruel punishment, is a mandatory additional punishment for medically fit males
aged 16 to 50 who have been sentenced to prison for a range of crimes, including
drug trafficking, rape, and immigration offenses. Sentencing officials may
also, at their discretion, order caning in cases involving some 30 other violent
and non-violent crimes.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In February, a constitutional challenge to section 377A of the penal code failed,
leaving intact a statute criminalizing sexual acts between consenting adult
men. The High Court dismissed the case because repeal of the law would further
a societal norm that the judge claimed has yet to “gain currency.” The plaintiffs argued the law is discriminatory and violates Singapore’s constitutional
equal protection guarantee. The plaintiffs appealed to the Court of
Appeal, which in October decided to hear the case with another challenge to
article 377A also pending at the court. A decision is expected by mid-2014. In a
third case, a plaintiff has sued to seek a declaration that the constitution “prohibits
discrimination against gay men on account of their sexual orientation in
the course of employment.”
Prime Minster Lee Hsien Loong has spoken dismissively of the challenges to
article 377A: “Why is that law on the books? Because it’s always been there and
I just think we leave it. I think that’s the way Singapore will be for a long time.”
Singapore’s Media Development Authority issued a regulation effective on June
1 that banned major news websites available in Singapore from “advocating
homosexuality or lesbianism.”
In August, in what was widely seen an affirmation of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender (LGBT) rights, over 20,000 participants joined the fifth annual Pink
Dot pride festival. The festival continued to attract prominent corporate sponsors,
including Google, Barclays, and J.P. Morgan.
Migrant Workers and Labor Exploitation
Foreign workers in Singapore, both men and women, are subject to labor abuses
and exploitation through debts owed to recruitment agents, non-payment of
wages, restrictions on movement, confiscation of passports, and, in some
cases, physical and sexual abuse. Foreign domestic workers are still excluded
from the Employment Act and key labor protections, such as limits on daily
work hours. Although the government is still not in compliance with minimum
standards for trafficking elimination, it has made some improvements in prevention
and protection, but prosecutorial efforts have been weak. Singapore
has not yet ratified the ILO Domestic Workers Convention or the UN Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons.
A government-mandated standard contract for migrant workers does not
address work-related discrimination issues such as lower wages, longer work
hours, and poorer living conditions. Labor laws discriminate against foreign workers by prohibiting them from organizing and registering a union or serving
as union leaders without explicit government permission.
On November 26, 2012, 171 Chinese nationals working as bus drivers for the
public transport company SMRT, whose majority shareholder is the government-
owned Temasek investment company, refused to report to work. They
demanded that SMRT management end discrimination against migrants in pay
and selection of bus routes, and improve company-provided unhygienic living
quarters. The government prosecuted four work-stoppage leaders for conducting
an illegal strike, sentencing them to prison for a number of weeks before
deporting them. Two of the four alleged that police beat them in custody.
Another 29 drivers who participated in the strike were not charged but were
deported.
Human Rights Defenders
In January 2013, Prime Minister Lee demanded that activist Alex Au take down a
blog post and readers’ comments and apologize or face legal action. It was the
third time in 11 months that Alex Au had faced such demands. In July 2012, the
Attorney General’s Chambers had sent a similar demand, as did Law Minister
Shanmugam in February 2012. Prosecutors issued a warning to Lynn Lee, a freelance
journalist filming interviews with striking bus drivers.
Nizam Ismail resigned as a member of the Board of Directors of the Association
of Muslim Professionals (AMP) and as board chairman of the Centre for
Research on Malay and Islamic Affairs under pressure from two government
ministers who expressed concerns to AMP about his political activities and
threatened to cut government funding for AMP.
Key International Actors
Singapore serves as a major trade and commercial hub for the region. It has
concluded 18 bilateral and regional free trade agreements with 24 trading partners,
including Australia, China, India, Japan, South Korea, New Zealand, the
United States, and the European Union.
The US and Singapore maintain strong trade and military ties, with security
cooperation continuing to grow under President Barack Obama. In April 2013, a US Navy littoral combat ship docked in Singapore, an illustration of the country’s
importance in the US “pivot” to the region. At the same time, Singapore
continues to maintain a close and warm relationship with China, and remains a
central player in the regional Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
bloc.
Sri Lanka
The Sri Lankan government of President Mahinda Rajapaksa made little
progress in 2013 in addressing accountability for serious human rights abuses
committed during the country’s nearly three-decades-long civil war, which
ended in 2009. In March, the United Nations Human Rights Council (HRC)
adopted a second resolution in as many years that called on Sri Lanka to implement
the recommendations made by its own Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation
Commission (LLRC) and provide accountability for alleged war crimes committed
by both sides in the civil war. The government claimed it was implementing
the LLRC recommendations, but its claims were difficult to verify and accountability
efforts lacked credibility.
The year saw an escalation in attacks by militant Buddhist groups against
Hindus and Muslims.
The independence of the judiciary came under question after the Rajapaksa
government orchestrated the impeachment of Chief Justice Shirani
Bandaranayake in December 2012 after she had ruled against the government
in a major case.
Elections for three provincial councils were conducted in September.
Independent observers reported dozens of incidents of intimidation, violence,
and improper military interference. The Tamil National Alliance (TNA) won a
large majority in the Northern Provincial Council, an ethnic Tamil-majority area
that was the site of much of the fighting during the civil war.
By September, the government was detaining 230 of the estimated 12,000
members and supporters of the defeated Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE)
held at the end of the civil war for “rehabilitation.”
Accountability
Sri Lanka’s failure over several years to address war crimes allegations prompted
the HRC in March to issue a resolution calling on Sri Lanka to independently
and credibly investigate violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law. The resolution also called on UN High Commissioner for Human
Rights Navi Pillay to give an oral update on the human rights situation in Sri Lanka during the HRC’s September session, and to present a written report at
the March 2014 session.
Following the HRC resolution, the government issued several updates regarding
its implementation of LLRC recommendations, including investigations into a
few war crimes allegations. Many of its claims were difficult to verify due to lack
of government transparency, and, even if accurate, in important respects fell far
short of the steps called for in the resolution.
Special army courts of inquiry established in 2012 wholly exonerated the army
of any laws of war violations despite significant evidence to the contrary. While
the government arrested 12 members of the police Special Task Force as part of
its investigation into the murder of five Tamil youths in Trincomalee in January
2006, it failed to arrest senior police officials implicated. In response to LLRC
concerns about enforced disappearances, the government established the latest
in a long line of special commission with a limited mandate and no clarity
as to whether the government would publicize its findings.
High Commissioner Pillay travelled to Sri Lanka in August. Her September oral
report to the HRC was a scathing critique of the government’s failures on postwar
accountability. Pillay said she found no evidence of government efforts “to
independently or credibly investigate the allegations” of war crimes and reported
that the government had failed to implement many of the LLRC recommendations.
Pillay said that the separation of the police from the Ministry of Defence,
a key LLRC recommendation, remained incomplete as the police were placed
under the command of a former army officer.
Torture and Rape
Torture and other ill-treatment of persons in custody by the security forces has
been a widespread problem both during and since the armed conflict. Human
Rights Watch published new evidence in February that rape and sexual violence
has been a key element of broader torture of suspected LTTE members and supporters
even since the war’s end. The torture is used to obtain “confessions” of
LTTE involvement, and to instill terror in the broader Tamil population to discourage
involvement with the LTTE.
The government rejected these findings and claimed they were fabrications by
individuals seeking to embellish their overseas asylum claims. Human Rights
Watch is unaware of any government investigations into the reported sexual
abuse.
Several European countries have since suspended deportations of Tamils with
connections to the LTTE, finding them to be at risk of torture on return. UNHCR
revised its guidelines on assessing asylum claims in December 2012, and recommended
that persons with certain links to the LTTE be regarded as being at
risk on return.
Arbitrary Detention and Enforced Disappearances
Sri Lanka’s Prevention of Terrorism Act gives police broad powers over suspects
in custody and is the law most commonly invoked by officials to justify prolonged
detention without trial of security suspects. It is still in regular use. The
government asserts it has made available comprehensive lists of the names of
those detained under the law as well as their places of detention, but family
members in 2013 reported difficulty accessing the information. Pillay said during
her trip in August that she had “never seen this level of uncontrollable
grief” when visiting with families of the forcibly disappeared in northern Sri
Lanka.
Civil Society Organizations and Media Freedom
Civil society organizations and media continue to face arbitrary restrictions and
intimidation. In June, the government proposed a dangerously ambiguous
media code that would have prohibited 13 types of substantive speech, including
content that “offends against expectations of the public, morality of the
country, or tends to lower the standards of public taste and morality.” Also prohibited
would have been any content that “contains material against the
integrity of the Executive, Judiciary, and Legislative”—which could have been
interpreted as barring criticism of the government. The proposed code was
withdrawn in the face of a storm of negative media coverage.
The government continues to block public access to certain news websites critical
of the government. Several cases of journalists killed or “disappeared” in
recent years remained unsolved.
Activists and organizations, particularly those working in the north and east,
report ongoing harassment and intimidation. Pillay reported that people who
she met with in the north and east were visited by security forces within hours
of her visit. Instead of investigating these reports, the government denied
Pillay’s allegations and demanded the names of her sources. Repression by the
government is not limited to the north and east: in August, the army opened fire
on protesters in Weliweriya demanding clean drinking water, killing three.
In July, a senior Sri Lankan diplomat launched a public attack on Callum
Macrae, producer of “No Fire Zone,” a documentary film about alleged war
crimes at the end of the civil war, tweeting suggestions that Macrae was a terrorist
receiving “blood money” from the LTTE. The government did not censure
the diplomat for his remarks, and a Channel 4 crew including Macrae was subjected
to continual harassment during the Commonwealth summit in
November.
A disturbing trend was the rise in violence against religious minorities, led
largely by the militant Buddhist group Bodhu Bala Sena (BBS). The government
did little to investigate or prevent these attacks. During an ongoing campaign
by the BBS targeting Sri Lanka’s Muslim population, the secretary to the
Ministry of Defence, the president’s brother, was the group’s guest at a public
event. In her September oral report to the HRC, High Commissioner Pillay
expressed alarm at the rise in hate speech against religious minorities, and
called for more forceful government intervention to prevent violence.
Military Abuses in the North and East
The government contends to have considerably decreased its military presence
in the north and east, but credible accounts indicate that military personnel
still frequently intervene in civilian life. The Defence Ministry and army websites
both regularly post articles about the role of the military in civilian affairs that
appear intended to exert control over the local population and development.
Independent observers of provincial council elections in September expressed
concern about military campaign activities in favor of the ruling party there, and the resulting heightened sense of insecurity and tension among the Tamil population
ahead of the elections.
Women and girls in the north and east remained especially vulnerable to sexual
harassment and violence that the army neither prevented and may have contributed
to. Women’s rights groups working in Tamil areas reported particular
difficulty documenting abuses because of an oppressive military presence.
Key International Actors
At the March HRC session, the government unsuccessfully tried to block the
council from adopting a resolution focusing on accountability for serious
wartime abuses. The resolution, backed by the United States and India among
others, sets the stage for calling for an independent investigation at the 2014
HRC session if Sri Lanka does not take meaningful steps to implement the resolution.
Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper, as well as the prime minister of
Mauritius, did not attend the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting
(CHOGM) in November in Colombo because of human rights concerns. The
prime minister of India also did not attend the summit, citing domestic concerns.
The human rights situation in Sri Lanka and lack of accountability for
wartime atrocities became the focus of media coverage. United Kingdom Prime
Minister David Cameron attended the summit, and spent much time touring
war-ravaged parts of the north and talking to local activists. He publicly said
the UK would back an international investigation into war crimes if the Sri
Lankan government did not undertake an independent investigation, a position
supported by the US and Canada.
China kept up its high-profile engagement and investment in Sri Lanka and
vocally opposed the HRC resolution. After pressing for Sri Lanka to hold meaningful
provincial council elections, India continued to call for the full implementation
of the 13th amendment to the constitution, which calls for devolution of
powers to the provinces.
Thailand
The government of Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra made little progress in
2013 in resolving ongoing, serious human rights problems, and continued to
protect the military from accountability for the political violence in 2010.
More than 100,000 opposition supporters took to the streets in November and
December in response to the ruling Pheu Thai Party’s attempt to pass a blanket
amnesty for all individuals responsible for political violence and corruption
from 2004 to 2011. This led to a series of clashes that had left at least four dead
and over 200 wounded at time of writing.
Despite pro-rights rhetoric, the government achieved very limited success
addressing other serious human rights concerns, including abuses in southern
border provinces, free speech restrictions, and violations of refugee and
migrant rights.
Accountability for Political Violence
At least 90 people died and more than 2,000 were injured in the 2010 political
violence, with most casualties resulting from unnecessary and excessive use of
lethal force by soldiers. Elements of the United Front for Democracy against
Dictatorship (UDD), popularly known as the “Red Shirts,” were also responsible
for deadly armed attacks on soldiers, police, and civilians.
Court inquests found that 15 of the victims in the 2010 violence were shot dead
by soldiers acting under orders from the Center for the Resolution of the
Emergency Situation (CRES), established by then-Prime Minister Abhisit
Vejjajiva and chaired by then-Deputy Prime Minister Suthep Thaugsuban. While
Abhisit and Suthep have been charged with premeditated murder based on
command responsibility, no military personnel have been charged in the
killings.
The status of government investigations into alleged crimes by the UDD-linked
“Black Shirt” militants remains unclear. Despite clear photographic and other
evidence, the UDD leadership and its supporters, including those holding positions
in the government and the parliament, continue to assert that the UDD
had no armed elements at the time of the 2010 events.
The government commendably has provided reparations to all those harmed by
the 2010 violence. Some victims and their families, however, have expressed
concern that financial compensation is serving as a substitute for bringing perpetrators
of violence to justice.
On November 1, 2013, the House of Representatives passed an amnesty bill
proposed by the Pheu Thai Party that promised a full amnesty for protesters
from all political sides charged with or convicted of actions against the state
from 2004 to 2011, for authorities who ordered crackdowns on protesters, for
soldiers who carried out the crackdowns, and for individuals convicted of corruption
after the 2006 coup. Even though the Senate rejected this bill on
November 11, anti-amnesty protests in Bangkok and other provinces escalated.
More than 100,000 people took to the streets in what protest leaders publicly
called an attempt to topple the Yingluck government and eliminate the political
network of former Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra.
Clashes on November 30 between pro and anti-government groups at
Ramkhamhaeng University and Rajamangala Stadium in Bangkok left at least 4
dead and 60 wounded. Protesters from the People’s Democratic Reform
Committee (PDRC) and other anti-government groups clashed with police when
they tried to storm the Government House and the Bangkok Metropolitan Police
headquarters on December 1 and 3, leading to more than 200 injuries—mostly
side-effects from exposure to teargas.
Freedom of Expression
Criticizing the monarchy is a criminal offense in Thailand. The number of arrests
and convictions for lese majeste (insulting the monarchy) offenses has significantly
declined since Prime Minister Yingluck entered office in 2011, but authorities
continue to use the lese majeste law (in article 112 of the penal code), as
well as the Computer Crimes Act, to suppress free speech and prosecute critics
of the monarchy. Persons charged with lese majeste offenses are routinely
denied bail and remain in prison for many months awaiting trial. In most cases,
convictions result in harsh sentences.
On January 23, the Bangkok Criminal Court sentenced Somyot
Prueksakasemsuk—a magazine editor and prominent pro-democracy activist—
to 11 years in prison for publishing two articles in his Voice of Taksin magazine that made negative references to the monarchy. Authorities denied bail to
Somyot eight times during the course of his 20-month pretrial detention. The
United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention determined in August
2012 that the pretrial detention of Somyot violated international human rights
law. Somyot has appealed his conviction.
On September 13, the Bangkok Criminal Court acquitted Yuthaphum Madnok of
lese majeste charges filed against him by his own brother. Authorities had
detained Yuthaphum without bail since September 2012 because the court
determined that his alleged insults to the monarchy posed a threat to national
security. The case, in which the lese majeste law became a weapon in a family
feud, shows how easily the law can be misused. Often the police, courts, and
prosecutors are afraid they will be accused of disloyalty to the monarch if they
fail to prosecute allegations of lese majeste.
The ruling Pheu Thai Party, the government’s allies in the UDD, the military
leadership, the opposition Democrat Party, and anti-government groups have
all explicitly and publicly argued that those accused of committing lese majeste
offenses should not be included in any amnesty proposal. In 2013, the palace
pardoned three individuals convicted of the offense.
On November 25, anti-government PDRC protesters assaulted Nick Nostitz, a
German freelance journalist, after a former Democrat Party member of parliament,
Chumpol Junsai, asserted from a protest stage that Nostitz was affiliated
with the UDD. Nostitz’s photograph subsequently was disseminated widely on
anti-government social media sites, raising concerns for his safety.
Led by politicians from the Democrat Party, thousands of PDRC supporters
marched to the headquarters of TV channels 3, 5, 7, 9, 11 and Thai PBS on
December 1 to pressure them to broadcast Suthep’s speech and not to transmit
government-provided information on the political confrontations.
Violence and Abuses in Southern Border Provinces
On February 28, the government agreed to hold talks with Hassan Taib from the
separatist Barisan Revolusi Nasional (BRN) movement, seeking an end to the
armed conflict that has claimed more than 5,000 lives in Thailand’s southern
border provinces since January 2004. The two sides agreed to cease hostilities
during the holy month of Ramadan from July 10 to August 18.
The Fatoni Fighters (also known as Pejuang Kemerdekaan Fatoni), insurgents in
the loose BRN network, continued to target civilians in bomb attacks, roadside
ambushes, drive-by shootings, and assassinations. The attacks by the ethnic
Malay Muslim insurgents appear aimed at intimidating and ultimately driving
out the ethnic Thai Buddhist population in Narathiwat, Yala, and Pattani
provinces, keeping the Muslim population under their control, and discrediting
government authorities for being unable to protect citizens. Thai security forces
have also been responsible for killings and other abuses against ethnic Malay
Muslims.
The government provided financial compensation to hundreds of Muslim victims
of abuses committed by the security forces. However, security personnel
still operate with impunity, and not a single security officer has been held
accountable for involvement in extrajudicial killings, torture, enforced disappearances,
and other abuses in the region.
Insurgents also launched bomb attacks against government-run schools and
attacked Buddhist teachers whom they accuse of representing the ideology of
the Thai Buddhist state. Since January 2004, 164 teachers have been killed in
southern Thailand.
Insurgents have recruited children from private Islamic schools to participate in
armed hostilities and to perform secondary tasks such as distributing separatist
leaflets; some have used private Islamic schools as areas to assemble
improvised explosive devices.
Enforced Disappearances
The government signed the International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance in January 2012, but has taken no steps
to obtain parliamentary ratification of the treaty. The penal code does not
recognize enforced disappearance as a criminal offense. Authorities have
continually failed to give priority to solving any of the 63 known cases of
enforced disappearance.
Human Rights Defenders
On February 25, a gunman killed Prajob Nao-opas, a well-known environmental
activist leading a campaign to expose the dumping of toxic waste in
Chachoengsao province. Since 2001 more than 20 environmentalists and human rights defenders have been killed. Investigations into the killings have
frequently suffered from inconsistent and shoddy police work, and been
plagued by political interference in law enforcement efforts and, in several
cases, by the Justice Ministry’s failure to provide witnesses adequate protection.
In a chilling development for human rights research, on February 14, the Natural
Fruit Company Ltd. filed criminal defamation charges against labor activist Andy
Hall for allegations made in an investigative report about serious labor rights
violations at its factory.
In the southern border provinces, the security agencies have profiled ethnic
Malay Muslim human rights defenders, paralegals, and student activists as
“insurgent sympathizers” and subjected them to surveillance and arbitrary
arrest and detention.
Refugees, Asylum Seekers, and Migrant Workers
The government has given public assurances that the 140,000 Burmese
refugees living in camps on the Thai-Burmese border will not be forced to return
home against their will. Some 40 percent of camp residents remain unregistered,
however, and Thailand restricts their freedom of movement and bars all
refugees from working.
Thailand is not a party to the 1951 Refugee Convention and has no law that recognizes
refugee status. Asylum seekers and refugees who are arrested often
face long periods of detention until they are accepted for resettlement or agree
to be repatriated at their own expense.
Authorities regularly intercept and push back boats carrying ethnic Rohingya
from Burma. The government considers all Rohingya arriving on Thailand’s
coast to be illegal migrants. Between January and October, more than 2,000
Rohingya were detained. Rohingya men are restricted to poor and extremely
cramped conditions in small cells, and at least eight of them have died from illness
while in immigration detention. Starting in July, Rohingya men—fearful of
being sent back to persecution in Burma or detained indefinitely in Thailand—
staged protests at immigration detention facilities in many provinces. Human
traffickers have gained access to government shelters and tried to lure out
Rohingya women and children.
Thailand’s labor laws provide little protection to migrant workers. A migrant
worker registry and “nationality verification” scheme provides legal documentation for workers, but does little to counter the impunity with which employers
violate such workers’ rights. Domestic workers remain excluded from key protections
such as a minimum wage, limits to working hours, and maternity leave.
Migrant workers remain extremely vulnerable to exploitation, with female
migrants enduring sexual violence and labor trafficking, and male migrants facing
extreme labor exploitation, including being trafficked onto fishing boats.
Anti-Narcotics Policy
The government still denies any official involvement in the more than 2,800
extrajudicial killings that accompanied then-Prime Minister Thaksin’s 2003
“war on drugs.” Criminal investigations of extrajudicial killings related to police
anti-drug operations have progressed very slowly.
The government continues to send drug users to “rehabilitation” centers, mostly
run by the military and the Interior Ministry, where “treatment” consists
mainly of military-style physical exercise. Routinely detained in prison prior to
compulsory rehabilitation, detainees get little or no medical assistance for drug
withdrawal symptoms.
Key International Actors
In November and December, the United Nations secretary-general—together
with officials from the European Union, United States, United Kingdom, and
Australia—raised concerns about the ongoing political confrontations, urging
all sides to reject violence, respect human rights, and resolve their differences
peacefully.
Thailand in 2013 launched a bid for a non-permanent seat on the UN Security
Council for 2017-2018, and for election to the UN Human Rights Council (HRC)
for 2015-2017. Thailand is one of the few countries in the Southeast Asia region
that has extended a standing invitation for HRC special procedures. On
September 9, 2013, Prime Minister Yingluck became the first Thai leader to
speak at the HRC. However, her speech did not substantively address
Thailand’s outstanding human rights problems.
Vietnam
The human rights situation in Vietnam deteriorated significantly in 2013, worsening
a trend evident for several years. The year was marked by a severe and
intensifying crackdown on critics, including long prison terms for many peaceful
activists whose “crime” was calling for political change.
The Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV) continued its one-party rule, in place
since 1975. While it maintained its monopoly on state power, it faced growing
public discontent with lack of basic freedoms. Denial of rights and endemic
official corruption are widely seen as stifling Vietnam’s political and economic
progress. Political infighting and economic policy disagreements within the CPV
about how to handle the crisis of legitimacy and economic stagnation created
an opening for members of the public to offer their opinions, particularly
through social media.
The year saw a significant expansion of critical commentary in digital and other
media. Critics questioned official policies, exposed official corruption, protested
land-grabs, defended religious freedom, and called for democratic alternatives
to one-party rule. One remarkable effort was “Petition 72,” originally
signed by 72 intellectuals but later signed by some 15,000 people, calling for
constitutional changes to allow multi-party elections. Another was “Statement
258,” calling for reform of article 258 of the penal code (“abusing democratic
freedoms”), a provision often used to punish freedom of speech.
The government took some positive steps. On November 7, 2013, Vietnam
signed the UN Convention Against Torture. On September 24, 2013, it issued a
decree ending administrative sanctions for same-sex wedding ceremonies,
although government sponsored amendments to the Marriage and Family Law
did not grant legal recognition to same-sex marriage. The government also
began phasing out detention and forced rehabilitation of sex workers in 2013.
Political Prisoners and the Criminal Justice System
Vietnam had an estimated 150-200 political prisoners at time of writing, including
lowland Vietnamese and upland ethnic minority prisoners, some of whom
were detained at least in part in connection with their religious activities. The total included at least 63 political prisoners convicted by politically controlled
courts in 2013, an increase over the roughly 40 sentenced in 2012, which in
turn exceeded the numbers sentenced in 2011 and 2010.
Vietnamese courts lack the independence and impartiality required by international
law. Where the party or government has an interest in the outcome of a
case, they—not the facts and the law—dictate the outcome. Trials are often
marred by procedural and other irregularities that go along with achieving a
politically pre-determined outcome.
The penal code provisions used most often against proponents of peaceful
political change are articles 79, 87, 88, 89, 91, and 258, though other laws,
such as tax laws, are also used. For example, prominent human rights lawyer
and blogger Le Quoc Quan was arrested on December 27, 2012, shortly after he
criticized the Communist Party’s political monopoly, but his arrest was justified
by trumped up charges of tax evasion. Following domestic and international
calls for him to be released, his trial was delayed but on October 2, 2013, he
was sentenced to 30 months’ imprisonment.
Freedom of Expression, Opinion, and Information
Government repression targets many independent writers, bloggers, and rights
activists. They face police intimidation, harassment, arbitrary arrest, prolonged
detention without access to legal counsel or family visits, court convictions,
and often severe prison sentences. Enhancing already extensive government
powers to punish and otherwise deter digital freedom, Prime Minister Nguyen
Tan Dung on September 1, 2013, put into force Decree 72, which contains provisions
legalizing content-filtering and censorship, and outlawing vaguely
defined “prohibited acts.” It also forbids individuals from synthesizing news on
their blogs or personal websites.
The 2013 persecution of bloggers was highlighted by the arrests of Truong Duy
Nhat and Pham Viet Dao for allegedly violating article 258. They face up to
seven years in prison if convicted.
Freedom of Assembly, Association, and Movement
Vietnam bans all political parties, labor unions, and human rights organizations
independent of the government or CPV. The authorities require official approval
for public gatherings and refuse to grant permission for meetings, marches, or
protests they deem politically or otherwise unacceptable. If such events go
ahead, organizers and participants are sometimes punished. In 2013, such
measures were applied to individuals who questioned government domestic
and foreign policies and to individuals who demonstrated against alleged landgrabs.
In May 2013, authorities in three Vietnamese cities intervened with violence,
temporary arrests, and concerted harassment to prevent and break up peaceful
“human rights picnics” at which activists planned to disseminate and discuss
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other human rights standards.
The government also repeatedly prevented critics from making trips outside
Vietnam, citing “national security reasons.” Prominent intellectuals Huynh Ngoc
Chenh and Nguyen Hoang Duc were prohibited from going abroad in May and
July 2013.
Freedom of Religion
In January 2013, the prime minister put Decree 92 into effect, further extending
controls on religious groups. In its enforcement actions, the government monitors,
harasses, and sometimes violently cracks down on religious groups that
operate outside of official, government-registered and government-controlled
religious institutions. Targets in 2013 included unrecognized branches of the
Cao Dai church, the Hoa Hao Buddhist church, independent Protestant and
Catholic house churches in the central highlands and elsewhere, Khmer Krom
Buddhist temples, and the Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam.
The January 2013 conviction and imprisonment of 14 mostly Catholic activists
by the People’s Court of Nghe An province initiated the year’s upsurge of government
attacks on critics. The vehicle this time was article 79 of the penal
code, prohibiting activities aimed at “overthrowing the government,” even
though the 14 activists were exercising fundamental human rights, such as participating
in volunteer church activities and peaceful political protests.
Abuses in Detention and Prison
Official media and other sources continue to report many cases of police
abuse, torture, or even killing of detainees. In May 2013, Nguyen Van Duc died
in the custody of Vinh Long province police due to “brain bleeding with cracks
on his skull, crushed right brain, blood-clotted left brain, two broken ribs, and
broken sternum.” Human Rights Watch is unaware of any investigation into his
death.
Many political prisoners suffer from poor health but do not receive adequate
medical attention. Several, such as Cu Huy Ha Vu, Nguyen Van Hai (Dieu Cay),
and Ho Thi Bich Khuong, went on hunger strikes in 2013 to protest denial of
their internationally recognized prisoner’s rights, such as adequate medical
care.
Constitutional Amendment
On November 28, 2013, the National Assembly adopted an amended constitution,
the provisions of which disappointed those hoping for significant reforms
to the political and economic system. Government-proposed amendments that
were approved include rhetorical commitments to human rights, but they leave
serious loopholes in place. The amended constitution falls far short of ensuring
effective promotion and protection of many fundamental rights.
Arbitrary Detention
People dependent on drugs, including children, continued to be held in government
detention centers where they are forced to perform menial work in the
name of “labor therapy.” Their detention is not subject to judicial oversight.
Violations of the rules—including the work requirement—are punished by beatings
and confinement to disciplinary rooms, where detainees told us they were
deprived of food and water.
Key International Actors
Vietnam’s most important foreign relations are with China and the United
States, but linkages with Japan, the European Union, the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, and Australia are also significant.
Vietnam’s relationship with China was complicated in 2013 by maritime territorial
disputes, though perhaps more important for both was the shared commitment
by each country’s communist parties to maintain their rule.
The United States continued to pursue improved military and economic relations
with Vietnam, although an American ban on the sale of lethal military
equipment remained in place in 2013. The US made some efforts to press
Vietnam to improve its human rights record, but the issue was not prominent in
meetings between President Barack Obama and President Truong Tan San in
July. The EU made only tepid efforts on promoting respect for rights, while Japan
remained silent and failed to use its status as Vietnam’s largest bilateral donor
to publicly press for reforms.
The EU and Vietnam continued negotiations on a Free Trade Agreement and a
third round of their annual human rights dialogue took place in September
2013. In April 2013, the European Parliament adopted a resolution condemning
continuing human rights violations in Vietnam and called on the EU to raise
concerns with Vietnamese authorities. While high level EU officials, such as EU
High Representative Catherine Ashton were silent, the EU delegation to Vietnam
issued public statements expressing concern over the crackdown on dissidents,
the resumption of execution as a criminal penalty, and the cyber restrictions
of Decree 72.
Armenia
President Serzh Sargsyan was re-elected in February and the ruling Republican
Party dominated Yerevan municipal elections in May. Although generally welladministered,
reports of voter harassment, vote-buying, misuse of administrative
resources to favor incumbents, and police unresponsiveness to citizens’
complaints marred both elections.
Ill-treatment in police custody persists. The government has yet to offer conscientious
objectors a genuine civilian alternative to military service. The authorities
did not adequately investigate a troubling number of noncombat deaths in
the military. They also failed to investigate violent attacks against peaceful protesters
by unidentified assailants.
Broadcast media lacks pluralism and there were several instances of violence
and harassment against journalists and media workers during the year.
Violence and discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity by
both state and non-state actors are serious problems. Bureaucratic restrictions
prevent people with terminal illnesses from accessing strong pain medications.
Presidential and Municipal Elections
International observers, led by the Organization for Security and Co-operation
in Europe (OSCE), concluded that the February presidential election “was generally
well-administered” but noted “some serious violations” of OSCE and
Council of Europe standards, such as pressure on voters. The OSCE also noted
other breaches, including public administration bias in favor of incumbents,
misuse of administrative resources, and interference by the incumbent’s proxies.
Local observers reported the presence of unauthorized persons in polling
stations, numerous attempts to pressure observers and journalists by political
parties and election commission members, and widespread ballot stuffing for
the incumbent candidate.
Yerevan Mayor Taron Markaryan, a Republican Party member, won re-election in
the May 5 city council elections. Local groups observed instances of vote buying,
multiple voting, and bullying of election observers by pro-government
activists.
Freedom of Assembly and Attacks Against Activists
In August, police used force to disperse a crowd of local residents and civic
activists in central Yerevan, demanding to halt construction of a high-rise apartment
building in the city center. Police briefly detained some 26 protesters and
beat at least one as he was transported to a police station; he required brief
hospitalization. In October, the Armenian ombudsman’s office found that the
police had used disproportionate force but no disciplinary action had been
taken at time of writing.
September saw a spate of attacks against peaceful protesters in Yerevan,
apparently intended to discourage participation in two peaceful protests. On
September 5, about six unidentified assailants attacked Haykak Arshamyan
and Suren Saghatelyan, well-known civil society activists, as they returned from
a peaceful demonstration in front of the Republican Party headquarters where
they were protesting President Sargsyan’s announcement that Armenia would
join the Russia-led customs union. Saghatelyan suffered a broken nose, requiring
surgery and hospitalization, and Arshamyan was treated for multiple bruises.
On September 4, about 10 unidentified assailants attacked activist Arman
Alexanyan after he left a sit-in at the municipal building to protest a temporary
price increase in municipal transport fares. He was hospitalized briefly for
bruises and head trauma. On August 25, about six unidentified assailants
attacked two activists, Babken Der Grigoryan and Mihran Margaryan, shortly
after they left the municipal building protest. Investigations were pending at
time of writing.
The Women’s Resource Center, a nongovernmental rights organization, has
faced an increasing number of threats by nationalist groups, including
Facebook comments by users who threatened to blow it up and slit the throats
of its activists. While these threats have been reported to the police, authorities
had yet to investigate at time of writing.
In November, authorities arrested Shant Harutyunyan, an opposition leader,
and 13 activists, after they clashed with riot police following an attempted
march to the presidential administration building. The government claims that
the group intended to forcibly occupy the building. At time of writing, all those
detained remained in pretrial custody, facing criminal charges of violence
against the authorities. Harutyunyan claimed that police officials physically abused him in custody, but authorities have not initiated an investigation into
the allegations. In late November, a Yerevan court ordered Harutyunyan be sent
to a psychiatric institution for a forced examination.
Torture and Ill-Treatment in Custody
According to local human rights defenders, torture and ill-treatment in police
custody persist, and the definition of torture in Armenian law does not meet
international standards, as it does not include crimes committed by public officials.
Authorities often refuse to investigate allegations of ill-treatment or pressure
victims to retract complaints. Police use torture to coerce confessions and
incriminating statements from suspects and witnesses.
For example, Artur Karapetyan, detained in October 2012 on charges of illegal
drug distribution, complained of police abuse in custody. According to his
lawyer, Karapetyan showed him wounds on his feet that he said were from a
beating. Although Karapetyan was released in December and the charges
against him dropped in April 2013, police failed to conduct an effective investigation
into his ill-treatment allegations.
In November 2012, Mger Andreasyan testified in a local court that Yerevan
police officers severely beat him after his arrest on robbery charges.
Andreasyan stated that, unable to bear sustained beatings, he attempted suicide
by using his head to break a window in the investigator’s office and trying
to jump out, but police prevented him. Although a Yerevan court dropped
escape charges against Andreasyan in March, there was no investigation into
his ill-treatment allegations.
Army Abuses
As of October 31, the Helsinki Citizens’ Assembly Vanadzor office had reported
29 noncombat army deaths, including 7 suicides. Local human rights groups
have documented the Defense Ministry’s failure to investigate adequately and
expose the circumstances of noncombat deaths and to account for evidence of
violence in cases where the death is ruled a suicide.
In June, parliament amended the law on alternative military service to remove
military supervision from alternative labor service and reduce it from 42 to 36 months. Local activists voiced concerns about the amendments, including the
Defense Ministry’s continued role in application decisions, vague eligibility
requirements, and length of service, which would still be longer than regular
military service. By mid-November, 33 Jehovah’s Witnesses who had been convicted
for refusing alternative service were released but were still required to
perform alternative service.
Freedom of Expression
Armenia has diverse print and online media, but broadcast media lacks pluralism;
for example, only 1 of Armenia’s 13 television stations carries live political
talk shows. International election observers noted the media’s “selective
approach” in covering post-presidential election developments, notably limiting
views critical of the conduct of the election.
The Committee to Protect Freedom of Expression, a local media monitoring
group, reported six instances of physical violence against journalists during the
first half of 2013. In one case, several young men forcibly prevented Artak
Hambardzumyan, from Journalists for Human Rights, from documenting alleged
ballot box stuffing in Artashat during the presidential election. As of June, the
committee had documented 34 instances of pressure on media outlets and
journalists.
Palliative Care
Armenia’s complicated and time-consuming prescription and procurement procedures
for opioid medications obstruct the delivery of adequate palliative
care, condemning most terminally ill patients to unnecessary suffering.
Although morphine is a safe, effective, and inexpensive way to improve the
lives of terminally ill people, Armenia’s current consumption levels of morphine
and alternative strong opioid medicines are insufficient to provide care to all
terminally ill cancer patients, leaving many without adequate pain relief during
the last stages of their illness.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Local lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) rights activists have
expressed concern for the alarming level of homophobia in Armenia. According
to PINK Armenia, a local rights group, transgender women who engage in sex
work are frequently assaulted and receive no police protection when they report
abuse. PINK Armenia also reported that the LGBT population continues to experience
employment discrimination, obstacles to health care, and physical and
psychological abuse in the army, in public, and in families.
According to an August Amnesty International report, government officials frequently
condone violent attacks against LGBT people, characterizing the violence
as an expression of “traditional values.” In July, the Armenian police
made a proposal to amend the code of administrative offenses to establish a
fine of up to US$4,000 for promoting “nontraditional sexual relationships.” The
proposal was subsequently withdrawn.
Also in July, a Yerevan court convicted two people for damage to property stemming
from a bomb attack in May 2012 against DIY, a bar frequented by LGBT
and women’s rights activists. Graffiti identified LGBT people as targets of the
attack. One attacker was sentenced to 19 months in prison and the other
received a two-year suspended sentence. They were both amnestied in October.
Local human rights groups expressed frustration that the sentence was too
lenient. Armenia does not have hate speech legislation.
Key International Actors
Armenia’s international partners noted that the February presidential election
was conducted smoothly, but in addition to the OSCE, the European Union, the
Council of Europe, and others also highlighted violations of OSCE election standards,
including misuse of administrative resources, lack of impartiality of public
administration, and cases of pressure on voters.
In September 2013, the EU delegation in Yerevan expressed deep concern
about attacks on members of civil society and cases of intimidation targeting
human rights defenders.
In its March European Neighborhood Policy progress report, the EU commended
Armenia for its “serious effort to address issues related to human rights and fundamental freedoms” but also highlighted a rise in homophobia and insufficient
media independence in the country.
In its April annual human rights report, the United States State Department
highlighted a number of human rights concerns in Armenia, including arbitrary
or unlawful deprivation of life; torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading
treatment or punishment; and denial of freedom of speech and peaceful
assembly.
In September, Armenia signed the United Nations Convention on the Protection
of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, affording
them equitable, humane, and lawful conditions.
Azerbaijan
The Azerbaijani government’s poor record on freedom of expression, assembly,
and association dramatically deteriorated during the year. The authorities
arrested dozens of political activists on bogus charges, imprisoned critical journalists,
broke up several peaceful public demonstrations, and adopted legislation
that further restricted fundamental freedoms. This crackdown was the
backdrop for the October 2013 presidential election, in which incumbent
President Ilham Aliyev was re-elected for a third term with 84.5 percent of the
vote.
The government continued its urban renewal campaign in the capital Baku,
forcibly evicting hundreds of families without adequate compensation. Torture
and ill-treatment persists with impunity.
Azerbaijan’s international partners failed to fully realize the potential of their
relationships with the government to press for rights improvements.
Elections
International observers from the Organization for Security and Co-operation in
Europe (OSCE) criticized the presidential election for failing to meet international
standards. It assessed counting in 58 percent of polling stations observed as
bad or very bad. It also said arrests and intimidation of opposition political
activists, a restrictive media environment, and violations of the freedoms of
assembly and association marred the pre-election campaign. International
observers from the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly and the European
Parliament were less critical.
Politically Motivated Prosecutions
In 2013, the authorities used a range of spurious charges—including narcotics
and weapons possession, hooliganism, incitement, and even treason—to
imprison political activists critical of the government. These activists included
several high-ranking opposition political party members such as Ilgar
Mammadov, chair of the opposition group REAL, arrested on February 4 and
charged with inciting violence; Tofig Yagublu, Musavat party deputy chair, also arrested in February on similar charges; Yadigar Sadigov, an advisor to
Musavat, arrested in June on hooliganism charges for allegedly beating up a
Nagorno-Karabakh war veteran; and Ilkin Rustemzade, a Free Youth activist,
arrested in May on hooliganism charges for alleged involvement in filming a
comedy video but later charged with inciting violence.
Seven members of the youth opposition movement NIDA were arrested in
March and April on drugs and other charges related to an alleged plan to instigate
violence at a peaceful protest. At time of writing their trials were ongoing.
In November, courts sentenced Rashad Ramazanov, a well-known blogger and
government critic, and Taleh Bagirov, a religious scholar and activist who
sharply criticized the government, to seven and nine years, respectively, on
bogus drug possession charges.
Dashgin Malikov, a Popular Front Party activist, was arrested in March shortly
after he criticized the government on social media and sentenced in July to twoand-
a-half years’ imprisonment on drug charges.
In two separate incidents in March and May, security personnel detained, blindfolded,
handcuffed, and mistreated Ibrahim Ibrahimli, a leader of an opposition
alliance, and Rahim Gaziyev, a former defense minister who had publicly criticized
President Aliyev. Both were released after several hours.
Freedom of Media
In May 2013, the parliament amended a law expanding the definition of slander
and insult to specifically include content published on the Internet.
At least five journalists were arrested or convicted in 2013 on spurious charges
in apparent retaliation for critical and investigative journalism. In March, Avaz
Zeynalli, editor-in-chief of the opposition newspaper Khural, was sentenced to
nine years’ imprisonment upon conviction for dubious extortion and tax evasion
charges. In April, Araz Guliyev, editor-in-chief of the news site
Xeber44.com, was convicted on charges of possessing illegal weapons and
organizing public order disturbances and sentenced to eight years’ imprisonment.
In November, Sardar Alibeyli, editor of the pro-opposition newspaper Nota Bene
and the PS Nota news portal, was convicted on spurious hooliganism charges
and sentenced to four years in prison.
In September, a court sentenced Hilal Mamadov, editor-in-chief of the Tolishi
Sado newspaper, arrested in 2012, to five years’ imprisonment for illegal drugs
possession, treason, and other charges. Also in September, police arrested
Parviz Hashimli, editor of the news website Moderator and a reporter for the
opposition daily Bizim Yol. At time of writing, he was awaiting trial on charges
of smuggling and illegal weapons possession.
In March, the executive director and editor-in-chief of Khayal TV, a local station,
was convicted on several charges, including participating in social unrest, and
sentenced to three years’ probation and released.
A smear campaign begun in 2012 against Khadija Ismayilova, a Radio Liberty
journalist, continued throughout 2013 in apparent retaliation for her investigations
into the business holdings of the president’s family and close associates.
Pro-government newspapers and sites published articles and videos personally
attacking the journalist and her family. Yafez Hasanov, another Radio Liberty
journalist, was the target of blackmail and threats by security services after he
refused to stop investigating a 2012 suspicious death in custody.
In February, a government smear campaign targeted Akram Aylisli, a well-known
writer, after he published a novel containing critical analysis of Azerbaijan’s
modern history and treatment of Armenians. President Aliyev stripped Aylisli of
his government stipend and honorary title of “Peoples’ Writer”; his wife and
son were also fired from their jobs.
In November, major opposition daily Azadlig temporarily ceased publishing due
to financial constraints after mounting defamation claims brought by officials,
frozen bank accounts, and government-imposed restrictions on distribution.
Freedom of Assembly
The authorities broke up several peaceful protests, at times violently, and
arrested protesters. In November 2012 and May 2013, parliament amended
laws increasing by more than hundredfold the fines for involvement in unauthorized protests and increasing from 15 to 60 days the maximum jail sentence for
minor public order offenses often used to incarcerate protesters.
On January 26, police rounded up more than 60 people at an unsanctioned,
peaceful rally in central Baku, using excessive force during the arrests. Courts
sentenced 5 people to up to 15 days of administrative detention and fined 20
people up to 2,500 manat (US$3,200) for resisting police and participating in
an unsanctioned protest.
On March 10, police used water cannons and teargas to disperse another
peaceful gathering in central Baku. Police arrested dozens and courts convicted
over twenty on misdemeanor charges, sentencing five to up to seven days’
detention and fining others up to 600 manat (US$760).
Freedom of Association
In February 2013, parliament adopted legislative amendments making it impossible
for unregistered groups to legally receive grants and donations, a measure
that will jeopardize groups that the government refuses to register, often
because they engage in work that is controversial or critical of the authorities.
Other amendments increased by five-fold fines for nongovernmental organizations
that receive funding from a donor without first concluding a grant agreement
and registering it with the Ministry of Justice.
The government continues to refuse to register the Human Rights Club, an
advocacy group that first filed its registration papers in 2011.
Torture and Ill-Treatment
Torture and ill-treatment continue with impunity. In the first nine months of
2013, the Azerbaijan Committee Against Torture, an independent prison monitoring
group, received 96 complaints alleging ill-treatment in custody.
The authorities did not effectively investigate credible allegations of beatings,
threats, and other abuses in custody made by several arrested political
activists. In March 2013, NIDA activist Mahammad Azizov told his lawyer that
after he retracted a confession made under duress, Ministry of National
Security officials punched him and beat him with clubs. As a result he could not
walk for four days and lost hearing in his left ear.
In May, Rashad Ramazanov told his lawyer that he was beaten in a police car
on the day of his arrest and during the first three days of questioning.
Forced Evictions and Illegal Demolitions
In 2013, the authorities continued urban renewal in Baku, involving expropriation
of many properties—primarily apartments and homes in middle class
neighborhoods. Some homeowners continued to face forced eviction in the
lead-up to May 2013 opening of central Baku’s Winter Garden, a complex with
parks and shops. Hundreds more have been forcibly evicted in previous years
to make way for parks, roads, a shopping center, and luxury residential buildings.
Most evictees have not received fair compensation based on market values
of their properties.
Human Rights Defenders
In February 2013, a court convicted Bakhtiyar Mammadov, a human rights
lawyer, on apparently politically motivated charges of large-scale extortion and
sentenced him to eight years in prison. Mammadov represented several residents
who were forcibly evicted from their homes in Baku in 2012.
In May, police briefly detained, slapped, and threatened human rights lawyer
Aslan Ismayilov after he publicly claimed that Rashad Ramazanov had been
beaten in custody. In September a court stripped Ismayilov of his bar membership.
Key International Actors
The European Union, United States, and other international and regional actors
and institutions expressed concern about the deterioration in Azerbaijan’s
human rights record but did not impose any consequences for it.
In its January 2013 resolution, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe (PACE) expressed concern about “the alleged use of fabricated charges
against activists and journalists” and called on Azerbaijan to, among other
things, release prisoners “whose detention gives rise to justified doubts and
legitimate concerns.” The PACE voted down a parallel resolution dedicated
exclusively to the issue of political prisoners in Azerbaijan.
In his July 2013 report, Nils Muižnieks, the Council of Europe’s commissioner for
human rights, expressed serious concern about “the apparent intensification of
… unjustified or selective criminal prosecution of journalists and others who
express critical opinions.” Other criticism included restrictions on freedom of
expression, assembly, association, and property rights.
In February 2013, EU High Representative Catherine Ashton and Commissioner
Štefan Füle jointly urged the authorities to “ensure speedy, fair, transparent,
and independent investigation of the charges” against Ilgar Mammadov and
Tofig Yagublu. In June, they expressed disappointment regarding legislation
expanding the definition of criminal libel.
In its March European Neighborhood Policy progress report, the EU noted that
Azerbaijan “addressed only a few of the key recommendations” contained in
last year’s report and highlighted serious, ongoing human rights violations
related to freedom of expression, association, and assembly.
In April, Azerbaijan underwent the second cycle of the Universal Periodic
Review at the United Nations Human Rights Council. The government
announced an open invitation to UN human rights experts and accepted all critical
recommendations regarding, inter alia, freedom of expression, assembly,
and association but continued to deny allegations of rights violations.
OSCE Special Representative on Freedom of the Media Dunja Mijatovic criticized
the Azerbaijani authorities’ failure to respect freedom of expression,
including the expansion of criminal libel laws and Avaz Zeynalli’s nine-year
prison sentence. In July, Azerbaijan successfully pushed to downgrade the
OSCE’s presence in Baku from a full-fledged mission to a project coordinator. At
time of writing, the OSCE’s new mandate was not made public.
In its annual human rights report published in April, the US Department of State
flagged a concern about restrictions on freedom of expression and assembly
and politically motivated imprisonment. The US embassy issued several statements
of concern on related issues during 2013.
Belarus
The human rights situation in Belarus saw little improvement in 2013. The state
suppresses virtually all forms of dissent and uses restrictive legislation and
abusive practices to impede freedoms of association and assembly. Journalists
are routinely harassed and subjected to arbitrary arrests and detention. Eight
political prisoners remain jailed. Those who have been released continue to
face restrictions, ranging from travel limitations to inclusion in law enforcement
agencies’ ‘watch lists’. Civil society groups cannot function freely. Belarusian
courts sentenced two more people to death during 2013.
Media Freedom, Attacks on Journalists
Most media are state-controlled, and authorities harass the few independent
journalists and outlets that remain. In 2013, police arrested 25 journalists as
they covered public protests. Courts sentenced at least four to short-term
detention following convictions on misdemeanor charges. The authorities frequently
prohibit reporting on public marches and open court hearings.
In March, the authorities once again denied registration to Belsat, the Polandbased
satellite television channel known for its critical reporting on Belarus.
Law enforcement officials warned Belarusian journalists reporting for Belsat
that they would face misdemeanor charges if they continue working for an
unregistered foreign media outlet.
In May, the prosecutor’s office issued a warning to Radio Liberty journalist Aleh
Hruzdzilovich following him publishing a book about the 2011 explosion in the
Minsk metro. The warning noted Hruzdzilovich’s doubt regarding the official
investigation’s results, which led to two people being charged with committing
a terrorist attack, sentenced to death, and executed in 2012. The Prosecutor’s
Office warned Hruzdzilovich he could be stripped of his journalistic accreditation
if he continued to spread “false information.”
In April, a court designated as “extremist” the 2012 Belarus Press Photo
Contest photo album, following a complaint filed by a regional department of
the state security service (KGB), and ordered that its entire print-run be
destroyed. The album’s images included news and art-related topics, and included photos depicting police violence against protesters. The KGB complaint
claimed that the album contained “intentionally distorted” facts about
Belarus and undermined the country’s “national honor and dignity.” In
November 2012, Belarusian customs officials at the Lithuanian-Belarusian border
confiscated the album’s entire print-run.
In two positive developments, the authorities in June allowed a visit to Belarus
by the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe’s (OSCE)
Representative on Freedom of the Media, and in May 2013 registered Arche-
Pachatak, an independent monthly that had been denied registration four times
in previous years. In March, Arche-Pachatak’s bank account was reactivated,
after being frozen in October 2012 due to a criminal investigation into its
finances, which revealed no violations.
In June, the KGB dropped criminal charges against blogger Anton Surapin, who
had been charged in 2012 with complicity in illegal border crossing after posting
in his blog photographs of a cross-border freedom of speech protest.
In March, the authorities dropped a criminal investigation against Andrey
Pochobut, the Belsat journalist accused of libel by President Aliaxander
Lukashenka. In July, a court lifted all restrictions imposed on Novaya Gazeta
journalist Iryna Khalip in connection with the two-year suspended sentence she
received in 2011 for “rioting”; the court confirmed the restrictions did not
require renewal. Khalip’s sentence appears to have been retaliation for her critical
reporting on the December 2010 protests in Minsk.
Freedom of Association
Belarusian legislation provides for a wide range of grounds to deny registration
to nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and establishes a maximum tw0-year
prison sentence for involvement in an unregistered group. The authorities rigorously
enforce this legislation and burdensome NGO reporting requirements,
and also conduct sudden NGO inspections. These actions force civil society
groups to function on the margins of the law. Unregistered groups are not able
to rent office space officially and are frequently raided by the state security
services.
In 2013, the authorities issued warnings to at least three activists for involvement
in unregistered groups. In June, the authorities pressed unfounded criminal
charges against Aliaksei Shchadrou, a devout Catholic, for allegedly establishing
an unregistered religious organization by opening a shelter with a prayer
room for homeless people in his house. Police raided Shchadrou’s house twice,
in February and April. During the February raid, the police confiscated his religious
books. In September, the criminal case against Shchadrou was dropped.
In July, parliament adopted amendments to laws regulating political parties and
public associations, but failed to loosen draconian regulations for NGOs.
Parliament refused to hold hearings on a proposal by 25 Belarusian NGOs to
improve legislation governing NGOs, including by simplifying the registration
procedure.
Freedom of Assembly
Authorities showed little tolerance in 2013 for peaceful gatherings: most were
prohibited and some marred by excessive police force.
Throughout 2013, dozens of peaceful protesters were convicted on misdemeanor
charges and sentenced, some repeatedly, to short-term detention. In
April, police held four environmental activists in “preventative” custody to stop
them from attending a march in Minsk to commemorate the 1986 Chernobyl
nuclear disaster. Police severely beat a protester at the march, which was
peaceful, and detained four journalists who covered it.
In August, police detained two members of the Viasna Human Rights Center
while handing out postcards in support of the group’s imprisoned leader Ales
Bialiatski. A court fined each 3 million Belarusian rubles (approximately
US$350) for violating regulations on organizing public events.
Harassment of Civil Society Groups
In October 2012, the Economic Court of Minsk ruled to dissolve Platforma, a
prison monitoring group, for alleged tax violations. In November, the appeals
court upheld the ruling in absentia, ignoring the group’s request for its representatives
to be present for the hearing.
In March, Taxation Ministry officials attempted to seize the property of the
Belarusian Helsinki Committee (BHC), the oldest human rights organization in
Belarus, for the group’s alleged failure to pay taxes on foreign grants it received
in 2002 and 2003. In previous years, the authorities attempted to dissolve the
BHC for alleged tax violations and issued warnings against the group for violating
NGO legislation, apparently in retaliation for its human rights work.
In February, following the second, unsuccessful attempt by Gay Belarus—the
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender rights group—to register, the authorities
launched an anti-LGBT campaign. Police raided gay clubs in various
Belarusian cities, and law enforcement authorities questioned at least 60 group
members.
Imprisonment of Critics and Opposition Members
At time of writing, 11 political prisoners remain behind bars, including Ales
Bialiatski, the head of Viasna Human Rights Center, who has been in jail since
2011 on politically motivated charges of tax evasion. They have limited access
to lawyers and face arbitrary reprimands (administrative punishment) and illtreatment.
Among those arrested in 2013 was Andrei Haidukou, a political opposition
activist and leader of the unregistered Union of Young Intellectuals. In July, a
court convicted him on charges of attempted cooperation with foreign intelligence
services, which may be linked to him seeking a grant from the United
States government to support his work. The court sentenced him to one-and-ahalf
years’ imprisonment.
Former political prisoners who have been pardoned or released early remain on
police “watch lists,” which give police grounds to frequently question them.
None have had their civil and political rights fully restored: they are prohibited
from running for or occupying public office and must obey restrictions that limit
their ability to engage in activism, including a curfew; bans on involvement in
demonstrations; and a requirement to inform the authorities about any changes
to their places of residence—all misdemeanor offenses. Committing three misdemeanor
offences in one year may result in another criminal sentence.
Death Penalty
Belarus remains the only country in Europe and Central Asia that uses capital
punishment. In 2013, Belarusian courts sentenced three people to death. In
October, the Supreme Court of Belarus annulled one of these, regarding a murder
case, and ruled that the case be re-investigated.
Those condemned to death in Belarus are refused the opportunity to bid
farewell to their relatives, families are not informed of the date of execution in
advance, and the burial place is not disclosed.
At time of writing, no one had been executed during 2013.
Key International Actors
Throughout the year, Belarus continued to demonstrate little interest in changing
its international pariah status. In the lead up to the November 2013 Eastern
Partnership Summit, the European Union demonstrated willingness to engage
in dialogue with the Belarusian government by suspending a visa ban against
the foreign minister, enabling him to travel to Brussels in July for the first highlevel
visit of a Belarusian official to EU headquarters since the 2010 government
crackdown.
A European Parliament recommendation to EU institutions on EU policy towards
Belarus, adopted in September, suggested to use the important opportunity
presented by the November summit to gradually improve EU-Belarus relations.
Progress on visa facilitation and readmission agreements, however, remained
stalled over Belarus’ failure to release political prisoners and make steps
towards improving the human rights situation. Stefan Fule, European commissioner
for enlargement and neighborhood policy, noted in September that use
of death penalty, political prisoners, and harassment of civil activists meant
that Belarus “had little progress to report.”
In his first and highly critical report on Belarus published in May, United
Nations Special Rapporteur on Belarus Miklos Haraszti called human rights
restrictions in the country “systemic and systematic.” In June, the UN Human
Rights Council voted to extend the special rapporteur’s mandate, which
Belarusian authorities refused to recognize, denying Haraszti a visa.
In June, the OSCE representative on freedom of the media urged Belarusian
authorities to address the problems of the country’s restrictive media legislation.
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Political deadlock in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) continued to impede necessary
human rights reform in 2013. The government failed to meet a European
Union deadline to end discriminatory restrictions on Jews and Roma running for
political office. Roma remain the most vulnerable group in the country, subject
to widespread discrimination. The number of returns of refugees and internally
displaced persons (IDPs) decreased due to concerns about conditions in prewar
communities.
Ethnic and Religious Discrimination
The authorities failed to implement a 2009 European Court of Human Rights
(ECtHR) ruling requiring BiH to amend its constitution to eliminate ethnic discrimination,
including in the national tri-partite presidency and House of
Peoples, both currently restricted to the three main ethnic groups (Bosniaks,
Serbs, and Croats). An October agreement between political leaders of BiH
failed to specify how the ruling will be implemented. The EU announced that it
will not accept the results of general elections in 2014 unless the constitution is
amended.
In October, BiH conducted its first census since 1991, after delays due to concerns
over the questionnaire and technical unpreparedness voiced by the
International Monitoring Operation (IMO) established by the EU and the Council
of Europe (CoE). The census went ahead amid criticism by civil society groups
including regarding improper storage of completed questionnaires. In an
October report, the IMO concluded that despite some problems the census was
conducted in accordance with international standards.
Roma, the most vulnerable minority group, continue to face widespread discrimination,
high unemployment, low levels of school enrollment, political representation,
and standards of living. Many Roma are not on the national public
registry, impeding their access to public services, including health care. The
practice of placing Roma children in Mostar, a city in the federation, in special
schools instead of mainstream schools continued. Many Roma, particularly
refugees and IDPs, including from Kosovo, continue to live in informal
settlements.
Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons
Implementation of a 2010 strategy to support the return of refugees and IDPs to
their pre-war homes remained slow. Although a housing project to promote
return to pre-war communities was launched in April, the number of returns
declined, with only 104 refugees and 96 IDPs returning to their areas of origin in
the first half of 2013, according to the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR). As of October 2013, there were still 103,353 registered IDPs.
Impediments to returns remain lack of economic opportunity, political instability,
and reluctance to return to areas where other ethnic groups constitute the
majority.
Additionally, excessive compensation awards to temporary occupants negatively
affected displaced people wanting to return to pre-war homes. In several
cases, returnees lost their property in compulsory auctions to satisfy compensation
claims, prompting repeated criticism from the Office of the High
Representative (OHR).
War Crimes Accountability
In February the new chief state prosecutor publicly committed to expedite some
600 pending war crime investigations and prepare for an increased caseload
once the mandate of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) expires at the end of 2014. Implementation of the national
war crimes strategy is hindered by insufficient capacity and funding, particularly
at the local level. In March the Organization for Security and Co-operation in
Europe (OSCE) launched a judicial capacity program that includes district and
cantonal courts. By November 2013 the War Crimes Chamber of the State Court
of BiH had reached verdicts in 25 cases, raising the number of completed cases
to 199.
The State Prosecutor’s Office signed a cooperation agreement on the prosecution
of war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide with its counterparts
in Serbia and Croatia.
In February, the ICTY Appeals Chamber acquitted Momcilo Perisic, wartime chief
of the General Staff of the Yugoslav Army, who had been convicted to 27 years
in prison for aiding and abetting crimes against humanity and violations of the laws or customs of war. The Appeals Chamber found that the criterion of specific
direction was not proven beyond reasonable doubt.
The ICTY trial of Bosnian Serb wartime General Radko Mladic, charged with
genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanity—including the murder of
7,000 men and boys from Srebrenica in July 1995—continued, subject to repeated
interruptions due to Mladic’s ill-health.
In the case of Bosnian Serb wartime president Radovan Karadzic, on trial at the
ICTY for many of the same crimes as Mladic, a charge of genocide in seven
Bosnian municipalities was reinstated in July by the Appeals Chamber of the
ICTY, after being dropped in 2012 on the grounds of insufficient evidence. On
September 3 Karadzic sought to have the decision overturned.
Also in July, the ECtHR ruled that the application of the 2003 criminal code in
two war crimes cases at the BiH State Court violated the right to protection from
retroactive criminal law under article 7 of the ECHR. In response, in October and
November the State Court ordered the retrial of 12 convicted war criminals,
including six involved in the Srebrenica massacre, and their release from custody
pending retrial.
National Security and Human Rights
BiH continued to subject foreign nationals to indefinite detention on national
security grounds. BiH failed to implement a 2012 ECtHR ruling halting the
deportation to Syria of Imad Al Husin, a naturalized Bosnian in indefinite detention
since 2008 on suspicion of terrorism, and ordering BiH to charge him, find
a safe third country to resettle him, or release him. He remains in indefinite
detention. Zeyad Khalad Al Gertani, another foreign national security suspect
from Iraq, also remains in detention without trial at time of writing.
In November, after a retrial, Mevlid Jasarevic was convicted of an act of terrorism
for firing on the United States embassy in Sarajevo in 2011, injuring one
policeman, and sentenced to 15 years in prison. The appeals court annulled the
previous verdict of 18 years in prison due to violations of the right to defense
and fair trial.
Civil Society and Media
Numerous threats and acts of intimidation by political and religious authorities
impeded investigative journalism. The national journalists’ association recorded
44 violations of freedom of expression in as of November, including 3 physical
assaults.
In April, the OSCE representative on freedom of the media voiced concern over
threats against journalists Predrag Lucic on online forums and Nebojsa
Vukanovic by a religious leader and the overall hostile atmosphere for journalists.
A broad civil society association, the Coalition for Combating Against Hate
Speech and Hate Crime, formed in January. The coalition pushed to amend the
federation’s criminal code to include gender identity and sexual orientation as
grounds for hate crimes. The House of Peoples rejected the amendment in
September.
Sarajevo Open Centre—a lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) rights
organization—facilitated an EU-supported training for police officers in
September. The center documented 16 hate crimes and 18 cases of hate speech
against LGBT people in 2013.
Political Gridlock
Repeated threats of secession by the authorities of Republika Srpska prompted
criticism by the OHR for undermining state integrity.
Political quarrels hindered the adoption of new legislation on Single Reference
Numbers, an identification number usually issued at birth that allows access to
state services and documents, drawing criticism from the EU, the OSCE, and the
OHR. The constitutional court rejected the previous law in February due to discrepancies
of names of some municipalities. New legislation was adopted in
November.
Mass protests outside the BiH parliament erupted in June when an infant
requiring urgent medical treatment abroad could not travel without an ID number.
Temporary measures have been enacted to issue numbers, but a permanent
solution is still needed.
Protest continued throughout July, expressing generalized dissatisfaction with
political gridlock and stalled progress. On several occasions police arbitrarily
detained peaceful protestors for interrogation.
Key International Actors
Continued political stalemate and failure to implement the 2009 ECtHR ruling
drew repeated criticism from EU, US, and CoE officials. EU foreign ministers in
July strongly criticized lack of implementation and other impediments for the
country’s move toward the EU and urged the government to bring the country’s
constitution into compliance with the European Convention on Human Rights.
After the third high-level meeting between the authorities of BiH and the EU in
October, Commissioner for Enlargement Stefan Füle voiced regret about the
lack of agreement and political will on the part of the authorities to solve the
issue.
US Deputy Assistant Secretary for European and Eurasian Affairs Philip Reeker
said in a May speech that constitutional reform is possible and had been within
reach in March, although it was thwarted at the last minute.
A September resolution by the CoE Parliamentary Assembly threatened sanctions
unless BiH implements the ruling and complies with other outstanding
obligations as a CoE member by the October 2014 presidential elections.
In June, the UN Human Rights Committee found several violations of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in the case of five individuals
who were tortured and then forcibly disappeared in 1992, marking the first
time BiH has been held accountable for forced disappearances during the war.
On July 23, BiH ratified the Istanbul Convention of the CoE on preventing and
combating violence against women and domestic violence.
In September, the Dutch Supreme Court found the Netherlands responsible for
the death of three Bosnian Muslims during Srebrenica because Dutch peacekeepers
had sent the men away from the UN compound. The decision was the
first to hold a government liable for events occurring under a UN mandate, highlighting
that principles of accountability also apply to peacekeeping missions.
In a September report, the CoE Committee for the Prevention of Torture and
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment confirmed allegations of illtreatment in police custody, particularly in Banja Luka, and recommended an
independent assessment, training of the police, and other safeguards.
The EU delegation strongly condemned attacks on journalists in BiH after a
September arson attack on the investigative weekly Slobodna Bosna.
In October, the US embassy, OHR, and EU mission in BiH criticized proposed
legislative amendments in the Republika Srpska National Assembly that could
undermine the editorial independence of the entity’s broadcast media.
The European Commission’s annual progress report, published in October,
highlighted among the main outstanding issues the need for constitutional
changes and to combat discrimination, including against Roma and LGBT people.
In his November report to the UN Security Council, High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina Valentin Inzko raised concerns over political instability
and challenges to the rule of law.
European Union
Amid economic crisis and much contested austerity measures in many member
states, discrimination, racism, and homophobia remained serious problems in
European Union member states. Roma, migrants, and asylum seekers are particularly
marginalized.
The Council of the European Union acknowledged for the first time that more is
needed to ensure human rights violations within EU borders are adequately
addressed, with an ongoing policy debate focused on improving responses to
rule of law crises. Meanwhile, abusive practices around the EU continued without
adequate action by EU institutions and member states.
EU Migration and Asylum Policy
The EU took final steps toward the creation of a Common European Asylum
System with the adoption by the European Parliament (EP) in June of an asylum
package, including recast versions of the Dublin regulation, the Asylum
Procedures Directive, and the Reception Conditions Directive. While the package
contains certain improvements, it provides broad grounds for detention of
asylum seekers, does not obligate member states to provide free legal assistance
at first instance, and fails to exempt especially vulnerable asylum seekers,
including torture survivors and unaccompanied children, from accelerated
procedures.
The Dublin III regulation, in force as of July, leaves intact the general rule that
the first EU country of entry is responsible for asylum claims while improving
safeguards, including the right to information, a personal interview, and an
appeal against a transfer decision. States must now assess the risk of inhuman
or degrading treatment before transfer to another EU country. The European
Union Court of Justice (CJEU) ruled in June that member states must examine
asylum claims by unaccompanied children present in their territory even if they
have previously applied elsewhere.
In November, the CJEU ruled that sexual orientation is grounds for seeking asylum
in the EU if the applicant comes from a country where laws criminalizing same-sex activity are enforced, and that no one should be expected to conceal
his or her sexual orientation.
EU member states adopted widely divergent approaches to Syrian asylum seekers.
For example Sweden said it would grant permanent residence to Syrians to
whom it previously granted temporary protection, whereas Greece tried to
return them to Turkey. Germany and Austria pledged to resettle 5,000 and 500
Syrian refugees respectively, but few other EU countries made more than token
resettlement offers.
In June, the European Commission (EC) and the EU high representative for foreign
affairs jointly called for a comprehensive approach to the Syrian crisis,
focusing on humanitarian assistance for refugees in neighboring countries,
while acknowledging the need for greater convergence in member states’
approach.
Boat migration to Europe increased, with over 35,000 migrants and asylum
seekers arriving by the end of October. An estimated 500 people had died at
sea by mid-October, including over 360 in a single boat tragedy in October. In
July, the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) blocked Malta’s proposed
summary return to Libya of a group of Somalis.
At time of writing, negotiations continued on proposed new regulations for the
EU Border Agency (Frontex). The EC Proposal would clarify Frontex’s role in
search and rescue operations at sea, as well as matters relating to disembarkation,
but would also allow for returns to third countries of those intercepted on
the high seas following a cursory assessment of protection needs and the situation
in the country of return. The then- European ombudsman concluded his
inquiry into Frontex in April with recommendations to Frontex to clarify the legal
framework for its operations as well as the agency’s responsibilities for rights
violations.
In September, the EP called for strategic guidelines to better protect unaccompanied
migrant children beyond the EC’s Action Plan, and Council of Europe
(CoE) Commissioner for Human Rights Nils Muižnieks reminded states of the
primacy of the best interests of the child in implementation of migration policies.
UN Special Rapporteur on Migrants Rights François Crépeau criticized the EU’s
securitized approach to migration, with its focus on strengthening external borders,
detention, and removals. In his April report, Crépeau recommended
increased safeguards, including ensuring alternatives to detention and human
rights provisions in migration cooperation agreements with non-EU countries,
and called on the EC to initiate infringement procedures against EU countries
for violating migrants’ rights.
Discrimination and Intolerance
Xenophobic sentiment and violence sparked concern among EU institutions
and the CoE. In March, an EP resolution called for adequate recording, investigation,
and prosecution of hate crimes, as well as assistance, protection, and
compensation for victims. In June, the council of the EU called for more efforts
to counter extreme forms of intolerance, such as racism, anti-Semitism, xenophobia,
and homophobia. In May, CoE Commissioner Muižnieks called for systematic,
continuous training for police, prosecutors, and judges, and effective
measures to address bias within law enforcement agencies.
Repeated racial slurs against a black minister in Italy prompted seventeen EU
ministers to sign a declaration in September condemning intolerance and
extremism.
Politicians in the UK and the authorities in Catalonia, Spain, proposed banning
the full-face Muslim veil, and voters in Ticino, Switzerland (not an EU country)
approved a ban in a September referendum. In November, the ECtHR heard the
case of a woman against the French ban on concealment of one’s face in public
on the grounds it allegedly violates her rights to private and family life and to
freedom of religion and expression.
A Fundamental Rights Agency (FRA) survey published in May found that 47 percent
of LGBT respondents reported experiencing discrimination or harassment
in the previous twelve months, while 25 percent said they had been attacked or
threatened with violence in the previous five years. A FRA survey reported in
November that 21 percent of Jewish respondents had experienced anti-Semitic
insults or harassment in the 12 months preceding the survey, while 2 percent
reported a physical attack during the same period.
Roma experience discrimination and destitution across the EU. In June, the EC
made recommendations to guide member states in effectively implementing
their Roma integration strategies. In September, France’s interior minister stated
that most Roma have no wish to integrate, while news emerged that
Swedish police kept unlawful Roma registries. In October, allegations that
proved unfounded of blonde-haired, blue-eyed children being abducted by
Roma families in Greece and Ireland prompted CoE Commissioner Muižnieks to
warn against irresponsible reporting.
In February, Portugal became the first EU country to ratify the CoE Convention
on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence,
followed by Italy in September.
In November, the ECtHR found that the exclusion of same-sex couples from civil
unions in Greece violated anti-discrimination norms and the right to private and
family life.
Counterterrorism
In its first ruling on European complicity in CIA renditions, in December 2012
the ECtHR found Macedonia had violated the torture prohibition and German
citizen Khaled el-Masri’s rights to liberty and security, an effective remedy, and
private and family life by illegally detaining him in 2003 and transferring him to
US custody, and for the failure of Macedonian authorities to effectively investigate
his allegations of ill-treatment.
The similar cases of Guantánamo detainees Abu Zubaydah, against Poland and
Lithuania, and Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri, against Poland and Romania, were
pending before the ECtHR at time of writing. CoE Commissioner Muižnieks and
the European Parliament in September and October respectively reiterated calls
for accountability for European complicity and for US cooperation in investigations.
In September, the EP opened an inquiry into the impact of the US National
Security Agency’s surveillance program on EU citizens’ privacy. The EP is
expected to adopt conclusions and recommendations on the matter in January
2014.
EU Foreign Policy
Although there were some positive initiatives undertaken during the course of
2013, such as the establishment of the European Endowment for Democracy
and two new sets of European Union (EU) guidelines on LGBTI rights and freedom
of religion and belief, EU members states and institutions lacked the vitality
and united efforts on human rights that existed in the run up to the adoption
by EU foreign ministers of the EU Strategic Framework on Human Rights and
Democracy in June 2012.
The EU’s 28 member states and institutions have yet to utilize their combined
leverage and unite behind a common message and approach to strategic partners
such as Russia and China on human rights, despite calls from the
European Parliament to do so. While the EU high representative did express
some concerns in statements, a principled and collective EU response that
would enable the EU’s human rights concerns to be placed firmly at the highest
levels of policy dialogues and public discussions with Russia and China was
still missing.
The EU as a whole remained the largest humanitarian donor for the Syrian crisis.
However, despite the EU’s stated commitment to both the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and to justice for serious crimes, the EU high representative
failed to ensure strong collective EU voice and strategy that would advance the
chances of bringing the crimes in Syria before the ICC. Twenty-seven EU member
states—all but Sweden—joined a Swiss-led initiative calling on the United
Nations Security Council to refer the situation in Syria to the ICC.
In reaction to the occupation of Northern Mali by Islamist armed groups, France
took the lead in responding to the request for military assistance issued by the
president of Mali by launching Operation Serval in January. Later in January, the
EU established a mission to train and advise the Malian security forces, including
a specific component on human rights and international humanitarian law.
The year 2013 marked a new era for EU-Burma relations. In April, the EU lifted
all targeted sanctions on Burmese army and government individuals and entities,
except its export ban on arms. A Comprehensive Framework for the EU’s
policy and support to Burma was subsequently endorsed by EU foreign ministers
in July. Also in July, the European Parliament adopted a resolution condemning the “grave violations of human rights and the violence perpetrated
against Rohingya Muslims in Burma/Myanmar.” The EC allocated €14.5 million
to Burma in humanitarian assistance in addition to € 5.5 million it allocated in
December 2012. The priority for the humanitarian aid remained Rakhine and
Kachin states and the eastern border areas. The EU continued to sponsor critical
Burma resolutions in the UN’s Human Rights Council and General Assembly.
In June, human rights appeared to have been left on the margins of the EU-Gulf
Cooperation Council Ministerial meeting that took place in Bahrain. The EU high
representative and EU member states failed to use their collective weight to
actively and publically press for the immediate and unconditional release of
imprisoned Bahraini activists, three of whom are dual nationals of Bahrain and
EU member state, despite repeated calls from the EP and civil society to do so.
During the course of 2013, the EU appeared to lack any policy to secure
improvements in countries with systematic rights repression such as Ethiopia,
Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, UAE, and Saudi Arabia.
The EU deployed different, sometimes inconsistent approaches to human rights
concerns in Central Asia, the Caucasus, and non-EU states in Eastern Europe. In
2013, the EU suspended a long-standing visa ban against the Belarusian foreign
minister, imposed in 2011, enabling him to travel to Brussels in July for the
first high-level visit of a Belarusian official since 2010. At the same time,
throughout the year the EU reiterated the need for Belarus to meet EU human
rights benchmarks, including immediate release of political prisoners, as a condition
for reopening dialogue.
Human Rights Concerns in Select EU Member States
Croatia
Croatia joined the EU in July amid continuing human rights concerns. The EC
called in March for improving the efficiency of the judiciary, domestic war
crimes prosecution, and protection of minorities.
Domestic and international war crimes prosecution continued. In January, a
local court ordered the state to compensate the children of Serb victims for the
attack on Varivode during “Operation Storm” in 1995.
Voluntary returns to Croatia increased, with 358 returns in the first five months
compared to 132 in all of 2012. Reintegration of members of the Serb minority
remains problematic, with continued discrimination and hostility in some
regions of the country and obstacles in relation to the right to housing. In
November, the Vukovar city council halted the implementation of bilingualism
after protests against Cyrillic street signs.
Roma, particularly stateless Roma, face difficulties accessing basic state services,
including health care, social assistance, and education.
Few applied for asylum in Croatia—928 people by mid-October—with Syrians
forming the third largest national group, yet reception centers are overcrowded,
and there were reports of some asylum seekers being placed in closed detention
facilities. Protection for unaccompanied children remains problematic, with
poorly trained guardians usually far from centers where children are placed,
often in unsuitable accommodation.
Voting rights for people with mental or intellectual disabilities were restored in
December 2012. Proposals to lift full legal guardianship from thousands of people
would still allow courts to vastly restrict legal capacity. Implementation of a
2011 deinstitutionalization plan for those with mental or intellectual disabilities
progressed slowly, with two projects targeting around 400 individuals launched
in May, while almost 9,000 remain institutionalized.
Following a December 2012 Supreme Court ruling, Turkish journalist Vicdan
Özerdem was released immediately from detention and returned to Germany
where she has political asylum. Özerdem was detained in mid-2012 for extradition
to Turkey where she is wanted on terrorism charges, sparking widespread
international criticism.
France
The European Roma Rights Centre and the Human Rights League reported that
over 13,400 Roma were evicted from informal settlements between January and
September, compared to 9,400 in all of 2012. In August, France’s National
Consultative Council for Human Rights called the mass distribution of removal
orders to Roma “administrative harassment” and urged the government to halt evictions from slums and squats without offering adequate alternative housing
and to respect EU free movement rules.
In October, the ECtHR ruled that France breached the right to private and family
life of a group of French Travelers by ordering their eviction from land they had
occupied for many years.
At its Universal Periodic Review in June, France accepted recommendations to
end ethnic profiling, and announced amendments to the police and gendarmerie
code of ethics. No further action was taken to stop discriminatory
identity checks. In October, a Paris court ruled against plaintiffs alleging ethnic
profiling, arguing anti-discrimination norms did not apply.
In May, the UN Committee on Enforced Disappearances expressed concern that
the lack of a suspensive appeal in the fast-track asylum procedure creates a
risk of return to enforced disappearance, and too frequent use of police custody
in France.
Riots erupted in the Paris suburb of Trappes in July after police stopped a
woman wearing a full-face veil. A 14-year-old lost an eye by what appeared to
be a flashball fired by police. Rights groups reported a rise in attacks against
Muslims, particularly women.
In April, the Defender of Rights raised concerns about an estimated 3,000 unaccompanied
migrant children in the overseas French department of Mayotte,
hundreds of whom are left to fend for themselves.
In July, the parliament abrogated the criminal offense of insulting the president
of the republic following a March ECtHR ruling that it violated freedom of
expression.
Parliament legalized same-sex marriage in April. SOS Homophobie, a non-profit
association aimed at countering homophobic discrimination and violence,
recorded testimonies of 3,200 homophobic incidents as of November, compared
to 2,000 in all of 2012. In May, the government pledged to begin publishing
statistics on homophobic violence in 2014.
In August, a new law introduced a crime of “reduction to slavery” into the penal
code, also criminalizing forced labor, reduction to servitude and exploitation of
people reduced to slavery.
In two separate cases, the ECtHR ruled in September and November that
France’s return of a failed Tamil asylum-seeker to Sri Lanka and of a Congolese
national to the Democratic Republic of Congo would breach the torture
prohibition.
Amid reports of mass data interception by US and British intelligence agencies,
Prime Minister Ayrault denied allegations in a July Le Monde article that French
intelligence services were systematically collecting data on communications in
France. At time of writing, parliament was examining a bill to increase moderately
oversight of intelligence agencies.
Germany
Asylum seekers and refugees launched protests and hunger strikes against
conditions in reception centers and restrictions on freedom of movement and
access to the labor market throughout 2013.
The trial of an alleged member of a neo-Nazi cell accused of murdering nine
immigrants and a policewoman, and four alleged accomplices, began in May. A
federal commission of inquiry made recommendations in August towards
improving German police practices, including increased attention to hate
crimes, more diversity among the police, and a greater emphasis on human
rights in police training. Parliament rejected bills to enhance penalties for
racially-motivated crimes as well as a bill to introduce hate crimes as a specific
category.
In April, Baden-Württemberg issued a decree requiring individual risk assessments
before returning Roma, Ashkali, and Egyptians to Kosovo, but deported
127 people in April and 90 to Serbia and Macedonia in July. At least three
German states continued to forcibly return Roma, Ashkali, and Egyptians to
Kosovo without adequate risk assessments and despite concerns about discrimination
and inadequate integration measures upon return.
The German Institute for Human Rights reported in June that ethnic profiling is a
common police practice, particularly in transportation hubs for immigration
control purposes, and recommended legal and policy reforms.
The government denied allegations that German intelligence and police services
profited from US mass surveillance technology and collaborated with US
intelligence agencies despite leaked information suggesting the contrary.
In September, Germany ratified the ILO Domestic Workers Convention. In
December 2012, the parliament adopted a bill clarifying that parents have the
right to have their sons circumcised for religious reasons in accordance with
certain medical standards.
Greece
Political uncertainty marked Greece’s third year of economic crisis. In May, the
UN independent expert on foreign debt and human rights warned that bailout
conditions undermine human rights. The sudden closure of the national public
broadcaster in June raised media freedom concerns, and resulted in a government
reshuffle.
Despite the creation in January of anti-racism police units and some arrests,
attacks on migrants and asylum seekers continued, with an NGO network
recording 104 incidents by the end of August. Anti-LGBT attacks appeared to
increase. The Greek ombudsman warned in September that racist violence and
impunity for the perpetrators undermine social cohesion and rule of law. In
November, the government tabled a bill to sanction hate speech and incitement
to violence, failing to address problems in existing legislation and practice with
respect to racist violence. Two people were convicted of racially aggravated
crimes in November, the first known time the 2008 statute has been applied.
The fatal stabbing of an anti-fascist activist in Athens in September by an
alleged member of Golden Dawn sparked a crackdown on the party and the
arrest of the party leader and five parliamentarians on charges of managing a
criminal organization. An internal police investigation found in October that 10
Greek police officers were linked to Golden Dawn.
In November, two Golden Dawn members were murdered outside a party’s
branch in Athens, and a third man was seriously injured. At time of writing, no
arrests had been made.
In April, three Greek foremen were arrested after shooting at 100 to 200
Bangladeshi strawberry pickers demanding unpaid wages. The 35 injured were granted humanitarian visas while the foremen and the farm’s owner were in
pretrial detention at time of writing.
In July, the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS expressed concern
after the government reintroduced a health regulation used in the past to justify
detention and forced HIV testing of alleged sex workers. A separate law allowing
police to detain foreigners based on overly broad public health grounds was
still in force.
In October, the ECtHR held that the failure by the Greek Supreme Court to condemn
a private company’s dismissal of an employee, because he was HIV-positive,
amounted to a violation of his right to protection from discrimination taken
together with his right to a private life.
Increased security along the land border with Turkey rerouted flows of irregular
migrants and asylum seekers, including Syrians, to Aegean Sea islands. Sea
crossings were marked by at least ten deaths. UNHCR expressed concern over
allegations of pushbacks to Turkey, including of people fleeing Syria.
The UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, the UN special rapporteur
Crépeau, and CoE Commissioner Muižnieks criticized abusive stops and arbitrary
detention during an ongoing police operation Xenios Zeus against irregular
migrants, and noted substandard conditions of migrants and asylum seekers
in often systematic and prolonged detention. The ECtHR condemned Greece
over inhuman and degrading treatment in immigration detention in three separate
cases. Detainees rioted at the Amgydaleza facility in August.
The new asylum service began processing applications in Athens in June, but
access to asylum in the rest of the country, and in detention, remains difficult.
Data published in 2013 show Greece had the lowest protection rate at first
instance in the EU (0.9 percent in 2012).
In May, the ECtHR ruled for the third time since 2008 that school segregation of
Roma pupils in Greece amounted to discrimination. CoE Commissioner
Muižnieks expressed concern over persistent reports of ill-treatment of Roma by
law enforcement agencies. In the first nine months of 2013, Greek police conducted
1,131 operations in Roma camps throughout the country, raising concerns
about ethnic profiling.
In March, the UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women (CEDAW) expressed concern over Greece’s response to violence against
women noting the lack of statistical data, and urged authorities to ensure that
victims have access to immediate means of redress and protection, and that
perpetrators are prosecuted and punished.
Hungary
Legal changes introduced by the government continued to threaten the rule of
law and weaken human rights protections. Constitutional amendments in
March further undermined judicial independence, stripped the Constitutional
Court of significant powers, and introduced several legal provisions previously
ruled unconstitutional.
Despite piecemeal changes to the media laws in March, the main media regulator,
the Media Council, continues to lack political independence. Potential fines
for journalists remain excessive, and requirements for content regulation are
still unclear. In March, independent news station Klubradio was able to renew
license after four favorable court rulings.
In response to international criticism, including a detailed opinion by the CoE
Venice Commission and a damning EP report highlighting concerns about, inter
alia, the independence of the judiciary, the legal status of churches, and political
advertising, the government made cosmetic changes to the constitution in
September that did not put an end to discrimination of religious groups and
only partially addressed limitations on political advertising in private media.
Roma continue to face discrimination and harassment. The mayor of northern
city Ozd shut off public water supplies to Roma settlements, affecting some 500
families. The ECtHR ruled in January that Hungary discriminated against two
Roma pupils by enrolling them in special education and in July upheld a
Hungarian court’s ban of the Hungarian Guard, an anti-Roma and anti-Semitic
group. In August, a Budapest court convicted four men of killing six Roma,
including one child, in racist attacks in 2008 and 2009.
Anti-Semitism remains a problem. Police are investigating the April assault on
the president of the Raoul Wallenberg Association after a soccer game where
supporters chanted the Nazi slogan sieg heil.
In March, the UN CEDAW Committee urged Hungarian authorities to strengthen
legal protections for domestic violence victims and increase space in shelters.
A domestic violence offense introduced in July created stiffer penalties and
widens public prosecution but excludes non-cohabitating partners without
common children and is only triggered by repeated abuse. In September, the
UN Committee on the Rights of People with Disabilities told Hungary to repeal a
constitutional provision restricting voting rights for persons under legal
guardianship and reinstate six such applicants to electoral lists.
In July, the government reinstated detention for asylum seekers on overly broad
grounds. In October, the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention urged
Hungary to take effective measures to prevent arbitrary detention of asylum
seekers and irregular migrants. By the end of August, 15,069 people, including
588 Syrians, had applied for asylum, a significant increase from 1,195 applications
during the same period last year.
In September, parliament adopted a law enabling local governments to criminalize
homelessness, punishable by fines, community service, and even prison.
Italy
Over 35,000 people reached Italy by sea by October, a significant increase over
the previous year; over one-fourth were Syrians. Reports emerged of Italy
instructing commercial vessels to return rescued migrants to ports in Libya if
closest, raising concerns about refoulement.
After several extensions, the North Africa emergency plan for receiving migrants
that was initiated in 2011 during the Libyan conflict ended officially on March
31, and emergency shelters closed. Rejected asylum seekers were given the
chance to reapply or receive a one-year permits to stay and 500 euros; many
traveled elsewhere in Europe. In September the government announced an
increase from 3,000 to 16,000 spaces in specialized reception centers for asylum
seekers and refugees. In July, UNHCR, which welcomed the move, emphasized
the need for a comprehensive reform of the reception system to improve
vastly insufficient support measures for refugees.
In April, UN special rapporteur Crépeau criticized Italy’s immigration detention
system, including substandard conditions and inadequate access to justice.
Detainees protested in several centers, including over the death of a Moroccan
man in the Crotone center in August. Crépeau reiterated concerns about automatic
summary returns to Greece, and inadequate safeguards in “quick return”
agreements with Tunisia and Egypt. Crépeau and UNHCR called on Italy to introduce
an effective age determination procedure to ensure that children enjoy
appropriate protections.
Three UN experts expressed concern over the illegal deportation of the wife and
daughter of Mukhtar Ablyazov, a critic of the Kazakhstan government, from
Rome in May, saying it appeared to be “extraordinary rendition.”
Acknowledging improper involvement of Kazakh authorities, the government
rescinded the deportation order in July, though mother and daughter remain in
Kazakhstan under travel restrictions.
A European Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) report in November
criticized overcrowding in prisons and ill-treatment, particularly of foreigners,
by police and Carabinieri.
The lower house of parliament approved a bill in September to extend hate
crime protections to lesbians, gays, bisexuals, and transgender people (LGBT).
LGBT organizations criticized an amendment to the bill, which must pass the
Senate, exempting a range of organizations from criminal liability for hate
speech.
In February, an appeals court sentenced three US citizens, including a former
Rome CIA station chief, for their role in the 2003 abduction of an Egyptian cleric
in Milan, overturning a lower court’s finding of diplomatic immunity. Separately,
the court found guilty five Italian intelligence officers whose involvement had
been cloaked in state secrecy.
In January, Italy became the first EU country to ratify the ILO Convention on
Decent Work for Domestic Workers. In October parliament converted into law an
August government decree creating new measures against domestic violence
and stalking including stiffer penalties in certain cases, and humanitarian visas
for undocumented victims. UN expert Joy Ngozi Ezeilo called on the government
in September to ensure a national approach to all forms of trafficking, including
for labor as well as sexual exploitation.
The Netherlands
Concerns about immigration and asylum policy persist. In June, the UN
Committee against Torture (CAT) expressed concerns about immigration detention
beyond the legal 18-month limit of unaccompanied children asylum seekers
and of families with children pending age determination, and conditions
and treatment in detention. The committee recommended effective use of alternatives
to detention. Detainees in Rotterdam and at Schiphol airport went on
hunger strikes in May to protest their poor treatment.
At time of writing, parliament is examining a bill to make irregular stay a crime
punishable by fines up to € 3,900 and prison up to six months for repeat
offenders. The Ministry of Security and Justice set a police target of 4,000
arrests of irregular migrants during the year.
As of June, unaccompanied asylum-seeking children are processed under an
accelerated procedure; those over the age of 16 whose asylum requests have
been rejected may be returned immediately unless adequate care in their home
country is unavailable or the child is unable to provide for him or herself. The
Dutch children’s rights ombudsman expressed concern that the procedure does
not adequately take into account the best interests of the child.
The government acknowledged in April that almost 300 people were misclassified
as “removable” despite pending asylum appeals, including a Russian who
committed suicide in January while in detention pending deportation. In
September, the government announced plans to reduce detention of asylum
seekers.
In September, the government granted permanent residence to 620 children
(and 690 family members) who had been living in the Netherlands for at least
five years and had applied for asylum, less than half of those who applied for
the program.
The Netherlands decided it could return failed Somali asylum seekers in late
2012, though court appeals halted deportations throughout 2013. In
September, shortly after the ECtHR ruled (in a case involving Sweden) that
improved security in the Somali capital allowed for returns, the government
began returns. In November, a Somali man was injured in a blast in Mogadishu
three days after his deportation from the Netherlands.
At time of writing, the Senate was examining a bill, already passed by the lower
house in February, to eliminate the sex reassignment surgery requirement for
transgender people wanting new identification documents.
Poland
The five-year investigation into secret CIA detention in Poland continued amid
lack of transparency. In November, the UN Committee Against Torture urged
Poland to complete the investigation within reasonable time. News emerged
early in the year that charges, never officially confirmed, against Poland’s former
intelligence chief would be dropped. In October, the prosecutor general
granted victim status in the case to a Yemeni national detained at Guantánamo
Bay.
In January, an appeals court acquitted the editor of the Antykomor.pl website of
charges of defaming the president. His conviction by a lower court in
September 2012 prompted the Organization for Security and Co-operation in
Europe to call for repeal of criminal defamation in Poland.
In February, the ECtHR found Poland in violation of the prohibition of inhuman
and degrading treatment for detaining a paraplegic in a prison unsuitable for
persons with disabilities.
At time of writing, Parliament was examining a bill to protect against discrimination
on grounds of sexual orientation and gender identity, and broaden the
legal definition of harassment.
The Senate was examining a bill to create a high-security facility for convicts
who are deemed to pose a threat to the life, health or sexual freedom of others
or to children. While safeguards are written into the bill, concerns remain that
the measure could lead to indefinite detention of individuals who have already
served out their sentences.
Romania
The European Commission concluded in January that the 2012 constitutional
crisis had been averted following implementation of its recommendations, but
pointed to continuing problems with the rule of law and judicial independence
and stability, due in part to intimidation and harassment of judges.
Discrimination and forced evictions of Roma, on short notice and without alternative
accommodation, persist. In August, authorities demolished 15 homes in
the Craica Roma settlement in Baia Mare. At this writing, the remaining 15 families
in the settlement face eviction. In September, local authorities in Eforie Sud
evicted 100 Roma, including 60 children. Also in September, the secretary of
state for minorities said that he would not send his child to a school with many
Roma students, fueling negative stereotypes and rationalizing segregation in
education.
Spain
UN special rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, Mutuma Ruteere,
raised concerns in January about the worsening of the situation of migrants
including unemployment, restrictions on access to health care and de facto
segregation of migrant neighborhoods, as well as anti-Roma sentiment. In
October, CoE Commissioner Muižnieks raised concerns about the impact of
budget cuts on vulnerable groups including children and persons with disabilities,
and impunity for law enforcement officials for ill-treatment and torture.
Rejecting a bill promoted by civil society calling for mortgage debt cancellation,
parliament adopted limited reforms to address the housing crisis in May. The
law improves judicial review of mortgage contracts, following a March European
Union Court of Justice ruling that existing law violated EU consumer protection
rules, slightly broadens the moratorium on evictions, and includes measures to
alleviate mortgage debt.
The national ombudsperson called on the police in May to introduce stop forms
recording ethnicity, race and/or nationality and the reason for the identity
check. In June the central government representative in Lleida, Catalonia, stated
that police applied ethnic criteria when conducting immigration-related
stops.
In October, a judge in Argentina exercised universal jurisdiction and requested
extradition of two former Franco regime officials for torture. In November, the
UN Committee on Enforced Disappearances urged Spain to investigate all
enforced disappearances regardless of when they were committed, and concluded
that incommunicado detention breaches the prohibition of secret detention
under the UN Convention on Enforced Disappearance.
In February, Spain’s Supreme Court annulled the Lleida, Catalonia, city ordinance
banning full-face veils, saying it violated freedom of religion. The regional
government announced its intention in July to prohibit face coverings in public
on security grounds, while news emerged in August that Catalonia police
were collecting data on women wearing the full-face veil.
The CPT expressed concerns in April about allegations of ill-treatment of incommunicado
terrorism-suspects and of people in police custody, and prison conditions.
The committee also criticized the “prison-like” atmosphere in immigration
detention centers.
In October, the ECtHR upheld its 2012 ruling that retroactive lengthening of
prison sentences, limiting eligibility for parole for people convicted of terrorism
offenses, violated fair trial standards. By mid-November, 31 prisoners—24 of
them ETA members—had been released in compliance with the ruling.
The Interior Ministry reported in September that almost 3,000 migrants attempted
to enter the Spanish enclave of Melilla since January, almost double the
number in the same period in 2012. Over three-quarters were prevented from
entering, amid allegations that Spanish law enforcement officials summarily
returned migrants to abuse at the hands of Moroccan police.
United Kingdom
Senior ministers regularly attacked the Human Rights Act and the ECtHR, and
Home Secretary Teresa May stated that if re-elected in 2015 the Conservative
party would scrap the Act and possibly withdraw from the European Convention
on Human Rights.
Accountability for counterterrorism and overseas abuse suffered setbacks. An
April law extended secret hearings on national security grounds in civil courts.
The government did not establish a new inquiry into UK involvement in rendition
and torture overseas, nor had it published any part of the aborted Gibson
inquiry’s interim report.
The UN Committee Against Torture (CAT) urged the UK in May to establish a
comprehensive inquiry into allegations of torture and other ill-treatment during
the UK’s military intervention in Iraq between 2003 and 2009. The same month,
the High Court said there had been no adequate inquiry into the deaths of Iraqis in British custody except in one case, and in a second ruling in October
ordered public inquiries into alleged killings of Iraqis by British forces. A public
judge-led inquiry investigating the alleged torture and execution of up to 20
Iraqis by British soldiers in Iraq in 2004 began in March. In November, a military
court convicted a UK marine of murdering an injured Afghan prisoner in
September 2011 in Afghanistan.
Jordanian cleric Abu Qatada was deported in July to face terrorism charges in
Jordan on the basis of a treaty guaranteeing the right to a fair trial, but concerns
remained about the use of torture evidence.
Same-sex marriage became legal in July.
In November, the trial began of two men for the brutal murder in May of British
soldier Lee Rigby in London. Attacks against Muslims and Islamic centers,
including arson attacks, rose in the months following Rigby’s murder. In
London, the Metropolitan police recorded a 51 percent rise in anti-Muslim crime
in the 12 months leading up to October 2013, compared to the previous year.
In July, the CEDAW Committee urged the UK to mitigate the impact of cuts to
services to women, particularly women with disabilities and older women. In
September, the UN special rapporteur on the right to housing, Raquel Rolnik,
criticized the impact of austerity measures, noting also testimonies of discrimination
in housing against Roma and Traveller communities, migrants, and asylum
seekers.
Rights groups reported worsening abuse of migrant domestic workers since
their right to change employers was removed in 2012.
In September, UN special rapporteurs on freedom of expression and on human
rights and counterterrorism requested further information on the August detention
of David Miranda, the partner of a Guardian newspaper journalist who
wrote articles about US surveillance programs, for nine hours at Heathrow airport,
the maximum time allowed under UK anti-terrorism law. The High Court
heard Miranda’s challenge to the legality of his detention in November. In
October Prime Minister David Cameron specifically mentioned the Guardian
when he warned that the government could take unspecified action against
newspapers if they did not show “social responsibility” in reporting on mass
surveillance.
In May, the UN CAT called for a “comprehensive framework for transitional justice”
in Northern Ireland. An inter-party group in the Northern Ireland executive
was expected to deliver recommendations on controversial issues by the end of
the year.
In February, the High Court suspended returns of Tamils to Sri Lanka pending a
review of an immigration tribunal’s country guidance on Sri Lanka. The new
guidance in July acknowledged torture, bribery, and availability of mental
health treatment in Sri Lanka as relevant factors, but narrowed the group of
people whose asylum claims are likely to succeed.
Georgia
The October 2013 presidential election completed a peaceful transition of
power in Georgia after difficult cohabitation between Prime Minister Bidzina
Ivanishvili and his political rival President Mikheil Saakashvili. Investigations
into torture and ill-treatment in custody were slow and lacked transparency.
Investigations into past abuses raised some concerns regarding selective justice
and politically motivated prosecutions. Police did not adequately respond
to several violent incidents against religious minorities and lesbian, gay, bisexual,
and transgender (LGBT) people.
Georgia deepened its political and economic ties with the European Union
through the Eastern Partnership process, which was closely tied to progress in
governance and human rights.
Presidential Election
International observers, led by the Organization for Security and Co-operation
in Europe, positively assessed the October 27 presidential election, highlighting
respect for fundamental freedoms of expression, movement, and assembly.
However, observers also noted allegations of political pressure, “including on
United Nations Movement (UNM) representatives at local self-government institutions.”
In July 2013 violent mobs attacked UNM campaign events in Zugdidi and
Batumi. Police detained over a dozen assailants; courts convicted them on
administrative charges, fined them, and released them.
Torture and Ill-Treatment, Prison Conditions
In June 2013, courts convicted 14 former prison officials implicated in beatings
and torture in prison revealed in videos released in 2012. Six received prison
terms ranging from three to six years; eight plea-bargained, receiving sentences
ranging from six months to five years. However, the prosecutor general fully
released from criminal responsibility Vladimer Bedukadze, who provided information
about the torture in which he was also involved. Many local and international
observers criticized the move.
In July, a court acquitted five former police officers who faced multiple charges,
including ill-treatment and rape of a detainee, leading to an exchange of accusations
between the Prosecutor’s Office and the judiciary. The former claimed
that it provided forensic examinations, victim and witness statements, and
other evidence at trial, while the latter asserted that some evidence was contradictory
and the prosecution failed to substantiate the charges.
In July, Mamuka Mikautadze, 36, was found hanged a day after police interrogated
and then released him regarding drug possession. According to his wife,
Mikautadze complained that police had beaten and forced him to sign false
testimony incriminating his friend. Local rights groups alleged that police were
slow to respond to Mikautadze’s family’s allegations. The investigation was
ongoing at time of writing.
In January, parliament adopted a broad prison amnesty, leading to the release
of over 8,000 inmates. This alleviated severe overcrowding, a chronic problem
in Georgian prisons.
Investigations into Past Abuses
In response to over 20,000 complaints about alleged past abuses, the authorities
charged 35 former officials from a variety of ministries with, inter alia,
abuse of office, embezzlement, and false arrest; 14 of them were in custody at
time of writing. The authorities did not explain the criteria they used to determine
which cases of past abuses to investigate, and while investigating past
abuses prosecutors questioned over 6,000 persons, mostly UNM party
activists. Both factors caused the opposition to allege its activists were subject
to politically motivated pressure.
Among those arrested was Vano Merabishvili, the UNM’s secretary general and
former interior minister, who faces charges including embezzlement and abuse
of office for obstructing a high-profile murder investigation. Merabishvili’s prosecution,
ahead of the presidential election, raised concern among some
observers that it was politically motivated.
On June 27, financial police briefly detained 23 Tbilisi municipal officials,
including many UNM members. The authorities claimed they were interrogated
as witnesses, but handcuffed the officials and provided neither prior notification to appear nor a court order required to forcefully bring witnesses before
investigation. Four of the officials, including a deputy mayor, were later arrested
in connection with an ongoing embezzlement investigation.
Right to Privacy
In September 2013, officials destroyed over 181 hours of secret video recordings
of individuals’ private lives, mostly of a sexual nature, obtained in recent
years through illegal government surveillance. Opposition politicians, journalists,
and civil society activists had been particular targets.
In May, a deputy interior minister leaked one of the videos involving a journalist
who had been fiercely critical of senior officials. The deputy minister was dismissed
and is awaiting trial on charges of illegal use or distribution of private
information.
Other illegal, secret recordings have not been destroyed. In July, parliament
adopted an amnesty bill exempting from criminal responsibility those who had
been involved in illegal surveillance, and those who were in possession of such
recordings but voluntarily handed them over by November 20.
The Interior Ministry maintains surveillance equipment on the premises of
telecommunication operators, giving it automatic access to all communications
without judicial oversight.
Freedom of Religion
Since November 2012, Orthodox Christian communities in several villages prevented,
at times violently, Muslims from holding religious services in houses
converted into mosques. Although the prime minister made several public
statements condemning the violence, little action was taken to hold the offenders
accountable.
In August 2013, local authorities in western Georgia forcefully removed a
minaret from a mosque, leading to a clash between local Muslim residents and
police. Officials claimed they wanted to inspect the minaret because it allegedly
lacked the proper import license. Several days later, the authorities returned
the minaret but did not reinstall it due to protests by the local Christian community.
In April three drunk military police officers verbally assaulted residents in a village
in Adjara region—which has a significant Muslim population—arbitrarily
stopping cars and searching people, calling them “Tatars” and demanding they
show crosses around their necks. The Defense Ministry sacked the officers, and
police arrested at least two of them.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
On May 17, 2013, a peaceful gathering to mark International Day Against
Homophobia was violently disrupted by thousands of counter-demonstrators,
including some Orthodox clergy. The day before, the patriarch of the Georgian
Orthodox Church publicly urged the authorities not to allow the gathering, calling
it an “an insult” to Georgian traditions.
Police had to evacuate the LGBT activists to safety, but they failed to contain
the mob, which attacked a van carrying the activists, throwing stones and other
objects; one journalist was hit on the head and briefly hospitalized. Authorities
charged two Orthodox priests and three other men with obstructing freedom of
assembly and petty hooliganism. The Tbilisi City Court ordered that charges be
dropped against one priest. At time of writing, the trials against the others were
ongoing.
Identoba, a local LGBT rights group, reported 34 incidents of violence and
intimidation against LGBT people during and after the May 17 incident. The
group noted that many victims do not report homophobic violence due to fear
of retribution and police failure to investigate adequately.
Freedom of Assembly
On February 8, hundreds of protesters gathered in front of the Tbilisi National
Library, where President Mikheil Saakashvili planned to hold his annual State
of the Nation address. The protesters verbally insulted and physically attacked
several UNM members and the Tbilisi mayor. The public defender criticized
police for failing to proactively ensure the safety of the UNM members, despite
the fact that they had accurate information on the protesters’ numbers,
demands, and mood. A court convicted two protesters of petty hooliganism and
released them after imposing a fine.
Freedom of Media
Georgia has a diverse print and broadcast media. In spring 2013 parliament
approved a package of amendments to media laws, supported by a coalition of
media organizations. The amendments envisage a more democratic composition
of the board of Georgia Public Broadcaster (GPB), greater financial transparency
of television companies, and a requirement that cable networks and
satellite content providers broadcast all television stations that carry news.
Previously, they were required to do so only for 60 days before elections.
Eka Kvesitadze and Davit Paichadze, the hosts of two GPB policy talk shows,
alleged that the GPB’s decision not to renew their contracts in September 2013
was politically motivated. Although the station director’s written order attributed
the non-renewal to the start of the new television season, he told one of
the journalists it was because he “did not like their tone.”
Key International Actors
The European Union closely engaged with the new Georgian government to
monitor the rights record and urge much-needed reforms. It created and funded
an expert position to advise the government on legal and constitutional and
human rights, and appointed to the post former Council of Europe
Commissioner for Human Rights Thomas Hammarberg.
In September—after regular visits to Georgia and extensive consultations with
officials, the political opposition, and civil society—Hammarberg published a
report with recommendations to the government to address religious intolerance,
independence of the judiciary, prison conditions, ill-treatment and torture,
illegal surveillance, minority rights, and other human rights issues.
In its March European Neighborhood Policy (ENP) progress report, the EU noted
that Georgia “acted on most …. [of the ENP’s] key recommendations,” but also
highlighted the need to ensure the independence of the judiciary, avoid selective
justice, and increase accountability and democratic oversight of law
enforcement agencies.
In its annual human rights report in April, the United States Department of State
flagged concerns about shortfalls in the rule of law and lack of judicial independence,
as well as restrictions on freedom of association and assembly.
The International Criminal Court prosecutor continued to monitor local investigations
into crimes committed during the 2008 Georgia-Russian conflict over
South Ossetia, while noting in a November 2012 report that these investigations
had yet to yield any results.
Kazakhstan
Kazakhstan’s poor human rights record continued to deteriorate in 2013, with
authorities cracking down on free speech and dissent through misuse of overly
broad laws. Authorities maintain strict controls on freedom of assembly and
religion. Despite flawed trials, courts upheld the prison sentences of people
convicted in the aftermath of violent clashes in December 2011 between police
and people in the western oil town of Zhanaozen. Torture remains common in
places of detention, even as authorities in July adopted a law on a National
Preventive Mechanism on torture.
The government continues work on overhauling its criminal legislation, but
based on a September draft of the criminal code, some amendments, if adopted,
would further restrict freedom of speech, assembly, religion, and association.
Arrest and Detention of Government Critics
On December 7, 2012, civil society activist Vadim Kuramshin was sentenced to
12 years’ imprisonment on extortion charges, despite a trial marred by procedural
violations and concerns his detention was retribution for public criticism
of the government.
On May 28, 2013, Kazakhstan’s Supreme Court upheld labor activist Rosa
Tuletaeva’s conviction and five-year prison sentence (reduced from seven years
by an earlier appeal) for organizing mass riots in connection with the
Zhanaozen violence. Prosecutorial authorities have declined to investigate
Tuletaeva’s allegations of torture in detention.
On August 5, Kazakhstan’s Supreme Court declined to review political opposition
leader Vladimir Kozlov’s seven-and-a-half-year prison sentence, despite
procedural violations and the broad, vague charges, such as inciting social discord,
used to convict him. As recently as mid-November, Kozlov’s wife reported
that Kozlov had not been receiving adequate and timely medical care in prison.
On August 9, Zinaida Mukhortova, a lawyer who in 2009 had alleged a member
of parliament from the ruling party interfered in a civil case in which she was
involved, was detained and forcibly admitted to a psychiatric hospital, violating her rights to liberty and security. She was initially denied access to her lawyer.
Mukhortova was released from psychiatric detention on November 1. Her case
against forcible detention was ongoing at time of writing.
On July 31, government critic Mukhtar Ablyazov was detained in France. His
extradition is sought by Ukraine, Russia, and Kazakhstan on multiple charges,
including embezzlement. Rights groups expressed serious concern that, if
returned, he would be at serious risk of ill-treatment and denied a fair trial. His
wife and child were illegally deported to Kazakhstan from Italy in May. United
Nations experts said that the move resembled an “extraordinary rendition.”
Freedom of Expression
Starting in late 2012, there was a marked escalation in the government’s crackdown
on independent and opposition media. In December 2012, in rushed trials,
courts banned the newspapers Vzglyad, Golos Respubliki, and their affiliated
sites, and prohibited K+ and Stan.TV from broadcasting. In 2013, several
newspapers including Pravda Kazakhstana and Tribuna, were suspended for
three months on technical grounds. In January, the Zhezkazgan youth newspaper
was ordered to close.
Despite widespread criticism of the government’s misuse of the overbroad and
vague criminal offense of “inciting social, national, clan, racial, or religious discord,”
authorities opened new cases. Authorities also proposed broadening the
scope of the criminal offense and increasing penalties on those found guilty of
it. One such case was against journalist Aleksandr Kharlamov in March 2013. In
mid-April, Kharlamov was forced to undergo a month of forced psychiatric
observation. He was later released and put under house arrest. His case was
ongoing at time of writing.
Some websites are blocked in Kazakhstan and libel remains a criminal offense.
Media watchdog AdilSoz reported that between January and August 2013, there
were 10 attacks on journalists, including on Igor Larra in August. In July, 4 men
were sentenced to between 11 and 15 years in prison for attacking independent
journalist Lukpan Akhmedyarov in April 2012.
Legal Reforms
Work on new criminal, criminal procedural, and penal codes continues amid
serious concerns that proposed amendments would further restrict fundamental
freedoms. In September, Dunja Mijatovic, the Organization for Security and
Co-operation in Europe’s media freedom representative, noted the proposed
draft legislation “still contains and even strengthens sanctions that could limit
free expression and freedom of the media,” and in particular highlighted the
“disproportionate sanctions” of suspending newspapers for minor administrative
offenses.
Torture
In 2013, several police officers were convicted for torture and in July, authorities
adopted a law on a National Preventative Mechanism against torture. Despite
this, the Anti-Torture Coalition, a civil society alliance, reported receiving 201
complaints of torture and ill-treatment in the first half of 2013 alone.
Perpetrators of torture often go unpunished. To date, there has been no effective
investigation into serious and credible allegations of torture by detainees
in the aftermath of the December 2011 Zhanaozen violence.
On November 18, a Kostanai court ordered local police to pay Aleksandr
Gerasimov 2 million Tenge (US$13,000) in compensation following a May 2012
United Nations Committee Against Torture (CAT) decision finding Kazakhstan
responsible for torturing Gerasimov in 2007. The committee had urged
Kazakhstan to conduct an impartial investigation and provide full and adequate
reparation.
Counterterrorism
In January 2013, amendments to counterterrorism laws were adopted in
response to stated government concerns about increasing radicalization and
armed attacks by alleged extremists. In October, President Nursultan
Nazarbayev approved a five-year State Program to Counter Religious Extremism
and Terrorism aimed at ensuring security and preventing terrorist attacks.
Forum18, an international religious freedom group, criticized the plan for its
“all-embracing controls” on religious activities.
Vladislav Chelakh, a 19-year-old border guard accused of murdering 14 border
guards and one ranger at a Kazakhstan-China border post in December 2011,
was sentenced to life in prison in December 2012 despite an investigation and
trial marred by irregularities. His sentence was twice upheld on appeal during
2013.
Freedom of Religion
Since the adoption in 2011 of a restrictive law on religion, religious groups have
been subjected to raids, fines, and confiscation of literature. Between January
and mid-November, authorities fined 119 individuals and sentenced 2 to shortterm
administrative detention for violating the religion law, according to
Forum18. In February, a Kazakh court banned the minority Islamic group Jamaat
Tablighi as “extremist.”
In May, Protestant pastor Bakhytzhan Kashkumbayev was arrested on a dubious
charge of “intentional infliction of grievous bodily harm” of a congregation
member. In July, he was subjected to a month of forced psychiatric observation.
In October, authorities brought an additional charge of propagandizing extremism
against him. His case was ongoing at this writing.
Freedom of Assembly
Authorities maintain restrictive rules on freedom of assembly, and throughout
the year detained and fined activists and others for organizing and/or participating
in peaceful unsanctioned protests. For example, in mid-May, a court in
Astana sentenced two civil society activists to between seven and fifteen days
in detention and fined nearly two dozen others for violating the law on public
assemblies.
Labor Rights and Child Labor in Agriculture
Legislation governing the organization, financing, and collective bargaining
rights of trade unions remains restrictive and violates Kazakhstan’s obligations
under international law. Proposed provisions in the new draft criminal code would further restrict workers’ right to strike—already subject to a broad prohibition
in certain sectors of the economy—and continue to criminalize funding of
trade unions by sources outside Kazakhstan. Work on a draft law on trade
unions was ongoing at time of writing.
In response to concerns about debt bondage, forced labor, hazardous child
labor, and other violations against migrant tobacco workers, Philip Morris
International and Philip Morris Kazakhstan continued to implement policies
aimed at decreasing such risks. In August 2012, the Ministry of Education and
Science issued an order permitting children of migrant workers employed in
accordance with migration laws to attend schools in Kazakhstan.
Returns to Risk of Torture
Kazakhstan continues to extradite individuals to Uzbekistan despite the risk of
torture there. On March 13, authorities extradited Khairullo Tursunov to
Uzbekistan, ignoring a February 28 UN Committee Against Torture communication
to stall his extradition until it could fully review his complaint.
Key International Actors
There was criticism of Kazakhstan’s rights record in 2013, notably by the
European Parliament (EP), but overall concern was toned down as Kazakhstan’s
partners prioritized trade and energy interests. In a statement issued following
her November 2012 visit to Kazakhstan, the EU High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy Catherine Ashton did not mention any human rights
concerns, and asserted that her discussions “focused on economic and trade
issues.”
In June, European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso did not raise
publicly any specific human rights concerns during his first trip to Kazakhstan
to discuss the European Union-Kazakhstan Enhanced Partnership and
Cooperation Agreement (PCA). Enhanced PCA negotiations, which had stalled
for over a year, resumed in October.
On April 11, United States Ambassador to the OSCE Ian Kelly voiced concern
that Kazakhstan’s 2011 religion law “falls short of upholding Kazakhstan’s
international obligations and commitments regarding freedom of religion.”
However, a July US-Kazakhstan annual Strategic Partnership Commission meeting
focused on trade and investment without explicit concern about rights
abuses in Kazakhstan.
On April 18, the EP adopted a resolution that flagged serious concerns about
Kazakhstan’s rights record, in particular about the closure of Alga! opposition
party and media outlets and the imprisonment of activists on “vague criminal
charges which could be considered to be politically motivated,” including
Vladimir Kozlov. The resolution stressed the importance of workers’ rights and
called for review of religion legislation. It also called for the EU to closely monitor
developments in Kazakhstan.
British Prime Minister David Cameron visited Kazakhstan in late June, during
which UK businesses concluded trade and other deals worth an estimated £700
million (US$1.1 million). Cameron said he and President Nursultan Nazarbayev
discussed human rights issues “at some length.” President Nazarbayev rejected
concerns, saying “nobody has the right to instruct us how to live and build
our country.”
Kyrgyzstan
Shortcomings in law enforcement and the judiciary contribute to the persistence
of grave abuses in connection to the ethnic violence in southern
Kyrgyzstan in June 2010. Ethnic Uzbeks and other minorities remain especially
vulnerable. Courtroom attacks on lawyers and defendants, particularly in cases
related to the June 2010 events, occur with impunity.
Human rights defender Azimjon Askarov remains wrongfully imprisoned. In
2013, authorities proposed legislative initiatives to tighten restrictions on nongovernmental
groups. Violence and discrimination against women and lesbian,
gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) persons remain concerns. Some religious
groups have faced harassment by the authorities. “Insult” and “insult of a public
official” remain criminal offenses.
Government officials and civil society representatives formed a national center
for the prevention of torture in 2013. In practice, ill-treatment and torture
remain pervasive in places of detention, and impunity for torture is the norm.
Access to Justice
Three years on, justice for crimes committed during the ethnic violence in
southern Kyrgyzstan in June 2010 remains elusive. The flawed justice process
has produced long prison sentences for mostly ethnic Uzbeks after convictions
marred by torture-tainted confessions and other due process violations.
Authorities have not reviewed convictions where defendants alleged torture or
other glaring violations of fair trial standards. At least nine ethnic Uzbeks continue
to languish in pretrial detention, some for a third year. New convictions in
August 2013 of three ethnic Uzbeks in Osh, and pending extradition orders of at
least six others in Russia again point to judicial bias against ethnic Uzbeks.
The authorities failed to tackle the acute problem of courtroom violence by
audiences in trials across Kyrgyzstan, including at the trial of three opposition
members of parliament in June, perpetuating an environment that undermines
defendants’ fair trial rights. Lawyers were harassed or beaten in court in 2013,
including for defending ethnic Uzbek clients in June 2010 cases. Mahamad
Bizurukov, an ethnic Uzbek defendant, and his lawyers have been subjected to repeated threats, harassment, and physical attacks for two years, most recently
in September 2013, with no accountability for perpetrators.
Torture
Despite the adoption of a national torture prevention mechanism in 2012, and
the organization of a related National Center for the Prevention of Torture in
2013, authorities often refuse to investigate allegations of torture and perpetrators
go unpunished. On rare occasions when charges are filed against police,
investigations, and court proceedings are unduly protracted.
A telling example is the criminal case against four police officers following the
August 2011 death of an ethnic Uzbek detained on charges related to the June
2010 ethnic violence. Usmonjon Kholmirzaev died several days after his release
without charge, apparently from injuries he sustained from beatings in custody.
The prosecution has been subjected to repeated delays over the last two years
and no one has yet been held accountable for his death.
In July 2013, Nurkamil Ismailov was found dead in a temporary detention facility
in southern Kyrgyzstan after police detained him for disorderly conduct.
Authorities alleged he committed suicide by hanging himself with his t-shirt.
The Jalalabad-based human rights group Spravedlivost intervened after which
authorities opened a criminal investigation on charges of negligence. In
September, Ismailov’s relative and the police settled out of court for an undisclosed
sum, with no admission of liability.
Freedom of Expression
In April 2013, internet providers in Kyrgyzstan lifted a 14-month ban on the
independent online Central Asian news agency Ferghana.ru, after Kyrgyzstan’s
state media agency wrote a letter stating its previous notice urging providers to
block Ferghana.ru was only a recommendation, not compulsory.
In June, OSCE representative on freedom of the media, Dunja Mijatovic, noted
Kyrgyzstan’s “progress in promoting media freedom and freedom of expression.”
Mijatovic urged authorities to bring to justice individuals responsible for the
2007 death of journalist Alisher Saipov, whose killers have not been identified.
Although Osh-based Yntymak Radio began broadcasting in Russian, Kyrgyz, and
Uzbek languages in March 2012, concerns persist regarding restrictions on
Uzbek-language media in southern Kyrgyzstan. In March 2013, the UN
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD) noted “that the
use of minority languages in media has decreased in particular in the Osh
region.” In July, an Osh court banned the Uzbek-language news site Harakat.net
for allegedly inciting racial hatred.
Sexual Orientation and Gender-Based Violence
The authorities’ approach to long-standing problems of gender-based violence,
including domestic violence and bride abduction, remains ineffective. In
February 2013, the Kyrgyz legislature adopted an amendment to increase the
maximum jail sentence for bride-kidnapping from three to seven years (10 years
if the girl is younger than 17).
In 2013, Labrys and Kyrgyz Indigo, LGBT rights groups, documented at least four
new cases of police extortion and harassment of at least seven LGBT people.
Gay and bisexual men are at particular risk of extortion, beating, and sexual
violence. They rarely report abuses to the authorities due to fear of disclosure
and retaliation, and abuses largely go unpunished. In March, unidentified
assailants attacked two Labrys staff in Bishkek at a disco; one suffered a concussion.
Police initially refused to register their complaint, which alleged the
attack was a hate crime, and had yet to investigate at time of writing.
Civil Society
On November 17, 2012, agents of the State Committee on National Security
(GKNB) temporarily detained an international staff member of the International
Crisis Group (ICG), an international NGO working on peace and security issues,
and without explanation, illegally searched and interrogated him, and confiscated
his computer. He was later expelled from Kyrgyzstan. The GKNB later
summoned five people for questioning apparently in connection with the ICG’s
work.
In 2013, the government sought to tighten control over civil society, proposing
three legislative amendments that would impose burdensome reporting obligations and restrictions on civil society groups. Activists successfully lobbied to
remove discriminatory provisions from two proposals. The third would require
groups accepting foreign funding to register and identify themselves publicly as
“foreign agents.” At time of writing, it had not been reviewed by parliament.
In May, human rights lawyer Ulugbek Azimov, an ethnic Uzbek, and two members
of his family were viciously assaulted after a traffic incident in Bishkek.
Police found and prosecuted one of the attackers, but others remain at large.
Azimov’s colleagues believe the attack may have been ethnically-motivated.
Azimjon Askarov, a human rights defender who worked to document police
treatment of detainees, continues to serve a life sentence, despite a prosecution
marred by serious violations of fair trial standards. Askarov was found
guilty of “organizing mass disorders,” “inciting ethnic hatred,” and taking part
in killing a police officer on June 13, 2010. Despite repeated complaints filed by
Askarov’s lawyer, including in 2013, prosecutorial authorities have refused to
investigate Askarov’s credible allegations of torture in custody. Askarov’s
November 2012 complaint to the United Nations Human Rights Committee is
under review.
Refugees
In recent years, Kyrgyzstan’s efforts to host refugees and asylum seekers have
been undermined by the government’s failure to implement fully its obligations
to protect the rights of asylum seekers and refugees from Uzbekistan. After a
long court battle, in May 2013, a Bishkek court overturned the Prosecutor
General’s Office’s extradition order for Khabibullo Sulaimanov, a former Imam
from Uzbekistan, after he was granted refugee status by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees. In February, Shukhrat Musin, a refugee from
Uzbekistan who fled religious persecution, was reported missing in Bishkek. In
October, he was located in a pretrial detention center in Andijan, Uzbekistan.
Freedom of Religion
In December 2012, President Atambaev signed amendments to Kyrgyzstan’s
religion laws authorizing greater control over religious literature deemed “extremist.”
Forum18, an international religious freedom watchdog, reported harassment of smaller religious communities in 2013, including of Jehovah’s
Witnesses and Ahmadi Muslims.
Key International Actors
Kyrgyzstan’s partners raised human rights concerns throughout the year, but
did not consistently seize opportunities to urge concrete improvements.
Statements issued by European Union leaders on the occasion of Kyrgyz president’s
September 2013 visit to Brussels noted challenges in upholding the rule
of law and the rights of minorities, but stopped short of urging any concrete
improvements. The ministerial-level cooperation council meeting with
Kyrgyzstan, held in November, urged “further steps to address human rights
concerns,” stressing “inter-ethnic reconciliation” and the “significant role”
played by civil society.
In December 2012, German Chancellor Angela Merkel specifically noted concern
about Azimjon Askarov’s imprisonment and the rights of ethnic minorities.
During a Kyrgyzstan visit in May, UN Assistant Secretary General for Human
Rights Ivan Simonovic raised Askarov’s case, violence against women, and the
need to address discrimination on grounds of ethnicity, religion, and gender.
Following her mission to Kyrgyzstan in April 2013, UN special rapporteur on the
sale of children, child prostitution, and child pornography, Najat Maalla M’jid,
highlighted the country’s insufficient protection of children from violence,
exploitation, and abuse, and urged law enforcement agencies to do more to
investigate, prosecute, and punish perpetrators.
In its March 2013 concluding observations, the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination (CERD) voiced serious concerns about the treatment of
ethnic minorities in Kyrgyzstan, including due process violations in court proceedings
following the June 2010 violence, allegations of torture, restrictions on
Uzbek-language media, and violence against ethnic minority women. The committee
also noted a few positive developments, including the adoption of a policy
on inter-ethnic relations.
During its review of Kyrgyzstan in November, the UN Committee Against Torture
noted that “[fundamental safeguards] were not upheld in practice” and
expressed “serious concern about prison conditions.”
Russia
Russian authorities continued the crackdown on civil society and government
critics that began in 2012. Enforcement of the “foreign agents” law led to an
unprecedented, nationwide inspection campaign of hundreds of nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs). Dozens of groups are fighting the prosecutors in
courts, refusing to register as “foreign agents.” Parliament adopted laws
restricting LGBT rights and freedom of expression and infringing on the right to
privacy. Abuses in the North Caucasus continue.
Civil Society
A 2012 law requires NGOs receiving foreign funding and conducting broadly
defined “political activity” to register as “foreign agents,” effectively demonizing
them as foreign spies. Authorities define as “political” such work as urging
reforms, raising awareness, and assisting victims of abuse.
From March to May 2013, authorities subjected hundreds of NGOs to invasive
inspections to intimidate groups and pressure them to register as “foreign
agents.”
At time of writing, the authorities filed administrative lawsuits against at least
nine inspected organizations and five administrative cases against leaders of
these groups for refusing to register. Two groups were forced to close as a
result; at least another three chose to wind up operations to avoid further
repressive legal actions. The Prosecutor’s Office ordered dozens of other
groups to register or warned they might need to do so. Many organizations also
faced sanctions for alleged violations of fire safety, tax and labor regulations,
and sanitary norms.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In June 2013, parliament unanimously adopted a law banning promotion among
children of “propaganda of nontraditional sexual relationships,” meaning lesbian,
gay, bisexual, or transgender (LGBT) relationships. Violators risk stiff
fines, and in the case of foreigners, up to 15 days’ detention and deportation.
Beginning in 2006, similar laws outlawing “propaganda of homosexuality”
among children were passed in 11 Russian regions.
Also in June, parliament passed a law banning adoption of Russian children by
foreign same-sex couples and by unmarried individuals from countries where
marriage for same-sex couples is legal. In September, several deputies introduced
a bill that would make a parent’s homosexuality legal grounds for denial
of parental rights. It was withdrawn later for revision.
Homophobic rhetoric, including by officials, and rising homophobic violence
accompanied debate about these laws. Three homophobic murders were
reported in various regions of Russia in May 2013.
Vigilante groups, consisting of radical nationalists, and Neo-Nazis, lure men or
boys to meetings, accuse them of being gay, humiliate and beat them, and post
videos of the proceedings on social media. For example, in September 2013 a
video showed the rape of an Uzbek migrant in Russia who was threatened with
a gun and forced to say he was gay. A few investigations were launched, but
have not yet resulted in effective prosecution.
Freedom of Expression
In June 2013, President Vladimir Putin signed a law imposing a maximum threeyear
prison sentence for publicly “insult[ing] the feelings of religious believers.”
The law provides no clear definition of acts or speech considered “insulting.”
The law is yet to be enforced.
At time of writing, parliament was debating a bill to ban criticism challenging
the fairness of Nuremberg Trial judgments or actions of anti-Hitler coalitions,
with a maximum three-year prison sentence. Doing so in the media or while
holding a public office carries a harsher criminal penalty of up to five years in
prison.
Arrests and Harassment of Human Rights Defenders,
Government Opponents, and Other Critics
The authorities continue to prosecute people who participated in a large
demonstration at Moscow’s Bolotnaya Square on the eve of Putin’s May 2012 inauguration, based on disproportionate “mass rioting” charges and alleged
acts of violence against police. At time of writing, two people were sentenced to
two-and-a-half and four-and-a-half years respectively in prison, and one was
sentenced to indefinite compulsory psychiatric treatment. A further 24 were
charged, of whom 14 were held in pretrial detention, some ten of them for more
than a year. Twelve of the twenty-four were on trial.
In July, a court sentenced anti-corruption blogger and opposition leader Alexei
Navalny to five years in prison on politically tainted embezzlement charges and
released him pending appeal. On October 16, an appeals court suspended the
sentence.
Two members of the punk group Pussy Riot, convicted on August 17, 2012, for a
40-second stunt in Moscow’s largest cathedral, were repeatedly denied parole
and continued to serve their two-year prison sentences. In September one of
them, Nadezhda Tolokonnikova, went on a hunger strike protesting alleged
inhuman work conditions, sleep deprivation, and threats by prison staff. She
renewed her hunger strike in October to emphasize the threats against her.
Russian authorities held Tolokonnikova incommunicado for over 26 days during
her transfer to a prison facility in Kransoyarsk.
In July, a court in Nizhny Novgorod rejected a petition by the Prosecutor’s Office
to ban the book International Tribunal for Chechnya as “extremist.” The book
calls for the creation of an international tribunal to investigate alleged war
crimes and crimes against humanity committed during two wars in Chechnya. In
October, an appeals court upheld this decision.
In September, Russian authorites arrested 30 activists with the environmental
organization Greenpeace for staging a protest in the Pechora Sea. Investigative
authorities charged them with piracy, then reclassified the charge to hooliganism.
At time of writing, 29 of the 30 had been granted bail and released.
In November, Mikhail Savva, an NGO leader on trial in Krasnador for allegedly
mismanaging a government grant, stated in court that authorities were planning
to press treason charges against him in an effort to intimidate him. Savva said
the authorities referenced the fact that he had received foreign grants for years
and met with US embassy officials, among other things.
North Caucasus
The Islamist insurgency in the North Caucasus republics continued in 2013, particularly
in Dagestan. According to Caucasian Knot, an independent online
media portal, in the first nine months of 2013, 375 people were killed in the
North Caucasus region, including 68 civilians, and 343 people were wounded,
including 112 civilians. Approximately 64 percent of the killings and 71 percent
of the injuries reported by Caucasian Knot occurred in Dagestan.
According to the Memorial Human Rights Center, one of Russia’s most prominent
independent rights groups, from January to June 2013, eight people suffered
abduction-style detentions by government agencies in Dagestan, with five
still unaccounted for at time of writing. Ramazan Abdulatipov, Dagestan’s new
leader, abandoned the “soft power” counterinsurgency policies of his predecessor,
including a commission for return of insurgents to peaceful life and promoting
dialogue with Salafi Muslims. In 2013, persecution by law enforcement
officials of Salafis increased. Unprosecuted abuses, including torture, abductions,
and attacks against suspected insurgents and their families served to
alienate Salafi communities. To combat “extremists,” the authorities condoned
the rise of people’s militias, which have driven some Salafis to flee their
homes.
In July, unidentified assailants shot dead Akhmednabi Akhmednabiev, an independent
journalist and critic of abuses by law enforcement and security agencies.
The official investigation, ongoing at time of writing, acknowledged that
he was killed because of his journalism. Prior to the murder, Akhmednabiev
reported to the authorities death threats he received, but they did not take adequate
steps to investigate. Akhmednabiev is the second journalist covering
counterinsurgency issues murdered in less than two years in Dagestan. The
2011 killing of Khadzhimurad Kamalov remains unresolved.
Five people suffered abduction-style detentions in Ingushetia between January
and March 2013, and two of them “disappeared,” according to Memorial. In
August, the head of Ingushetia’s Security Council, Akhmet Kotiev, was killed in
an alleged insurgent attack.
According to Memorial, one person “disappeared” after abduction by security
forces in Chechnya in the first six months of 2013. Law enforcement and security agencies under the de facto control of Chechnya’s leader, Ramzan Kadyrov,
continued collective punishment against relatives and suspected supporters of
alleged insurgents. Victims increasingly refuse to speak about violations due to
fear of official retribution. Abuses remain unpunished and largely under-reported.
In September, Russia’s Prosecutor General’s Office berated the Chechen minister
of international affairs for lack of cooperation in investigating cases of disappearances
dating to 1990-2000.
Women are forced to wear headscarves in public buildings, and according to
local women’s rights activists, “honor” killings are on the rise in Chechnya.
Cooperation with the European Court of Human Rights
At time of writing, the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) had issued over
200 judgments holding Russia responsible for grave human rights violations in
Chechnya. At least three pertain to violations that law enforcement officials perpetrated
under Kadyrov’s de facto control.
While Russia continues to pay the required monetary compensation to victims,
it fails to meaningfully implement the core of the judgments by not conducting
effective investigations, and failing to hold perpetrators accountable In
October, when the ECtHR ruled on the case of Abdulkhanov and Others v.
Russia, for the first time in a case concerning the armed conflict in Chechnya,
the Russian government acknowledged that there had been a violation of the
right to life.
In June 2013, the ECtHR ruled that Russia violated the European Convention on
Human Rights during the trial and sentencing, on tax evasion and fraud
charges, of former Yukos oil company owner Mikhail Khodorkovsky in 2005 and
awarded US$13,500 damages to the jailed businessman.
Abuses Linked to Preparations for the 2014 Olympic Games
Authorities continued to intimidate and harass organizations, individuals, and
journalists who criticized the local government in the Black Sea city of Sochi,
including for its preparations for the 2014 Winter Olympic Games.
Some migrant workers involved in building Olympic venues and other infrastructure
continued to report that employers failed to provide contracts or
promised wages. Police detained on false charges at least one worker who tried
to complain about exploitation. Local authorities failed to effectively investigate
workers’ complaints and, in September, initiated large-scale raids to detain and
deport irregular migrants ahead of the games in 2014.
The authorities are resettling more than 2,000 families to obtain land for
Olympic venues and infrastructure. Not all of those evicted have received fair
compensation. The authorities refuse to compensate or resettle other families
whose properties have been severely damaged or altered by Olympic construction.
Palliative Care
Restrictive government policies and limited availability of pain treatment persists
and severely hinders the delivery of palliative care. Each year, tens of
thousands of dying cancer patients are denied their right to adequate pain
relief. In May 2013, a doctor in Krasnoyarsk and another woman were found
guilty and fined on charges of illegal trafficking of controlled substances, after
they helped a man in the final stages of cancer and in debilitating pain obtain
opioid pain medicines. In September, an appeals court sent the case for retrial.
The court hearing the retrial excluded a lead defense lawyer from the case.
A May 2013 government decree somewhat eased patients’ access to narcotic
pain medications. However, implementation is problematic.
Disability Rights
The government has taken several high-profile steps to demonstrate its commitment
to ensuring an accessible environment for its approximately 13 million
citizens with disabilities, including implementing its multibillion-ruble
Accessible Environment Program and its decision to host the Sochi 2014 Winter
Paralympics.
However, for many people living with disabilities in Russia, taking part in the
basic activities of daily life can be extremely difficult or even impossible due to
a range of barriers they encounter. These include the lack of ramps and elevators, leading to isolation in their homes; employers’ unwillingness to hire people
with disabilities; and inadequate visual, auditory, and sensory accommodations
in buses, trains, and train stations. Most people with disabilities interviewed
by Human Rights Watch who submitted written complaints to local government
about inaccessible facilities or services reported that the response
was not timely or effective.
Hundreds of thousands of adults and children with disabilities considered to
need constant care currently live in closed institutions, including many who
would like to and could hold jobs and live independently, with certain social
supports.
Migrant’s Rights
In July 2013, Moscow police launched a discriminatory campaign against irregular
migrants, detaining people based on their non-Slavic appearance with the
stated aim of identifying alleged violations of migration and employment regulations.
Several thousand were allegedly taken into custody. Some were
released and others were expelled. Several hundred were put in a makeshift
tent camp and held in inhumane conditions. The campaign to detain and
deport irregular migrants spread to other regions of Russia with high concentration
of labor migrants, including Sochi.
Key International Actors
International actors raised a range of concerns about developments in Russia,
condemning the anti-LGBT “propaganda” law, the “foreign agents” law and the
burdensome inspections of NGOs that followed its adoption, and the flawed
conduct of high-profile trials against political opponents.
In May 2013, the United Nations special rapporteurs for freedom of association,
human rights defenders, and freedom of expression voiced serious concerns
about the “obstructive, intimidating, and stigmatizing effects” of waves of
inspections of Russian NGOs in connection with the “foreign agents” law.
During its Universal Periodic Review at the Human Rights Council, Russia rejected
key recommendations related to freedom of association, LGBT rights, and
abuses of migrant workers in Sochi. The Council of Europe’s secretary general and its commissioner for human rights urged Russia to reevaluate the NGO law,
as did Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe rapporteurs.
European Union High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
Catherine Ashton spoke out against several “deeply troubling” trends in Russia,
including the crackdown on civil society and political activists, impunity for
past human rights violations, and discriminatory legislation against LGBT persons.
At the conclusion of the June 2013 EU-Russia summit, European Council
President Herman van Rompuy acknowledged that human rights remain an
“important, although difficult, element of our relations.”
EU governments also publicly criticized the human rights situation in Russia.
Germany and France condemned the “foreign agents” law, particularly after
German and French organizations operating in Moscow were inspected.
Officials of many foreign governments and intergovernmental organizations
also voiced strong concerns about the anti-LGBT “propaganda” law.
Although the International Olympic Committee (IOC) publicly affirmed its commitment
to nondiscrimination regarding LGBT people, it has refused to ask
Russia to repeal the “propaganda” law. Former IOC President Jacques Rogge
went no further than to ask Russia for “assurances” that there will be no discrimination
in Sochi. Current IOC head Thomas Bach declined to condemn the
law and stated that the IOC “cannot claim to rise above sovereign states.”
Relations between the US and Russia were particularly strained in 2013. In
December 2012, the US Congress adopted legislation introducing a visa ban
and asset freeze against Russian government officials involved in the death of
whistleblower tax lawyer Sergei Magnitsky and the torture or killing of other
whistleblowers. The initial list included 18 names, 16 of which were directly
connected to the Magnitsky case. In response, the Duma adopted a law banning
US adoptions of Russian orphans. In January 2013, the US withdrew from
the civil society component of the US-Russian Bilateral Presidential
Commission due to disagreements over the “foreign agents” law.
US President Barack Obama canceled a planned September summit with Putin,
citing lack of progress on the bilateral agenda, including on human rights abuses.
A meeting between US and Russian foreign and defense ministers went ahead, but did not address human rights. Obama later noted that he was personally
“offended” by Russia’s “antigay and lesbian legislation.”
Russia’s Foreign Policy
Russia’s foreign policy impeded accountability for humanitarian law violations
and, for much of the year, humanitarian assistance for all in Syria. In its drive to
ensure no “regime change,” no military intervention, and no singling out of the
Syrian government for abuses, Russia, a close ally and supporter of the Syrian
government, also failed to take actions to end war crimes and crimes against
humanity, hold their perpetrators accountable, and ensure access to humanitarian
assistance for people in all parts of Syria, including rebel-held areas.
Until the chemical weapons attacks of August 21, Russia and China continued
to block meaningful action by the UN Security Council regarding Syria.
Following the attack, Russia supported a council resolution requiring the Syrian
government to eliminate its chemical weapons program. Russia also allowed
the passage of a statement by the council’s president calling for immediate,
safe, and unhindered humanitarian access throughout Syria. Russia continued
to obstruct efforts by some council members to refer the situation in Syria to
the International Criminal Court, which would then have the mandate to examine
serious crimes committed by all parties to the conflict.
In 2013, Russia continued proposals to weaken the autonomy of UN treaty bodies.
These included the “supervision” by member states, allowing states under
review to negotiate questions the particular committee would ask.
Despite the explicit mandate of the UN Human Rights Council to respond to situations
of human rights violations, Russia continued to play a negative role by
questioning the council’s engagement in specific countries where engagement
was needed, including Sri Lanka, Belarus, and Syria, branding the council’s
response politicized.
Serbia
Despite a historic agreement in April by the European Council to start European
Union membership talks in January 2014 with Serbia, human rights concerns
persist. The situation of ethnic minorities remains precarious, especially for
Roma. Journalists continue to be targets of threats despite attempts to bring
perpetrators to justice. The asylum system is weak and overburdened. The signing
of a cooperation protocol between Serbian and Bosnian prosecutors offers
potential to improve the slow progress in war crimes prosecutions.
Accountability for War Crimes
War crimes prosecutions progressed slowly in 2013. The Belgrade War Crimes
Chamber reached convictions in six cases and acquitted two people in one
case. The Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor indicted three people for crimes
against civilians. Fourteen prosecutions were pending at time of writing.
In February, the chamber sentenced seven members of the “Sima’s Chetniks”
paramilitary unit to a total of 72 years’ imprisonment for killing 28 Roma civilians,
raping and torturing three Roma women, and destroying the mosque in
Skocic in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In July, the chamber sentenced Petar Ciric, of the Vukovar Territorial Defense
corps of the Yugoslav National Army, to 20 years imprisonment for participating
in the torture and murder by firing squad of 200 Croatian prisoners of war in
November 1991.
Also in July, the chamber ordered the Serbian government to compensate three
Kosovo Albanians for torture and inhuman treatment following their unlawful
detention in May 1999 when Serbian forces occupied the Kosovar village of
Novo Cikatovo.
In February, Serbia signed a war crimes protocol with Bosnia facilitating the
mutual transfer of information and evidence of war crimes. In July, this resulted
in an agreement to cooperate on investigations against 30 suspected war criminals
believed to live in Serbia.
In April, Serbian President Tomislav Nikolic offered an apology on Bosnian TV in
the name of the Serbian people for war crimes committed by Serb forces in Bosnia during the 1992-1995 war. The apology stopped short of calling the massacre
in Srebrenica a genocide.
In late May, the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
acquitted former Serbian security officials Jovica Stanisic and Franko Simatovic
of criminal responsibility for the removal of Bosniaks and Croats from parts of
Bosnia and Croatia between 1991 and 1995.
In November, the war crimes prosecutor charged two former officers in the
Yugoslav army with the killing of 27 people in the Kosovo village Trjnje in 1999.
Also in November, in a pending case against 11 former members of the
Yugoslav armed forces, the war crimes prosecutor added the indictment of former
army commander Toplica Miladinovic for ordering the attacks on four
Kosovo villages where at least 45 people were killed in 1999.
Freedom of Media
In April, the editor-in-chief of Juzne Vesti, a Serbian investigative journalism
platform, received threats over the phone from the director of the Nis Heating
Plant, Milutin Ilic, and two others saying “watch what you publish” due to
reporting on operations at the plant. The three men were charged in September
with threatening the safety of a person performing tasks of public importance.
In June, Koreni and Intermagazin web-portals published an article calling Nedim
Sejdinovic, a well-known journalist and human rights activist from the
Vojvodina region in northern Serbia, an “Islamic thinker” and “Vojvodina separatist,”
and suggesting that he should not feel safe in his hometown.
A long-awaited government commission was established in January to investigate
the murders of three prominent journalists in Serbia more than a decade
ago. The seven-member commission is tasked with analyzing all prior investigations,
ascertaining why they failed, and creating the basis for future investigations.
Treatment of Minorities
Attacks and harassment against the Roma minority continued, but authorities
brought some alleged perpetrators to justice. In March, a 17-year-old Roma boy 14-year-old boy was charged with manslaughter in connection with the attack.
In August, a group of hooligans attacked a Roma settlement in Resnik, threatening
residents and shouting racist slurs. At time of writing police had made four
arrests.
Forced evictions and discrimination against Roma in education remain concerns.
Authorities demolished approximately 40 homes in an informal Roma
settlement in Belgrade in April, providing no alternative accommodation. Also
in Belgrade, 50 Roma families faced imminent threat of eviction from their
social housing at time of writing. Roma children continue to be disproportionally
enrolled in schools for children with developmental disabilities. According to
the European Roma Rights Centre, in the 2012-2013 school year, 22.8 percent of
all students enrolled in special needs education were Roma.
Tensions between members of the Hungarian minority and Serb majority in the
Vojvodina region in northeast Serbia continued. Groups of Serbs attacked
Hungarians in separate incidents in January and February, in Temerin and
Subotica, respectively, allegedly because of they were ethnic Hungarians.
Police were investigating both cases at time of writing.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Despite landmark court decisions and a strengthened legal framework for the
protection of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) rights, members of
the LGBT community continue to face intolerance and harassment. A local
human rights group reported at least 30 threats per month on social media
against members of the LGBT community involved in organizing the 2013 Pride
Parade. In September, Serbia’s National Security Council banned the Pride
Parade for the third consecutive year again citing security concerns. The
Constitutional Court in May held that the ban on the 2011 Pride Parade violated
the right to freedom of assembly and awarded damages to the Pride Parade
Belgrade association. The Appellate Court in Novi Sad, northern Serbia, set a
legal precedent in January when it fined a man for discriminating against a colleague
on grounds of sexual orientation by calling him a derogatory term.
The criminal code was amended in December 2012 to prohibit hate speech on
grounds of sexual orientation and gender identity, and to include hate motivation,
including against LGBT people, as an aggravated circumstance in sentencing. The government adopted a national strategy for prevention and protection
against discrimination in June.
Asylum Seekers and Displaced Persons
In the first eight months of 2013, Serbia registered 2,232 asylum seekers, up
from 1,454 during the same period in 2012. Syrians comprised the largest
national group (432 people).
Concerns remain with the capacity of Serbia’s two reception centers, which can
only accommodate 280 people and are operating at near maximum capacity.
According to the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), national asylum
authorities are considering locations for a third reception center at this writing.
For the first time since it assumed responsibility for the asylum procedure in
2008, the Asylum Office granted subsidiary protection to two applicants in
2013; to date it has never granted refugee status.
No movement occurred in finding a lasting solution for refugees and internally
displaced persons (IDPs) from the Balkan wars. According to data from the
Serbian Commissariat for Refugees and Migrations, as of September there were
54,000 refugees in Serbia, most from Croatia, and 210,000 IDPs, a majority of
whom are from Kosovo. According to UNHCR estimates, 90,000 IDPs are in a situation
of need, primarily with respect to housing.
In December 2012, the Serbian parliament criminalized the act of helping
Serbian citizens to leave to seek asylum abroad. EU and individual member
states, including Germany, Sweden, and Belgium, had pressured Serbian
authorities to address the flow of so-called “fake” asylum seekers to the EU,
most of whom appear to be Roma. There were no reported cases of people prevented
from leaving Serbia in 2013.
Key International Actors
The European Court of Human Rights in a March decision ordered Serbia to
investigate hundreds of cases of missing children following suspected deaths
in hospital wards between 1970-1990 and to provide adequate compensation
to parents.
In July, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon urged Serbia to intensify efforts to
determine the fate of over 1,700 people who disappeared during the 1990s war.
The same month, the UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women expressed concerns about the increasing number of women
murdered or abused by their spouses and ex-spouses and urged the government
to ensure effective investigations, prosecutions, and punishment of perpetrators.
In October, while acknowledging some improvements in the areas of media
freedom and judicial reforms, the European Commission’s annual progress
report on Serbia urged authorities to strengthen the independence of key public
institutions, including the judiciary, and stressed the need for further reforms. It
also called on authorities to enhance the protection of journalists, human
rights defenders, and the LGBT population from threats and attacks.
Kosovo
Human rights protection remains weak in Kosovo. Despite reforms, the justice
system continues to have a large backlog. Ethnic minority communities, Roma,
Ashkali, and Egyptians in particular, continue to suffer discrimination.
Journalists and human rights defenders were subjected to threats and attacks
during 2013.
Tensions sometimes flared up in the divided north, despite improved political
relations with Serbia, demonstrated by an April agreement establishing a special
police commander and appeal court for the Serbian minority; an August
agreement to establish permanent border crossings between Kosovo and
Serbia in 2014; and the September dissolution of Serb parallel structures in
northern Kosovo. In September, unknown assailants killed an EU Rule of Law
Mission (EULEX) police officer in an attack against two EULEX police vehicles.
Police were investigating at time of writing.
Impunity, Accountability, Access to Justice
Justice system reform enacted in January restructured the courts in an attempt
to address the years-long case backlog. A new criminal code also entered into
force in January, without three contested provisions deemed to restrict media
freedom.
In the first nine months, EULEX judges handed down five war crimes judgments,
reaching acquittals in all but one case. The September acquittal of Fatmir Limaj
and nine others in a case concerning the 1998 mass murder of Serb and
Albanian civilians in Klecka by Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) forces illustrates
weaknesses in Kosovo’s witness protection program and challenges to prosecute
crimes committed during and after the war. Testimony from a key witness,
found dead in a park in Germany in December 2012, in what police called a suicide,
was first ruled inadmissible and then, in the retrial, contradictory and
unreliable.
In June, three men were sentenced to six, four, and three years respectively for
beating and torturing Kosovo Albanian civilians illegally detained in the KLA
Llapashtica detention center between 1998 and 1999. In October, the EULEX
special prosecutor charged 15 people with war crimes against civilians and prisoners
in 1998 at a KLA detention center in Likovac.
Hundreds of cases are pending before the Kosovo Special Prosecution Office,
the War Crimes Investigative Unit of the Kosovo Police, and EULEX. At time of
writing, 13 arrest warrants were outstanding concerning Serbs who are believed
to reside outside Kosovo. EULEX continues to investigate 94 war crimes cases
from the 1998-1999 Kosovo war, including massacres in Meja, Dubrava, and
Krusha thought to involve more than 1,000 victims.
At the end of August, the Human Rights Review Panel (HRRP), an independent
body set up in 2009 to review allegations of human rights violations by EULEX
staff, handed down 15 decisions, finding violations in 5 cases. In the case concerning
attacks by Kosovo Police and ethnic Albanians against Serbs during the
2012 Vidovdan Serbian religious holiday, the HRRP found that EULEX had failed
to allocate adequate resources to provide protection or to conduct an effective
investigation into allegations of human rights abuse.
Freedom of Media
Journalists continue to face a hostile environment. In May, a gas bomb was
thrown into the house of the editor-in-chief of Radio Television of Kosovo, the
public service broadcaster, causing damage but no injuries. Kosovo authorities
condemned the attack and police were investigating. At time of writing, no
arrests had been made.
In June, a mixed panel of Kosovo and EULEX judges acquitted former Mayor of
Skenderaj Sami Lushtaku; the former owner of Infopress, Rexhep Hoti; its former
editor-in-chief, Avni Azemi; and two other journalists of threats against Jeta
Xharra, the director of BIRN, a regional news group. The court held that the 12
news items where Infopress referred to Xharra as “a Serbian spy,” and
“embassy slut,” in response to a BIRN TV program dealing with alleged mismanagement
in Skenderaj where Lushtaku was mayor at the time, did not pose
a threat to Xharra.
Treatment of Minorities
Roma, Ashkali, and Egyptian communities, numbering approximately 40,000
people, are the most vulnerable and marginalized groups in Kosovo and continue
to face difficulties obtaining personal documents, impeding their access to
health care, social assistance, and education.
In July, the Ministry of Social Welfare changed the eligibility criteria for social
assistance in a way that effectively prevents many Roma, Ashkali, and Egyptian
families from accessing social benefits. The 2010 Strategy for Integration of
Roma, Ashkali, and Egyptians continues to exist on paper only, with the government
failing to allocate necessary funds to implement the strategy.
Movement occurred with respect to the 2010 Strategy on Reintegration of
Repatriated Persons, including Roma, Ashkali and Egyptians, as central funds
were transferred from the Ministry of Internal Affairs to the Municipal Offices for
Communities and Return, responsible for identifying and supporting Roma,
Ashkali, and Egyptian returnees. The impact of the fund transfer was too early
to tell at time of writing.
Tensions between the Serb minority and Albanian majority flared in the second
half of 2013, particularly in northern Kosovo, with a fatal shooting of an EULEX
officer in September and threats against a Serb politician and his family in
Mitrovica in the lead-up to local elections in November. Police were investigating
both incidents at this writing. In defiance of a Constitutional Court ruling,
the Kosovo Assembly passed in September an amnesty for certain crimes committed
up until June 20, 2013, in “resistance” to Kosovo law enforcement
authorities, including destroying property, assisting offenders after they committed
crimes, and falsifying documents. Supporters of the amnesty law argue
it is intended to facilitate the integration of Kosovo’s Serb minority.
Between January and August, Kosovo Police Services reported only 10 inter-ethnic
incidents, without specifying whether such incidents involved physical
injuries or property damage. International observers remained concerned that
many inter-ethnic incidents are unreported, unregistered, and misclassified.
In January, approximately sixty graves in four orthodox graveyards were vandalized
in Serb minority areas in Kilokot, Obilic, Prizren, and Kosovo Polje. Police
arrested five people in January, including four under 18. Prime Minister Hashim
Thaci condemned the vandalism and allocated 97, 000 EUR (US$ 131,000) to
repair the graves. In February, two Serbian children were injured when an
unknown assailant threw a hand grenade at a house in a suspected act of ethnic
violence. The police were investigating at time of writing.
Human Rights Defenders
In March, at least two assailants severely beat prominent human rights defender
Nazlie Bala outside her apartment. Anonymous death threats preceded the
attack, citing her public support of a proposed amendment to an existing law
that would provide compensation and rehabilitation to survivors of war crimes
of sexual violence. A letter under her door read: “Do not protect the shame.
Otherwise we will kill you.” Police were investigating at this writing.
A mob of about twenty men with clubs destroyed equipment and beat one
employee during the launch of magazine Kosovo 2.0’s “sexuality” issue in
December 2012. The issue included several articles related to lesbian, gay,
bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) issues. In September, the EULEX mission and
the Kosovo state prosecutor charged three people for inflicting bodily harm and
inciting hatred.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
LGBT people face social stigma and a culture of silence. Qesh, the only public
LGBT organization in Kosovo, reported receiving several threats via social
media related to an LGBT event in May hosted in cooperation with the government
ministry for good governance. The organization reported one of these
threats and police were investigating at time of writing.
Asylum Seekers and Displaced Persons
During the first eight months of the year, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) registered 483 voluntary returns, including
people from outside Kosovo and internally displaced persons, compared to 589
during the same period in 2012.
Deportations to Kosovo from Western Europe continued, with limited assistance
provided upon return. Between January and August, the UNHCR registered 2,149
forced returns to Kosovo, including 378 Roma, 143 Ashkali, and 6 Egyptians.
Most minorities were returned from Sweden (243) followed by Germany (150).
The lead-contaminated Osterode camp outside Mitrovica closed in December
2012 and the remaining five Roma, Ashkali, and Egyptian families were resettled
to an apartment building in north Mitrovica.
Key International Actors
In a resolution adopted in January, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe called on Kosovo authorities to fight corruption, make judicial reforms,
address war crimes, protect and promote the rights of Roma, Ashkali, and
Egyptians, ensure independence of media and adequate protection for journalists,
and strengthen the fight against human trafficking. It also urged the
European Union to focus its policy dialogue with Kosovo on strengthening the
rule of law.
EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs Catherine Ashton welcomed Kosovo’s
April agreement with Serbia aiming to normalize relations and advance
European integration, but failed to stress the importance of strengthening
human rights protection.
In an October progress report, a stabilization agreement between the EU and
Kosovo, the European Commission (EC) raised serious concerns about the rule
of law and protection of minorities. The EC urged Kosovar authorities to address
corruption, organized crime, and attacks on the judiciary by strengthening legislation
and its implementation and ensure security and protection measures
for judges, prosecutors, witnesses, and plaintiffs. It also urged authorities to
take further measures to reduce the backlog of court cases by enforcing court
rulings. The report called on authorities to investigate and prosecute attacks
motivated by ethnicity or religion and for prompt implementation of the national
strategy and action plan for the Roma, Ashkali, and Egyptian communities.
During a June visit, UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay
expressed serious concerns about rule of law, including the independence of
the judiciary and case backlogs, as well as discrimination against Roma,
Ashkali, and Egyptians, Serbs, Gorani, and other minorities and called for vigorous
implementation of laws and tougher responses to hate speech and ethnic
intolerance.
In July, UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon called on Kosovo and Serbia to cooperate
to resolve the issue of missing persons in Kosovo. To date, more than
1,700 people remain missing as a result of the war with Serbia.
Tajikistan
President Emomali Rahmon was re-elected to a fourth term in office in
November in an election that lacked meaningful political competition. Oinihol
Bobonazarova, the only genuine independent candidate, was forced to exit the
race prematurely in October after the authorities interfered with her campaign
and intimidated her relatives and supporters. During the lead-up to the election,
authorities widened a crackdown on freedom of expression, imprisoned
opposition leaders, shut down a leading nongovernmental organization (NGO),
and stepped up efforts to extradite political opponents from abroad.
The government also persisted with enforcing a repressive law on religion,
restricting media freedoms, and pressuring civil society groups. There were
widespread complaints by NGOs of the authorities’ use of torture to obtain confessions.
In positive developments, Tajikistan passed a long-awaited law on domestic
violence and committed to accede to the Second Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights on the elimination of the
death penalty.
Government Opponents and Other Critics
Authorities cracked down on government critics and the political opposition
ahead of November’s presidential election.
In February, former Prime Minister and one-time presidential candidate
Abdumalik Abdullanjanov, a refugee in the United States since 1994, was
detained in Kiev on an Interpol warrant. Tajikistan sought his extradition on
charges ranging from embezzlement to involvement in a plot to assassinate
President Rahmon. Abdullanjanov was released following an intervention by
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
In March, Salimboy Shamsiddinov, head of the Uzbek society of the Khatlon
region, was reported missing after leaving his home in Qurghonteppa. The
authorities declared that there was no sign that Shamsiddinov was beaten or
kidnapped. In July, officials claimed that a body resembling Shamsiddinov’s was found in a river in neighboring Uzbekistan, but Shamsiddinov’s family stated
they did not recognize the body from the picture they were shown.
In April, unknown assailants attacked Mahmadali Hayit, deputy head of the
Islamic Revival Party of Tajikistan (IRPT), outside his home in Dushanbe. The
attack happened days before the IRPT’s planned 40-year anniversary convention.
Hayit told Human Rights Watch that he had been under surveillance before
the attack, and that unknown individuals in plain clothes were regularly coming
to his home to inquire about his whereabouts.
In May, businessman and former Minister of Industry Zaid Saidov was detained
at the Dushanbe airport on returning from a trip abroad. In April, Saidov had
announced the creation of an opposition political party, New Tajikistan. Fellow
New Tajikistan members believe that Saidov, currently on trial in a security
services detention center on corruption, embezzlement, polygamy, and rape
charges, was targeted for his opposition activity.
Also in May, Sherik Karamkhudoev, an IRPT leader from the autonomous
province of Gorno-Badakhshan, was sentenced to 14 years’ imprisonment for
“participating in mass disorders” in a closed trial. Karamkhudoev was reported
missing in April 2012 after government troops launched a military operation in
his home region. He resurfaced two weeks later in security services custody in
Dushanbe. His lawyers and family publicly stated that he was tortured in pretrial
detention.
In September, authorities in Dubai pardoned Umarali Kuvvatov, head of the
opposition movement Group of 24, following 10 months of detention on a Tajik
extradition request. Kuvvatov, who was detained in Dubai’s airport in December
2012, stated that he feared assassination were he to be returned to Tajikistan
and is now in hiding outside Tajikistan. A former businessman with close ties to
the Rahmon family, Kuvvatov believes he is being pursued because of his
opposition activities and his knowledge of high-level corruption.
Criminal Justice and Torture
Despite reforms in 2012 to make the criminal code’s definition of torture comply
with international standards, torture remained an enduring problem in 2013.
Torture is often used to coerce confessions and the right to counsel is routinely denied in pretrial custody. In January, UN Special Rapporteur on Torture Juan
Mendez stated in his report on his May 2012 visit to Tajikistan that with regard
to torture, “numerous loopholes and inconsistencies” persist in criminal procedure
and law enforcement practices. In July 2013, the Coalition against Torture,
a group of Tajik NGOs, reported that despite some reforms, claims of torture by
detainees have increased since the beginning of 2012.
In January, a Sughd region appellate court upheld a lower court’s decision to
shut down a leading human rights organization on charges that appeared politically
motivated. The group, the Association of Young Lawyers “Amparo,” had
investigated torture and advocated for the rights of army conscripts. The Justice
Ministry filed a motion to liquidate Amparo in June 2012, only weeks after an
Amparo representative spoke publicly about the need to monitor severe torture
and hazing in Tajikistan’s army.
While impunity for torture was still the norm, authorities took a few positive
steps to hold perpetrators accountable. In May, an appellate court upheld a ruling
requiring the Interior Ministry to compensate the widow of Safarali Sangov
approximately US$10,000 for damages relating to Sangov’s death in police custody
in March 2011, which human rights groups deemed to be the result of torture.
In May, a prison official was convicted of negligence in connection with the
death of Hamza Ikromzoda, who had died as a result of torture in a Dushanbe
prison in September 2012. Investigations against three others accused of
involvement are still pending. Relatives reported that Hamza’s body bore traces
of torture, including burns from a heated iron.
Freedom of Media
Tajikistan further restricted media freedoms in 2013. Authorities periodically
blocked access to independent websites and filed defamation suits against, or
otherwise intimidated, critical journalists. While the 2012 decriminalization of
libel was a step forward, Tajik law retains criminal sanctions for insulting the
president or any government representative, creating a chilling effect on the
freedom of speech.
In January, according to Internet service providers, the state telecommunications
agency ordered the blocking of several websites, including Facebook and
Radio Ozodi, the Radio Free Europe Tajik service. State Telecommunications
Chief Beg Zukhorov stated that the sites were blocked at “the request of the
public” and accused social media users of insulting “respectable people.”
Throughout the year there were also reports that access to YouTube had been
blocked, including for several days in May after a video appeared on the site
showing President Rahmon singing and dancing at his son’s wedding.
In February, authorities denied journalistic accreditation to veteran journalist
and former Radio Ozodi correspondent Abdukayumov Kayumzoda, known for
his journalistic independence.
Also in February a Dushanbe court ordered the independent weekly Imruz News
to pay approximately $10,500 in civil libel damages and publicly apologize to
the son of a high-ranking government official after the paper published a story
questioning his early release from prison where he had been serving a nineand-
a-half-year sentence for drug trafficking.
On April 25 IPRT’s website became unavailable to Tajik users for several weeks.
In response to an inquiry regarding the blocking of the site,
Telecommunications Chief Zukhurov denied government involvement. But a
spokesperson for the Internet provider told an IRPT representative, “You represent
a political party; therefore, we can only say that the problem isn’t with us.”
Freedom of Religion
Tajik authorities maintained tight restrictions on religious freedoms, including
on religious education and worship. Authorities suppress unregistered Muslim
education throughout the country, bring administrative charges against religious
instructors, and have closed many unregistered mosques.
The government has increased the powers of the State Committee for Religious
Affairs to enforce the country’s restrictive religion law and impose large administrative
fines without due process. Authorities also maintained tight controls
on those seeking to receive religious education abroad.
Rights groups, religious communities, and international bodies continued to
criticize the 2011 highly controversial Parental Responsibility Law, which stipulates that parents must prevent their children from participating in religious
activity, except for state-sanctioned religious education, until they turn 18.
Under the pretext of combating extremism, Tajikistan continues to ban several
peaceful minority Muslim groups. Some Christian minority denominations, such
as Jehovah’s Witnesses, are similarly banned.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Although Tajikistan decriminalized same-sex sexual activity in 1998, lesbian,
gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) people are subject to wide-ranging discrimination
and homophobia. In 2013, Tajik NGOs documented several cases of
police violence against LGBT people. LGBT people are especially vulnerable to
extortion, fearing that their sexual orientation could be revealed to their family
or employers.
The Rights of Women and Children
In March, President Rahmon signed a law on the prevention of domestic violence.
The law allows law enforcement officers, not solely victims, to initiate
criminal charges. For years, civil society groups had been pushing the government
to adopt such a law because of their concerns of the seriousness of the
problem of domestic violence in Tajikistan.
Key International Actors
In November, following the re-election of President Rahmon by an overwhelming
majority, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe election
observer mission issued a statement finding that while the election had taken
place peacefully, restrictive registration requirements resulted in a lack of genuine
choice. The report also found that extensive positive state media coverage
of President Rahmon provided him with a “significant advantage,” with widespread
reports on election day of “group voting, and indications of ballot box
stuffing.”
In a May visit, UN Assistant Secretary General for Human Rights Ivan Simonovic
welcomed the country’s preparations to abolish the death penalty and
expressed concern over the widespread problem of violence against women.
While welcoming the Tajik government’s willingness to cooperate with UN
human rights mechanisms and to bring national legislation in line with international
standards, Simonovic specifically called on the Tajik authorities to
empower women by increasing their representation among the ranks of police
officers and prosecutors.
During her November 2012 visit to Dushanbe, EU High Representative Catherine
Ashton raised public concern with President Rahmon about the government
forcing the closure of Amparo, the anti-torture NGO.
The United States embassy issued a statement in April regarding the beating of
opposition leader Mahmadali Hayit, urging the authorities to conduct a thorough
and impartial investigation. Also in April, for the second year in a row, the
US Commission on International Religious Freedom designated Tajikistan a
“country of particular concern” based on the government’s “systematic, ongoing,
and egregious violations of religious freedoms.”
Turkey
In office for three terms since 2002, and enjoying a strong parliamentary majority,
the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) has demonstrated a growing
intolerance of political opposition, public protest, and critical media.
In May, police violently dispersed campaigners staging a peaceful sit-in protest
against a plan to build on Istanbul’s Taksim Gezi Park, triggering weeks of antigovernment
protests in cities throughout Turkey in late May and June. In repeatedly
and harshly clamping down on protests, the government failed to uphold
human rights.
On September 30, the government announced what it called a “democratization
package” of reforms that demonstrated that the government is more focused on
addressing the undemocratic legacy it inherited than abuses that have proliferated
under its watch. Positive steps included ending the headscarf ban for
women in the civil service; signaling that the 10 percent election threshold that
has kept minority parties out of parliament will be lowered; and easing the
restriction on mother-tongue education by permitting it in private schools.
Cross-party efforts to reach a consensus on a new constitution stalled over contested
elements such as the definition of citizenship and minority rights provisions.
The government made important initial steps in a peace process with the country’s
Kurdish minority. At the start of 2013, the government announced talks
with imprisoned Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) leader Abdullah Öcalan to end
the decades-long armed conflict with the PKK. Bolder steps to address the
rights deficit for Turkey’s Kurds could address the root causes of the conflict
and help further human rights for all ethnic and religious minority groups in
Turkey. Significantly, the government and the PKK maintained a ceasefire
through 2013 and there were no deaths reported on either side.
The Syrian conflict continued to be strongly felt in Turkey’s border towns, and,
as of November, Turkey was hosting 500,000 Syrian refugees, including
200,000 living in camps, according to Turkish government estimates. Turkish
authorities periodically prevented tens of thousands of Syrian asylum seekers
from crossing into Turkey, forcing them to live in internally displaced persons
camps and Syrian villages in the border areas, including in areas hit by Syrian aerial attacks. A February car bombing killed 18 at the Cilvegözü, Hatay border
crossing with Syria, and a May bomb attack in the Hatay town of Reyhanlı killed
52 civilians. The Turkish authorities suspect Syrian government involvement in
both attacks. Five suspects have been indicted for the former bombing and 33
suspects for the Reyhanlı bombing.
Freedom of Expression, Association, and Assembly
The government’s response to the Taksim Gezi Park protests in Istanbul and
anti-government protests in other cities demonstrated its intolerance of the
right to peaceful assembly and free expression. The authorities charged hundreds
of individuals involved in the protests—mostly in Istanbul, Ankara, and
Izmir—with participating in unauthorized demonstrations, resisting the police,
and damaging public property. Several dozen people face additional terrorism
charges in connection with the protests. Around 50 protesters remained in pretrial
detention at time of writing. A criminal investigation into the organizers of
Taksim Solidarity, a platform of 128 nongovernmental organizations supporting
the Gezi Park campaign and sit-in was ongoing.
The mute or biased coverage of the Taksim Gezi protests in much of Turkey’s
media highlighted the reluctance of many media companies to report news
impartially when it conflicts with government interests. In the course of the
year, scores of media workers, among them highly respected mainstream journalists
and commentators writing critically of the government in different
media, were fired from their jobs.
Turkey continued to prosecute journalists in 2013, and several dozen remain in
jail. The trial continued of 44 mainly Kurdish journalists and media workers (20
in detention since December 2011, at time of writing) for alleged links to the
Union of Kurdistan Communities (KCK), a body connected with the PKK.
The government continued efforts to amend some laws that are used to limit
free speech. In April, parliament passed a reform bill—known as “the fourth
reform package” following three others since March 2011—amending various
laws in response to violations identified by the European Court of Human Rights
(ECtHR) in many judgments against Turkey. Positive changes included lifting
limits on severe restrictions on publishing or reporting statements by illegal
organizations (article 6/2, Anti-Terror Law) and narrowing the scope of the crime of “making terrorist propaganda” (article 7/2, Anti-Terror Law; article
220/8, Turkish Penal Code).
Reforms undertaken in 2013 did not remedy the situation of the thousands of
prosecutions of individuals on charges of “membership of an armed organization”
(article 314, Turkish Penal Code) for activities amounting to nonviolent
political association. Demonstrating the government’s widespread misuse of
terrorism laws to prosecute and incarcerate individuals, hundreds of Kurdish
political activists, elected mayors, parliamentarians, officials of the Peace and
Democracy Party, students, and lawyers have been in prison for long periods, in
some cases for over four-and-a-half years, during their trials for association
with the KCK. The human rights defender Muharrem Erbey has spent four years
in prison on these charges.
There was a spate of trials in 2013 against public figures for insulting the religious
sentiments of a part of the population, similar to the prosecutions of individuals
for “insulting Turkishness” common in the recent past. Pianist Fazil Say
received a 10-month suspended prison sentence for sending tweets that poked
fun at believers and Islam. An Istanbul court in April, and again during a retrial
in September, determined the tweets had “insulted the religious sentiments of
a part of the population” (under article 216/3 of the Turkish Penal Code). The
case was at appeal at time of writing. Lawyer Canan Arın stood trial under the
same charge, plus the charge of insulting the president, for her December 2011
comments at an Antalya Bar Association seminar on women’s rights mentioning
the practice of early marriage in Islam and a reference to the fact that President
Abdullah Gül’s bride had been a child. In May, the trial was suspended on condition
that Arın does not commit a similar offense for the next three years.
Police Ill-treatment and Excessive Use of Force
The Taksim Gezi Park protests saw police repeatedly disperse protesters, most
of whom were entirely peaceful, with water cannons, rubber bullets, and teargas,
resorting to excessive use of force and beatings of detainees. Police also
unlawfully shot teargas canisters directly at protesters, leading to scores of protesters
receiving serious head injuries as a direct result. The Turkish Medical
Association reported that 11 people lost an eye in this way. Fourteen-year-old
Berkin Elvan was hit by a teargas canister in June and remained in a critical condition in a coma at time of writing. Six demonstrators and one police officer
died in the course of demonstrations between May and September. Ali İsmail
Korkmaz, a protester in Eskişehir, died of his head injuries in July after being
beaten during a June 2 demonstration. The trial of four police and four civilians
for his murder was scheduled to begin in February 2014. A police officer stood
trial in September for the fatal shooting of Ethem Sarısülük, a protester in
Ankara.
A report of the Interior Ministry’s inspectorate quoted in the press in September
found that police in Istanbul and Izmir had used excessive force. The Security
Directorate’s inspectorate announced in September that 164 police officers, 32
of them senior officers, faced administrative investigation. There was no information
about the progress of criminal investigations into the police for excessive
use of force at time of writing. Investigation and prosecution of demonstrators
proceeded at a much faster pace.
Combatting Impunity
Great obstacles remain in securing justice for victims of abuses by police, military,
and state officials. The lifting of the statute of limitations for the prosecution
of torture was a positive element in the April reform bill, though prosecution
of unlawful killings by state perpetrators is still subject to a 20-year time
limit, raising concerns about impunity for abuses committed in the early 1990s.
In June 2013, the Diyarbakır prosecutor’s office said it lacked jurisdiction in the
case of an attack by the Turkish Air Force in December 2011 that killed 34
Kurdish villagers close to the Iraqi Kurdistan border near Uludere. The prosecutor
referred the case to the military prosecutor, but the lack of an effective
investigation to date supports concerns about an official cover-up.
The retrial of a group of young men for the January 2007 murder of journalist
Hrant Dink began in September following the Court of Cassation decision to
quash the first verdict on procedural grounds. To date there has been inadequate
investigation of evidence of state collusion in Dink’s murder.
The trial of anti-AKP coup plotters (the Ergenekon gang) ended in August with
259 defendants receiving a range of long sentences and 21 acquitted. The case
was under appeal. While the Ergenekon case represented a milestone in civilian control over the military, it illustrates the serious concerns regarding the proliferation
in recent years, and the fairness, of “mass trials” in which multiple
defendants are alleged to have been part of terrorist groups. In the Ergenekon
case, there are concerns too there was no investigation of the human rights
abuses in which a core group of the military suspects were implicated.
In September, the trial began of 103 retired members of the top military (5 in
detention at time of writing) charged with removing the government of former
Prime Minister Necmettin Erbakan in 1997.
Key International Actors
The European Union, leading EU member states, and the United States
expressed strong support for a peace process to end the conflict with the PKK
and solve the Kurdish issue. They also raised to varying degrees concerns over
the Turkish government’s handling of the Taksim Gezi Park protests, including
police use of excessive force in dispersing nonviolent demonstrations. The
European Commission also expressed concern over the handling of the Taksim
Gezi Park protests in its annual progress report released in October. In
November, the EU revived EU accession negotiations with Turkey, opening a
new chapter on regional policy.
Among ECtHR rulings against Turkey in 2013, a July decision (Abdullah Yaşa and
Others v. Turkey) found that improper firing of teargas by Turkish police directly
at protestors, injuring a 13-year-old, had violated human rights standards, and
called for stronger safeguards to minimize the risk of death and injury resulting
from its use.
Following a visit in November 2012, the UN special rapporteur on extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions concluded “the most important and urgent
challenge is the lack of accountability in cases of killings, both those perpetrated
recently and those from the 1990s.”
In July, the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention issued an opinion stating
the detention of 250 military personnel on trial for coup-plotting (the so-called
Sledgehammer trial) was arbitrary and violated the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights.
Turkmenistan
Turkmenistan remains one of the world’s most repressive countries. The country
is virtually closed to independent scrutiny, media and religious freedoms are
subject to draconian restrictions, and human rights defenders and other
activists face the constant threat of government reprisal. The government continues
to use imprisonment as a tool for political retaliation. The release of several
political prisoners and the adoption of some new laws that some have
hailed as “reform,” have barely dented this stark reality.
Cult of Personality, No Pluralism
President Gurbanguly Berdymukhamedov, his relatives, and associates enjoy
unlimited power and total control over all aspects of public life in
Turkmenistan. Berdymukhamedov’s cult of personality continued to grow in
2013. His portraits permeate the country.
After Berdymukhamedov led a mass bicycle ride in August, civil servants and
students were pressured to purchase bicycles at high prices. The government
often forces people, sometimes by the thousands, to gather for hours for events
attended by Berdymukhamedov. They are not permitted to leave, even to use
the toilet.
In a June 2013 by-election, Ovezmammed Mammedov, chairman of the Party of
Industrialists and Entrepreneurs, became the first parliamentary deputy who is
not a member of the ruling party. Founded by a close associate of
Berdymukhamedov, with the government’s active involvement, Mammedov’s
party presents no alternatives to government policies.
Civil Society
Repressive government policies make it extremely difficult for independent
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) to operate. Civil society activists and
journalists, including those living in exile and their families in Turkmenistan,
face a constant threat of government reprisal. NGOs are legally banned from
carrying out any work unless they are registered, yet no independent NGO has
obtained registration in the past five years.
A January 2013 presidential decree required all foreign grants to be registered
with the government. Funding proposals require at least five layers of government
approval, including a government assessment that assistance in the proposed
area is desirable. Funding for “political” activities is prohibited.
Freedom of Media and Information
In December 2012, parliament adopted a law banning censorship and affirming
citizens’ right to freedom of expression and information. In practice, however,
there is a total absence of media freedom in Turkmenistan. The state controls
all print and electronic media, with the exception of one newspaper founded by
an individual close to Berdymukhamedov.
Lack of access to Turkmenistan makes foreign media coverage very difficult. In
May 2013, police arrested Rovshen Yazmuhamedov, a local correspondent for
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty who reported on social issues and whom
authorities questioned after his articles generated online reader responses.
After two weeks of international pressure, the authorities released
Yazmuhamedov. The reason for his detention remains unknown.
An example of conspicuous state interference with freedom of information
occurred in April 2013, when Berdymukhamedov fell off his horse during a hippodrome
race. Security forces forced spectators to delete from their cameras
any image of the fall.
Internet access remains limited and heavily state-controlled. The country’s only
Internet service provider is state-operated, and social media and many websites
are blocked, including those of foreign news organizations.
Monthly Internet connectivity costs roughly US$100, making it inaccessible for
many. Internet cafes require visitors to present their passports. The government
is known to monitor electronic and telephone communications.
Freedom of Movement
Turkmenistan’s government continues to restrict the right of its citizens to travel
freely outside the country by means of an informal and arbitrary system of
travel bans commonly imposed on civil society activists and relatives of exiled
dissidents. While a handful of persons previously banned from foreign travel were permitted to travel abroad in 2013, others were not, including family members
of political prisoners.
Students studying abroad frequently face obstacles leaving Turkmenistan when
returning to their studies. In September 2013, border officials prohibited, without
explanation, several Turkmen students from leaving the country to return to
Tajikistan to resume studies. Tajikistan’s Ministry of Education confirmed that
no Turkmen students studying at Tajik universities have returned.
In June, the migration service announced it would issue new biometric passports
to Turkmen citizens who also have had Russian passports since June
2003. However, according to the Turkmenistan Initiative for Human Rights, a
Vienna-based group, these individuals report continued problems obtaining the
new passports. The new passports are required for all travel abroad for all
Turkmen citizens, with very few exceptions.
Freedom of Religion
No congregations of unregistered religious groups or communities are allowed,
and religious communities have been unable to register for years. A new administrative
offenses code, adopted in August 2013, establishes new fines for
involvement in unregistered religious activity, although the amount of the fines
will be known only when the code enters into force in 2014.
According to Forum 18, an independent international religious freedom group,
in September 2013, police in Mary province summoned for questioning Ilmurad
Nurliev, a Protestant pastor who was released from prison in 2012 after serving
18 months on bogus swindling charges. They questioned, harassed, and threatened
him and others who signed an unsuccessful 2007 petition to register
Nurliev’s congregation.
Forum 18 reported that in March, police in Lebap province raided the homes of
several Protestant believers and confiscated their Bibles. Courts sentenced two
of them to fines of twice the average monthly wage for possession of banned
religious literature.
Forum 18 also reported that in January, police raided the home of a Jehovah’s
Witness who had filed a complaint to the United Nations Human Rights
Committee, detained and beat six visitors, and threatened one with rape. All were released, and a court fined three of the six for violating laws on religious
literature.
Political Prisoners, Enforced Disappearances, and Torture
In February 2013, civil society activists Annakurban Amanklychev and
Sapardurdy Khajiev were released from prison after fully serving nearly sevenyear
sentences on bogus weapons charges. Before their arrest, they had been
affiliated with the Turkmenistan Helsinki Foundation, an exiled human rights
group. Both suffer numerous health problems related to their incarceration.
Also in February, the authorities released two popular singers, Murad Ovezov
and Maksat Kakabaev, sentenced on bogus charges in 2011 to five and seven
years’ imprisonment respectively.
In July, authorities released Geldymyrat Nurmuhammedov, a former minister of
culture and tourism, who had openly criticized the government and was forced
to undergo nine months of forced drug rehabilitation treatment, despite having
no history of drug abuse.
However, many others continue to languish in Turkmen prisons on what appear
to be politically motivated charges. The actual number of those jailed on political
grounds is impossible to determine because the justice system lacks transparency,
trials are closed in political cases, and the overall level of repression
precludes independent monitoring of these cases.
Political dissident Gulgeldy Annaniazov, arrested in 2008, remains imprisoned
on charges that are not known even to his family. He is serving an 11-year sentence.
A decade after their arrest and show trials, several dozen persons convicted in
relation to the November 2002 alleged assassination attempt on former
President Saparmurat Niyazov remain victims of enforced disappearances.
Some of those disappeared include former Foreign Minister Boris
Shikhmuradov and Turkmenistan’s Former Ambassador to the Organization for
Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) Batyr Berdiev. Their fate is
unknown, even to their families. Human Rights Watch is aware of longstanding
unconfirmed reports that several defendants in the case have died in detention.
Torture remains a grave problem, particularly in high-security facilities. The
International Committee for the Red Cross does not have full access to Turkmen
prisons. The government has persistently denied access to the country for independent
human rights monitors, including international NGOs and 10 United
Nations special procedures.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Consensual sex between men is criminalized with a maximum prison sentence
of two years. Turkmenistan rejected recommendations made during the April
2013 United Nations Universal Periodic Review to decriminalize consensual sex
between adults of the same sex.
Key International Actors
After having had no active projects on Turkmenistan since 1997, the World Bank
in July approved an interim strategy to provide analytical and technical services
to Turkmenistan.
The upgrading of relations between the European Union and Turkmenistan, in
the form of a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA), remained stalled.
The European Parliament continued to postpone its necessary approval of the
PCA, in part over human rights concerns. But there was no apparent effort on
the part of the EU institutions to press for human rights reforms in exchange for
the finalization of the agreement.
In November 2012, during her first trip to Central Asia, EU High Representative
Catherine Ashton met with Foreign Minister Rashid Meredov to discuss energy
and other issues. Ashton’s public statement noted that human rights concerns
were also discussed, although she did not articulate them publicly. The annual
EU-Turkmenistan human rights dialogue bore no concrete results.
In April, Turkmenistan was reviewed under the UN Universal Periodic Review.
While Turkmenistan accepted most of the recommendations made by UN member
states during the review, it rejected eighteen among the most pressing
ones, five of which related to demands to release political prisoners or make
known the whereabouts of prisoners who have disappeared in the country’s
prison system.
In May, Assistant Secretary General for Human Rights Ivan Simonovic met with
high-level officials in Turkmenistan, and emphasized the need for access to the
country for UN special procedures.
Ukraine
In 2013, Ukraine derailed its long-standing ambition of deeper political and
economic integration with the European Union by suspending signature of the
EU-Ukraine Association Agreement, including a Deep and Comprehensive Free
Trade Area that it had initialed in March 2012. The government’s unexpected
decision to suspend signing the agreement sparked large and mostly peaceful
protests in Kiev and other major cities. The protests grew after the authorities
used excessive force to disperse protesters, injuring dozens, and arrested several
activists for allegedly “rioting.”
Parliament considered homophobic bills aimed at criminalizing the “promotion”
of homosexuality among children and failed to revise the labor code to
include lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) people as a protected
category. Although activists participated in an LGBT equality march in May,
attacks on LGBT groups and individuals remain a serious concern. There were
many more attacks on journalists than in 2012. President Viktor Yanukovich
pardoned several politicians imprisoned on politically motivated charges, yet
former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko and several others remain in prison.
Ukraine’s asylum system remains flawed. The government took important steps
to improve access to palliative care, but has yet to implement new regulations
or expand access to opiate substitution treatment for drug users.
Rule of Law
October 2013 marked two years since former Prime Minister Yulia
Tymoshenko’s conviction on charges of abuse of office. In April, the European
Court of Human Rights determined Tymoshenko’s pre-trial detention had been
arbitrary, because she was not allowed a review of her detention or to seek
compensation for unlawful detention. The European Court dismissed
Tymoshenko’s complaints concerning conditions of pre-trial detention and
found no violation concerning alleged ill-treatment during her transfer from
prison to a hospital in April 2012. The European Court will rule separately on the
legality of Tymoshenko’s criminal conviction and sentence.
In a September report on its 2012 visit to Ukraine, the Council of Europe’s
Committee for the Prevention of Torture confirmed Tymoshenko’s allegations of
use of excessive force during her April 2012 hospital transfer.
In November, police briefly detained Tymoshenko’s lawyer Serhiy Vlasenko on
domestic violence charges. Vlasenko was later released on bail. Ten days later,
parliament failed to pass a bill that would allow Tymoshenko to receive medical
treatment in Germany, which she has requested out of concerns for her safety
in Ukrainian medical institutions.
In April, President Yanukovych pardoned several former officials from
Tymoshenko’s government, including former Minister of Internal Affairs Yuri
Lutsenko, imprisoned in 2010 on charges of embezzlement and abuse of office.
Lutsenko is barred from running for public office for at least four years, until his
conviction is expunged.
In March, Ukraine issued an extradition request for Viktor Romanyuk, a candidate
for the Batkovchina opposition party in the October 2012 parliamentary
elections, on allegations of attempting to steal state property in 2008. Italian
authorities arrested Romanyuk in March, but refused to extradite him, after a
court found no grounds to support a criminal prosecution. Romanyuk led in his
district when results in several districts were annulled at the request of a candidate
for the pro-government Party of Regions. The case against Romanyuk
appears aimed at preventing him from returning to campaign in repeat elections
yet to be scheduled.
Migration and Asylum
Ukraine’s asylum system remains deeply flawed. Despite 2011 changes to the
refugee law, asylum seekers often encounter barriers in accessing asylum procedures,
face prolonged periods of administrative detention, and have difficulty
challenging their detention or appealing expulsion decisions by the courts.
Ukraine’s refugee recognition rates continue to decline. Because of flaws in the
asylum system, there is no effective protection against refoulement, although
there were no known new cases in 2013.
In February, Kyiv airport officials detained former Prime Minister of Tajikistan
Abdoumalik Abdoulladjanov, as he arrived from the United States, where he has refugee status, in response to a politically motivated extradition request by
Tajikistan, in violation of domestic law. Following an outcry from human rights
groups and international organizations, authorities denied the extradition
request and released Abdoulladjanov in April.
Ukrainian authorities failed to properly investigate the refoulement of a Russian
political activist, Leonid Razvozzhayev, who went missing in October 2012
while in the process of applying for asylum in Ukraine and reappeared several
days later in custody in Russia. The activist alleged mistreatment by the
Russian authorities upon his forcible return to Russia, including being held in
incommunicado detention and forced to sign a confession under duress.
Health
The government took important steps to improve care for tens of thousands of
patients suffering from severe pain, by approving local production of oral morphine
and adopting new drug control regulations that significantly simplify prescription
of strong pain medications. As of September 2013, however, the
Ministry of Health had not operationalized the new norms, limiting patients’
access to essential medications. The expansion of treatment for dependence
on opium-based drugs slowed considerably. Just 7,500 patients were receiving
opiate substitution treatment in 2013, far short of the 20,000 approved in the
National HIV/AIDS Program. Opiate substitution treatment remains unavailable
in prisons, which hold many injecting drug users.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Two homophobic bills pending in parliament propose heavy fines or a prison
sentence of up to six years for the production, publication, or distribution of
materials aimed at the “promotion” of homosexuality among children. In
February, the Cabinet of Ministers proposed amendments to the Labor Code
introducing sexual orientation as protected grounds against discrimination, but
parliament twice postponed consideration of the amendments. The EU requires
Ukraine to adopt comprehensive anti-discrimination legislation for completion
of the EU-Ukraine visa liberalization process.
Neo-Nazi and nationalist groups led a campaign through social networks and
organized rallies in different regions threatening violence against LGBT people
and calling for cancellation of the May Pride Equality March. After a Kyiv court
banned all public events in the city center for the day of the march, it was held
on the outskirts of Kyiv with a heavy police presence protecting march participants
from counter-protestors. Police investigations into online threats against
LGBT activists had no results.
Several LGBT activists were attacked. In May, members of the ultra-right
Svoboda political party threw sour cream at LGBT activist Olena Shevchenko
outside a club in Kyiv. Shevchenko filed a complaint with police but has
received no response. Also in May, unidentified assailants attacked an LGBT
activist in Mykolayiv, in southern Ukraine, punching, kicking and shouting
homophobic slurs at him. The police opened an investigation into the attack,
which is ongoing.
The law requires transgender people to undergo forced sterilization and a
mandatory 45-day psychiatric institution stay as part of legal gender recognition
procedures.
During its March UN Human Rights Council Universal Periodic Review Ukraine
rejected recommendations to adopt anti-discrimination legislation and drop
homophobic bills.
Civil Society and Media
Thirty-five journalists were attacked in the first six months of 2013, more than
twice as many as during the same period in 2012. Two journalists covering a
May opposition rally in Kyiv suffered multiple injuries after a group of nationalist
youth severely beat them. Police reportedly stood by without intervening. In
September, a court handed suspended sentences to three of the attackers for
hooliganism and obstructing journalists’ work.
In July, unknown attackers assaulted journalist Sergei Ostapenko outside his
apartment in Lugansk, resulting in multiple bruises. Also in July, two men beat
Oleg Bogdanov, a journalist from an online outlet, “Road Control,” near his
home in Donetsk, breaking his nose and jaw. Both journalists had reported on police corruption. Criminal investigations into both cases are ongoing, but have
produced no results.
In January, following a closed trial, a Kyiv court sentenced Oleksy Pukach, former
chief of the Interior Ministry’s Criminal Investigations Directorate, to life in
prison for the premeditated murder in 2000 of outspoken journalist Georgi
Gongadze. In 2005, a court sentenced three former policemen for carrying out
the murder. Despite Pukach’s testimony implicating several senior government
officials, including former Ukrainian President Leonid Kuchma, with giving the
order to murder Gongadze, no one else has been charged.
In July, a district court ordered that 70-year-old Raisa Radchenko from
Zaporizhzhya, who publicized corruption and police abuse, be placed in a psychiatric
facility, alleging that her behavior “posed a threat to society.” Doctors
diagnosed Radchenko, who had no history of mental illness, with a personality
disorder and paranoia and forcibly gave her strong sedatives. Officials denied
Radchenko access to her lawyer in police custody and in the psychiatric facility.
Radchenko was released after two weeks, following an outcry by human rights
groups and the Ukrainian human rights ombudsperson.
Key International Actors
Throughout the year, the EU consistently urged Ukraine’s authorities to fulfill
the human rights criteria the EU had set out in order to enable signature of the
EU-Ukraine Association Agreement at the November 2013 Eastern Partnership
summit. These included tangible progress on: ending politically motivated prosecutions;
fair and transparent elections; and judiciary reform. In a sudden
move, one week before the summit, the Ukrainian government announced its
decision to halt the association agreement with the EU, citing among other reasons
the need to “restore trade volumes” with Russia.
Earlier in the year, Russia exerted pressure on Ukraine, stating that the EU
Association Agreement, including the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade
Area, would harm relations with Moscow and preclude Ukraine’s participation
in a regional Russia-led Customs Union. In August, Russia imposed stricter customs
controls on goods from Ukraine and threatened to cut the gas supply and
permanently tighten customs procedures should Ukraine sign the agreement
with the EU. In September, EU Commissioner for Enlargement and European Neighbourhood Policy Štefan Füle called Russian pressure unacceptable. EU
High Representative Catherine Ashton called the Ukrainian government’s decision
not to sign the Association Agreement with the EU “a disappointment not
just for the EU but also for the people of Ukraine.”
In April, Ashton and Füle welcomed President Yanukovich’s pardon of several
officials imprisoned on politically motivated charges and urged the authorities
to continue addressing cases of selective justice.
In July, the Representative on Freedom of the Media from the Organization for
Security and Co-operation in Europe condemned attacks on journalists in
Ukraine and called on the authorities to ensure journalists’ safety.
In a July report, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) said Ukraine’s asylum system still requires fundamental
improvements, including better protection against refoulement.
Uzbekistan
Uzbekistan’s human rights record remained abysmal across a wide spectrum of
violations. The country is virtually closed to independent scrutiny. Freedom of
expression is severely limited. Authorities continue to crack down on rights
activists, harass activists living in exile, and persecute those who practice their
religion outside strict state controls. Forced labor of adults and children continues.
Torture remains systematic in the criminal justice system. The International
Committee of the Red Cross took the unusual step in April of announcing publicly
its decision to end prison visits in Uzbekistan. It cited its inability to follow
standard procedures for visits, including being able to access all detainees of
concern and speaking with detainees in private.
Despite continuing grave abuses, the United States and the European Union
advanced closer relations with Uzbekistan, seeking cooperation in the war in
Afghanistan.
Human Rights Defenders and Journalists
Human rights defenders face the threat of government reprisal, including
imprisonment and torture. Authorities block international rights groups and
media from operating in Uzbekistan.
Uzbekistan has imprisoned more than a dozen human rights defenders on
wrongful charges and has brought charges against others because of their
work. Those currently serving prison sentences include: Solijon
Abdurakhmanov, Azam Formonov, Mehrinisso Hamdamova, Zulhumor
Hamdamova, Isroiljon Holdarov, Nosim Isakov, Gaibullo Jalilov, Turaboi
Juraboev, Abdurasul Khudoinazarov, Ganihon Mamatkhanov, Chuyan
Mamatkulov, Zafarjon Rahimov, Yuldash Rasulov, Bobomurod Razzakov,
Dilmurod Saidov, Nematjon Siddikov, and Akzam Turgunov.
Other peaceful opposition figures remain imprisoned on politically motivated
charges following unfair trials, including: Muhammad Bekjanov, Batyrbek
Eshkuziev, Ruhiddin Fahruddinov, Hayrullo Hamidov, Bahrom Ibragimov, Murod
Juraev, Davron Kabilov, Matluba Karimova, Samandar Kukanov, Gayrat Mehliboev, Erkin Musaev, Yusuf Ruzimuradov, Rustam Usmanov, Ravshanbek
Vafoev, and Akram Yuldashev. Many detained activists are in serious ill-health
and have been tortured in prison.
On January 17 Khorezm-based activist Valerii Nazarov appeared outside his
home heavily drugged and unable to speak. He went missing on December 7,
2012, the day before he was to take part in an opposition rally marking the 20th
anniversary of Uzbekistan’s Constitution. Before going missing, Nazarov’s
house was surrounded by security services. Friends believe he was held in a
mental hospital.
On February 5, 25 men broke into the home of Fergana-based rights activist
Nematjon Siddikov, beating him and his three sons. Days earlier Siddikov had
alleged the involvement of officials in a smuggling ring along the Uzbek-Kyrgyz
border. Although in the vicinity, police failed to protect Siddikov during the
attack but intervened later to arrest him on charges of defamation and assault.
In May, Siddikov and one of his sons were sentenced to six years’ imprisonment.
In June, authorities deported Kyrgyz rights defender Tolekan Ismailova when
she arrived at the Tashkent airport. Also in June, Ergashbai Rahimov, an activist
who had advocated for the release of imprisoned journalist Solijon
Abdurakhamanov, was detained for over a month in Karakalpakstan on defamation
charges.
On July 8, a court in Karshi fined rights defenders Elena Urlaeva, Malohat
Eshonkulova, and others a total of US$15,500 for staging a peaceful protest
over the incommunicado detention of Hasan Choriev, father of the leader of
Birdamlik, an opposition movement. Several women attacked Urlaeva and others
moments before they began their protest outside the local office of the
prosecutor general. Officials in the building did not stop the beating but later
arrested the activists.
In August, 60-year-old Bobomurad Razzakov, the Bukhara region representative
of the rights group Ezgulik (“Compassion”), was convicted of involvement in
human trafficking and sentenced to four years’ imprisonment.
On August 23, a court in Jizzakh sentenced 75-year-old activist Turaboi Juraboev
to five years in prison. Arrested in May, Juraboev was found guilty of extortion despite the fact that three of the plaintiffs withdrew their complaints. Juraboev
is known for his anti-corruption work.
In July, a Tashkent court sentenced in absentia France-based activist Nadejda
Atayeva, her father, and her brother to six, seven, and nine years’ imprisonment,
respectively, on trumped-up charges of embezzlement. Prosecutors never
informed Atayeva about the trial, which was held in secret.
In September, authorities arrested Sergei Naumov, a journalist known for his
independent reporting on politically sensitive issues such as ethnic discrimination,
under circumstances that appeared orchestrated to keep him from carrying
out his work. Naumov was held in incommunicado detention for 12 days
after a hearing marred by procedural violations and without access to independent
counsel.
The Andijan Massacre
Eight years on, authorities continue to refuse an independent investigation into
the 2005 government massacre of hundreds of people in Andijan. They had
gathered to protest in connection with the prosecution of local businessmen on
terrorism charges. Authorities persecute anyone suspected of having witnessed
the atrocities or who attempts to speak publicly about them.
On May 13, authorities arrested activists Elena Urlaeva and Adelaida Kim as
they attempted to lay a wreath of flowers at a public monument in Tashkent to
commemorate the massacre’s eighth anniversary.
Criminal Justice and Torture
Torture plagues Uzbekistan’s places of detention, where it is often used to
coerce confessions and occurs with impunity. Methods include beating with
batons and plastic bottles, hanging by the wrists and ankles, rape, and sexual
humiliation.
There is no evidence that the introduction of habeas corpus in 2008 has
reduced torture in pretrial custody or ensured due process for detainees.
Authorities routinely violate the right to counsel. Defense lawyers that take on
politically sensitive cases have been disbarred since the passage of a law in
2009 dissolving the independent bar association.
Algeria
Despite the lifting of the state of emergency in April 2011 and the adoption of
new laws on association, media, and political parties, Algeria has made little
progress on the protection of human rights. Authorities continued to restrict
freedom of assembly and association, prohibiting meetings and protests. They
clamped down on union rights, frequently resorting to arrests and prosecutions
of union leaders and activists.
Security forces and armed groups continued to enjoy impunity for atrocities
they committed during the civil war of the 1990s. Armed militants committed a
significant number of attacks against government officials, members of security
forces, and civilians, culminating in the attack against the gas facility of In
Amenas. After lifting the state of emergency back in 2011, authorities adopted
new legislation authorizing the long-established practice of holding alleged terrorists
in assigned secret residences for up to nine months.
Freedom of Assembly
Algerian authorities continue to restrict freedom of assembly, relying on preemptive
techniques, including blocking access to sites of planned demonstrations
and arresting organizers in advance to prevent public protests from even
beginning. During peaceful demonstrations in the south of the country organized
by associations of the unemployed, police arrested protesters. Courts later
sentenced several of them to fines or suspended prison terms. Police arrested
Taher Belabès, a coordinator for the National Committee for the Defense of the
Rights of the Unemployed, in the southern town of Ouargla on January 2, after
police dispersed peaceful protesters demanding jobs and the sacking of local
officials for failing to tackle unemployment. Prosecutors charged Belabès with
“obstructing the flow of traffic” and “inciting a gathering” and sentenced him
on February 3 to one month in prison and a fine of 50,000 Algerian dinars
(US$614).
Freedom of Association
On February 20, 2013, police arrested and expelled 10 non-Algerian members of
associations of unemployed workers in other Maghreb countries who had traveled to Algiers to attend the first Maghreb Forum for the Fight Against
Unemployment and Temporary Work (Forum maghrébin pour la lutte contre le
chômage et le travail précaire) that was to take place on February 20 and 21 at
the labor union center in the Bab Ezzouar neighborhood. Officials held them at
the Bab Ezzouar police station, then took them to the airport, from where they
expelled five Tunisians and three Mauritanians that same day, and two
Moroccans the following day.
Freedom of Speech
The state operates all television and radio stations, and on key issues, such as
security and foreign and economic policy, they broadcast the official line and
allow no dissident commentary or critical reporting.
The January 2012 Law on Information eliminated prison sentences but raised
fines for journalists who commit speech offenses. The offenses include defaming
or showing contempt for the president, state institutions, and courts. The
law has also broadened restrictions on journalists by requiring them to respect
vaguely worded concepts, such as national unity and identity, public order, and
national economic interests.
Other speech offenses still pervade the penal code, which provides for up to
three years in prison for tracts, bulletins, or flyers that “may harm the national
interest” and up to one year for defaming or insulting the president of the
republic, parliament, the army, or state institutions. Prosecutors haul journalists
and independent publishers into court for defaming or insulting public officials,
and first instance courts sometimes sentence them to prison and heavy
fines, only to have appeals courts overturn or convert to suspended sentences
the penalties imposed by the lower courts.
On May 19, the public prosecutor in Algiers charged Hisham Abboud, director
and owner of the private newspaper Jaridati and its French edition Mon Journal,
of compromising state security by publishing a story about President Abdelaziz
Bouteflika’s health. The Telecommunications Ministry had banned the two
newspapers from publishing a front page report on the deteriorating health of
the president, based on French medical sources and sources close to
Bouteflika.
Judicial Harassment
In 2013, authorities charged several human rights activists and union leaders
with crimes related to the peaceful exercise of their right to assemble or their
voicing of support for strikes and demonstrations. A court on May 6 sentenced
Abdelkader Kherba, a member of the National Committee to Defend the Rights
of the Unemployed (Comité national pour la défense des droits des chômeurs-
CNDDC) to two months in prison, and fined him 20,000 dinars (US$250) after
he distributed leaflets about national unemployment.
Rights of Unions
Algerian authorities in 2013 have increasingly clamped down on workers’
efforts to form independent unions and organize and participate in peaceful
protests and strikes. Authorities have blocked union demonstrations, arbitrarily
arrested trade unionists, and prosecuted some on criminal charges, when the
real motive behind their prosecution appears to have been punishment for
union activities.
Algerian authorities engage in administrative maneuvers to withhold legal status
from independent unions. The law on legalizing new unions requires these
groups only to notify the authorities that they exist, not to seek their permission
to form. But authorities sometimes refuse to issue a receipt proving they have
been notified.
The Union of Higher Education Teachers in Solidarity (Syndicat des Enseignants
du Supérieur Solidaires), for example, filed its papers on January 19, 2012. It
received no receipt at the time and has yet to receive any response from the
government, which means it cannot legally operate.
Accountability for Past Crimes
The 2006 Law on Peace and National Reconciliation provides a legal framework
for impunity for perpetrators of atrocities during the civil war. The law also
makes it a crime to denigrate state institutions or security forces for the way
they conducted themselves during the political strife, potentially penalizing
people who allege that the forces perpetrated human rights violations.
Associations of the disappeared, which continue to call for truth and justice,
face harassment.
Terrorism and Counterterrorism
On January 16, 2013, militants linked to Al-Qaeda and affiliated with a brigade
led by a man named Mokhtar Belmokhtar took more than 800 people hostage
at the Tigantourine gas facility In Amenas, near the Algeria-Libya border. The
Algerian Special Forces raided the site in an effort to free the hostages. At the
end of the episode, at least 37 foreign hostages and 29 members of the armed
group were killed.
Algeria strengthened its role as a regional player on counterterrorism, and continued
to participate in the Global Counterterrorism Forum, a multilateral group
that the US created to expand counterterrorism discussions beyond Western,
industrialized countries.
Key International Actors
The European Union, which has an “association agreement” with Algeria,
agreed to provide Algeria with €172 million (US$234 million) in aid between
2011 and 2013.
On July 2013, the government applied for candidature on the United Nations
Human Rights Council for the period of 2014 to 2016. Yet despite pledges to UN
High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay during her visit to Algeria in
September 2012, the government is still denying access to the UN special rapporteur
on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
the UN Working Groups on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances and
on Arbitrary Detention, and the special rapporteur on summary, arbitrary, or
extrajudicial executions.
In its most recent Universal Periodic Review of Algeria in 2012, the UN Human
Rights Council recommended the release of prisoners detained solely for exercising
freedom of expression, the removal of barriers to free assembly and
expression, and the ratification of several international treaties, including the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. However, to date the Algerian
authorities have implemented none of these recommendations. On November
12, 2013, the General Assembly of the UN elected Algeria as a member to the
Human Rights Council.
Bahrain
Bahrain’s human rights record regressed further in key areas in 2013 and the
government made little real progress regarding reforms it claimed to pursue.
Security forces continued to arrest scores of individuals arbitrarily in towns
where anti-government protests regularly take place. Continuing reports of torture
and ill-treatment in detention were consistent with the findings of the 2011
Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry (BICI). The government’s failure to
implement key recommendations of the BICI stand in contrast to its claims it is
making progress on human rights. The judicial system, headed by ruling family
members, has yet to hold any senior official responsible for serious human
rights violations that have occurred since 2011, including torture-related deaths
in detention.
High-profile critics of the government remain in jail on charges that relate solely
to exercising their rights to freedom of expression and assembly. Authorities
continue to arrest and prosecute dissidents, including human rights defenders,
on security-related charges. The arrest of the deputy head of al-Wefaq, the
largest opposition group, prompted all the other opposition groups participating
in a deeply flawed national dialogue process to suspend their involvement.
The process resumed in February after a one-year hiatus. Of the 27 participating
groups, 18 are linked to the government and they had still had not agreed on an
agenda at time of writing.
In August, the government passed a set of laws that further restrict the right to
freedom of assembly and may further restrict the right to freedom of expression.
Arbitrary Detentions, Ill-Treatment, and Torture
Security forces continued to detain scores of individuals arbitrarily every
month, according to local rights activists. In May, masked plainclothes police
conducted targeted night-time raids in towns around Bahrain’s motor racing circuit
in advance of the Formula 1 Grand Prix. Arresting officers failed to produce
arrest or search warrants. Authorities often deny holding detainees when family
members seek to locate them and initial interrogations typically take place without the presence of a lawyer, in violation of Bahrain’s constitution and
code of criminal procedure. The Bahrain Centre for Human Rights documented
approximately 200 cases in a six-week period between July and mid-August
during which authorities falsely denied holding detained individuals for two to
ten days.
Many detainees complained of ill-treatment in detention, sometimes rising to
the level of torture. Four former detainees told Human Rights Watch that they
were severely beaten, and in one case sexually assaulted, while in detention at
the Interior Ministry’s Criminal Investigations Directorate (CID) in 2013.
Bahrain’s constitution forbids the use of torture and use of evidence secured by
torture, and Bahrain is a state party to the United Nations Convention Against
Torture.
According to local rights groups, authorities detained scores of children for participating
in anti-government protests in 2013 and regularly held them in detention
facilities alongside adults. One 17-year-old boy detained at CID headquarters
told Human Rights Watch that he was forced to stand in a corridor, handcuffed,
and blindfolded for several hours as passing officers insulted him and
one officer threatened they would rape him.
In April, authorities indefinitely postponed the planned visit of UN Special
Rapporteur on Torture Juan Mendez.
Prosecution and Harassment of Government Critics
In January, Bahrain’s Court of Cassation upheld lengthy convictions for 13 highprofile
critics of the government. The evidence against them consisted of public
statements advocating reforms to curtail the power of the ruling family, Al
Khalifa, and confessions that the defendants alleged were coerced while they
were in incommunicado detention.
In September, authorities arrested Khalil al-Marzooq, the assistant secretarygeneral
of al-Wefaq, the main legal opposition group. Prosecutors ordered al-
Marzooq to be held for 30 days to investigate charges that he had been “inciting
and advocating terrorism.” The charges relate to comments he made at a
rally in which he publicly denounced violence. Shortly after his arrest, al-Wefaq and other participating opposition groups announced they were suspending
their involvement in the national dialogue.
On September 29, a Bahrain court sentenced 50 persons, including several
rights activists, alleged to be part of the February 14th Youth Coalition, to jail
terms ranging from 5 to 15 years for security-related offenses, including “establishing
a terrorist group for the purpose of disturbing public security, disabling
constitution and law, preventing public institution and authorities from performing
their duties, attacking public and personal rights, and harming national
unity.”
At time of writing Human Rights Watch was unable to determine if any of the
convictions were for recognizable criminal acts warranting such serious sentences.
Defense lawyers and detainees alleged that confessions were coerced.
One defendant, rights and opposition activist Naji Fateel, who received a 15-
year sentence, claimed he was badly tortured in April during his first three days
in detention. He alleged that authorities handcuffed and blindfolded him, beat
him severely, subjected him to electric shocks, and suspended him from the
ceiling. Political activist Reyhana al-Mousawi, who received a five-year sentence,
alleged she was subjected to electro-shocks and forced to sign a confession.
Abdul Ghani Kanjar, the former spokesperson for the National Committee for
Martyrs and Victims of Torture who fled Bahrain in 2012 and is now the overseas
spokesperson for the Haq Movement for Liberty and Democracy, an unrecognized
opposition group, received a 15-year sentence in absentia. Kanjar told
Human Rights Watch he had no relation to the 14th February Coalition and was
not familiar with the names of many of those convicted.
In August, staff at Copenhagen Airport, apparently acting on directions from
Bahraini authorities, prevented the acting director of the Bahrain Center for
Human Rights, Maryam al-Khawaja, from boarding a flight to Manama. Al-
Khawaja, whose father and sister are in jail in Bahrain as a result of their
protests against the government, had publicly announced her plans to fly to
Bahrain to monitor anti-government protests planned for August 14.
The targeting of medical professionals continues to be a concern. In January,
seven physicians and one nurse were dismissed from their positions at the Ministry of Health and convicted for providing medical care to protesters in
2011. The continuing presence of security forces around hospitals prevents neutral
medical access, in violation of medical ethics and the right to health.
Accountability
Since 2011, Bahrain established an ombudsman’s office in the Ministry of
Interior and a Special Investigations Unit in the Public Prosecution Office, but
neither of these offices took steps to hold senior officials accountable for serious
human rights abuses or address what the BICI characterized as a “culture
of impunity.” Senior officials told Human Rights Watch that a platoon commander
in the police and a battalion commander in the criminal investigations
division had been found responsible for rights violations, but it is not clear
what action, if any, was taken in these cases.
In May, a Bahrain appeals court reduced the seven-year sentence of a Bahrain
police lieutenant convicted of the April 2011 murder of Hani Abd al-Aziz Jumaa
to six months. The lieutenant is the highest ranking security official known to
have been convicted for abuses.
Freedom of Assembly, Association, and Expression
In April, Bahrain’s cabinet endorsed an amendment to article 214 of the penal
code to increase from two to five years the maximum sentence for insulting the
king. Lawyer Mahdi al-Basri was one of at least five individuals sentenced to
prison in 2013 for allegedly insulting King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa on social
media.
In early August, the parliament issued 22 recommendations to King Hamad in
advance of planned anti-government protests on August 14. One recommendation
led to the amendment of article 11 of the 1973 Law on Public Gatherings. All
demonstrations, marches, rallies, or sit-ins must now have the prior written permission
of the head of state security, who can stipulate the number of permitted
protesters and the time and place of any protest.
Political parties remain prohibited, but in 2013, 20 licensed political societies
operated in the country, including Islamist and secular, pro-government and
opposition groups. In September, Justice Minister Shaikh Khalid bin Ali Al Khalifa announced an amendment to the 2005 Law for Political Societies to
require that political groups secure advance government permission to meet
with foreign diplomats in Bahrain and abroad and that a Foreign Ministry representative
accompany them in such meetings.
Authorities continue to restrict freedom of association by arbitrarily rejecting
registration applications for civil and political groups and intrusively supervising
independent organizations. The provisions of a 2012 Draft Law on Civil
Organizations and Institutions submitted to parliament in January 2013 for
approval are much more restrictive than those in an earlier 2007 draft, and in
some respects worse than the 1989 law still in effect. At time of writing the parliament
had not acted on the draft.
Women’s Rights
Law no.19 of 2009 on the Promulgation of the Law of Family Rulings regulates
matters of personal status in Bahrain’s Sunni courts, but it does not apply in
the country’s Shia courts, which means that the majority of Bahraini women are
not covered by a codified personal status law. Domestic violence is not specifically
addressed in the penal code and marital rape is not considered a crime.
Migrant Workers
Approximately 460,000 migrant workers, primarily from Asia, make up 77 percent
of Bahrain’s private workforce. Due to shortcomings in Bahrain’s legal and
regulatory framework and failure to enforce laws, they endure serious abuses
such as unpaid wages, passport confiscation, unsafe housing, excessive work
hours, physical abuse, and forced labor. Conditions for domestic workers are of
particular concern. A regional Gulf Cooperation Council unified contract for
domestic workers, expected to be approved in early 2014, falls short of the minimum
standards outlined in the Domestic Workers Convention that the
International Labour Organization adopted in 2011.
International Actors
Two European Parliament resolutions strongly criticized Bahrain’s human rights
record, as did a joint statement supported by 47 states in September 2013 at the United Nations Human Rights Council in Geneva. The United Kingdom and
the United States, key allies of Bahrain, joined the HRC statement but generally
failed to criticize publicly abusive steps taken by Bahrain in 2013. The European
Union failed to use its collective weight in actively and publically pressing for
the immediate and unconditional release of imprisoned Bahraini activists,
three of whom are dual nationals of Bahrain and EU member states. In August,
media reported that Britain was in talks with Bahrain over the sale of 12
Typhoon jets.
Egypt
After mass protests on June 30 against the Muslim Brotherhood, General Abdel
Fattah al-Sissi on July 3 deposed Pre sident Mohamed Morsy, who had come to
power through democratic elections one year earlier, and appointed
Constitutional Court judge Adly Mansour as interim president. Mansour issued
a Constitutional Declaration setting out a roadmap, which included drafting a
new constitution and elections. A constituent assembly of 50 appointed members
completed a draft of the constitution in December. In the months following
the ouster of President Morsy, police used excessive lethal force, killing over
1,300 persons at protests, and arrested over 3,500 Brotherhood supporters.
Armed group escalated attacks in North Sinai killing scores of police and soldiers.
A Sinai-based armed group, Ansar Bayt al-Maqdes, claimed responsibility
for a Cairo assassination attempt in September on the interim government’s
minister of interior.
Prior to his removal, President Morsy’s Muslim Brotherhood-dominated government
had shown disregard for rights protections, with an increase in the prosecutions
of journalists, police abuse, and sectarian violence. In December 2012,
33 percent of eligible voters (the lowest turnout for any poll since the 2011
uprising) approved Morsy’s controversial new constitution by 64 percent in a
referendum. The constitution further undermined key rights protections following
Morsy’s November 2012 Constitutional Declaration which immunized his
decisions from judicial review. Legislation issued by the Shura Council, Egypt’s
interim legislative body following the June 2012 dissolution of the People’s
Assembly, included deeply restrictive draft public assembly and draft associations
laws.
Extrajudicial Killings and Torture by Security Forces
In January, police in Port Said killed 46 people over three days after gunmen
killed two policemen during a demonstration outside a prison. In response,
President Morsy praised the police and declared a one-month state of emergency
in the Canal cities of Port Said, Suez, and Ismailia. In January and
February, police shot dead at least 22 other anti-Morsy protesters in Cairo,
Mansoura, and Mahalla.
Clashes between pro- and anti-Brotherhood protesters in the week of Morsy’s
overthrow between June 30 and July 5 killed at least 54 people around the country.
Security forces used excessive lethal force in dealing with pro-Brotherhood
protests that involved some violence on the part of protesters. On the morning
of July 8, the military broke up a Brotherhood sit-in outside the Republican
Guard headquarters, killing 61 protesters who responded with stone-throwing
and some gunfire, which killed two security officers.
On July 27, the police clashed with a pro-Brotherhood march, killing 95 protesters,
many of them with single-shot wounds to the head and chest. On August
14, police forcibly broke up the two Muslim Brotherhood sit-ins at Rab’a al-
Adawiya and al-Nahda in Cairo, killing up to 1,000 people, according to Prime
Minister Hazem Beblawy. A small number of protesters in the Rab’a sit-in
responded to the police with gunfire, killing seven policemen. Security officials
failed to allow ambulances safe access to the sit-in to transfer severely wounded
protesters to hospitals, failed to allow safe exit for patients, and shot dead
one ambulance worker. Attacks on health workers and facilities threaten the
realization of the right to health. Residents and officials had complained about
the tens of thousands of Morsy supporters blocking the streets, and detaining
and abusing suspected “infiltrators.”
Impunity for Abuse by Security Forces
There was no effort to account for the crimes of the Mubarak era or those killed
by the police and military during and after the January-February 2011 uprising.
In January, Morsy received a report by a fact-finding committee he had set up
on police and military abuses against protesters, but refused to make its findings
or recommendations public. In July 2013, the interim government established
a Ministry for Transitional Justice but it took no steps towards accountability.
The government failed to set up a fact-finding committee to look into the
mass killing of protesters, despite Interim President Adly Mansour’s July 8
promise to do so.
In a rare case of police accountability, a court in March sentenced one officer to
three years imprisonment for shooting protesters during the protests in
Mohamed Mahmoud Street in Cairo in November 2011. Only 5 of the 38 trials of
middle and low-ranking police officers accused of killing protesters in January 2011 resulted in prison sentences. Two of them were suspended, so that only
two officers have served actual prison time. In January, the Court of Cassation
overturned the conviction of former president Hosni Mubarak. His retrial
opened in May and was ongoing at time of writing. In October, the trial opened
of four police officers for the deaths of 37 detainees they were transporting to
Abu Zaabal prison on August 18 on charges of “negligence and involuntary
manslaughter.”
Prosecutors failed to investigate security forces for the killing of the hundreds
of protesters in July and August, yet were quick to refer protesters to trial on violence-
related charges. In November, a minor offenses court sentenced 12 students
to 17 years imprisonment for a protest on October 30.
Mass Arrests and Torture
In January and February, the police arrested over 800 protesters outside the
presidential palace and elsewhere and illegally held hundreds, including at
least 264 children, in Central Security Forces camps where they subjected
dozens to torture, including sexual abuse. Between January and June, at least
eight people died in custody as a result of torture by the police. In March,
Morsy praised the police as the “heart of the revolution.”
After the military deposed Morsy in July, military officials detained the former
president along with 10 of his senior aides incommunicado at an unknown location
for weeks. On November 4, the authorities eventually transferred Morsy to
court for the opening of his trial. The judge then ordered his detention in a regular
prison. Five of Morsy’s aides remained detained incommunicado without
legal basis at the time of writing.
In the weeks following the dispersal of the sit-ins on August 14, police arrested
the majority of the high-level and much of the mid-level leadership of the
Brotherhood. They also arrested thousands of demonstrators, including 1,400
detained in the immediate aftermath of the sit-in dispersals—150 of whom were
children. Prosecutors ordered their pretrial detention pending interrogation on
charges of inciting or participating in violence and have continued renewing
their detention on the basis of requests from security agencies but little independent
evidence.
Military Trials
Throughout the year military prosecutors continued to try civilians before military
courts despite government claims, first by Morsy and subsequently by the
post July 3 government that this was no longer occurring. The number of military
trials of civilians increased following Morsy’s overthrow. Although the military
mostly refrained from bringing people before military courts in Cairo, even in
cases where clashes with protesters involved the military, they tried at least 96
civilians before military courts in the other governorates. In September, a military
court in Suez sentenced 51 Muslim Brotherhood members to imprisonment
on charges of assaulting military officers. In October, a military court sentenced
Watan journalist Hatem Abdel Nour to one year in prison for impersonating a
military officer. In October and November, military trials sentenced two Sinaibased
journalists, Ahmad Abu Draa’ and Mohamed Sabry, to suspended prison
sentences in relation to their work as journalists.
Freedom of Religion and Sectarian Violence
In the first half of the year under Morsy, prosecutors interrogated at least 14
people on charges of blasphemy, referring 11 of them to trials which resulted in
prison sentences for opinions protected by freedom of expression. Incidents of
sectarian violence continued and increased dramatically after his overthrow. In
April, sectarian violence in the town of Khosus left five Christians and one
Muslim dead. Two days later, the police failed to intervene to halt clashes that
broke out after a funeral at the main Coptic cathedral in Cairo, and at times
themselves shot at Christian protesters inside church grounds.
In June, a mob of hundreds of Islamists lynched four Shia Egyptians in the village
of Abu Musallim just outside Cairo after weeks of anti-Shia hate speech by
Islamist extremists. The Morsy administration condemned the lynching but
failed to condemn the sectarianism that incited it or to uphold the right of Shia
to religious freedom.
In the aftermath of Morsy’s overthrow, there was an unprecedented increase in
attacks on churches and property of Christians. Immediately following the
August 14 dispersals of Muslim Brotherhood sit-ins in Cairo, mobs chanting
Islamist slogans attacked at least 42 churches, burning or damaging 37, and leaving 4 people dead. The attacks came after weeks of anti-Christian discourse
in speeches at the two Brotherhood sit-ins in Cairo. Security forces failed to
intervene to halt the attacks but subsequently arrested dozens of suspects.
Prosecutors ordered their pretrial detention.
Freedom of Expression
Under Morsy there was a sharp increase in prosecutions of journalists and
political activists on charges of “insulting” officials or institutions and “spreading
false information,” using Mubarak-era penal code provisions. An investigative
judge appointed by the justice minister questioned over 15 journalists and
politicians on criminal charges of “insulting the judiciary” after they publicly
criticized the judiciary’s lack of independence. Courts ordered fines and suspended
sentences in at least five defamation cases. In April, the president’s
office withdrew nine criminal complaints it had filed against journalists for
“insulting the president” in response to public criticism.
On July 3, the military-installed authorities shut down the Muslim Brotherhood
TV station along with two other Islamist stations. Over the following two
months, security officers raided the Arabic and English offices of Al Jazeera and
the offices of Turkish broadcaster TRT, and police arbitrarily arrested at least 40
journalists during mass arrests after clashes. At least seven remain detained,
including Al Jazeera Arabic journalist Abdallah al-Shamy who was arrested during
the dispersal of the Rab’a sit-in on August 14. In September, security forces
raided and sealed the premises of Freedom and Justice, the Muslim
Brotherhood newspaper. In October and November, police arrested dozens of
protesters for peaceful activities such as the possession of flyers or balloons
with anti-military slogans on them.
Freedom of Association and Labor Rights
The repressive Mubarak-era Law 84 on Associations remains in force, and security
agencies blocked funding for human rights projects at registered NGOs,
leading to a freeze on activities. From March to June, the Shura Council and the
presidency drafted a deeply restrictive law on associations. In June, a Cairo
criminal court sentenced 43 Egyptian and foreign nongovernmental organization
workers to prison sentences, some of them suspended. Morsy’s government failed to pass a new trade unions law and, by the end of the year, hundreds
of independent trade unions remained without legal protection. With the
change in government in July, a cabinet drafting committee completed a new
draft law on associations, but the government did not formally propose the law.
The Rights of Women and Girls
Systematic sexual harassment of women and girls in public spaces continued
without serious government attempts to halt or deter the practice. In January,
Egyptian groups reported at least 19 cases of mob sexual assaults, including
one woman who attackers raped with a bladed weapon and cut her genitals. In
June and July, women’s rights groups confirmed 186 sexual attacks on women
in Cairo’s Tahrir Square over one week. The government’s response has typically
been to downplay the extent of the problem or to seek to address it through
legislative reform alone. There is no law criminalizing domestic violence specifically.
Other forms of violence against women, including child marriage and
female genital mutilation continued to take place in some areas, despite laws
prohibiting them. Personal status laws in Egypt continue to discriminate
against women in relation to marriage, divorce, child custody, and inheritance.
Drafters of the 2013 constitution failed to include a provision ensuring equality
between men and women in the constitution.
Refugee, Asylum-Seeker, and Migrant Rights
The population of refugees from Syria in Egypt grew to 300,000 by the end of
the year. Over 125,000 Syrians have registered with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR); Egypt, however, has prevented UNHCR
from registering Palestinians from Syria. Airport officials sent three Syrian
men—two in January and one in October—back to Syria against their will in violation
of the principle of non-refoulement.
After Morsy’s overthrow, security officials implemented a visa requirement and
security clearance for Syrians. As a result airport officials denied entry to at
least 276 Syrians and returned them to Syria again in violation of the international
prohibition against refoulement. In July, police and military police arrested
at least 72 Syrian men and 9 boys at checkpoints on main Cairo roads in an
arrest sweep following a media campaign accusing Syrians of supporting the Muslim Brotherhood. Since August, Egypt has detained without legal basis over
1,500 refugees from Syria, including 250 children, and coerced over 1,200 to
leave Egypt under threat of indefinite detention.
African migrants continued to report torture and rape at the hands of traffickers
operating in Sinai, a problem the government failed to address or acknowledge.
In May, prosecutors interrogated a Sudanese man on charges of human trafficking,
torture, and rape in the Sinai but failed to refer anyone to trial. Egyptian
prosecutors have investigated only one person on Sinai-related trafficking
offenses but have made no effort to investigate collusion on the part of members
of the security forces, including at the Suez Canal and along the route from
the southern border.
Key International Actors
The United States and European Union member states occasionally raised
human rights concerns publicly but did not strongly condemn rights abuses
under Morsy, including in response to police violence in January and February.
After the military deposed Morsy, and in light of pressure in the US Congress to
suspend US military aid to Egypt, the US canceled scheduled joint military exercises
and later, after the violent dispersal of the two sit-ins, suspended the
delivery of F16 fighter jets.
In October, President Barack Obama suspended additional military and economic
assistance, including US$260 million in cash aid, and withheld certain
large-scale military systems, such as Apache helicopters. Despite this step, little
was said about ongoing abuses and the lack of accountability.
In June, the European Court of Auditors said in a report that EU aid to Egypt
achieved little progress in support of human rights and democracy. In August,
the EU Foreign Affairs Council reminded member states of their obligation to
suspend commercial weapons sales to Egypt in accordance with the EU’s
Common Position on arms exports, but failed to take any other measures. In
September, member states at the Human Rights Council in Geneva failed to
take collective action on Egypt, although some member states raised Egypt as a
country of concern.
Iran
Millions of Iranians participated in presidential and local elections in June
2013. Executions, especially for drug-related offenses, continued at high rates.
The judiciary released some political prisoners, but many civil society activists
remained in prison on political charges.
Freedom of Assembly, Association, and Voting
During Iran’s June 14 presidential and local elections, dozens of opposition
party members were serving prison sentences and prevented from participating.
Opposition figures Mir Hossein Mousavi, Zahra Rahnavard, and Mehdi
Karroubi remained under house arrest or detention at time of writing.
On May 21, the Guardian Council, an unelected body of 12 religious jurists, disqualified
all but eight of the more than 680 registered presidential candidates
using vague criteria that enabled authorities to make sweeping and arbitrary
exclusions. Nonetheless, turnout was high and voters overwhelmingly elected
cleric and former diplomat Hassan Rouhani whose campaign promises included
a “civil rights charter,” improving the economy, and greater political engagement
with the West.
Following Rouhani’s inauguration, authorities in September released at least a
dozen rights activists and political opposition figures, but scores of others
jailed for their affiliation with banned opposition parties, labor unions, and student
groups remain in prison. The judiciary continued to target independent
and unregistered trade unions.
Iran’s interim minister of science, responsible for management of the country’s
universities, announced in September that universities could reinstate professors
and students suspended for their political activities from 2005 to 2012, but
at time of writing dozens remained unable to continue their studies or teach.
In September, the Ministry of Culture ordered the reopening of the country’s
largest independent film guild, the House of Cinema, which authorities had
shut down in January 2012.
Death Penalty
According to official sources, Iranian authorities executed at least 270 prisoners
as of October 2013, though the real number is thought to be much higher. In
2012, Iran carried out more than 544 executions, second in number only to
China, according to Amnesty International, which reported that at least 63 executions
were carried out in public. Crimes punishable by death include murder,
rape, trafficking and possessing drugs, armed robbery, espionage, sodomy,
adultery, and apostasy. Most of those executed were convicted of drug-related
offenses following flawed trials in revolutionary courts.
On October 2, a local news website reported that authorities executed a child
offender on murder charges close to the southwestern town of Kazeroun. It is
believed that dozens of child offenders (individuals under 18 when they
allegedly committed the crime) are currently on death row in Iran’s prisons.
Iranian law allows capital punishment for persons who have reached puberty,
defined as 9 for girls and 15 for boys.
In early 2013, Iran’s judiciary implemented an amended penal code under
which children convicted of “discretionary crimes” such as drug-related offenses
would no longer be sentenced to death. A judge may still sentence to death
juveniles convicted of crimes such as rape, sodomy, and murder if he determines
that the child understood the nature and consequences of the crime, a
vague standard susceptible to abuse. The amended law retains stoning as punishment
for the crime of adultery.
Authorities executed at least 16 people in 2013 on the charge of moharebeh
(“enmity against God”) or “sowing corruption on earth” for their alleged ties to
armed opposition groups, including eight Baluch prisoners executed in “retaliation”
for the killings of more than a dozen border guards along the Iran-
Pakistan border. Dozens of others are on death row for terrorism-related
charges following politically-motivated prosecutions and unfair trials, including
Iranian Arab men for their alleged links to groups involved in attacking security
forces. At time of writing, at least 40 Kurdish prisoners, including Sunni rights
activists branded as “terrorists” by the government, were awaiting execution on
national security charges such as moharebeh.
Freedom of Expression and Information
At least 40 journalists and bloggers were in Iran’s prisons at time of writing,
according to Reporters Without Borders. On December 28, 2012, Supreme
Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei publicly warned journalists and others against
suggesting that Iran’s elections would not be free.
In late January, authorities arrested more than a dozen journalists, apparently
in connection with their coverage of the upcoming elections and alleged affiliations
with foreign media but released most by late February. On October 28,
authorities shut down the reformist daily, Bahar, five days after it published a
controversial article thought to question a historical event in Shia Islam. They
also severely cut back Internet speeds and blocked proxy servers and virtual
private networks that Iranians used to circumvent government filtering of websites.
An investigation by judiciary officials into the November 6, 2012 death in custody
of blogger Sattar Beheshti stalled. Authorities harassed Beheshti’s family
to cease criticism regarding the slow pace of the investigation. Iran’s cyber
police arrested Sattar Beheshti on October 30, 2012, apparently because of his
blogging activities.
Since the June election, despite promises by the new minister of technology to
remove restrictions on online and press freedoms, authorities continued to
block websites and jam foreign satellite broadcasts.
Human Rights Defenders and Political Prisoners
In September and October, authorities released a few dozen rights activists and
political prisoners such as journalist Isa Saharkhiz, but many of them had completed
or were close to completing their prison terms. Authorities released
Nasrin Sotoudeh on September 18 after she had served three years of a six-year
prison sentence. It is not clear whether the judiciary has thrown out her sentence
completely, including a 10-year ban on practicing law. At time of writing,
dozens of other rights defenders, including prominent lawyers such as
Mohammad Seifzadeh and Abdolfattah Soltani, remained in prison on politically
motivated charges.
Iranian authorities regularly subject prisoners, especially those convicted on
politically-motivated charges, to abuse and deprive them of necessary medical
treatment. Security forces deprived Hossein Ronaghi, a rights activist and blogger,
and opposition leaders Mousavi and Karroubi, from receiving the regular
check-ups doctors had recommended for serious medical conditions.
On June 22, Afshin Osanlou’s family learned of his death at Rajai Shahr Prison
in the city of Karaj, 25 kilometers from Tehran. According to his brother, the
death could have been avoided if prison officials had transferred Osanlou to a
hospital after he suffered a heart attack in prison on June 20. Since 2009, officials
have reported the suspicious deaths in custody of at least seven political
prisoners whom rights activists believe died as a result of torture, ill-treatment,
or medical neglect.
In September, Evin prison authorities denied that student activist
Arash Sadeghi, whom security forces arrested in January 2012 and
transferred to Evin prison, was being detained there, raising concerns
among his family and activists. Authorities had held Sadeghi in solitary
confinement in Evin prison and prevented his family from visiting
him regularly. Sadeghi reportedly initiated a hunger strike in June after
alleging that prison guards abused him. Officials released Sadeghi on
bail on October 20.
Women’s Rights
The Guardian Council disqualified all of the approximately 30 women who had
registered as candidates for the presidential election.
Iranian women face discrimination in many areas including personal status
matters related to marriage, divorce, inheritance, and child custody. A woman
needs her male guardian’s approval for marriage regardless of her age, and
cannot generally pass on her nationality to her foreign-born spouse or their
children. A woman may not obtain a passport or travel outside the country without
the written permission of a male guardian. Child marriage, though not the
norm, continues in Iran, where the law provides that girls can marry at the age of 13 and boys at the age of 15; and below such ages with the permission of a judge. In October, the Guardianship Council ratified the Law on Protection of
Children and Adolescents with No Guardian (adoption) after they amended a
provision, despite opposition, to allow adoptive parents to marry children in
their care if a judge deems it to be in the latter’s best interest.
Treatment of Minorities
The government denies freedom of religion to adherents of the Baha’i faith,
Iran’s largest non-Muslim religious minority, and discriminates against them.
On July 31, an Iranian daily reprinted a fatwa, or religious edict, previously
issued by Supreme Leader Ayatollah Khamenei, stating that Baha’is are part of
a “deviant and misleading sect” and urging Iranians to “avoid” them. One hundred
and fourteen Baha’is were in Iran’s prisons as of September 2013, according
to the Baha’i International Community.
On August 24, unknown assailants murdered Ataollah Rezvani, a member of the
Baha’i community, in the southern port city of Bandar Abbas. According to the
Baha’i International Community, individuals and government officials had
threatened Rezvani numerous times because of his faith and activism. He is
one of at least nine Baha’is who have been murdered or died under suspicious
circumstances since 2005. The Baha’i International Community reported that in
2013, 52 Baha’is were physically assaulted by plainclothes government agents
or unidentified attackers.
Authorities restrict political participation and employment of non-Shia Muslim
minorities, including Sunnis, who account for about 10 percent of the population.
They also prevent Sunnis from constructing mosques in major cities and
conducting separate Eid prayers. Government targeting of Sufis, particularly
members of the Nematollahi Gonabadi sect, continued unabated. In July, revolutionary
courts in Tehran and Shiraz sentenced members of the Nematollahi
Gonabadi sect to terms of one to 10.5 years for their peaceful activities.
The government restricted cultural as well as political activities among the
country’s Azeri, Kurdish, Arab, and Baluch minorities.
In September, Iran threatened to expel hundreds of thousands of Afghans without
allowing them to have their asylum claims considered fairly and to challenge
any order to deport them. At time of writing, authorities had not carried out plans to deport the Afghans, but the 2.5-3 million Afghan refugees and
migrant workers living and working in Iran continue to face serious abuses.
Key International Actors
Activists inside Iran reported that unilateral financial and banking sanctions
imposed against Iran by the United States and European Union had an adverse
effect on access to specialized medicines and medical equipment.
On March 11, Ahmed Shaheed, the United Nations special rapporteur on the
human rights situation in Iran, issued his second annual report to the UN
Human Rights Council (HRC), which found an “apparent increase in the degree
of seriousness of human rights violations” and expressed alarm at the “rate of
executions in the country, especially for crimes that do not meet serious crimes
standards.” On March 22, the HRC renewed the mandate of the special rapporteur,
established in 2011. On November 19, the UN General Assembly’s Third
Committee voted to support the resolution on the promotion of human rights in
the Islamic Republic of Iran.
In October, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon released his annual report on
the situation of human rights in Iran, saying there was continued concern
regarding the rights situation in the country. Later that month, Shaheed
released his report, which said there was “no sign of improvement” on rights
issues previously raised by UN monitoring mechanisms.
The government continued to block access to Shaheed and to experts with
other UN rights bodies.
Iraq
Human rights conditions in Iraq continued to deteriorate in 2013. Security dramatically
declined as sectarian tensions deepened. Al Qaeda in Iraq and other
insurgent groups emboldened by the Syrian conflict and Iraq’s political crisis
carried out nearly daily attacks against civilians, making 2013 the bloodiest of
the last five years. Suicide attacks, car bombs, and assassinations became
more frequent and lethal, killing more than 3,000 people and injuring more
than 7,000 between May and August alone.
The government responded to largely peaceful demonstrations with violence
and to worsening security with draconian counterterrorism measures. Borders
controlled by Iraq’s central government remained closed to Syrians fleeing civil
war, while as of November, nearly 206,600 Syrians fled to the Kurdistan
Regional Government (KRG)-controlled area.
In December 2012, thousands of Iraqis took part in demonstrations in mostly
Sunni areas, demanding reform of the Anti-Terrorism Law and the release of
illegally held detainees. Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki announced in January
2013 that he had created special committees to oversee reforms, including freeing
prisoners and limiting courts’ use of secret informant testimony. At time of
writing, there was little indication that the government had implemented
reforms. Security forces instead used violence against protesters, culminating
in an attack on a demonstration in Hawija in April, which killed 51 protesters.
Authorities failed to hold anyone accountable.
The government responded to increasing unrest with mass arrest campaigns in
Sunni regions, targeting ordinary civilians and prominent activists and politicians
under the 2005 Anti-Terrorism Law. Security forces and government supporters
harassed journalists and media organizations critical of the authorities.
Detention, Torture, and Executions
Iraq’s security forces abused detainees with impunity. Throughout the year,
detainees reported prolonged detentions without a judicial hearing and torture
during interrogation. In February, Deputy Prime Minister Hussein al-Shahristani
told Human Rights Watch that security forces frequently carried out mass arrests without arrest warrants. Courts continued to rely on secret informant
testimony and coerced confessions to issue arrest warrants and convictions.
On May 11, villagers south of Mosul found the bodies of four men and a 15-yearold
boy, which bore multiple gunshot wounds. Witnesses had last seen them
alive on May 3 in the custody of the federal police 3rd Division, but at time of
writing, the government had not announced any investigation into the deaths.
Iraq executed at least 151 people as of November 22, up from 129 in 2012 and
68 in 2011. In mid-March, after Justice Minister Hassan al-Shimmari announced
that the ministry was about to execute 150 people, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay likened Iraq’s justice system to
“processing animals in a slaughterhouse.” The Justice Ministry rarely provides
information about the identities of those executed, the charges against them,
or the evidence presented against them at trial.
Freedom of Assembly
Security forces responded to peaceful protests with threats, violence, and
arrests. In April, army and police forces used lethal force on demonstrators who
had been gathering largely peacefully for five months. In Fallujah and Mosul in
February and March, respectively, security forces fired on demonstrators, killing
at least seven people in both incidents.
On April 23 in Hawija, soldiers, federal police, and Special Weapons and Tactics
(SWAT) forces fired on a crowd of about 1,000 demonstrators. A ministerial
committee tasked with investigating the attack has so far failed to interview any
witnesses or participants or hold any members of the security forces accountable.
Security forces from the police, army, and SWAT responded to protests
against corruption and lack of services in August in Baghdad and Nasiriya with
force, arresting, and in some instances, beating protesters, then prosecuting
them on specious charges of “failure to obey orders.” The Interior Ministry
invoked broad and restrictive regulations on protests to refuse permits for
peaceful demonstrations, in contravention of Iraq’s constitutional guarantee of
free assembly.
Freedom of Expression
The Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) named Iraq the “worst nation” on its
2013 Impunity Index of unsolved journalist murders. There have been no convictions
in more
than 90 murders of journalists since 2003, and the government shows no will
to solve the murders.
On April 1, unknown assailants attacked the Baghdad offices of four independent
daily newspapers, destroying equipment, setting fire to the buildings, and
injuring several employees. Police announced an investigation into the attacks
but released no results.
On April 28, the government Communications and Media Commission of Iraq
(CMC) suspended the licenses of 10 satellite television stations and prevented
them from broadcasting. These were all pro-Sunni opposition stations, leaving
other channels, including all state-run channels, free to broadcast. A senior
CMC official told Human Rights Watch that the CMC had no legal basis for the
suspensions, but ordered them because the 10 stations were “promoting violence
and sectarianism.” The commission announced on its website that the
suspensions were in response to the coverage of the Hawija attack.
Journalists reported that security forces blocked them from accessing antigovernment
demonstrations, effectively restricting media coverage. A television
correspondent told Human Rights Watch that men in military uniforms and vehicles
who refused to identify themselves abducted him on December 28 in
Ramadi when he tried to cover one of the ongoing demonstrations. They blindfolded
and threatened to kill him before releasing him.
Between July and September, unknown gunmen assassinated at least five journalists
in Mosul. Two worked for the Sharqeyya news channel, one for the
Mosuleyya news channel, and two were spokesmen for Mosul’s governor. The
government has not announced the results of any investigations into the
killings.
Rights of Women and Girls
Female prison inmates suffer from overcrowding and lack sufficient access to
female-specific health care. Women are frequently detained with their young
children, who are deprived of access to education and adequate health care as
well as light, fresh air, food, and water. Dozens of women reported that security
forces detained, beat, tortured, and in some instances, sexually abused them
as a means of intimidating or punishing male family members suspected of terrorism.
On October 27, Iraq’s Justice Ministry announced that it had sent a draft law on
Jaafari (Shia) jurisprudence and personal status to the Cabinet for approval and
referral to the Parliament for passage. The draft law stipulates that Jaafari
jurisprudence in Islamic Sharia would govern Shia Iraqis in personal status
issues such as marriage, divorce, inheritance, and adoption. Local rights
groups expressed concern that the proposed legislation would feed sectarianism
because, if adopted, different sects will be governed by different rules in
matters of personal status laws. The proposed legislation contains numerous
provisions that violate women’s and children’s rights. Particularly troublesome
are articles that would lower the marrying age for females—18 for both men and
women under Iraq’s current Personal Status Law (1959)— to the age of 9 for
females and 15 for males; prevent Muslim males from marrying non-Muslim
females except on a temporary basis; broaden the permissible conditions for
polygamy; give men the right to prevent their wives from leaving the house
without permission; and restricts women’s rights in matters of divorce and
inheritance even more than the current Personal Status Law.
Many Iraqi women have lost their husbands as a result of armed conflict, generalized
violence, and displacement. The resulting financial hardship has made
them vulnerable to trafficking for sex trafficking and sexual exploitation. The
parliament passed a counter-trafficking law in April 2012, but authorities have
done little to enforce or prevent it. In February, a government official told
Human Rights Watch that security officers and judges are not educated about
the law and courts continue to prosecute trafficking victims under laws criminalizing
prostitution.
The KRG passed the Family Violence Law in 2011, but officials have done little
to implement the provisions criminalizing domestic violence and “honor”
killings. Dozens of male family members have abused or killed female relatives since the law was passed. Local organizations report that the government has
not created special courts to prosecute domestic violence cases, hired additional
female security officers, or educated security officers about the law, as
the law requires.
Refugees and Displacement
According to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), over
206,600 Syrian refugees have fled to Iraq since 2011, a dramatic increase from
the 30,000 Syrians who reportedly took refuge in Iraq in 2012.
Since August 2012, the Baghdad government-administered al-Qaim and al-
Rabia border crossings have been closed to Syrian refugees. On August 15
2013, the KRG reopened the Peshkapor crossing, near Duhok, after having
closed the crossing for over a month. Over 60,000 refugees fled into the KRGcontrolled
territory in the two months that followed.
Thousands of Iraqis remain displaced within their own country. They continue
to reside in squatter settlements without access to basic necessities, such as
clean water, electricity, and sanitation, and the government has no plan for
their return. In July, hundreds of families fled the Moqdadeya area of Diyala
province when Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq, a pro-government Shia militia, distributed
leaflets to Sunni residents threatening them with death. Diyala residents said
that security forces did nothing to protect them or to facilitate their return.
In September 2012, the UN Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) oversaw the
transfer of about 3,200 members of the exiled Iranian opposition organization,
Mojahedin-e Khalq (MEK), from Camp Ashraf, a former military base where the
group had resided since 1986, to Camp Liberty, another former military base.
On February 9 and June 15, unidentified armed men attacked Camp Liberty,
killing 11 and injuring many more. The MEK reported that 52 of its members
were shot and killed in an attack on September 1 at Camp Ashraf. The group
said that Iraqi security officials carried out the attacks, but officials denied the
allegations and blamed the deaths on infighting among camp residents.
In his outgoing address to the UN Security Council, former UNAMI envoy Martin
Kobler voiced concern over residents’ reports that the MEK leadership prevents
group members from participating in the UNHCR resettlement process, denies them access to medical treatment, and threatens them for disagreeing with
camp leaders or voicing a desire to leave.
Attacks on Civilians by Non-State Actors
Al Qaeda in Iraq issued statements claiming responsibility for lethal suicide,
car bomb, and other attacks in Iraq including: a bombing at a football field on
June 30 that killed 12 people, mostly boys under 16; a car bomb explosion on
July 12 at a Shia funeral in Moqdadeya, west of Baghdad, that killed 10 people,
including emergency services workers who died when a suicide bomber targeted
them as they assisted the first set of casualties; and July 21 attacks on two
Baghdad prisons that, according to the Justice Ministry, killed at least 68 members
of the security forces and an unknown number of prisoners. Taken together,
such attacks amount to an ongoing and systematic policy of killing civilians
that may constitute crimes against humanity.
Shia militias carried out targeted assassinations and high-ranking officials
reported that members of the Shia militia group Asai’b Ahl al-Haqq were
increasingly formally integrated into the government, largely through posts in
the security ministries. Residents of mixed Sunni-Shia neighborhoods in
Baghdad and other areas in the country reported that Shia armed groups Asa’ib
Ahl al-Haqq and Kita’ib Hezbollah threatened Sunni residents with death if they
did not leave the areas.
Key International Actors
Ten years after the US-led invasion of Iraq, the US government has turned a
blind eye to serial abuses. Accountability for abuses committed by coalition
forces in Iraq remains almost nonexistent.
On his first visit to the US in two years, Prime Minister Maliki met with President
Barack Obama on November 1 to request a range of security aid from the US,
including heavy weapons, increased intelligence and other forms of counterterrorism
support. On the occasion of the visit, several senators wrote to Obama expressing their concern over Maliki’s “sectarian and authoritarian agenda”
and stressed the need for Maliki to present a plan for reconciliation with Iraq’s
disenfranchised Sunni population.
Israel and Palestine
Israeli forces killed at least 15 Palestinian civilians in the West Bank, most in
circumstances that suggest the killings were unlawful. Israeli authorities
destroyed homes and other property under discriminatory practices, forcibly
displacing hundreds of Palestinian residents in West Bank areas under Israeli
control, as well as hundreds of Bedouin citizens of Israel.
In the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, Israeli authorities took inadequate
action against Israeli settlers who attacked Palestinians and damaged their
property in 361 incidents as of October 31, the United Nations reported. Israel
imposed severe restrictions on Palestinians’ right to freedom of movement,
continued to build unlawful settlements in occupied territory, and arbitrarily
detained Palestinians, including children and peaceful protesters.
Israel, along with Egypt, impeded the rebuilding of Gaza’s devastated economy
by blocking virtually all exports from Gaza.
Hamas authorities in Gaza executed three men in 2013 and sentenced 12 others
to death after unfair trials. Security forces conducted arbitrary arrests and tortured
detainees. The authorities permitted some local human rights organizations
to operate, but suppressed political dissent, free association, and peaceful
assembly.
In the West Bank, Palestinian Authority (PA) security services beat peaceful
demonstrators, detained and harassed journalists, and arbitrarily detained
hundreds. Credible allegations of torture committed by the PA’s security services
persisted.
In July, Israeli and Palestinian leaders agreed to resume final-status negotiations,
facilitated by the United States.
Gaza Strip
Israel
Israel Defense Forces (IDF) conducted occasional aerial attacks and ground
incursions in Gaza. As of September 30, Israeli forces had killed three civilians
in Gaza, according to the UN. They continued to shoot at Palestinian civilians in
the “no-go” zone just inside Gaza’s northern and eastern borders and beyond
six nautical miles from the shore, wounding farmers and fishermen.
Israel did not open any criminal investigations against members of its forces for
wrongdoing during “Operation Pillar of Defense” in November 2012, during
which aerial bombs and air-to-surface missiles killed scores of Palestinian civilians
in attacks that apparently violated the laws of war. Hamas did not prosecute
anyone for rocket launches by Palestinian armed groups unlawfully targeting
Israeli population centers during the conflict that killed three Israeli civilians.
Palestinians from Gaza with complaints that Israeli forces had unlawfully killed
their relatives were barred from traveling to Israeli courts to testify.
Blockade
Israel’s punitive closure of the Gaza Strip, particularly the near-total blocking of
exports, continued to have severe consequences for the civilian population.
Egypt also blocked all regular movement of goods at the crossing it controls,
and imposed increased restrictions on the movement of people after the military-
backed government came to power in July. More than 70 percent of Gaza’s
1.7 million people receive humanitarian assistance.
Israel allowed imports to Gaza that amounted to less than half of 2006 pre-closure
levels. As of August 31, a monthly average of 78,810 tons of construction
materials entered Gaza from Israel in 2013, as opposed to 174,212 tons per
month before Israel imposed a closure following Hamas’s takeover, according
to Gisha, an Israeli rights group.
In July, Egypt’s new military-backed government significantly tightened restrictions
on the movement of Palestinians at the Rafah crossing between Gaza and
Sinai, citing attacks by armed groups in the Sinai against Egyptian security forces. The number of Gaza residents passing through the crossing fell from a
monthly average of 20,000 earlier in 2013 to 6,281 in July, according to Gisha.
Egypt did not permit regular imports or exports of goods through Rafah and
destroyed or closed many of the tunnels beneath the border that have been
used for smuggling, leading to increased prices and unemployment, particularly
in the construction sector. Imports of construction materials through the tunnels
fell to 1,500 tons per day in July, from 7,500 tons previously. As of
September, Gaza was unable to build some 250 new schools needed to adequately
serve the population, according to Gisha.
“No-Go” Zones
As part of an Egyptian-brokered ceasefire agreement after hostilities in
November 2012, Israel agreed to reduce the “no-go” zones it imposed inside
Gaza to lands within 100 meters of the Israeli perimeter fence. Yet as of July
2013, Palestinian farmers reported that Israeli forces continued to shoot at
them at distances of up to 800 meters. As of September 30, Israeli forces had
killed at least one Palestinian civilian in the “no-go” zones, according to the
United Nations.
Israel eased its restrictions on Palestinian fishermen, allowing them to sail up
to six nautical miles from shore rather than three miles as previously. From
March to May 2013, Israel again extended the fishing restriction to the prior
limit in response to rockets launched by Palestinian armed groups. The UN
reported that Israeli navy forces shot at Palestinian fishermen in 95 incidents
during the first half of the year, double the number in the previous six months,
wounding five fishermen. The closures prohibited access to 70 percent of
Gaza’s maritime area as recognized under international law.
Hamas and Palestinian Armed Groups
Palestinian armed groups launched 31 rockets into Israel as of November 19,
causing no casualties, compared with 1,632 indiscriminate rocket attacks in
2012. The rockets launched by armed groups in Gaza cannot be accurately
aimed at military objectives and amount to indiscriminate or deliberate attacks
on civilians when directed at Israeli population centers.
On June 22, Hamas executed by hanging Emad Abu Ghalyon and Hossein al-
Khatib, convicted in separate cases of “collaboration with the enemy.” Courts
in Gaza have repeatedly accepted coerced confessions as evidence of guilt in
other capital cases. In October, Hamas executed by hanging Hani Abu Aliyan,
who was a child at the time of one of his two capital offenses. Abu Aliyan’s
lawyer said that his client had confessed to that crime under torture.
Hamas took no apparent steps to arrest or prosecute gunmen who killed seven
men for allegedly collaborating with Israel in 2012. At least six of the men had
been sentenced to death but were appealing their sentences when the gunmen
took them from detention centers and killed them. The faces of some of the
gunmen were visible in photographs widely published in the media. Hamas’s
armed wing claimed responsibility for the killings.
The internal security agency and Hamas police tortured or ill-treated 180 people
as of October 31, according to complaints received by the Independent
Commission for Human Rights (ICHR), a Palestinian rights body.
Hamas security forces arbitrarily summoned and detained civil society activists,
university professors, and members of the rival Fatah political faction.
On July 25, the prosecutor general ordered the closure of the Gaza offices of the
regional broadcaster al-Arabiya and the Ma’an News Agency, a Palestinian outlet,
for news stories suggesting that Hamas supported Egypt’s Muslim
Brotherhood. In November, Hamas allowed Ma’an to re-open and pledged to
allow al-Arabiya to do so.
West Bank
Israel
The IDF fatally shot at least 15 Palestinian civilians including 3 children in the
West Bank as of September 31, most in circumstances that suggest the killings
were unlawful. In January, Israeli forces shot Samir `Awad, a 16-year-old student,
in the back as he fled from soldiers who had hidden and surprised him as
he approached the separation barrier near the secondary school in the village
of Budrus. In August, Israeli forces used lethal force against residents of the Qalandia refugee camp after clashes erupted during an arrest raid, killing three,
including Roubin Zayed, 34, shot from close range while walking to work.
In August, the Israeli military closed its investigation into the death of Bassem
Abu Rahmeh, who died after a high-velocity IDF tear-gas canister hit him in the
chest in 2009. Video recordings of the incident showed Israeli forces firing from
a short distance directly at Abu Rahmeh, who was not throwing stones or near
any demonstrators. The military said it had “insufficient evidence” to prosecute
any soldier for his death.
In April, Israeli forces arrested and detained a Palestinian volunteer paramedic
for assisting an injured protester at the Damascus Gate in Jerusalem,
Physicians for Human Rights-Israel reported. Similar cases have been reported
during other protests, violating international human rights law.
Israeli authorities took inadequate action against Israeli settlers who injured
Palestinians and destroyed or damaged Palestinian mosques, homes, schools,
olive trees, cars, and other property. As of October 31, the UN reported 361 such
attacks in 2013.
Settlement Building and Discriminatory Home Demolitions
Construction work began on 1,708 settlement housing units during the first half
of 2013, an increase of 70 percent over the number begun during the same period
in 2012, according to Peace Now and Israel’s Central Bureau of Statistics.
After US Secretary of State John Kerry announced the resumption of Israeli-
Palestinian peace talks in July, Israel advanced plans for around 3,000 more
units as of September.
As of November 18, Israeli authorities demolished 561 Palestinian homes and
other buildings in the West Bank (including East Jerusalem), displacing 933
people. Israeli authorities demolished every structure in the Palestinian communities
of Tel al-`Adassa, near Jerusalem, and Khillet Mak-hul, in the northern
Jordan Valley, in August and September respectively.
Building permits are difficult or impossible for Palestinians to obtain in East
Jerusalem or in the 60 percent of the West Bank under exclusive Israeli control
(Area C), whereas a separate planning process readily grants settlers new construction
permits. In October, following the suggestion of the High Court of Justice, the military decided to negotiate with 1,300 Palestinian residents of
eight villages in an area designated as a military training zone rather than
demolish their homes.
Freedom of Movement
Israel maintained onerous restrictions on the movement of Palestinians in the
West Bank, including checkpoints and the separation barrier. Settlement-related
movement restrictions forced Palestinians to take time-consuming detours
and restricted their access to agricultural land. In July, Israel opened a road to
Hebron to Palestinians that had been closed for eight years.
Israel continued construction of the separation barrier around East Jerusalem.
Some 85 percent of the barrier’s route falls within the West Bank rather than
along the Green Line, isolating 11,000 Palestinians on the Israeli side of the
barrier who are not allowed to travel to Israel and must cross the barrier to
access livelihoods and services in the West Bank. Palestinian farmers in 150
communities on the West Bank side of the barrier were separated from their
lands on the Israeli side, the UN reported.
Arbitrary Detention and Detention of Children
Israeli military authorities detained Palestinians who advocated nonviolent
protest against Israeli settlements and the route of the separation barrier.
Israeli security forces continued to arrest children suspected of criminal offenses,
usually stone-throwing, in their homes at night, at gunpoint; question them
without a family member or a lawyer present; and coerce them to sign confessions
in Hebrew, which they did not understand. The Israeli military detained
Palestinian children separately from adults during remand hearings and military
court trials, but often detained children with adults immediately after arrest.
As of September 30, Israel held 135 Palestinian administrative detainees without
charge or trial, based on secret evidence. Israeli prison authorities shackled
hospitalized Palestinians to their hospital beds after they went on long-term
hunger strikes to protest their administrative detention.
Palestinian Authority
Complaints of torture and ill-treatment by West Bank PA security services persisted.
The ICHR reported 126 complaints as of October 31.
PA security services and men in civilian clothes identified as security employees
violently dispersed peaceful protests and arbitrarily detained protesters
and journalists. The PA continued to ban the distribution of two pro-Hamas
weekly newspapers in the West Bank.
Palestinian courts did not find any West Bank security officers responsible for
torture, arbitrary detention, or prior cases of unlawful deaths in custody. To our
knowledge, the PA did not prosecute officers for beating demonstrators in
Ramallah on August 28.
Attacks by Palestinian civilians injured 60 settlers in the West Bank as of
September 30, the UN reported. On April 30, a Palestinian civilian killed Eviatar
Borovsky, a security guard from Yitzhar settlement. In July, an Israeli military
court convicted a Palestinian man for the attack.
Palestinian governing authorities in the West Bank, as well as in Gaza, delegated
jurisdiction over personal status matters such as marriage and divorce to
religious courts. In practice, women seeking marriage and divorce suffered discrimination.
Courts required Muslim women to obtain a male relative’s consent
to marry and to obtain the husband’s consent to divorce except in limited
cases.
Israel
Bedouin citizens of Israel who live in “unrecognized” villages suffered discriminatory
home demolitions on the basis that their homes were built illegally.
Israeli authorities refused to prepare plans for the communities or approve construction
permits, and rejected plans submitted by the communities themselves,
but retroactively legalized Jewish-owned private farms and planned new
Jewish communities in the same areas.
In September, according to the Israeli rights group Adalah, the Interior Ministry
stated that it had demolished 212 Bedouin homes in 2013 and that Bedouin
themselves, under threat of heavy fines, demolished an additional 187 homes.
In June, the Israeli parliament gave initial approval to a proposed law that
would bar Bedouin from contesting home demolition orders in court or appealing
zoning plans that discriminate against Bedouin communities, raising the
likelihood of increased numbers of home demolitions. Government officials
estimated that the law, if implemented, would displace 30,000 Bedouin.
There are an estimated 200,000 migrant workers in Israel. In March, the
Supreme Court ruled that Israel’s Work Hours and Rest Law, which provides for
overtime pay, does not apply to migrant workers, mostly from the Philippines,
who work as live-in caregivers for ill or elderly Israelis. Many caregivers are
indebted to recruiting agencies, beholden to a single employer for their livelihood,
and unable to change jobs without their employer’s consent. A 2012
bilateral agreement with Thailand significantly reduced recruitment fees for
Thai agricultural workers and made it easier for them to change employers.
Government policies restrict migrant workers from forming families by deporting
migrants who marry other migrants while in Israel, or who have children there.
Around 60,000 African migrants and asylum seekers have entered Israel irregularly
from Egypt since 2005; Israel’s almost-completed fence along its border
with Egypt reduced new arrivals in 2013 to a few dozen. Israel continued to
deny asylum seekers who entered the country irregularly the right to a fair asylum
process and detained around 2,000 people, primarily Eritrean and
Sudanese nationals. In June, the Ministry of Interior began to implement a “voluntary
returns procedure” under which asylum seekers could “choose” to be
deported, waiving their right to an asylum procedure, rather than remain in
indefinite detention under the “anti-infiltration law.” Earlier, in May, Israel stated
it had “voluntarily” deported around 500 Sudanese from detention and
another 1,500 who had not been detained, and it later deported smaller groups
of Eritreans through an undisclosed third country. The Supreme Court overturned
the anti-infiltration law in September for violating the right to liberty
under Israel’s Basic Law, and gave the government 90 days to review the cases
of detainees.
Israel continued to delegate jurisdiction over marriage, divorce, and some other
aspects of personal status to Jewish, Muslim, Christian, and Druze religious
courts. In practice, women seeking divorces suffered discrimination, such as
refusal of divorce by state-funded Jewish religious courts without the husband’s consent in up to 3,400 cases per year, according to women’s rights groups. The
government did not publish figures of spouses denied divorce but women were
reportedly the vast majority.
Key International Actors
The US allocated US$3.1 billion in military aid to Israel in 2013 and $427 million
in assistance to Palestinian security forces and economic support to the PA. In
July, Israeli and Palestinian leaders agreed to resume final-status negotiations,
facilitated by the US.
In March 2013, the prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC) stated
that the “ball is now in the court of Palestine” to seek the court’s jurisdiction,
after the UN General Assembly voted to recognize Palestine as a non-member
observer state in 2012. Israel and the US reportedly pressured Palestinian leaders
not to join the ICC, and the Canadian foreign minister threatened unspecified
“consequences.”
The EU allocated €168 million (about $227 million) in direct financial support to
the PA and €300 million ($406 million) in development and security sector support
to the Palestinian territory for 2013.
Jordan
Jordan received and hosted hundreds of thousands of refugees fleeing the conflict
in Syria in 2013, although the authorities prevented or restricted some from
entry. In January, the political wing of the Muslim Brotherhood called for a boycott
of the first parliamentary elections held under the amended election law,
according to which some seats are elected using party lists. In March, King
Abdullah II reappointed Abdullah Ensour as prime minister. Authorities stepped
up attacks on independent media, censoring over 260 websites that refused to
comply with new government registration requirements.
Freedom of Expression and Belief
Jordanian law criminalizes speech deemed critical of the king, government officials,
and institutions, as well as Islam and speech considered defamatory of
others. In 2013, the authorities failed to amend the penal code to bring it into
compliance with constitutional free speech guarantees strengthened in 2011,
and continued to prosecute individuals on charges such as “insulting an official
body,” using vaguely worded penal code articles that place impermissible
restrictions on free expression.
In October 2012, Jordan’s parliament approved amendments to the Press and
Publications Law that require all independent news websites operating within
the country to register with the Press and Publications Department, and
empower the director of the press department to close down or censor unregistered
sites. The amendments also make an electronic publication’s owner, editor-
in-chief, and director responsible, along with the author, for comments or
posts that users place on its website. They also require the editor-in-chief of
each news website to have been a member of the Jordan Press Association
(JPA) for four years, although the JPA’s bylaws limit its membership to employees
of print publications.
On June 2, 2013, the director of the Press and Publications Department ordered
the blocking of over 260 news websites. They had refused to register in protest
against the new press law requirements and to preserve their independence.
Some blocked news websites registered with the press department in
November after losing a lawsuit to overturn the censorship order.
On September 17, police arrested Nidhal al-Fara`nah and Amjad Mu`ala, respectively
publisher and editor of the Jafra News website, after it posted a thirdparty
YouTube video that authorities deemed insulting to the brother of Qatar’s
ruler. Prosecutors charged both men with “disturbing relations with a foreign
state” before the State Security Court, whose judges include serving military
officers.
Following a visit in September, United Nations Special Rapporteur on Freedom
of Religion or Belief Heiner Bielefeldt praised Jordan as “a safe haven and voice
of religious moderation,” but noted that unrecognized religious groups such as
Baha’is, Druze, and Evangelical Christians face difficulties adjudicating personal
status issues.
In March, prosecutors referred five university students from Al al-Bayt University
in Mafraq to the State Security Court on charges of “inciting sectarian or racist
strife” and “insulting a religious symbol,” alleging that their style of dress and
musical tastes indicated that they were “devil worshippers.” The State Security
Court exonerated them on the first charge, but at time of writing they remained
on trial before an ordinary court in Mafraq on the second charge, which they
deny.
Freedom of Association and Assembly
Since the amended Public Gatherings Law took effect in March 2011, Jordanians
no longer require government permission to hold public meetings or demonstrations.
However, prosecutors continued to charge protesters with participating
in “unlawful gatherings” under article 165 of the penal code.
At time of writing, dozens of cases arising from protest-related incidents in 2011
and 2012 were in process before the State Security Court. In many cases, prosecutors
had charged defendants with “subverting the system of governance or
inciting opposition to it,” using article 149 of the penal code.
On September 1, Prime Minister Ensour announced that the government
planned to amend the State Security Court law to end trials of civilians before
the court unless they faced terrorism, espionage, treason, money counterfeiting,
or drug charges. This would bring the court into compliance with article 101
of the constitution, which allows military judges to try civilians only for these five groups of crimes; however, as the penal code classifies vaguely worded
offenses such as “undermining the system of governance” as terrorism, the
court will still be able to try civilians on such charges.
Refugees and Migrants
By November, over 550,000 persons from Syria had sought refuge in Jordan
since 2011, according to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR). Of these, approximately 113,000 were then housed at the Zatari
Refugee Camp in northern Jordan, down from over 200,000 in April, and 4,000
others were at the Emirates-Jordan camp in Zarqa Governorate. Another camp
for Syrians was under construction near al-Azraq, east of Amman.
The authorities did not permit entry to all those fleeing Syria’s conflict. In particular,
they denied entry, in breach of international law, to Palestinian and
Iraqi refugees residing in Syria, single males of fighting age, and people without
documents. Human Rights Watch estimates that several thousand have been
affected.
In late May, the daily number of Syrian refugee arrivals fell abruptly from over
1,500 to 300 or less. Refugees reported that Jordanian officials had closed the
country’s border or imposed a strict limit on refugee entry. Jordanian officials
attributed the fall to intense fighting between Syrian government and opposition
forces, impeding refugees’ access to the border.
Hundreds of foreign migrants working in the duty-free Qualified Industrial
Zones and in agriculture and domestic work complained about labor violations,
including unpaid salaries, confiscation of passports, and forced labor.
Government inspections and judicial redress remained lax.
Jordan hosted over 70,000 migrant domestic workers in 2013, mostly from the
Philippines, Sri Lanka, and Indonesia. Nongovernmental organizations repeatedly
referred domestic workers who had suffered multiple abuses to labor ministry
investigators but they rarely classified any of them as victims of the crime
of trafficking. Instead they treated each aspect of abuse such as non-payment
of salaries separately, sometimes even detaining workers for “escaping”
employers.
The Rights of Women and Girls
Jordan’s personal status code remains discriminatory despite a 2010 amendment.
Marriages between Muslim women and non-Muslims are not recognized.
A woman separated from a Muslim husband forfeits her custodial rights after
the child reaches seven years old.
Article 9 of Jordan’s nationality law denies women married to foreign-born
spouses the ability to pass on their nationality to their husbands and children.
Articles 98 and 340 of Jordan’s penal code, which provide for reduced sentences
for perpetrators of “honor crimes,” remained in force. Honor crimes continued
to take place in 2013. In one case, local media reported in April that a
25-year-old man in Zarqa Governorate murdered his 20-year-old sister, stabbing
her 10 times in the chest, back, and throat, and dumped her body in the desert
near their home. The man confessed to the police that he murdered his sister
because she repeatedly left the house for long hours.
Torture, Arbitrary Detention, and Administrative Detention
Perpetrators of torture or other ill-treatment continued to enjoy near-total
impunity. Credible allegations of torture or other ill-treatment are routinely
ignored because it remains up to police, intelligence prosecutors, and judges to
investigate, prosecute, and try fellow officers. At the Police Court, where many
such cases are heard, two out of three sitting judges are serving police officers
appointed by the police. To date, no police or intelligence officer has even been
convicted of torture under article 208 of the penal code.
In late March 2013, a public prosecutor investigated the death-in-custody of
Sultan al-Khatatba, whom authorities had arrested on a drug possession
charge. The public prosecutor recommended that at least six police officers
should face charges of torture under article 208, the first such recommendation
known. Judicial authorities, however, transferred the case to the police court,
which at time of writing had not released any public information on the
progress of the case.
Local governors continued to use provisions of the Crime Prevention Law of
1954 to place individuals in administrative detention for up to one year in circumvention
of the Criminal Procedure Law. The National Center for Human Rights reported that 12,410 persons were administratively detained, some for
longer than one year, in 2012.
Key International Actors
The United States has a memorandum of understanding to provide Jordan with
a minimum of US$360 million in economic assistance, and $300 million in foreign
military financing annually. The US granted an additional $200 million in
2013 to help Jordan cope with the refugee crisis, and announced plans to
increase aid by an additional $340 million in 2014. The US did not publically
criticize human rights violations in Jordan in 2013 except in annual reports.
Jordan received a grant from Saudi Arabia of $200 million in February and finalized
a deal for a $667 million grant in April as part of a $5 billion aid package
pledged to Jordan by Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries in December
2011.
In April, the US military deployed approximately 1,000 soldiers to northern
Jordan, as well as scores of F-16 aircraft and patriot missiles, to mitigate the
potential spillover effects of the Syrian civil war.
The United Kingdom deported Muslim cleric Abu Qatada to Jordan in July after
the two countries signed a mutual legal assistance treaty to facilitate cooperation
on criminal matters. The treaty guaranteed deportees from the UK would
not face torture or other ill-treatment in Jordan, or face prosecutions based on
torture-tainted confessions.
Kuwait
Recurring political disputes between the government and Parliament paralyzed
political institutions and the passage of most new legislation. A constitutional
court ruling in June 2013 dissolved the parliament formed in December 2012.
However, the court upheld controversial amendments to the electoral law that
had prompted the opposition’s boycott of the polls in 2012 and sparked violent
street protests. Elections in July 2013 led to the formation of a new parliament,
including two women among its 50 members, one less than in 2012.
Kuwait continues to exclude thousands of stateless people, known as Bidun,
from full citizenship, despite their longstanding roots in Kuwaiti territory.
The government has aggressively cracked down on free speech, often resorting
to a law forbidding any offense to the ruler (emir).
A new effort to dramatically reduce the number of migrant workers in Kuwait
has led to the implementation of regulations to allow for swift and unlawful
deportation.
Treatment of Minorities
There are at least 105,702 stateless people in Kuwait, known as Bidun. After an
initial registration period for citizenship ended in 1960, authorities shifted
Bidun citizenship claims to a series of administrative committees that for
decades have avoided resolving the claims. Authorities claim that many Bidun
are “illegal residents” who deliberately destroyed evidence of another nationality
in order to get the generous benefits that Kuwait provides its citizens.
In March 2011, the government granted Bidun certain benefits and services,
such as free health care and education, as well as registration of births, marriages,
and deaths. Some Bidun have complained there are still administrative
hurdles to accessing these benefits.
In March 2013 the Parliament passed a law to naturalize 4,000 “foreigners” in
2013, touting this as a measure to address the citizenship of Bidun. Activists in
the Bidun community have said this measure has not benefitted their community,
but is being used to grant citizenship to children born to Kuwaiti mothers and foreign fathers. The government confirmed to Human Rights Watch that so
far no Bidun had benefited from the law.
Some Bidun activists say that the real number of Bidun in Kuwait is closer to
240,000, reflecting the government’s failure to update its statistics.
Members of the Bidun community frequently take to the streets to protest the
government’s failure to address their citizenship claims, despite government
warnings that Bidun should not gather in public. Article 12 of the 1979 Public
Gatherings Law bars non-Kuwaitis from participating in public gatherings.
Women’s Rights
In January, Kuwait gave women the right to apply for posts as prosecutors,
which until then were only open to male candidates. This will allow women to
pursue careers as judges in the future. However women continue to face discrimination
in many other aspects of their lives, and large legal gaps remain in
protections for women. Kuwait has no laws prohibiting domestic violence, sexual
harassment, or marital rape. In addition, Kuwaiti women married to non-
Kuwaiti men cannot give their spouses or children Kuwaiti citizenship. Kuwaiti
law does not let women marry a partner of their choice if their father will not
grant permission.
In May, the Kuwaiti authorities announced that Saudi Arabian women would not
be provided with drivers’ licenses while in Kuwait without the permission of
their male guardians; women are not allowed to drive in Saudi Arabia.
Freedom of Assembly
According to local activists and lawyers, government forces responded with
excessive violence to multiple demonstrations by Bidun and Kuwaiti citizens.
Human Rights Watch documented one case where special forces officers beat a
demonstrator in April 2013 when detaining him, and heard allegations of many
more cases.
Freedom of Expression
The year 2013 saw increased violations of free speech in Kuwait. The authorities
brought cases against at least 29 people who expressed critical views of the
government over Twitter, Facebook, blogs, other social media platforms, and at
protests. Human Rights Watch knows of nine cases in 2012.
Most of these cases have been brought under article 25 of Kuwait’s penal code
of 1970, which prescribes a sentence of up to five years in prison for anyone
who publicly “objects to the rights and authorities of the emir or faults
him.” The article gives no detail on what constitutes an offense. Kuwait would
have to demonstrate incitement to violence or similar crimes for these cases to
meet international standards on permissible restrictions of free speech. Human
Rights Watch documented eight cases of political commentary that did not
amount to incitement to violence, but that Kuwaiti courts in 2013 found violated
article 25.
In July, during the Muslim fasting month of Ramadan, Kuwaiti ruler Emir Sabah
al-Ahmad al-Jaber Al Sabah issued a pardon for all those been jailed under article
25. However, the authorities subsequently brought charges against at least
one individual under that article, indicating that the pardon does not represent
a change in government policy.
Migrant Workers
Migrant workers make up around 2 million of Kuwait’s population of 2.9 million,
including more than 600,000 domestic workers. In March 2013, the government
announced that it intended to reduce the number of expatriate workers
by 100,000 every year for the next 10 years, in order to bring the total down to
one million. Kuwait has since adopted a number of mechanisms facilitating
quick, non-judicial deportations in order to reach its goals.
In April, Kuwait implemented a policy of deporting migrants after they had committed
their first major traffic violation. By September, according to local human
rights organizations, the Ministry of Interior had deported 1,258 expatriates for
traffic violations. In August, the health ministry announced that it would deport
any expatriates with confirmed cases of infectious diseases, though Human Rights Watch had not documented any such deportations at time of writing.
These deportations occur without any judicial review.
Kuwait has also adopted indirect methods to push migrants to leave. In March,
Kuwait adopted regulations requiring expatriates applying for a driving license
to be 18 or over, pass a driving test, be a legal resident for at least two years,
have a university degree, and earn at least KWD400 (US$1,400) per month.
Local media reported in August that authorities began evicting expatriate tenants
from private homes owned by Kuwaiti citizens. According to local NGOs,
residential buildings that are rented out to expatriates must be classified as
“investment accommodations.”
Death Penalty
On June 18, 2013, Kuwaiti authorities hanged two Egyptian men, one convicted
of abduction and rape, and the other on murder charges. It was Kuwait’s second
round of executions in 2013, and the first time it had applied the death
penalty since 2007.
Key International Actors
The United States, in its 2013 US State Department’s annual Trafficking in
Persons report, classified Kuwait as Tier 3—among the most problematic countries—
for the seventh year in a row. The report cited Kuwait’s failure to report
any arrests, prosecutions, convictions, or sentences of traffickers for either
forced labor or sex trafficking, and weak victim protection measures.
Lebanon
The security situation in Lebanon deteriorated in 2013 with violence spilling
over from the armed conflict in Syria. Sectarian tensions led to deadly clashes
in Tripoli and Saida amidst a climate of impunity for gunmen. Syrian refugees
registering in Lebanon topped 816,000 in November, and with limited international
support, the Lebanese government struggled to meet the refugees’
needs. The prime minister resigned in early 2013, and at time of writing, a new
government had not yet formed, leaving draft laws to stop torture, improve the
treatment of migrant domestic workers, and protect women from domestic violence,
stalled in Parliament for most of 2013.
Spillover Violence from Syria
Violence from neighboring Syria spilled over into Lebanon including through
kidnappings, cross border shelling, and car bombings in Beirut and Tripoli.
Kidnappings of Lebanese in Syria by both Syrian government forces and armed
opposition groups led to retaliatory kidnappings in Lebanon by victims’ relatives.
Lebanese authorities helped to facilitate the release of some kidnapped
victims, but have not taken law enforcement measures either to prevent or
prosecute kidnappings.
On April 14, a Syrian opposition group indiscriminately shelled Shia villages in
northern Bekaa killing two civilians and wounding three. Syrian government
forces also attacked targets in Lebanon with air and artillery strikes, wounding
two individuals in a helicopter strike in Arsal, in the Bekaa, on June 12.
On July 9, a car bombing in the mostly Shia Beir al-Abed neighborhood in
Beirut’s suburbs left dozens wounded. On August 15, a previously unknown
Syrian opposition group, the Aisha Brigades, claimed responsibility for a car
bombing in Beirut’s Shia suburbs that killed some 70 people and injured hundreds
more. Eight days later, on August 23, two car bombs targeting two Sunni
mosques in Tripoli, where sheikhs who support the Syrian opposition were giving
sermons, left more than 40 dead and 400 wounded. No one claimed
responsibility for these bombings.
On October 30, Ali Eid, the chief of the Arab Democratic Party and a former parliamentarian,
was summoned by the Internal Security Forces’ Information Branch in connection to the car bombings in Tripoli. At time of writing, Eid was
still refusing to respond to the summons.
Lebanese government forces were largely absent in the targeted neighborhoods
until late September, when Internal Security Forces were first deployed to the
Beirut suburbs.
Authorities planned similar measures for Tripoli, and in November, Internal
Security Forces deployed in several neighborhoods there including Jabal
Mohsen and Bab al-Tabbaneh as the security plan began to be implemented.
Clashes in Tripoli and Saida
Sustained violence between armed groups in Tripoli took a deadly toll, particularly
in the mainly Alawite Jabal Mohsen and Sunni Bab al-Tabbaneh neighborhoods
where the Syrian conflict exacerbates existing tensions. In May, major
clashes erupted between the neighborhoods killing at least 28 and wounding
over 200. In October, a week of fighting between the neighborhoods also resulted
in at least 13 dead and 91 wounded. On October 28, the army deployed to
the two neighborhoods and restored calm.
On November 12, amidst fears of renewed violence, the army also deployed to
several neighborhoods in Tripoli and set up checkpoints following the assassination
of Sheikh Saad Eddine Ghaya, a pro-Syrian government Sunni sheikh.
The Tripoli clashes have resulted in a sharp increase in sectarian attacks,
including attacks against Alawite workers and the destruction of Alawite shops.
On May 31, Sunni militants told Alawite workers at the Tripoli municipality not
to come to work or face death. On November 2, a bus transporting Alawite
workers stopping at the entrance of Bab al-Tabbaneh came under attack and
nine workers were injured. On November 3, the army said that it had detained
one man in relation to the incident.
The government failed to take steps that could protect residents, such as confiscating
weapons, arresting and prosecuting fighters, and maintaining an
active security presence.
Heavy clashes broke out in the southern city of Saida on June 23, after armed
followers of Sheikh Ahmed al-Assir, a pro-Syrian opposition Imam, fired on an
army checkpoint and the army counterattacked. Two days of clashes left 18 soldiers
and 28 of al-Assir’s supporters dead, according to media reports.
Torture, Ill-Treatment, and Prison Conditions
Following the June clashes in Saida, the Lebanese army detained individuals it
suspected of supporting al-Assir. Many of whom reported being beaten and tortured.
Seven individuals told Human Rights Watch that security officers kicked
them and beat them with fists and, in some cases, sticks and cables. Nader
Bayoumi died while in military custody, apparently as a result of beatings in
custody. A military judge issued arrest warrants in July for four soldiers and
one officer implicated in Bayoumi’s death. Their trial was ongoing at time of
writing.
Internal Security Forces (ISF) subjected suspected drug users, sex workers, and
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people in their custody to ill-treatment
and torture. The most common forms of alleged abuses were beatings with
fists, kicks with boots, and assault with implements such as sticks, canes, and
rulers.
Lebanon, with substantial assistance from donor countries, has taken a number
of steps to expand and reform the ISF in the last five years, including by establishing
a new code of conduct. However, these efforts remain inadequate and
have failed to address ongoing abuses. Despite repeated government pledges
to prevent torture and ill-treatment, accountability remains elusive. Lebanon
has not yet established a national preventive mechanism to visit and monitor
places of detention, as required under the Optional Protocol to the Convention
against Torture (OPCAT), which it ratified in 2008.
Refugees
By September, over 816,000 Syrian refugees in Lebanon had approached
UNHCR for registration. Registration does not grant Syrians legal status, but
enables them in some cases to receive assistance. Syrians who enter at official
border crossings are granted a six-month residency permit with one-time possibility
of renewal, after which extension requires a $200 renewal fee. Absent
legal status, refugees face the risk of detention for illegal presence in the country.
Lebanon, the last of Syria’s neighboring countries to maintain an open border
policy, began arbitrarily barring Palestinians from Syria from entering the
country in August.
Over 60,000 Palestinians from Syria have entered Lebanon since the conflict
began, joining the estimated 300,000 Palestinian refugees already living in Lebanon in appalling social and economic conditions. The year 2013 saw no
tangible improvement in Palestinian access to the labor market despite a 2010
labor law amendment that was supposed to ease such access. In 2013, a decision
by the minister of labor exempted Palestinians from insurance and medical
examination requirements typically required to get a work permit but its impact
was limited as Lebanese laws and decrees still bar Palestinians from working in
at least 25 professions requiring syndicate membership, including law, medicine,
engineering, and from registering property.
Migrant Workers’ Rights
Migrant domestic workers are excluded from the labor law and subject to
restrictive immigration rules based on employer-specific sponsorship—
the kafala system—which put workers at risk of exploitation and abuse. While
outgoing Labor Minister Charbel Nahhas announced in January 2012 that he
would look at abolishing the kafala system, in 2013 Labor Minister Salim
Jreissati failed to do so or to put forward legislation that would protect the estimated
200,000 migrant domestic workers in the country. In July, a criminal
court sentenced an employer to two months in prison, imposed a fine, and
required her to pay damages and compensation to a migrant domestic worker
whose wages she had not paid for years. Migrant domestic workers suing their
employers for abuse continue, however, to face legal obstacles and risk imprisonment
and deportation due to the restrictive visa system.
In June, the Association of Owners of Recruitment Agencies in Lebanon adopted
a self-regulating code of conduct to protect the rights of migrant domestic workers,
but the impact was limited in the absence of enforcement mechanisms.
Following the March 2012 suicide of Alem Dechasa-Desisa, an Ethiopian
domestic worker, the trial of recruitment agency owner Ali Mahfouz, who is
accused of contributing to her suicide, began in February 2013 but was postponed
until February 2014.
Women’s Rights
In July 2013, a parliamentary subcommittee approved a 2010 draft bill that
seeks to protect women and children from domestic violence, criminalizing
domestic abuse for the first time. At time of writing, parliament had yet to vote on the bill. Discriminatory provisions that significantly harm and disadvantage
women continue to exist in personal status laws, determined by an individual’s
religious affiliation. Women suffer from unequal access to divorce and, in the
event of divorce, to child custody. Lebanese women, unlike Lebanese men, cannot
pass on their nationality to foreign husbands and children, and continue to
be subject to discriminatory inheritance law.
Legacy of Past Conflicts and Wars
In October 2012, Justice Minister Shakib Qortbawi put forward a draft decree to
the cabinet to establish a national commission to investigate the fate of
Lebanese and other nationals who “disappeared” during and after the 1975-
1990 Lebanese civil war. The cabinet formed a ministerial committee to examine
the draft, but at this writing, no action had been taken.
In September, a criminal case brought by Najat Hashisho against three members
of the Lebanese Forces militia for “disappearing” her husband over 30
years ago was dismissed for lack of evidence. Hashisho and her attorney
argued there was significant evidence against the accused and planned to
appeal the decision.
In February 2012, the UN’s Special Tribunal for Lebanon announced that the inabsentia
trial of four indicted members of Hezbollah, for the killing of former
Prime Minister Rafik Hariri in 2005, would go forward. The trial is tentatively
scheduled to begin on January 13, 2014.
Key International Actors
Syria, Iran, and Saudi Arabia maintain a strong influence on Lebanese politics
through local allies, and increasingly so as Lebanon becomes more involved in
the conflict in Syria.
Many countries have given extensive, albeit insufficient, support to help
Lebanon cope with the Syrian refugee crisis and to bolster security amidst
spillover violence. In July, the UN Security Council issued a presidential statement
calling for strong international support to Lebanon to help it meet its
security challenges and to assist the government in responding to the refugee
influx.
Libya
Libya’s interim government faced multiple challenges in 2013. Myriad armed
groups controlled security in many parts of the country, thousands of detainees
remained in government and militia-controlled detention facilities without
access to justice, and rampant ill-treatment and deaths in custody persisted.
Forced displacement of tens of thousands of people from the town of Tawergha
by militias from nearby Misrata had yet to be resolved.
Authorities failed to conclude any investigations into politically motivated
assassinations, attacks on protesters in Benghazi and Tripoli, and attacks on
journalists and foreign diplomatic missions, citing lack of resources and the
precarious security situation.
Political Transition
The General National Congress (GNC), Libya’s first elected parliament, has yet
to fulfill its core mandate to organize elections for the Constituent Assembly
(CA). On July 16, the GNC approved a law for electing the 60-member CA, which
will draft Libya’s constitution but at time of writing the law had not been
issued, and the elections date had not been fixed.
The GNC suffered from political discord between its main political parties, in
particular the Muslim Brotherhood-affiliated Justice and Construction Party
(JCP) and the more liberal leaning National Forces Alliance (NFA); resignations
by some Congress members; and removal of some congress members due to a
sweeping lustration law that banned from office persons who had held any
office in the Gaddafi era.
Security and Militias
The interim government failed to control deteriorating security in the country,
especially in the capital, Tripoli, and in Benghazi, Libya’s second largest city.
Myriad armed groups with varying agendas and allegiances, some affiliated
with the government, controlled large swathes of the country and its
resources—including Libya’s oil terminals, its main income source—and operated
with impunity. The government failed to demobilize militias or merge fightOn September 19, Libyan authorities started the pre-trial stage of domestic proceedings
against one of Gaddafi’s sons, Saif al-Islam Gaddafi, his intelligence
chief, Abdullah Sanussi, and 36 other senior Gaddafi-era officials. They faced
charges of murder, torture, and indiscriminate killings committed during the
2011 uprising. The trials of these former officials were expected to start in
December.
At time of writing, the GNC had yet to pass the draft transitional justice law,
which calls for a commission to investigate abuses, refer perpetrators for prosecution,
and compensate victims directly. It would cover abuses committed during
the Gaddafi era and during the transitional phase following the 2011 conflict.
A draft law that would provide some compensation for mainly female victims
of physical and sexual violence had yet to pass.
Death Penalty
Military and civil courts imposed at least 28 death sentences, 12 of them
passed in absentia, since Gaddafi’s fall in October 2011. The Misrata Military
Court sentenced two members of Gaddafi’s military to death for violations committed
during the 2011 conflict, including indiscriminate attacks against civilians
and torture. A civil court in Misrata sentenced a former Gaddafi official and
pro-Gaddafi fighter to death for unlawful killings during the 2011 uprising. Civil
courts in Misrata, Benghazi, Zawiya, and Tripoli sentenced 12 civilians to death
on charges related to the 2011 conflict and common crime charges, including
murder. Lawyers and family of the accused alleged serious due process violations,
including the inability to call defense witnesses. The Supreme Court had
yet to approve the death sentences at time of writing.
International Justice and the International Criminal Court
Saif al-Islam Gaddafi and Abdullah Sanussi, who are wanted by the
International Criminal Court (ICC) for crimes against humanity, remained in
Libyan custody, without access to lawyers.
Libya filed a legal bid at the ICC to prosecute Gaddafi domestically in May 2012,
and was told it could postpone surrendering him to the court until the ICC made
its decision. In May 2013, the ICC judges rejected Libya’s bid and reminded the Libyan authorities of their obligation to surrender him. Libya has appealed the
decision rejecting its bid.
On October 11, the ICC ruled Sanussi’s case inadmissible thereby granting Libya
the right to try him domestically. Sanussi’s lawyers at the ICC appealed that
decision. At time of writing, the ICC had yet to rule on the appeal.
Forced Displacement
Approximately 35,000 people from the town of Tawergha, in Libya’s northeast,
remained forcibly displaced at the end of 2013, with militias from nearby
Misrata preventing them from returning to their homes. The militias accuse
Tawerghans of supporting Gaddafi and committing serious crimes, including
rapes and torture, against people in Misrata in 2011.
Militias mainly from Misrata continued to arbitrarily detain, torture, harass, and
kill Tawerghans in custody. At time of writing, 1,300 people from Tawergha were
detained, mainly in Misrata, or unaccounted for. The same militias also prevented
residents of Tomina and Karareem, towns near Tawergha, from returning
home.
Freedom of Speech and Expression
Attacks on journalists increased amid instability. In August, unknown
assailants killed a journalist in Benghazi, two other journalists escaped separate
assassination attempts. Throughout the year, militias threatened and beat
scores of other media workers, mainly in Tripoli and Benghazi
Two politicians faced blasphemy charges and possible death sentences if
found guilty for using posters during the GNC elections campaign in June 2012
that militia members claimed insulted Islam.
An editor of al-Ummah newspaper faced charges of insulting members of the
judiciary after he published a list of allegedly corrupt judges and prosecutors. If
found guilty, he could face up to 15 years in jail.
Freedom of Religion
Attacks on Sufi religious sites across the country continued in 2013, although
fewer in number than in 2012. Authorities made no effort to protect the religious
sites of minorities or arrest those responsible for attacks. In August,
unknown persons desecrated Sufi graves in Tripoli and, in September, desecrated
a Sufi gravesite in Mizdah, southern Libya. In September, a Sufi religious
leader was assassinated by unknown gunmen in the Eastern city of Derna.
Women’s Rights
In February, Libya’s Supreme Court lifted restrictions on polygamy, enabling a
man to marry up to four wives without the prior consent of his first wife. In April,
the Ministry of Social Affairs suspended issuing marriage licenses for Libyan
women marrying foreigners after a call by Grand Mufti al-Sadeq al-Ghariani to
avoid spreading “other” religions in Libya. In the absence of a Personal Status
Law, the law Concerning the Specific Provisions on Marriage and Divorce and
their Consequences, Law No. 10 of 1984 is the only current legislation dealing
with domestic violence, but enforcement remains weak.
Political Isolation
After months of controversy, the GNC in May passed the Political Isolation Law,
barring Gaddafi-era officials from holding public office for 10 years. The law’s
sweeping provisions, vague procedures, and lack of judicial review, meant it
violated human rights standards. Armed groups surrounded the Foreign Affairs,
Justice, and Interior ministries, as well as the GNC, demanding that the GNC
pass the law.
Key International Actors
The United States, European Union countries, and the United Nations played
significant roles throughout the year. In May, the EU signed a border assistance
agreement with Libya supporting border security efforts. The US, UK, Germany,
France and Italy expanded cooperation, particularly in the security sector,
although promised trainings of security forces for the most part did not
materialize.
In March, the UN Security Council adopted resolution 2095, which extended the
mandate of the United Nations Mission to Libya (UNSMIL) for one more year.
The resolution modified the arms embargo to allow Libyan authorities access to
non-lethal weapons and equipment in certain circumstances. Also in March
2013, the UN Human Rights Council (HRC) adopted a resolution that urged the
government to implement reform, but failed to condemn ongoing and serious
violations. The HRC asked the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights to
report back in March 2014 on the situation on the ground.
On May 8, the US, UK, and France expressed concern for the armed protests
and violence during the democratic transition. On September 10, the US, UK
and Italy issued a statement supporting the Libyan government in its efforts to
restore security and build its institutions and cautioning against disruption of
Libyan oil exports due to protests by armed groups at Libya’s main exporting oil
terminals.
In response to ongoing insecurity, the US, UK, France, Italy, and Turkey
announced plans to train more than 8,000 militia members for a General
Purpose Force to be merged into Libya’s army and police forces.
Morocco/Western Sahara
Morocco’s 2011 constitution incorporated strong human rights provisions, but
these reforms did not lead to improved practices, the passage of implementing
legislation, or the revision of repressive laws. In 2013, Moroccans exercised
their right to peaceful protest in the streets, but police continued to violently
disperse them on occasion. Laws that criminalize acts deemed harmful to the
king, the monarchy, Islam, or Morocco’s claim over the disputed Western
Sahara limited the rights to peaceful expression, assembly, and association. In
February, a military court sentenced 25 civilian Sahrawis to prison terms,
including nine to life imprisonment. The trial was just one of many unfair trials
in recent years that have resulted in politically motivated convictions.
Freedom of Expression
Independent print and online media continue to investigate and criticize government
officials and policies, but face prosecution and harassment when they
cross certain lines. The press law prescribes prison terms for “maliciously”
spreading “false information” likely to disturb the public order, or for speech
that is ruled defamatory.
Moroccan state television provides some room for debate and investigative
reporting but little for direct criticism of the government or dissent on key
issues. Authorities allowed Al Jazeera to resume operations in Morocco, having
ordered it to shut its bureau in 2010 on account of its coverage of the dispute
over the status of Western Sahara. On September 17, authorities arrested Ali
Anouzla, director of the independent news site Lakome.com, because of an article
describing, and providing an indirect link to, a militant Islamist recruitment
video attacking King Mohammed VI. Released on October 25, he faced trial at
time of writing on charges under the 2003 counterterrorism law, including
“intentionally aiding those who perpetrate acts of terrorism.”
Abdessamad Haydour, a student, continued to serve a three -year prison term
for insulting the king by calling him a “dog,” “a murderer,” and “a dictator” in a
YouTube video. A court sentenced him in February 2012 under a penal code provision
criminalizing “insults to the king.”
Freedom of Assembly
Moroccans have continued to hold marches and rallies to demand political
reform and protest government actions since popular protests swept the region
in February 2011. The police mostly allow these protests, but on some occasions
in 2013 they attacked and severely beat protesters. For example, on
August 2, police violently dispersed a small protest in front of the Parliament in
Rabat against a royal pardon that had been granted to a convicted pedophile.
However, authorities tolerated subsequent street protests against the pardon,
which authorities said had been granted in error.
In Western Sahara, security forces routinely repressed any public gathering
deemed hostile to Morocco’s contested rule over that territory. This included
gatherings in the territory’s main town, El-Ayoun, on March 23, April 29, and
October 19. Authorities allowed an unprecedentedly large demonstration in
favor of self-determination on May 4.
Freedom of Association
The 2011 constitution introduced protection for the first time for the right to create
an association yet, in practice, officials continue to arbitrarily prevent or
impede many associations from obtaining legal registration, undermining their
freedom to operate. Groups affected include some that defend the rights of
Sahrawis, Amazighs (Berbers), sub-Saharan migrants, and the unemployed.
Others include charitable, cultural, and educational associations whose leaders
includes members of al-Adl wal-Ihsan (Justice and Spirituality), a wellentrenched,
nationwide movement that advocates for an Islamic state and
questions the king’s spiritual authority. The government, which does not recognize
Justice and Spirituality as a legal association, tolerated many of its activities,
but prevented others. In Western Sahara, authorities withheld legal recognition
for all local human rights organizations whose leaders support independence
for that territory, even associations that won administrative court rulings
that they had wrongfully been denied recognition.
Terrorism and Counterterrorism
Hundreds of suspected Islamist extremists arrested in the aftermath of the
Casablanca bombings of May 2003 remain in prison. Many were convicted in
unfair trials after being held in secret detention and subjected to ill-treatment
and, in some cases, torture. Police have arrested hundreds more suspected militants
since further terrorist attacks in 2007 and 2011. Courts have convicted
and imprisoned many of them on charges of belonging to a “terrorist network”
or preparing to join Islamist militants fighting in Iraq or elsewhere.
Police Conduct, Torture, and the Criminal Justice System
Moroccan courts continue to impose the death penalty, but the authorities
maintained a de facto moratorium under which they have carried out no executions
since the early 1990s.
In his final report on his 2012 visit to Morocco, United Nations Special
Rapporteur on Torture Juan Mendez concluded in February 2013, “In cases
involving State security, such as terrorism, membership in Islamist movements,
or supporters of independence for Western Sahara, there is a pattern of torture
and ill-treatment by police officers during the arrest process and while in detention….
Many individuals have been coerced to confess and sentenced to prison
on the basis of such a confession.” The rapporteur’s recommendations included
amending the law to ensure that “access to lawyers of a suspect’s own
choosing is granted from the moment of apprehension” and shortening the
length of pre-charge detention in police custody from the current maximum of
12 days allowed in terrorism related cases. Moroccan authorities responded in
detail, noting steps they were taking, such as an engagement by “the Ministry
of Justice and Liberties … to ensure the video recording of all statements made
to the police during investigations and interrogations.”
Courts failed to uphold the right of defendants to receive fair trials in political
and security-related cases. In some cases, they failed to order medical examinations
that might substantiate defendants’ allegations of torture, refused to
summon exculpatory witnesses, and convicted defendants based on apparently
coerced confessions.
In February 2013, the Rabat Military Court sentenced 25 Sahrawi men to prison
terms, imposing nine life sentences, after convicting them on charges arising
from violence that occurred on November 8, 2010, when security forces dismantled
the Gdeim Izik protest encampment in Western Sahara. Eleven members of
the security forces died in the violence. The court failed to probe the allegations
made by defendants, most of whom had spent 26 months in pretrial detention,
that police officers had tortured or coerced them into signing false statements.
Yet, the court relied on these contested statements as the main, if not sole, evidence
to convict them.
Prison conditions were reportedly harsh, due in large part to severe overcrowding,
a problem aggravated by investigating judges’ frequent resort to the pretrial
detention of suspects. The Justice Ministry stated that as of October 2012,
31,000 of the country’s 70,000 prison inmates were pretrial.
On September 12, 2013, Justice Minister Moustapha Ramid—a well-known
human rights lawyer who was appointed following the 2011 election victory of
the Islamist-oriented Hizb al-Adalah wal-Tanmiya (Justice and Development)
party—unveiled proposals on judicial reform that, if implemented, could
enhance judicial independence. These proposals include diminishing executive
control over prosecutors.
Migrants and Refugees
Migrants from sub-Saharan Africa continued to experience police abuse in
2013. On several occasions, police rounded up migrants, transported them to
the Moroccan-Algerian border and dumped them there without formally verifying
their status or informing them of their rights.
In September, the National Council of Human Rights (CNDH), a state-funded
body that reports to the king, issued a report on the plight of migrant workers
and recommended that the government take measures to protect their rights.
These included the establishment of a “national legal and institutional framework
of asylum.” Currently, Morocco delegates asylum status determination to
the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), and generally refrains from
expelling migrants who have documents proving that they have applied for or
received recognition from the UNHCR. King Mohammed VI publicly welcomed
the CNDH’s recommendations, and ordered a government task force to examine the status of migrants whose asylum claim the UNHCR had already recognized
with a view toward regularizing them.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
The 2011 constitution guarantees equality for women, “while respecting the
provisions of the Constitution, and the laws and permanent characteristics of
the Kingdom.” The Family Code contains discriminatory provisions for women
with regard to inheritance and the right of husbands to unilaterally divorce their
wives. Reforms to the code in 2004 improved women’s rights in divorce and
child custody and raised the age of marriage from 15 to 18.
Domestic Workers
Despite laws prohibiting the employment of children under the age of 15, thousands
of children under that age—predominantly girls—are believed to work as
domestic workers. According to the UN, nongovernmental organizations, and
government sources, the number of child domestic workers has declined in
recent years, but girls as young as 8 years old continue to work in private
homes for up to 12 hours a day for as little as US$11 per month. In some cases,
employers beat and verbally abused the girls, denied them an education, and
refused them adequate food.
Morocco’s labor law excludes domestic workers from its protections, including
a minimum wage, limits to work hours, and a weekly rest day. In 2006, authorities
presented a revised draft law to regulate domestic work and reinforce existing
prohibitions on under-15 domestic workers, but at this writing the parliament
has yet to adopt it.
Key International Actors
In 2008, the European Union awarded Morocco “advanced status,” placing it a
notch above other members of the European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP).
Morocco is the largest beneficiary of EU aid in the Middle East and North Africa
after the Occupied Palestinian Territories, with €580 million (US$757 million)
earmarked for 2011 to 2013, plus an additional €35 million in 2013 under the EU’s SPRING program that aids countries judged to be undergoing democratic
transitions.
On September 10, EU Ambassador to Morocco Rupert Joy praised the CNDH
report on migrants in Morocco, which, he said, “recognizes violations to the
rights of migrants that have concerned us for a long time, but also proposes
concrete recommendations for migration policies that are more just and more
effective.” Joy pledged “considerable financial assistance” from the EU and its
member states toward projects that are “inspired by” the CNDH’s recommendations.
On a state visit, French President François Hollande refrained from any public
human rights criticism. During an address to parliament and at a press conference
on April 4, he insisted that France, Morocco’s leading trading partner and
source of public development aid and private investment, did not wish “to give
lessons.” However, the Foreign Ministry, in a rare remark that could be interpreted
as criticism, reacted on April 29 to the police’s repression of a demonstration
in Western Sahara by “recall[ing] our attachment to the right to protest
peacefully.”
In 2013, the United States, a close ally to Morocco with which it maintains a formal
human rights dialogue, gave the final portion of a five year $697 million
grant from the Millennium Challenge Corporation to reduce poverty and stimulate
economic growth. At the annual UN Security Council debate in April on
renewing the mandate of the peacekeeping force for Western Sahara (MINURSO),
the US initially proposed enlarging the mandate to include human rights
monitoring but backed down in the face of Morocco’s vehement opposition.
On November 22, King Mohammed VI was received by a US president in
Washington for the first time since 2002. President Barack Obama praised
Morocco’s intentions and commitments to make various human rights improvements,
but did not publicly criticize Morocco’s human rights practices.
Morocco has facilitated the visits of several UN human rights mechanisms over
the past two years, including the special rapporteur on trafficking in persons in
June 2013. At time of writing the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention was
scheduled to take place in December 2013.
Oman
Omani authorities in 2013 restricted the right to freedom of expression through
the use of criminal defamation laws. Despite a royal pardon on March 21 of
more than 35 activists convicted in 2012 on charges of “insulting the Sultan”
and participating in unauthorized protests, officials continued to harass and
detain pro-reform activists in 2013, creating little opportunity for citizens to
impact the government and its policies.
Omani authorities restricted the right to freedom of assembly both in law and in
practice, using force to break up peaceful demonstrations, and arresting individuals
present at protests. In one case, officials arrested and detained a Shura
Council member who attended the demonstration on charges of inciting violence
and wrongful public assembly.
Although Oman’s constitution bans discrimination based on gender, women
and girls face discrimination in family law.
Pro-Reform Activists
The government continued to harass and detain Omani pro-reform activists in
2013. In March, Sultan Qabus pardoned activists convicted in 2012 on charges
of “insulting the sultan” and “illegal gathering” after the courts had sentenced
them to between 6 and 18 months in prison. At least 31 of the activists had
gone on a hunger strike in February to protest the delay of the Omani Supreme
Court in hearing their appeals.
In January, Omani authorities arrested human rights activist and blogger Saeed
Jaddad, 43, and held him for eight days in solitary confinement on charges
including calling for demonstrations and heaping discredit on state officials
before releasing him on bail. Jaddad has called for political and social reforms
in posts on Facebook and on his blog.
On July 3, Omani authorities arrested Jaddad again at a rural property he owns
in the Dhofar region, claiming he was inhabiting the property illegally. Jaddad
said he obtained the property through a property swap with the local municipality
and had yet to receive proper documentation. When Jaddad refused to vacate the property, authorities arrested him on charges of “resisting the
authorities” and held him in detention overnight.
On July 21, the public prosecution summoned Jaddad on a new charge of
“undermining the status and prestige of the state.” Authorities released him on
bail but threatened that he may again be interrogated and brought to trial on
these charges.
Freedom of Expression
Articles 29, 30, and 31 of Oman’s Basic Law protect freedom of expression and
the press, yet other legislation restricts these freedoms and in practice authorities
did not respect these rights. Oman’s Telecommunications Act of 2002
restricts online content. Article 26 penalizes “any person who sends, by means
of telecommunications system, a message that violates public order or public
morals.”
On July 29, Omani authorities arrested pro-reform activist Sultan al-Saadi at a
gas station as he was traveling with his family. Fourteen armed men from the
Omani Intelligence Service detained al-Saadi, confiscated his laptop and other
personal items, and took him to an undisclosed location. They released him on
August 20 without charge. Al-Saadi claimed that security forces subjected him
to ill-treatment in detention.
Authorities had previously arrested al-Saadi in 2011 on the basis of his participation
in pro-reform demonstrations in the northern industrial town of Sohar,
and in 2012 on charges of “insulting the Sultan” because of his pro-reform
Facebook and Twitter advocacy. Sultan Qabus had included him in his pardon
of activists in March 2013.
On September 13, Omani security forces arrested blogger Noah Saadi, who had
criticized Omani authorities on his blog for arresting Dr. Talib al-Maa’mari, a
Shura Council member who had participated in anti-pollution protests. At time
of writing, authorities had prevented Saadi from contacting his family and
denied him access to a lawyer. Authorities previously arrested Saadi for his participation
in protests in Sohar in 2011, when thousands of Omanis took to the
streets demanding jobs and an end to corruption.
Freedom of Assembly
Omani authorities require citizens to request government approval for all public
gatherings, and regularly arrest citizens at unapproved gatherings.
In July, the sultan reportedly pardoned another group of 14 activists jailed in
2011 anti-government protests in Sohar. The Sohar prisoners were serving sentences
of between 30 months and 5 years for their role in the protests. To
Human Rights Watch’s knowledge, authorities have not expunged the convictions
of any of the pardoned activists.
On August 22, activists gathered in Liwa, a town north of Sohar near the port, to
protest pollution from the industrial zone at the port, which they consider a
public health risk. Police used tear gas to disperse demonstrators who had
blocked the entrance to the port. On August 24, security forces arrested Dr.
Talib al-Maa’mari, a member of Oman’s Shura Council, who was present at the
anti-pollution demonstration. Authorities did not permit al-Maa’mari to meet
with a lawyer until September 10, 2013, almost 14 days after his arrest. On
September 9, the public prosecution charged al-Maa’mari with inciting a crowd
and wrongful assembly at a public place. According to the verdict, which
Human Rights Watch reviewed, the court sentenced both al-Ma’mari to seven
years in prison with a fine of 1,000 riyals (US$2,600), and al-Baloushi to four
years with a fine of 500 riyals ($1,300) on charges of “illegal gathering” and
“blocking traffic.” At time of writing, this case was before an appeals court.
Women’s Rights
Article 17 of Oman’s Basic Law officially provides that all citizens are equal and
bans discrimination on the basis of gender, however despite such constitutional
guarantees, women continue to face discrimination in law and practice.
Women continue to be discriminated against in the Personal Status Law that
governs family law in matters of divorce, inheritance, child custody, and legal
guardianship, granting men privileged status in these matters.
In December 2012, Oman held its first municipal council elections with a total
of over 1,400 candidates, including 46 women, competing for 192 seats. Four
women were elected.
Key International Actors
Both the United States and the United Kingdom provide significant economic
and military aid to the sultanate. Neither country publicly criticized Oman’s
human rights abuses in 2013, except in annual reports.
In late 2012, the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), of which Oman is a member,
revised and re-signed its security cooperation agreement enabling each state
party to take legal action against its own or other GCC citizens when they are
judged to have interfered in the internal affairs of any GCC state.
Qatar
Unlike most other Gulf states, Qatar has not experienced serious domestic
unrest. Yet the human rights climate remains problematic, particularly for the
large and growing migrant worker population. Migrants continue to experience
serious rights violations, including forced labor and arbitrary restrictions on the
right to leave Qatar, which expose them to exploitation and abuse by employers.
Qatar’s poor record on freedom of expression declined further with the
announcement of a draft cyber crime law.
Migrant Workers’ Rights
Qatar is upgrading its infrastructure in preparation for the 2022 FIFA World Cup,
but authorities have yet to implement reforms that are needed to afford foreign
migrant workers adequate protection against serious rights abuses, including
forced labor and trafficking.
According to official 2013 statistics, Qatar has a population of about 2million,
of whom only 10 percent are Qatari nationals. The number of economically
active foreign nationals increased by 122,000, almost 10 percent, in the 12
months from April 2012, and is expected to rise further in response to the
demands of Qatar’s burgeoning construction sector.
Qatar’s Law 14 of 2004 regulating labor in the private sector limits workers’
hours requires that they receive paid annual leave, sets requirements on health
and safety, and requires on-time payment of wages each month. However, the
authorities fail to enforce this and other laws intended to protect workers’
rights.
Workers typically pay exorbitant recruitment fees and employers regularly take
control of their passports when they arrive in Qatar. The kafala (sponsorship)
system ties a migrant worker’s legal residence to his or her employer, or sponsor.
Migrant workers commonly complain that employers fail to pay their wages
on time if at all, but are barred from changing jobs without their sponsoring
employer’s consent other than in exceptional cases and with express permission
of the Interior Ministry. Adding to their vulnerability, they must obtain an
exit visa from their sponsor in order to leave Qatar. Migrant workers are prohibited from unionizing or engaging in strikes, although they make up 99 percent
of the private sector workforce.
Many migrant workers live in cramped, unsanitary conditions, especially those
working without documentation.
Workers can become undocumented when employers report them as having
absconded, or when they fail to pay to renew workers’ annual ID cards. A lack
of proper documentation leaves workers at risk of arrest and detention or
deportation. It also leaves them at risk of further labor exploitation. Authorities
rarely, if ever, bring criminal prosecutions against employers for violating
Qatar’s labor or anti-trafficking laws.
In May 2013, the Qatar Foundation, a quasi-governmental organization heavily
engaged in property development, announced a code of conduct relating to
workers’ conditions that it requires contractors and sub-contractors on its projects
to respect. Another quasi-governmental organization, the 2022 Supreme
Committee, plans to follow suit for projects related to the World Cup. These
codes, if properly enforced, would improve conditions for workers on certain
projects and possibly bring them up to international minimum standards.
However, they are no substitute for enforced state-led regulation and they will
not alleviate conditions for most of Qatar’s low-paid migrant workers, since
these projects constitute only a fraction of those ongoing in Qatar.
Domestic migrant workers, almost all women, are especially vulnerable. In
addition to the problems the general migrant worker population face, they are
also subject to verbal, physical, and in some cases, sexual abuse. Some are not
allowed to speak to strangers or are locked up in the homes where they work.
Many do not receive a day off. They are not afforded any protection under
Qatari labor law, which could provide them with days of rest and limit their
working hours among other measures. A regional unified contract for domestic
workers, expected to be approved in 2014, falls well short of the minimum standards
outlined in the recently adopted International Labour Organization’s
Domestic Workers’ Convention.
Freedom of Movement
A number of foreign professionals working as expatriates in Qatar complained
they were unable to leave the country because their employers failed or refused
to issue them exit visas.
Law No. 4 of 2009, which regulates the sponsorship, employment, and residence
of expatriate workers, requires they obtain residence permits, and exit
permits when they wish to leave the country. Under the kafala system, these
permits are provided by “residence sponsors,” who can effectively prevent
those they sponsor from leaving Qatar.
The law does not require residence sponsors to justify their failure to provide
an exit permit, instead placing the onus on the sponsored expatriate to find
another Qatari national willing to act as an exit sponsor. Alternatively, the expatriate
must publish a notice in two daily newspapers and then provide a certificate
15 days later showing that he or she faces no outstanding legal claims. The
exit visa requirement cannot be justified as a means of preventing foreigners
fleeing court cases in Qatar, as the Interior Ministry has separate powers to
impose travel bans on non-citizens facing criminal charges or civil claims in
Qatar’s courts.
There are also concerns over the arbitrary manner in which Qatar imposes
indefinite travel bans against individuals accused of criminal or civil offences
by their employers.
The exit visa requirement and the authorities’ use of arbitrary travel bans
means that Qatari employers can prevent their foreign employees from leaving
Qatar indefinitely, a power they may use unfairly to secure concessions from
foreign employees with whom they are in dispute. Formerly highly-paid expatriates
trapped in Qatar in 2013 included the French professional footballer, Zahir
Belounis, and three former employees of the Al Jazeera Children’s Channel.
Freedom of Expression
In February, an appeal court reduced to 15 years the life imprisonment sentence
imposed on poet Mohammed Ibn al-Dheeb al-Ajami, a Qatari national, in
November 2012, by a court in Doha. The court convicted him of incitement to
overthrow the regime after he recited poems critical of Qatar’s then-emir, Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani. In June 2013, the emir abdicated, handing
power to his son, Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad al-Thani.
In May, Qatar’s cabinet approved a draft cyber-crimes law, but it remained
unclear when it would be enacted. The authorities did not consult the statefunded
Doha Center for Media, whose role is to promote media freedom in
Qatar, when preparing the draft law and they did not disclose its full contents.
According to state media, however, it “punishes anyone who infringes on the
social principles or values or otherwise publishes news, photos, audio or visual
recordings related to the sanctity of the private and familial life of persons,
even if they were true; or infringes on others by libel or slander via the Internet
or other information technology means.” As yet, authorities have also not
enacted a problematic draft media law of 2012 that would expose journalists in
Qatar to prohibitive financial sanctions if they criticize any Gulf Cooperation
Council states.
Provisions of Qatar’s penal code are inconsistent with international free speech
standards. Article 134, for example, prescribes a penalty of up to five years’
imprisonment for anyone who is convicted of criticizing the emir or vice-emir.
Women’s Rights
Provisions of Law No. 22 of 2006, Qatar’s first codified law to address issues of
family and personal status law, discriminate against women. Article 36 states
that two men must witness marital contracts, which are concluded by male matrimonial
guardians. Article 57 prevents husbands from hurting their wives physically
or morally, but article 58 states that it is a wife’s responsibility to look
after the household and to obey her husband. Marital rape is not a crime.
Saudi Arabia
Saudi Arabia stepped up arrests, trials, and convictions of peaceful dissidents,
and forcibly dispersed peaceful demonstrations by citizens in 2013. Authorities
continued to violate the rights of 9 million Saudi women and girls and 9 million
foreign workers. As in past years, authorities subjected thousands of people to
unfair trials and arbitrary detention. In 2013, courts convicted seven human
rights defenders and others for peaceful expression or assembly demanding
political and human rights reforms.
Freedom of Expression, Association, and Belief
On March 9, the Criminal Court of Riyadh sentenced rights activists Dr.
Mohammed al-Qahtani and Dr. Abdullah al-Hamid to 10 and 11 years in prison
respectively and lengthy travel bans, after convicting them on charges that
included “breaking allegiance with the ruler,” and “setting up an unlicensed
organization.” The charges related solely to the men’s peaceful human rights
advocacy. The verdict also ordered the dissolution of their organization, the
Saudi Civil and Political Rights Association (ACPRA). A court in Buraida convicted
APCRA activist Abd al-Karim al-Khodr on similar charges in June and sentenced
him to eight years in prison.
The Specialized Criminal Court in June sentenced human rights advocate
Mikhlif al-Shammari to five years in prison and a 10-year travel ban based on
his writings and exposure of human rights abuses. Human rights activists
Waleed Abu al-Khair and Fadhel al-Manasef remained on trial at this writing on
charges based solely on their peaceful exercise of the rights to free expression
and association.
Saudi officials continue to refuse to register political or human rights groups,
leaving members subject to prosecution for “setting up an unregistered organization.”
In August, an appeals court upheld the Social Affairs Ministry’s denial
of registration to the Eastern Province-based Adala Center for Human Rights.
The ministry said it can only license charitable organizations, and that Adala’s
activities are not covered under the ministry’s definition of a charity.
Saudi Arabia does not tolerate public worship by adherents of religions other
than Islam and systematically discriminates against Muslim religious minorities,
in particular Twelver Shia and Ismailis.
On February 8, officers from the Committee for the Promotion of Virtue and the
Prevention of Vice, or religious police, raided a gathering of around 40
Ethiopian women in al-Khobar on the pretext that it was a Christian religious
gathering. Authorities jailed them and deported them in groups, the last in July.
In July, a Jeddah court convicted liberal activist Raif Badawi and sentenced him
to six years in prison and 600 lashes for “insulting Islam” by founding a liberal
website, and for his comments during television interviews. In October, authorities
released journalist Hamza Kashgari, who had been held since February
2012 without charge on blasphemy allegations related to his fictitious Twitter
dialogue with the Prophet Muhammad.
Criminal Justice
Detainees, including children, commonly face systematic violations of due
process and fair trial rights, including arbitrary arrest, and torture and ill-treatment
in detention. Saudi judges routinely sentence defendants to hundreds of
lashes.
Judges can order arrest and detention, including of children, at their discretion.
Children can be tried for capital crimes and sentenced as adults if physical
signs of puberty exist.
Authorities do not always inform suspects of the crime with which they are
charged, nor of supporting evidence. Saudi Arabia has no penal code, so prosecutors
and judges largely determine criminal offenses at their discretion.
Authorities generally do not allow lawyers to assist suspects during interrogation
and often impede them from examining witnesses and presenting evidence
at trial. Previous court rulings do not bind judges, and there is little evidence
that they seek consistency in sentencing for similar crimes.
Authorities continued to arrest and hold suspects for months and sometimes
years without judicial review or prosecution. Security forces detained Jordanian
activist Khaled al-Natour at King Khalid International Airport in Riyadh on
January 6, 2013, as he attempted to enter Saudi Arabia on a business trip. Al Natour had appeared in videos of protests in Amman that criticized Saudi
Arabia’s armed intervention in Bahrain. Authorities held him incommunicado
and without charge for three months until releasing him on April 7. The governmental
Human Rights Commission told Human Rights Watch in July that over
2,500 terrorism suspects still languish in prisons without charge or trial for up
to 10 years.
According to media reports, Saudi Arabia executed at least 64 persons between
January and November 2013, mostly for murder, drug offenses, and armed robbery.
The vast majority of executions were carried out via public beheading. On
May 21, authorities in Jizan governorate executed five Yemenis for armed robbery
and murder by “crucifixion”— a punishment of beheading followed by display
of the decapitated body in public. At time of writing, prosecutors in the
Specialized Criminal Court were pursuing a “crucifixion” sentence against
prominent Shia cleric Nimr al-Nimr.
In April, authorities in the southern city of Abha executed seven Saudi men by
firing squad for armed robberies in 2005; at least two were under 18 at the time
of the alleged robberies. Saudi Arabia is one of just four countries worldwide
that continues to execute child offenders.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
Under the guardianship system, girls and women are forbidden from traveling,
conducting official business, or undergoing certain medical procedures without
permission from their male guardians. Likewise, under un-codified rules on personal
status, women are not allowed to marry without the permission of their
guardian; unlike men, they do not have unilateral right to divorce and often
face discrimination in relation to custody of children.
On October 26, at least 50 Saudi women got behind the wheel throughout the
kingdom in defiance of the ban on women driving. Police officials said that
officers had pulled over at least 18 women driving in various areas of the
country, though it is unclear whether any faced fines or other penalties. On
October 27, police arrested Tariq al-Mubarak, a secondary school teacher and
columnist for the London-based Arabic newspaper Asharq al-Awsat, who had
expressed support for an end to the driving ban. Authorities released
al-Mubarak on November 3.
The Ministry of Education announced in May that girls enrolled in private
schools could take part in supervised sports if they wear “decent clothing,” but
failed to announce a promised national strategy to promote sports for girls in
government-funded schools.
In January, King Abdullah appointed 30 women to the Shura Council and
amended the council statute to guarantee representation of women. The
Ministry of Justice granted the first lawyer-trainee license to a woman, Arwa al-
Hujaili, in April.
Punishment for domestic violence remained lax, but in August the Council of
Ministers issued a new law criminalizing domestic abuse for the first time. The
law does not detail enforcement mechanisms to ensure prompt investigations
of abuse allegations or prosecution of those who commit abuses and does not
explicitly criminalize marital rape.
Migrant Workers’ Rights
Over 9 million migrant workers fill manual, clerical, and service jobs, constituting
more than half the workforce. Many suffer abuses and exploitation, sometimes
amounting to conditions of forced labour or servitude.
The kafala (sponsorship) system ties migrant workers’ residency permits to
“sponsoring” employers, whose written consent is required for workers to
change employers or exit the country. Some employers illegally confiscate
passports, withhold wages, and force migrants to work against their will.
On November 4, following a seven month “grace period” for foreign workers to
correct their status and documentation, authorities raided businesses and set
up checkpoints across the country to apprehend workers without required documentation
or not working for their legal sponsors. Interior Minister Mohammed
bin Nayef announced in late November that authorities had expelled over
60,000 foreign workers in the crackdown’s first three weeks.
Some 1.5 million migrant domestic workers remain excluded from the 2005
Labor Law, though in July the Council of Ministers passed a new regulation on
domestic work. The law would offer domestic workers certain basic protections
for the first time, such as requiring a nine-hour daily break, prompt salary payment
at the end of each month, sick leave, and a one-month paid vacation every two years. The law would prohibit sponsors from employing workers outside
the sponsor’s home or assigning work harmful to a worker’s health.
Domestic workers, most of them women, frequently endure a range of abuses
including overwork, forced confinement, non-payment of wages, food deprivation,
and psychological, physical, and sexual abuse. Workers who attempted to
report employer abuses sometimes faced prosecution based on counterclaims
of theft or “sorcery.”
Authorities executed 24-year-old Sri Lankan domestic worker Rizanna Nafeek in
January for the 2005 death of a 4-month-old child in her care, though Nafeek
was only 17 at the time of her alleged crime and despite her claims that investigators
obtained her confession under duress and she did not have access to a
competent translator during interrogation.
Key International Actors
The United States, a key ally, did not publicly criticize Saudi human rights violations
beyond Congressionally mandated annual reports, though State
Department spokespeople expressed “concerns” over the convictions of al-
Hamid, al-Qahtani, and Badawi.
In August, the US Department of Defense approved the sale of 1,300 cluster
bombs to Saudi Arabia for more than US$640 million. Neither country is party
to the Convention on Cluster Munitions.
In March 2013, UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay “strongly
condemned” the executions of the seven Saudi men from Abha, including two
who were children at the time of the crimes for which they were convicted.
Syria
Syria’s armed conflict escalated even further in 2013 as the government intensified
its attacks and began using increasingly deadly and indiscriminate
weapons, culminating in a chemical weapons attack on the Damascus countryside
on August 21. Government forces and pro-government militias also continued
to torture detainees and commit executions.
Armed opposition forces, including a growing number of pro-opposition foreign
fighters, have also carried out serious abuses including indiscriminate attacks
on civilians, executions, kidnapping, and torture. According to United Nations
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, as of July 2013 more than 100,000 people had
been killed in the conflict. The spread and intensification of fighting have led to
a dire humanitarian crisis with millions internally displaced or seeking refuge in
neighboring countries.
Attacks on Civilians, Unlawful Use of Weapons
On August 21, hundreds of civilians, including many children, were killed in a
chemical weapons attack on areas near Damascus. A UN investigation determined
that the nerve agent sarin was used. While the Syrian government denies
responsibility, available evidence strongly suggests that government forces
were responsible for the attack. In response to US and French threats of strikes
in response to the attack, Syria acceded to the Chemical Weapons Convention
and agreed to eliminate its chemical weapons in the first half of 2014.
Syrian armed forces have also continued to use cluster bombs—weapons
banned by the 2008 Convention on Cluster Munitions, which Syria has not
signed. Human Rights Watch has identified 152 locations where government
forces used at least 204 cluster munitions, in 9 of the country’s 14 governorates.
The actual number of cluster munitions used by Syrian government
forces is probably higher.
The Syrian air force has dropped incendiary weapons in populated areas in
dozens of instances, including on a school playground in al-Qusayr in
December 2012. Incendiary weapons contain flammable substances designed
to set fire to objects or to cause burn injuries and death.
Syria’s air force also repeatedly carried out indiscriminate, and in some cases
deliberate, strikes against civilians, and its army has also struck populated
areas with ballistic missiles. Human Rights Watch investigated nine apparent
ballistic missile attacks in 2013 that killed at least 215 people, including 100
children. No military targets were struck in the attacks and in seven of nine
cases investigated Human Rights Watch found no signs of any apparent military
targets in the vicinity.
Executions by Government and Pro-government Forces
Syrian government and pro-government forces conducted several large-scale
military operations across the country during which government forces and progovernment
militias carried out mass killings.
On May 2-3, these forces killed at least 248 people, including 45 women and 43
children, in the towns of al-Bayda and Baniyas in Tartous governorate. The overwhelming
majority were summarily executed after the end of military confrontations.
The attacks were one of the deadliest instances of mass summary executions
since the start of the conflict.
At least 147 bodies were found in the city of Aleppo’s river between January and
March. The location where the bodies were discovered and information about
the victims’ last known whereabouts indicate that the executions most likely
took place in government-controlled areas, although the perpetrators or their
motivation remains unknown.
Arbitrary Arrests, Enforced Disappearances, Torture, and
Deaths in Custody
Since the beginning of the uprising security forces have subjected tens of thousands
of people to arbitrary arrests, unlawful detentions, enforced disappearances,
ill-treatment, and torture using an extensive network of detention facilities
throughout Syria. Many detainees were young men in their 20s or 30s; but
children, women, and elderly people were also detained.
Those arrested include peaceful protesters and activists involved in organizing,
filming, and reporting on protests as well as journalists, humanitarian assistance
providers, lawyers, and doctors. In some instances, activists reported that security forces detained their family members, including children, to pressure
them to turn themselves in. A large number of political activists remain in
incommunicado detention while others have faced trial, including before military
and counterterrorism courts, for exercising their rights.
On February 3, security officials arrested Mohammed Atfah, a Syrian Arab Red
Crescent volunteer working with children in Homs, at a checkpoint. A detainee
who was held with Mohammed and later released told his family that
Mohammed’s health had deteriorated so significantly in detention that he was
no longer able to recognize people around him.
On March 13, security forces also arrested Nidal Nahlawi and his friends in
Damascus while they were planning relief operations. Nidal has been accused
of supporting terrorism under the overbroad July 2012 Counterterrorism Law.
He and other activists, including several members of the Syrian Center for
Media and Freedom of Expression (SCM) are standing trial before a special
counterterrorism court on the basis of this law. The court does not meet basic
international fair trial standards. The charges are brought under the guise of
countering violent militancy, but the allegations against the activists actually
amount to such acts as distributing humanitarian aid and documenting human
rights abuses.
Released detainees and defectors describe a range of torture methods used by
Syrian security forces including prolonged beatings, often with batons and
wires, use of painful stress positions, electrocution, sexual assault, the pulling
of fingernails, and mock execution. During a visit to an abandoned state security
detention facility in Raqqa in April 2013, Human Rights Watch found a basat
al-reeh torture device—a cross-shaped contraption used to immobilize
detainees during torture.
Several former detainees said they witnessed people dying from torture in
detention. At least 490 detainees died in custody in 2013, according to local
activists.
In February 2013, Human Rights Watch documented the death in detention of
Omar Aziz, 64, a peaceful activist who had been helping local committees
deliver aid. A second detainee Ayham Ghazzoul, 26, a human rights activist, and member of SCM, died in detention in November, a released detainee told
his family.
Armed Opposition Abuses
Armed opposition groups have increasingly carried out serious abuses including
indiscriminate attacks, extrajudicial executions, kidnapping, and torture.
Foreign fighters and jihadist groups have been among the worst perpetrators of
the abuses that Human Rights Watch has documented.
On August 4, a coalition of opposition groups led predominately by Islamist militant
groups conducted an operation in the Latakia countryside in which some
of the groups killed at least 190 civilians, including 57 women, at least 18 children,
and 14 elderly men. Many of them were summarily executed. Armed opposition
groups have been implicated in other indiscriminate attacks against the
civilian population, including car bombings and mortar attacks on governmentheld
civilian areas inside Syria as well as cross-border strikes on Shia villages
in Lebanon.
Armed opposition groups fighting in Syria are also using children for combat
and other military purposes, and have used schools as military bases, barracks,
detention centers, and sniper posts, turning places of learning into military
targets and putting students at risk.
Displacement Crisis
The UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) estimates
that 4.25 million Syrians are internally displaced. In 2013, humanitarian aid
agencies experienced significant challenges in getting assistance to the displaced
and affected civilian population within Syria because of sieges imposed
by both government and opposition fighters, the government’s continuing
refusal to allow assistance to come in across the border, and armed opposition
groups’ failure to guarantee security for humanitarian workers.
Attacks on healthcare workers and facilities have significantly eroded the country’s
ability to protect the right to health: 32 of the country’s 88 public hospitals
have closed and government forces have detained, tortured, and killed hundreds
of health workers and patients, and have deliberately attacked vehicles carrying patients and supplies. A recent report of the UN Human Rights Council
(UNHRC) concluded that “the denial of medical care as a weapon of war is a
distinct and chilling reality of the war in Syria.”
As of November 18, 2013, 2.23 million Syrians had registered or were pending
registration as refugees with the UN Refugee Agency (UNHCR), the vast of
majority of them in Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey, Iraq, and Egypt. In 2013 Iraq,
Jordan, and Turkey denied entry to tens of thousands of Syrians, either by limiting
daily numbers and the profile of those who could cross or by closing border
crossings entirely and only sporadically allowing a limited number to cross.
Syrians stranded as a result lived in poor conditions and were at risk of attacks
by government forces.
All four neighboring countries accepting Syrian refugees have denied Syrians
secure legal status. Israeli Defense Minister Ehud Barak said that Israel would
prevent “waves of refugees” from fleeing Syria to the occupied Golan Heights.
On January 13, 2013, Egyptian airport officials deported two Syrians back to
Syria, in violation of Egypt’s non-refoulement obligations, and, on July 8, without
warning, the Egyptian government changed its entry policy for Syrians by
requiring them to obtain a visa and security clearance beforehand. On the same
day, Egypt denied entry to 276 people arriving from Syria, including a plane
forced to fly back to Syria. On July 19 and 20, Egyptian security forces arrested
dozens of Syrian men and some boys at checkpoints on main roads in Cairo,
many arbitrarily. The authorities deported at least 24 of them, including 7 boys,
to neighboring countries.
Palestinians from Syria have faced additional obstacles. Since March, Jordan
has routinely denied entry to Palestinian refugees from Syria. Egypt has also
restricted entry to Palestinians from Syria starting in January. The Lebanese
government also began on August 6 to bar most Palestinians from Syria from
entering.
In 2013, the number of refugees from Syria attempting to reach Europe, including
through dangerous smuggling routes, has increased. While some European
Union countries offer them safety, in others, including Greece, they face detention
and significant obstacles in getting protection.
UNHCR reported that over 75 percent of the registered Syrian refugees in neighboring
countries are women and children who face particular vulnerabilities.
Aid agencies report that domestic violence, sexual harassment, and exploitation
have increased and social constraints and fear limit the mobility of refugee
women, restricting their access to income-generating activities or health and
other critical services.
At time of writing, UNHCR reports that only 62 percent of its appeal for the
regional refugee response is funded, leaving a US$1.14 billion budget shortfall.
As a result, UNHCR has cut assistance to refugees, including subsidization of
health care and provision of basic goods.
Key International Actors
The UN Security Council (Security Council) remained deeply divided on Syria.
The August 21 chemical weapons attack pushed the US and Russian governments
to negotiate a deal that resulted in a September 27 Security Council resolution
requiring the Syrian government to destroy its chemical weapons program
and cooperate with international inspectors. A presidential statement of
the Security Council followed on October 2 calling for immediate action to
ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian access throughout Syria, including
across borders where appropriate.
Despite these developments, Russian and Chinese opposition precluded the
Security Council from referring the situation to the International Criminal Court
(ICC), obstructing accountability for violations in the conflict.
The General Assembly and the Human Rights Council passed resolutions on
Syria with overwhelming majorities in 2013. The Human Rights Council extended
until March 2014 the international commission of inquiry mandated to investigate
violations and identify where possible those responsible. A total of 64
countries called on the Security Council to refer the situation in Syria to the ICC,
including 6 Security Council members: France, the United Kingdom,
Luxembourg, Argentina, Australia, and South Korea. France included an ICC
referral in an early draft of the Security Council resolution on chemical weapons
use, but this was later removed during negotiations over the text. Neither the
United States nor China expressed support for a referral. Russia said an ICC
referral would be “ill-timed and counterproductive.”
Syrian opposition factions under the umbrella grouping, the National Coalition
of Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition Forces continued to gain international
support in 2013 and recognition as the legitimate representative of the Syrian
people. Despite this however, the coalition has failed to create a unified political
or military opposition. Armed opposition groups in Syria are receiving financial
and military support from Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Turkey, and the US. The UK
and France provide non-lethal aid to armed opposition groups.
The governments of Iran, Russia, and China continued to support the Syrian
government either diplomatically or through financial and military support.
The European Union as a whole remained the second largest humanitarian
donor for the Syrian crisis after the US. However, despite the EU’s stated commitment
to both the ICC and to justice for serious crimes, the EU high representative
failed to ensure a strong collective EU voice and strategy that would
advance the chances of bringing the crimes in Syria before the ICC. Twentyseven
EU member states—all but Sweden—joined a Swiss-led initiative calling
on the Security Council to refer the situation in Syria to the ICC.
Tunisia
Tunisia’s process of democratic transition continued, but at a slow pace. The
National Constituent Assembly (NCA), elected in October 2011, continued to
draft a new constitution but at this writing it had yet to be approved. The assassination
by alleged Islamist militants of two leading leftist opposition politicians,
Chokri Belaid and Mohamed Brahmi, on February 6 and July 25 respectively,
caused widespread shock and sparked a political crisis that saw the NCA
suspended for two months.
Since they overthrew the Ben Ali regime in 2011, Tunisians have enjoyed greater
freedom of expression, assembly and association, including the freedom to
form political parties. However, several factors have hampered the consolidation
of rights’ protections. These include the delay in adopting a new constitution
consistent with international human rights law and standards, the retention
of the former regime’s repressive legal arsenal, and attempts by the executive
branch to control media and prosecute speech offenses.
Human Rights in the Draft Constitution
The NCA issued a new draft constitution in June. Thought an improvement on
the three previous drafts—providing safeguards for most civil, political, economic,
social, and cultural rights—it was also deficient in several respects. In
particular, it failed to include a clause directly incorporating human rights, as
defined under customary international law and in international treaties that
Tunisia has ratified, into Tunisian national law. In addition, the new draft contained
only weak formulations of the principles of equality and non-discrimination
before the law, and allowed for limitation of the rights to freedom of
expression, assembly, association, movement, and access to information in
overly broad terms, which could result in their arbitrary restriction. At time of
writing, it remained unclear when the new constitution would be adopted.
Freedom of Expression and Media
The authorities decided in May 2013, after some delay, to implement decreelaw
116 on audiovisual media. This required the creation of an Independent
High Authority for Audiovisual Communication (HAICA) to regulate broadcast media. Despite this, the executive branch continued unilaterally to appoint the
heads of state radio and television broadcasters in contravention of international
freedom of expression standards governing the independence of public
service media.
In 2013, judicial authorities prosecuted many journalists, bloggers, artists, and
intellectuals on account of their peaceful exercise of freedom of expression
using penal code provisions criminalizing “defamation,” “offenses against
state agents,” and “harming public order,” all of which can result in prison
terms. The NCA made no effort to abolish or suspend these Ben Ali era provisions,
and the courts did not rule them inconsistent with international human
rights law.
On March 8, authorities charged blogger Olfa Riahi with criminal defamation
after she published information online about alleged misuse of public funds by
former foreign minister Rafik Abdessalem. Her case was still under investigation
at time of writing.
On August 30, a criminal court in Hammamet imposed prison terms on two
Tunisian rappers, known by the names “Weld El 15” and “Klay BBJ,” after convicting
them in their absence of “insulting the police” and other charges. They
had performed a song critical of police violence at a music festival. On October
17, an appeals court acquitted Klay BBJ and set him free after three weeks in
prison. In March, Weld El 15 had released a video accompanying his song “Cops
Are Dogs,” which showed police assaulting people. For this, a criminal court in
Manouba sentenced him to two years in prison, which the Appeals Court in
Tunis reduced to a suspended six-month term on July 2.
On September 9, an investigative judge ordered the arrest and detention of
police union leader Walid Zarrouk after he allegedly posted comments on a
Facebook post criticizing politicized prosecutions. The same day, in separate
cases, prosecutors summoned Zouhaer al-Jiss, a journalist, for moderating a
radio program in which a participant criticized Tunisia’s president, and Zied al-
Heni, a journalist who had criticized the arrest of a cameraman who filmed an
egg-throwing attack on the culture minister. Al-Heni was arrested that day and
spent three days in jail before being released on bail.
Judicial Reform
In April, the NCA appointed a temporary high judicial council to supervise
the appointment, promotion, transfer, and discipline of judges pending the
adoption of a new constitution. This long awaited reform was intended to end
or reduce the undue executive influence over the judiciary that, in October
2012, saw the Ministry of Justice arbitrarily dismiss 75 judges.
Women’s Rights
Tunisia has long had a reputation as among the most progressive of Arab states
with respect to women’s rights. The new draft constitution reflects this, declaring
that the state “guarantees the protection of women’s rights and supports
their gains,” “guarantees equal opportunity between men and women to
assume responsibilities,” and “guarantees the elimination of all forms of violence
against women.” This is an improvement over previous constitutional
drafts that invoked notions of “complementary” gender roles that risked diluting
the principle of equality between men and women. However, the new draft
constitution fails to fully embody the principle of equality between the sexes as
it refers to equal opportunity in “assuming responsibilities,” but not to the
broader right to equality of opportunity in all political, economic, and other
spheres.
Prosecution of Attacks by Fundamentalist Groups
In May, a Tunis court imposed two-year suspended prison sentences on 20
defendants it convicted of participating in an attack on the American Embassy
on September 14, 2012, by thousands of people, mostly religious conservatives,
protesting a movie made in the US that they deemed insulting to Islam.
Four protesters died in the attack, in which protestors burned the American flag
and a nearby American school, and destroyed cars and other property.
The authorities also accused Islamist religious conservatives of responsibility
for the assassinations of Chokri Belaid and Mohamed Brahmi, and said that
both men were shot with the same gun. Their murders sparked widespread
protests. The authorities declared Ansar al-Sharia, an Islamist group, a “terrorist
organization” and arrested dozens of suspected members. Two of the suspects
alleged torture in prison.
Abuses against Protesters
Tunisians now have more freedom to exercise their rights to peaceful demonstration
since Ben Ali’s ousting. However, police and other security forces continued
to use excessive force against demonstrators in 2013. For example, on
May 19, security forces fired live ammunition and birdshot at protestors during
clashes in Intilaka and Cite Ettadhamen, Tunis neighborhoods, killing one person
and injuring four others. Following the murder of Mohamed Brahmi, security
forces used excessive force, including beatings and tear gas, to disperse protesters,
killing one person and injuring others. The authorities failed to investigate
and to hold the security forces accountable.
Accountability for Past Crimes
In June, the NCA began considering a draft transitional justice law, which proposes
the creation of a Council of Truth and Dignity to uncover the truth about
past rights abuses. At time of writing, the law had yet to be enacted.
Military courts have tried several groups of defendants accused of killing protesters
during the revolution which toppled the former president. A military
court also sentenced Ben Ali, who remains in Saudi Arabia, to life in prison for
complicity in murder, after trying him in absentia, and jailed several former
high-ranking officials.
These trials appeared to respect defendants’ rights and enabled some victims
to pursue justice, but several factors undermined their value towards achieving
accountability, notably the authorities’ failure to identify the direct perpetrators
of killings and lack of an adequate legal framework to prosecute senior officers
with command responsibility for crimes that their subordinates committed. The
government’s failure to press effectively for Ben Ali’s extradition from Saudi
Arabia also undermined accountability.
Although Ben Ali’s security forces used torture extensively, the new authorities
have failed in the almost three years since the overthrow of Ben Ali to investigate
the majority of torture cases. In the one torture-related trial that has taken
place, a court convicted former Interior Minister Abdallah Kallel and three security
officials of “using violence against others either directly or through others,”
and sentenced them to two year prison terms. The case arose from the arrest and detention of 17 senior military officers in 1991 in connection with an
alleged plot by the Islamist group Al-Nahdha against Ben Ali.
Key International Actors
The European Union provides funding support for judicial, security sector and
other institutional reform. In October 2012, the EU approved €25 million (US$32
million) to support strengthening judicial independence and pledged a further
€40 million ($51.2 million) in June 2013.
On September 13, following his visit to Tunisia, the special rapporteur on the
promotion of truth, justice, reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence urged
the government to adopt a comprehensive transitional justice program, and to
enact legislation transferring jurisdiction over cases involving gross violations
of human rights in which the military or security forces are implicated, from military
courts to the ordinary civilian justice system.
United Arab Emirates
The United Arab Emirates (UAE) continues to crack down on freedom of expression
and association. The authorities are arbitrarily detaining scores of individuals
they suspect of links to domestic and international Islamist groups. A court
convicted 69 dissidents in July after a manifestly unfair trial, in which evidence
emerged of systematic torture at state security facilities. The UAE made no
reforms to a system that facilitates the forced labor of migrant workers. Plans to
ameliorate conditions for female domestic workers fall short of the standards
outlined in the convention on domestic workers that the International Labour
Organization (ILO) adopted in 2012.
Torture and Fair Trial
In July, the Federal Supreme Court sentenced 69 Emirati dissidents to prison
terms of up to 10 years on charges of aiming to overthrow the government after
a mass trial of a total of 94 defendants marred by violations of fair trial standards,
including credible allegations that the defendants endured torture in
pretrial detention. The court acquitted 25 of the defendants.
Authorities held at least 64 of the detainees at undisclosed locations for up to a
year before the trial began in March, and many of the detainees had no access
to legal assistance until late February. Prior to the opening of the trial, security
officials denied international observers entry to the UAE. Authorities prevented
other observers who had been admitted to the country from entering the court,
despite the fact that they had complied with the stipulated procedures.
At the first trial hearing, some of the defendants told the judge they had been
seriously ill-treated during their months in detention. In June, rights groups
received 22 statements written by some of the 94 people on trial that corroborated
these claims. All but six of those who wrote statements said that officials
subjected them to temperature extremes and interrogated them while they were
blindfolded. Two said their interrogators threatened them with electrocution.
Other detainees in the UAE have also alleged that they endured ill-treatment
that in some cases amounted to torture. Officials held Egyptian journalist Anas
Fouda in custody for 35 days after state security officers detained him in July, and after his release, he said that officials kept him in solitary confinement,
with extremes of temperature and harsh lighting that resulted in sleep deprivation.
Saud Kulaib, an Emirati national, spent five months in incommunicado
detention between December 29 and May 27. In addition to enduring solitary
confinement, extremes of temperature, and sleep deprivation, he told family
members and other inmates that officers beat him, sliced his hand open with a
razor blade, threatened to pull out his fingernails, and told him that his wife
was in detention and on hunger strike.
Fourteen Egyptians are at time of writing in Al Wathba jail after spending up to
seven months in incommunicado detention before their transfer there in June.
They did not have access to a lawyer until September 22 and their family members
claim they had been subjected to physical and psychological torture in
detention.
Freedom of Association and Expression
Those convicted in the mass trial all have ties to an Emirati Islamist group, al-
Islah, that has advocated political reform in the UAE. The judgment in the case
indicates that the judge convicted them solely on the basis of their exercise of
their rights to freedom of association and expression. The bulk of the evidence
in the 243-page judgment focuses on the peaceful political activities of the
accused and their ties to al-Islah, which the judgment asserts is a branch of the
Muslim Brotherhood.
The only evidence that suggests any intention to overthrow the government is a
confession by one defendant, Ahmed al-Suweidi, whom authorities forcibly disappeared
for five months after his arrest on March 26, 2012. In court, al-
Suweidi denied all the charges. There is nothing in the judgment aside from al-
Suweidi’s disputed confession that suggests those convicted were doing anything
other than expressing opinions in the context of an organization whose
goal was political reform.
The authorities continue to arbitrarily detain individuals with suspected links to
peaceful Islamist groups and to arrest and prosecute people for criticizing the
government.
In April, an Abu Dhabi court sentenced Abdulla al-Hadidi to 10 months in prison
for publishing false details of a public trial session via the Internet. Al-Hadidi
had attended four court sessions of the UAE’s mass trial and had posted comments
about what he witnessed on social media sites. The court’s judgment
invoked the UAE federal decree on cybercrime, passed in November 2012. The
decree provides for prison sentences for a range of nonviolent political activities
carried out on or via the Internet, from criticism of the UAE’s rulers to calling
for unlicensed demonstrations. In July, the day after authorities arrested an
Emirati national named Khalifa Rabia, a government-linked television channel
aired a piece accusing him of “affiliation with secret cells” on the basis of an
analysis of his Twitter account, which contained tweets in support of political
detainees in the UAE. Rabia remained in detention at time of writing.
Authorities have not yet filed charges against the 14 Egyptians detained
between November 21, 2012 and January 7, 2013, but local media alleged that
the detained men had formed a covert Muslim Brotherhood cell attempting to
establish a foothold in the UAE. According to their lawyer, only three of them
have ever been members of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt. The detainees
include doctors, engineers, and university professors, all of whom have lived
and worked in the UAE for many years. Eight of the detainees have been in the
UAE for between 20 and 30 years.
Migrant Workers
According to 2011 government statistics, foreigners account for more than 88.5
percent of UAE residents, many of them low-paid migrant workers from South
Asia. Despite years of criticism, the UAE has not addressed shortcomings in its
legal and regulatory framework that facilitate the exploitation and forced labor
of these workers.
Recruiting agencies often charge workers fees of several thousand dollars and
employers customarily confiscate the workers’ passports for the duration of
their stay in the UAE. The authorities have taken no steps to stop either of these
illegal practices. Nor have they taken steps to reform the kafala (sponsorship)
system that ties a migrant worker’s legal residence to his or her employer, or
“sponsor.” Migrant workers have no right to organize or bargain collectively,
and face penalties for going on strike. In May, hundreds of workers at a site in Dubai went on strike demanding better pay and conditions. After the two-day
strike, immigration officials issued at least 40 deportation orders.
UAE labor law excludes domestic workers, almost exclusively migrant women,
denying them basic protections such as limits to hours of work and a weekly
day off. A flawed 2012 draft law for domestic workers has yet to be adopted and
a regional unified contract for domestic workers, expected to be approved in
2014, falls well short of the minimum standards outlined in the Domestic
Workers Convention that the ILO adopted in 2011.
Women’s Rights
In July, a Norwegian woman received a 16-month prison sentence for extramarital
sex after she reported to the police that she had been raped. The police did
not believe her claim that the sex was nonconsensual. The subsequent international
outcry led to an official pardon and her release, but the case highlighted
how women who report rape can be threatened with criminal charges instead,
and as such exposed longstanding problems with procedures for victims of sexual
violence.
Federal Law No. 28 of 2005 regulates matters of personal status in the UAE and
some of its provisions discriminate against women. The law states that UAE
women have the right to work “without being held disobedient” and the right to
complete their education, but it also requires that a male guardian concludes a
woman’s marriage contract. Talaq, unilateral divorce, occurs by a declaration
from the husband in the presence of a judge.
Despite the existence of shelters and hotlines to help protect women, domestic
violence remains a pervasive problem. The penal code gives men the legal right
to discipline their wives and children, including through the use of physical violence.
The Federal Supreme Court has upheld a husband’s right to “chastise”
his wife and children with physical abuse.
Key International Actors
Influential allies such as the United States, France, and the United Kingdom, all
of which are seeking multibillion-dollar fighter jet contracts with the UAE, have
refrained from criticizing the UAE’s crackdown on political dissent.
Yemen
The fragile transition government that succeeded President Ali Abdullah Saleh
in 2012 following mass protests failed to address multiple human rights challenges.
Conflict-related abuses, legally sanctioned discrimination against
women, judicial executions of child offenders, and non-accountability for the
previous government’s human rights violations all persisted in 2013.
Five hundred and sixty five representatives of political parties, women, youth,
and civil society launched a national dialogue process in March, which was
slated to produce recommendations within six months to guide the subsequent
constitutional drafting process regarding the nature of the state. At time of writing,
the dialogue had yet to end because of delays caused by political maneuvering.
Clashes continued between state security forces and armed factions demanding
greater autonomy in southern Yemen and between Salafist groups and
armed tribesmen and Huthis in the north. The Yemeni government and the
United States continued to engage in military operations with the Islamist
armed group Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP). On December 5, suicide
bombing attacks both claimed and denied by AQAP against Yemen’s
Defense Ministry compound killed at least 52 people and injured another 161.
The dead included at least seven foreign doctors and nurses working at the military
hospital in the compound.
Yemen faces a growing humanitarian crisis, with nearly half the population
lacking sufficient food, according to UN agencies.
Accountability
In 2012, Yemen’s parliament granted Saleh and his aides immunity from prosecution,
and the current president, Abdu Rabu Mansour Hadi, has not created
mechanisms to provide accountability for past abuses.
In September 2012, President Hadi decreed that an independent commission of
inquiry should be created to investigate alleged violations committed during
the 2011 uprising and recommend accountability for perpetrators and redress
for victims. Over one year later, he had still not nominated the commissioners.
Hadi presented a deeply flawed draft transitional justice law to parliament in
January, but it has yet to be passed. The draft law does not grant victims judicial redress, but is merely a victim compensation scheme, limited in time to
events of 2011.
The trial began in September 2012 of 78 defendants—but not the key suspects—
for the deadliest attack of the uprising, in which pro-government gunmen
killed 45 protesters and wounded 200 on March 18, 2011. It was marred by
political interference, failure to follow leads that might have implicated government
officials, and factual errors. In April 2013, a trial judge ordered prosecutors
to reinvestigate former president Saleh and 11 top aides in connection with
the incident.
Militant Attacks
AQAP carried out dozens of deadly bombings and other attacks on Yemeni
security forces. The Islamist group held several foreigners for ransom, releasing
most after weeks or months, but continued to detain Saudi diplomat Abdallah
al-Khalidi, who was abducted in March 2012.
The US carried out at least 22 drone strikes on alleged AQAP members as of
mid-September, according to the New America Foundation and the United
Kingdom-based Bureau of Investigative Journalism. The strikes killed between
72 and 139 people, most of them alleged militants, but lack of access to most
targeted areas and the unwillingness of the United States to provide information
on attacks, prevented full inquiries, including regarding civilian casualties.
A Human Rights Watch investigation of six US targeted killing operations in
Yemen—one in 2009 and the rest in 2012-13—found two attacks were unlawfully
indiscriminate and four others raised serious laws-of-war concerns.
Unlawful Use of Mines
In May 2013, Human Rights Watch documented the use of antipersonnel landmines
allegedly by the Republican Guards in Bani Jarmooz, an area northeast of
the capital, Sanaa, in 2011. The mines have caused at least 1 death and 14
injuries of civilians, including 9 children.
Yemen is a state party to the Mine Ban Treaty, and at a meeting of the treaty in
Geneva in May, renewed its commitment to the treaty, promised to investigate
the allegations, and committed itself to addressing the issue by clearing the
mines and assisting the victims.
The Ministry of Defense established a committee to investigate the allegations
of landmine use and demine the area, but as of September the committee had
yet to send an assessment team to the area.
Attacks on Health Workers
Health workers and facilities are struggling to protect themselves from armed
groups. Medecins Sans Frontieres reported 18 different attacks against their
staff in Amran in the past year, including shootings, threats, and physical
attacks on health workers.
Children and Armed Conflict
In recent years, Human Rights Watch has documented cases of children participating
in combat with both the First Armored Division and the Republican
Guard. In June 2012, UNICEF Yemen reported several incidents of child recruitment
by the Yemeni armed forces and by the armed group Ansar al-Sharia, an
offshoot of AQAP. In September, the United Nations special rapporteur on children
in armed conflict announced that the government had approved an action
plan to end the recruitment and use of children in government armed forces.
In Aden, from February until June, the Southern Movement (or Hirak), an
umbrella group seeking independence or greater autonomy for southern
Yemen, prevented nearly 50,000 children from going to school on Wednesdays
and Saturdays so that they could participate in a civil disobedience campaign.
At least a dozen schools in Aden came under armed attack during the campaign
from Hirak forces, some several times. In September, the civil disobedience
campaign resumed, but campaigners agreed to exempt schools, allowing students
to attend even on the weekly day of general strike.
Juvenile Death Penalty
Despite a 1994 law prohibiting death sentences for child offenders (anyone
under 18 at the time of their crime), in the last five years Yemen has carried out
multiple executions of individuals who may have been children at the time of
their offense. At least 22 possible child offenders among convicted murderers remain on death row in Sanaa’s Central Prison, and in prisons in Ibb, Taiz,
Hodeida, and Aden.
Yemen’s low rate of birth registration means that accused individuals often do
not have birth certificates to establish their age. In addition, not all judges follow
the law prohibiting death sentences for juvenile offenders.
In June 2013, Yemen’s Justice Ministry established a committee of forensic
medical experts to assess the age of young individuals accused of serious
crimes whose age remains in doubt. The committee represented an effort to
tackle the problem of death sentences for child offenders, but it relies solely on
forensic medicine, which has a high margin of error, according to studies carried
out by the Dutch government and the UK Royal College of Pediatrics and
Child Health. Social evaluations, including a review of documents such as
school registration as well as interviews with community members, remain necessary
to supplement forensic evidence.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
Women in Yemen face severe discrimination in law and in practice. Women cannot
marry without the permission of their male guardians; they do not have
equal rights to divorce, inheritance or child custody; and a lack of legal protection
leaves them exposed to domestic and sexual violence.
Child marriage remains widespread with doctors and the media reporting the
deaths of child brides as young as 8 years old following their wedding night or
childbirth. Yemen has not legislated a minimum age of marriage.
The national dialogue presented an important opportunity to secure protection
for women and girls’ rights. The rights and freedoms committee within the
national dialogue made positive recommendations on equality of men and
women and non-discrimination, including a recommendation that the minimum
age of marriage should be set at 18.
Attacks on Journalists
Since President Hadi took office, the authorities have eased formal controls on
media, though legal restrictions remain. However there has been an increase in
assaults on journalists and bloggers by the authorities and their supporters, and
by militant groups, including Saleh loyalists, Huthis, and religious conservatives.
In the first half of 2013, the Freedom Foundation, a Yemeni organization that
monitors press freedom, recorded 144 attacks affecting 205 media members,
including verbal harassment, confiscations, politicized prosecutions, enforced
disappearances, and killings.
The government generally has not condemned these attacks, investigated
them, held those responsible to account, or taken measures to protect journalists.
Key International Actors
In September 2013, the Friends of Yemen, a group of 39 countries and 8 international
organizations, reiterated their joint pledge of US$7.8 billion that was
made in 2012. Only 24 percent of the aid pledges had been dispersed by
September 2013, according to the Yemeni government.
The US, the largest non-Arab donor, pledged $256 million in bilateral aid from
January to September 2013. It reports having provided more than $221 million
in humanitarian assistance since 2012, $100 million in development and economic
aid, and approximately $247 million in counterterrorism and security
assistance.
Since May 2012, US President Barack Obama has in place an executive order
allowing the Treasury Department to freeze the US-based assets of anyone who
“obstructs” implementation of the political transition, scheduled to end with
the Yemeni presidential elections in 2014.
In September 2013, for the fifth consecutive year, Obama issued a full waiver
allowing Yemen to receive military assistance, despite documented use of child
soldiers by various forces, including government troops and pro-government
militias.
In September 2013, the UN Human Rights Council passed resolution 24/32,
which made reference to different human rights challenges, including child
offenders facing the death penalty, child marriage, the protection of journalists,
the need for investigations into past abuses, and the passage of a transitional
justice law.
Canada
Canada enjoys a global reputation as a defender of human rights at home and
abroad that reflects a solid record on core civil and political rights protections,
and a generally progressive approach to economic and social rights.
Nonetheless, serious human rights concerns demand remedial action by federal
and provincial governments, particularly with regard to the rights of the
indigenous peoples of Canada, people impacted abroad by Canada’s extractive
industries, and ethnic and religious minorities in Quebec. Recent federal government
actions undermining the ability of civil society organizations to engage
in advocacy impede progress on a range of human rights issues.
Violence against Indigenous Women and Girls
In February 2013, the federal government established an all-party committee in
Canada’s House of Commons to hold hearings on the issue of missing and murdered
indigenous women and to propose solutions to address root causes of
violence. The committee made limited progress and was criticized by missing
women advocates for lacking clear direction, prioritizing government witnesses
over victims’ family members, and failing to consider alternative, culturally sensitive
methods of family and community participation.
The Native Women’s Association of Canada has documented 582 cases of missing
and murdered indigenous women and girls in Canada as of March 2010.
Many of the killings and disappearances were between the 1960s and the
1990s, but 39 percent occurred after 2000. The number of cases is undoubtedly
higher today, but comprehensive data is not available since the government cut
funding for the organization’s database, and police forces in Canada do not
consistently collect race and ethnicity data.
In February, Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) Commissioner Bob Paulson
told his officers via email, “Don’t worry about it, I’ve got your back,” in
response to a 2013 Human Rights Watch report documenting the RCMP’s failure
in British Columbia (BC) to protect indigenous women and girls from violence,
as well as abusive police behavior against indigenous women and girls, including
excessive use of force, and physical and sexual assault. Canada has inadequate
police complaint mechanisms and oversight procedures, including a lack of a mandate for independent civilian investigations into all reported incidents
of serious police misconduct.
In February 2013, the federal government referred Human Rights Watch’s report
on police mistreatment of indigenous women and girls in BC to a complaints
commission for investigation. The commission, while civilian led, often works
closely with the police and does not have the power to issue binding recommendations
on the RCMP. As of November, the commission’s investigation was
ongoing.
The federal government continues to reject calls for a national inquiry into the
murders and disappearances sounded by the premiers of Canada’s provinces
and territories, the Assembly of First Nations, and many civil society organizations.
Public national inquiries allow for impartial investigation into issues of
national importance.
More than a dozen countries, including Switzerland and New Zealand, raised
the issue of violence against indigenous women and girls in Canada during its
second periodic review by the United Nations Human Rights Council in April
2013. Both the UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights sent delegations
to Canada to investigate the problem in 2013. After conducting his own visit in
October 2013, UN Special Rapporteur on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
James Anaya endorsed the call for Canada to hold a national inquiry into the
murders and disappearances of indigenous women.
Mining Industry Abuses
Canada is the mining industry’s most important global hub, home to most of
the world’s mining and exploration companies. These firms have an enormous
collective impact on the human rights of vulnerable communities worldwide
In 2013, Human Rights Watch documented allegations that Vancouver-based
Nevsun Resources’ flagship Bisha gold mine in Eritrea was partly built using
forced labor deployed by local state-owned contractor, Segen Construction. In a
statement, Nevsun expressed “regret if certain employees of Segen were conscripts”
during the mine’s construction, and insisted there were no ongoing
abuses. However, it refused to sever ties with Segen.
In 2011, Human Rights Watch documented allegations that security guards
employed by Canadian mining giant Barrick Gold had gang-raped women at a
Papua New Guinea mine site and engaged in other abuses. The company has
since taken steps to prevent further abuses and has promised to provide remediation
to dozens of women who were victims of sexual violence. Some
activists have criticized Barrick’s plan because women who elect to accept the
benefits will be required to sign legal waivers that they will not participate in
any civil legal action against the company. However, if the plan’s end results
respect the rights of victims to prompt and appropriate redress, it could be a
path-breaking example of how companies can move proactively to respond to
serious abuses linked to their operations at home and abroad. The remediation
scheme was scheduled to begin delivering compensation packages to victims
in late 2013.
The Canadian government neither regulates nor monitors the human rights
practices of Canadian mining companies when they go abroad. Its sole action
on this front has been to establish in 2009 a corporate social responsibility
counselor whose office is without oversight or investigatory powers.
Counterterrorism
Canadian citizen Omar Khadr, whom US forces captured on the battlefield in
Afghanistan in July 2002 at the age of 15, was repatriated in 2012. Canada has
continued to deny Khadr access to rehabilitation and reintegration services as
required for former child soldiers. He remains incarcerated, serving an eightyear
sentence under a plea agreement for murder in violation of the laws of war
and material support for terrorism, entered in the military commission system
in Guantanamo, a fundamentally flawed system with no provisions for adjudicating
youth offenders. In June 2013, Khadr became eligible for parole after having
served one-third of his sentence, or 32 months.
Indigenous Rights
Canada’s federal government has apologized for the residential school system
of the 1800s and 1900s. Approximately 150,000 indigenous children were
removed from their families and communities and placed in the schools, where
they were forbidden to speak their own languages or practice their culture.
Many also suffered physical and sexual abuse. In 2013, information surfaced
indicating that some children in residential schools in the 1940s and 50s were
subjected to medical experimentation.
Indigenous groups have criticized Canada for failing to respect land agreements
with indigenous communities or to consult adequately with them, including
with regard to resource extraction plans on traditional lands. The government
has to pay adequate attention to severe poverty, housing, water, sanitation,
health care, and education problems in indigenous communities, particularly
those in remote and rural areas.
Freedom of Religion
In September 2013, the provincial government of Quebec introduced a potentially
discriminatory proposal that would impinge on freedom of religious
expression by prohibiting government employees from displaying conspicuous
religious symbols, which would include head scarves, but not small symbols,
such as cross pendants. Women’s centers in Quebec reported an increase in
verbal and physical attacks on Muslim women after debate over the proposal
began.
Asylum Seeker and Migrant Rights
In September 2013, more than 150 immigration detainees in a Toronto detention
center launched a hunger strike to demand improved access to medical
care and better conditions. In June 2012, Canada’s parliament passed Bill C-31,
which permits the government to designate a group of people arriving as an
“irregular arrival,” making them subject to mandatory detention with limited
judicial review and risking the prolonged detention of refugees and children 16
and older.
C-31 created an administrative Refugee Appeal Division, but asylum seekers
from 27 “designated countries” that have a history of respecting human rights
are not allowed to appeal their denials to it, although the Federal Court may
review their denials. C-31 also places a five-year ban on “irregular arrivals” from
applying for permanent residence, negatively impacting the right of separated
refugee families to reunite.
Civil Society
Civil society representatives and organizations across a range of fields report
that government actions, including funding cuts, threatened revocation of nonprofit
status, and intrusive monitoring have had a chilling effect on dissent to
the current federal government’s policies.
In July 2013, Voices-Voix, a coalition of more than 200 national and local civil
society organizations, expressed concern that the Prime Minister’s Office had
reportedly instructed government officials to compile “friend and enemy stakeholder”
lists as part of the process of preparing briefing materials for new cabinet
members.
In 2012, the natural resources minister accused environmental and other “radical
groups” of trying to use money from “foreign special-interest groups” to
undermine development in the country. His comments came a day before federal
regulatory hearings began on whether to approve Enbridge’s Northern
Gateway pipeline that would deliver crude from Alberta’s oilsands to Kitimat,
BC, for shipment to Asia.
United States
The United States has a vibrant civil society and media that enjoy strong constitutional
protections. Yet its rights record is marred by abuses related to criminal
justice, immigration, national security, and drug policy. Within these areas,
victims are often the most vulnerable members of society: racial and ethnic
minorities, immigrants, children, the elderly, the poor, and prisoners.
Revelations in 2013 of extensive government surveillance and aggressive prosecutions
of whistleblowers raised concerns about infringement of privacy rights
and freedom of expression, generating a firestorm of international protest
against US practices.
Federal policymakers proposed reforms to harmful longstanding immigration
and sentencing laws and policies. The outcome of these initiatives was uncertain
at time of writing.
A renewed commitment by President Barack Obama to close the Guantanamo
Bay detention facility remained unfulfilled. Lack of transparency made it impossible
to assess the implementation of promised reforms to the practice of “targeted
killings” abroad, including through use of unmanned aerial drones; new
information on individual strikes found instances of violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law.
Harsh Sentencing
The US has the largest reported incarcerated population in the world, and by far
the highest rate of imprisonment, holding 2.2 million people in adult prisons or
jails as of year-end 2011.
Mass incarceration reflects three decades of harsh state and federal sentencing
regimes, including increased use of life and life without parole sentences, high
mandatory minimum sentences, and “three strikes” laws. The Sentencing
Project reported that one in nine US prisoners are serving a life sentence.
The growing number of elderly prisoners poses a serious challenge to correctional
authorities: as of 2011, the latest year for which complete numbers are
available, 26,136 persons aged 65 and older were incarcerated in state and federal
prisons, up 62 percent in five years.
In a positive step, the US Department of Justice in August announced revisions
to its rules for reviewing requests for compassionate release of elderly or disabled
prisoners, making more federal inmates eligible for this rarely used
mechanism.
Also in August, US Attorney General Eric Holder instructed federal prosecutors
to try to avoid charges carrying mandatory minimum sentences for certain lowlevel,
nonviolent drug offenders. Though welcome, this policy change still
leaves many drug offenders subject to disproportionately long mandatory sentences.
Legislative efforts to grant judges more discretion in such cases are
under debate.
In 2013, Maryland joined 17 other states and the District of Columbia in abolishing
the death penalty, but 32 states still allow it. At time of writing, 34 people
had been executed in the US in 2013. North Carolina repealed its 2009 Racial
Justice Act, which allowed death row prisoners to appeal their sentences on the
basis of racial discrimination.
Racial Disparities in Criminal Justice
Whites, African Americans, and Latinos have comparable rates of drug use but
are arrested, prosecuted, and incarcerated for drug offenses at vastly different
rates. For example, African Americans are nearly four times more likely to be
arrested for marijuana possession than whites, even though their rates of marijuana
use are roughly equivalent. While only 13 percent of the US population,
African Americans represent 41 percent of state prisoners, and 44 percent of
federal prisoners serving time for drug offenses.
Because they are disproportionately likely to have criminal records, members of
racial and ethnic minorities are more likely than whites to experience stigma
and legal discrimination in employment, housing, education, public benefits,
jury service, and the right to vote.
In August, a federal court found that the “stop and frisk” policy of the New York
City Police Department (NYPD) violated the rights of minorities. A disproportionate
share of people “stopped and frisked” under the policy are African
American or Latino, and the New York Civil Liberties Union reports that 89 percent
of those stopped are innocent of any wrongdoing. The NYPD appealed the
ruling.
Drug Policy Reform
In recent decades the US has spent hundreds of billions of dollars to arrest and
incarcerate drug offenders in the US. Its heavy reliance on criminal laws for
drug control has had serious human rights costs, including infringement of the
autonomy and privacy rights of those who simply possess or use drugs.
In a welcome shift, the US Department of Justice announced in August that it
would not interfere with states’ legalization of marijuana so long as states comply
with certain federal priorities, such as prohibiting sale of drugs to children
or transport of drugs across state lines. It also noted that a robust state regulatory
approach to marijuana may prevent organized crime from benefiting from
the illicit marijuana trade.
Washington and Colorado moved forward with implementation of state ballot
initiatives to legalize the recreational use of marijuana, as well as to regulate
its production, sale, and distribution. Twenty other US states have legalized
marijuana for medical purposes.
Prison Conditions
September 2013 marked the 10-year anniversary of the passage of the Prison
Rape Elimination Act (PREA), which resulted in the development of national
standards to detect, prevent, and punish prison rape. Implementation remains
a challenge: approximately 4 percent of state and federal prison inmates and 3
percent of jail inmates report having experienced one or more incidents of sexual
abuse in 2011-2012, and many incidents continue to go unreported.
Transgender prisoners continue to experience high levels of violence in detention.
Many prisoners and jail inmates—including youth under age 18—are held in
solitary confinement, often for weeks or months on end. In July, an estimated
30,000 inmates in California’s prison system engaged in a hunger strike to
protest conditions, including the use of solitary confinement. Prolonged solitary
confinement is considered ill-treatment under international law and can
amount to torture.
Poverty and Criminal Justice
Poor defendants across the country languish in pretrial detention because they
are too poor to post bail. The most recent data indicates 60 percent of jail
inmates—at a cost of $9 billion a year—are confined pending trial, often
because they lack the financial resources to secure their release. In 2013, the
chief judge of New York supported legislative reforms that would begin to
reduce the pretrial incarceration of indigent defendants.
Extremely high court fees and surcharges are also increasingly common, as
cash-strapped counties and municipalities often expect their courts to pay for
themselves or even tap them as sources of public revenue. The impact on poor
defendants is particularly harsh.
Practices that exacerbate and even punish economic hardship are increasingly
common. In Arkansas, tenants who fall behind on their rent face criminal prosecution.
In states across the US, courts put hundreds of thousands of misdemeanor
offenders on probation with private, for-profit companies that charge
local authorities nothing for their services but collect tens of millions of dollars
in fees each year from the offenders they supervise.
In August, a decade after a group of inmates’ families filed a petition challenging
the exorbitant rates charged for interstate jail and prison phone calls, the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) voted to cap the cost of the calls.
In cities throughout the US, homeless people are targeted and arrested under
laws that prohibit loitering, sitting, and occupying public space.
Youth in the Criminal Justice System
In nearly all US jurisdictions, substantial numbers of youth offenders are tried
in adult court and sentenced to serve time in adult jails and prisons.
The widespread practice of sentencing youth offenders to life without the possibility
of parole is changing as states grapple with how to comply with recent US
Supreme Court decisions. Separate decisions have held that the sentence cannot
ever be mandatory for youth offenders, nor can it be imposed on youth
offenders convicted of non-homicide crimes. The Supreme Court has not yet
abolished application of the sentence to juveniles, however, and youth offenders continue to receive life without parole sentences for homicide crimes. In
2012, Human Rights Watch reported that of 500 youth offenders serving life
without parole, nearly every one reported physical violence or sexual abuse by
inmates or corrections officers.
Youth are also sentenced to other extreme prison terms that are the functional
equivalent of life without parole because the sentence exceeds an average
lifespan. In September 2013, California passed a law creating a review process
for youth sentenced to adult prison terms, requiring the parole board to provide
a meaningful opportunity for release based on the diminished culpability of
youth as compared to adults. In many cases this will mean earlier release.
Federal law requires jurisdictions to register juveniles convicted of certain sexual
offenses on a national, publicly accessible online registry. Registration
impacts youth offenders’ access to education, housing, and employment.
The Rights of Noncitizens
There are approximately 25 million noncitizens in the US, nearly 12 million of
whom are in the country without authorization.
The vast network of immigration detention centers in the US now holds about
400,000 noncitizens each year. At any given time, hundreds of detainees are
held in solitary confinement. In September, US Immigration and Customs
Enforcement (ICE) announced it would limit but not ban the use of solitary confinement.
The criminal prosecution of immigration offenses, which historically had been
largely dealt with through deportation and other non-criminal sanctions, continues
to increase. In 2012, immigration cases constituted 41 percent of all federal
criminal cases; illegal reentry is now the most prosecuted federal crime. Many
of those prosecuted have minor or no criminal history and have substantial ties
to the US such as US citizen family members they were seeking to rejoin when
arrested.
In 2013, after years of inaction, the US Congress began debating a major overhaul
of the US immigration system. In June, the Senate passed a bill that would
create a path to citizenship for millions of unauthorized immigrants and allow
for greater consideration of the right to family unity in some deportation decisions. If enacted into law, the bill would better align immigration enforcement
and detention practices with human rights requirements, including eliminating
a one-year filing deadline for asylum applicants, though it would continue to
mandate the automatic deportation of noncitizens with criminal convictions,
even for minor offenses. The bill calls for an additional $47 billion to be spent
on enforcement efforts along the US-Mexico border, including a major increase
in federal prosecutions of immigration offenses and substantial increases in
penalties for illegal entry and reentry.
At time of writing, the House of Representatives had not made any serious
progress on comprehensive immigration reform.
“Secure Communities” and other federal programs involving local law enforcement
agencies continued to play an important role in deportations. The federal
government has portrayed these programs as focused on dangerous criminals,
but most immigrants deported through Secure Communities are non-criminal or
lower level offenders. These programs also exacerbate distrust of police in
immigrant communities.
Connecticut and California, along with the cities of Newark and New Orleans,
have joined a growing number of states and localities that have placed limits
on local law enforcement participation in Secure Communities, largely by
declining to hold people without charge for federal immigration authorities if
they have no or minor criminal history.
Labor Rights
Hundreds of thousands of children work on American farms. The 1938 Fair
Labor Standards Act exempts child farmworkers from the minimum age and
maximum hour requirements that apply to other working children. As a result,
child farmworkers often work 10 or more hours a day and risk pesticide exposure,
nicotine poisoning, heat illness, injuries, life-long disabilities, and death.
Seventy-five percent of children under 16 who died from work-related injuries in
2012 worked in agriculture. Federal protections that do exist are often not
enforced.
Congress has still not closed a legal loophole allowing children to do hazardous
work in agriculture starting at age 16; hazardous work is prohibited in
all other jobs until age 18.
Millions of US workers, including parents of infants, are harmed by weak or
non-existent laws on paid leave, breastfeeding accommodation, and discrimination
against workers with family responsibilities. Inadequate leave contributes
to delaying babies’ immunizations, postpartum depression, and other
health problems, and causes mothers to stop breastfeeding early. In 2013, several
federal bills were introduced to improve national work-family policies;
Rhode Island joined California and New Jersey in establishing state paid family
leave insurance; and several cities adopted paid sick day laws.
In September, the Obama administration issued a regulation ending the exclusion
of certain homecare workers from minimum wage and hour protections.
These workers, most of whom are women, including many immigrants and
minorities, provide essential services to people with disabilities and the elderly.
Health Policy
Sixteen states have refused to expand Medicaid services under the Affordable
Care Act, impeding the right to health for the poor, African Americans, and other
groups with limited access to medical care.
HIV infections in the US continue to disproportionately affect minority communities,
men who have sex with men, and transgender women. Many states continue
to undermine human rights and public health through restrictions on sex
education, inadequate legal protections for HIV-positive persons, resistance to
harm-reduction programs such as syringe exchanges, and failure to fund HIV
prevention and care. Harmful criminal justice measures include laws that target
people living with HIV for enhanced penalties and police use of condom possession
as evidence of prostitution.
The Rights of Women and Girls
In February, Congress renewed the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA), the
primary federal law providing legal protection and services to victims of domestic
and sexual violence and stalking. The new law includes enhanced protections
for immigrant victims; lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) victims;
and victims on tribal lands.
In January, a Human Rights Watch report detailed the inadequacy of police
response to sexual assaults in the District of Columbia, leading to reforms in
that police department’s approach to these cases.
Emergency contraception became available without a doctor’s prescription to
customers of all ages in 2013. According to the Guttmacher Institute, states
adopted 43 restrictions on access to abortion in the first half of 2013. These
restrictions took a variety of forms, including requiring that abortion providers
have admitting privileges at local hospitals, that patients undergo pre-abortion
ultrasounds, and banning abortion after a specified number of weeks since the
woman’s last menstrual period.
In January 2013, the Department of Defense lifted a longstanding ban on
women serving in direct combat roles.
Military women and men continue to face high levels of sexual violence. The
government estimates that 26,000 sexual assaults took place in the military in
2012, and Defense Department data suggests that 62 percent of those who
report such assaults experience retaliation.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In June, the US Supreme Court invalidated two of the most egregious anti-LGBT
initiatives in the country. In United States v. Windsor, the court struck down section
3 of the 1996 Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA), which prohibited federal
recognition of state-approved same-sex marriages. In Hollingsworth v. Perry,
the court dismissed an appeal by proponents of Proposition 8, a 2008
California state referendum that would have revoked the right of same-sex couples
to marry. The court has not yet ruled on the constitutionality of state laws
that prohibit same-sex marriage.
Counterterrorism and Surveillance
The indefinite detention without charge or trial of detainees at Guantanamo Bay
entered its twelfth year, with 162 detainees remaining at the facility. Eighty-two
of them have been cleared for transfer to home or third countries by an interagency
task force since 2009. Though President Barack Obama renewed his
pledge to close the prison at Guantanamo in May, at time of writing his administration had only transferred eight detainees from the facility since 2011. Two
of them were repatriated to Algeria in August, and two more were repatriated to
Algeria in December.
Early in 2013, several detainees at Guantanamo began a hunger strike; at its
peak, 106 reportedly participated in some fashion, with 45 being tube-fed twice
a day. Medical and human rights groups wrote letters of protest noting that
force-feeding of competent prisoners was a violation of medical ethics and
human rights norms.
The administration continued to use fundamentally flawed military commissions
at Guantanamo to prosecute detainees. Pre-trial hearings moved slowly in
the only two active commission cases: one against five men accused of plotting
the September 11, 2001, attacks and another against a man accused of plotting
the bombing of the USS Cole in Yemen in October 2000. The commission’s
inability to establish rules protecting attorney-client access and communications,
among other things, hampered progression of the cases. The prosecution
has announced it intends to bring charges against only seven other
Guantanamo detainees.
Long after the process was set to begin, the administration began reviewing the
cases of Guantanamo detainees not slated for release or facing active charges,
an important step towards closing the facility. But guidelines for the reviews fail
to safeguard detainees’ basic rights—including access to classified information
where such information provides the basis for their detention, the right to be
present throughout proceedings, and meaningful access to counsel.
In late 2012, the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence completed a comprehensive
study of the CIA’s post-September 11, 2001 secret detention and interrogation
program, which ended in 2009. At time of writing, the report remained
classified.
In May, President Obama announced a policy for targeted killings abroad
requiring that the target be a continuing, imminent threat to US persons and
that there should be near certainty that no civilians would be harmed in the
strike. President Obama said the US government preference is to detain rather
than kill. The full policy remains classified and no information on compliance has been provided. The administration has also not provided the full legal
basis for its targeted killings under US and international law.
In August, Secretary of State John Kerry stated that drone strikes in Pakistan
would end “very soon,” though he provided no exact timeline.
Classified documents leaked to journalists by former National Security Agency
(NSA) contractor Edward Snowden showed that the US has secretly used surveillance
powers, granted by Congress to prevent terror attacks, to systematically
capture huge streams of data, including emails, Internet searches, phone
call information, and other records, from companies and communications
nodes located both in the US and abroad, sometimes with the assistance of foreign
governments. Most of what it intercepts comes from people not suspected
of any wrongdoing, and the government retains substantial amounts of data for
various periods of time. Judicial and congressional oversight of the surveillance
is minimal and secretive.
People in the US have some legal protection of their privacy interest in the contents
of their communications, but not in the “metadata” or details of communications
usually shared with companies or other third parties (such as date,
time, location, sender, and recipient). US officials assert that collection of communications
does not invade privacy until the data is examined, or “queried.”
US law on surveillance offers little or no privacy protections for non-Americans
outside the United States.
Disclosures in 2013 revealed that US officials may also be systematically undermining
international encryption standards and security practices adopted by
Internet companies, weakening the online security of all Internet users.
Prosecutors filed charges against Snowden under the Espionage Act. US law
does not provide adequate legal protections or defenses for whistleblowers
who disclose national security or intelligence information to the public, even on
matters of pressing public importance. The Obama administration tried to block
attempts by Snowden to obtain asylum in various countries. Snowden ultimately
obtained temporary asylum in Russia.
In August, a US court martial sentenced Pfc. Chelsea (previously Bradley)
Manning to 35 years in prison on Espionage Act and other charges for leaking
hundreds of thousands of secret government records to Wikileaks for publication, including some that showed evidence of wrongdoing or possible war
crimes. Before the trial, Manning had already pled guilty to charges amounting
to 20 years’ imprisonment.
US Foreign Policy
In January, US lawmakers discussed whether to send military assistance to
Syrian opposition forces in that country’s civil war. In February, the administration
said that it would begin sending non-lethal aid, including food and medical
supplies, to the opposition. In September, the US appeared ready to conduct
strikes against Syria in response to the Syrian government’s use of chemical
weapons near Damascus that killed more than 300 people. Obama had previously
indicated that use of chemical weapons in Syria constituted a “red line”
that would prompt US action in the conflict.
Obama sought congressional authorization for US military engagement in Syria,
but a United Nations Security Council-supported agreement to place Syria’s
chemical weapons under international control indefinitely delayed a congressional
vote
Burma became an important part of Obama’s “pivot” toward Asia, with Burma
seeking to lessen its reliance on China. The US promoted greater political
reform in the country and encouraged US investment in Burma, subject to
human rights reporting requirements that went into effect in May. In
September, the US restricted military assistance to Burma in light of child soldiers
concerns.
Following the July overthrow of President Mohammed Morsi in Egypt, the US
condemned the interim military government for declaring a state of emergency
and for violations against civilians, including Muslim Brotherhood supporters.
In October 2013, the US suspended some military and economic assistance but
did so because the interim government was failing to move the country toward
democracy, not because of the ongoing abuses or lack of accountability.
The US continued to play a pivotal role in mobilizing the UN Human Rights
Council to respond to egregious human rights violations, including in Sri Lanka,
Iran, and North Korea.