INTRODUCTION

Sovereignty loomed less large in 1999 as an obstacle to stopping and redressing crimes against humanity. Governmental leaders who committed these crimes faced a greater chance of prosecution and even military intervention. The lesson sent is that leaders risk their freedom and control of territory if they commit the most severe human rights abuses.

The year saw significant progress toward an international system of justice available to prosecute these crimes. The Spanish-initiated case against former Chilean dictator General Augusto Pinochet, the first international prosecution of a former head of state since Nuremberg, continued to move through the British courts. The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia issued the first indictment of a sitting head of state, Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic. NATO troops in Bosnia arrested several, though still not the most significant, war-crimes suspects indicted by the tribunal. The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda continued its successful prosecution of leading authorities responsible for genocide in that country. The International Criminal Court, the first global institution of justice capable of prosecuting the world's worst human rights offenders, picked up support at an impressive clip; with eighty-nine governments having signed its treaty through October, the question is no longer whether this landmark institution will become operational, but when.

Not only international tribunals but also national courts showed a greater willingness to prosecute severe human rights crimes committed outside their nation's borders. In addition to Britain's and Spain's prosecution of Pinochet, a Swiss military court found a former Rwandan official guilty of war crimes for his role in the 1994 genocide. Already, Germany and Denmark had convicted two Bosnian Serbs and a Bosnian Muslim for atrocities committed during the Bosnian conflict, while Austrian and Swiss courts had tried and acquitted two Bosnian Serbs for such crimes. Similar criminal proceedings are ongoing in at least four other cases in Belgium, France, Germany and the Netherlands. And a senior Iraqi official had to beat a hasty retreat home when public appeals were launched to the governments of Austria and Jordan to arrest him for his role in severe Iraqi repression.

Meanwhile, the international community displayed a new willingness to deploy troops to stop crimes against humanity. In East Timor, intense diplomatic and economic pressure convinced Jakarta to permit belatedly the deployment of a multinational force to halt the scorched-earth campaign of Indonesian army-backed militia. In Kosovo, it took NATO's controversial bombing campaign before Belgrade would acquiesce in the deployment of international troops to stop widespread ethnic slaughter and forced displacement.

These trends mark the beginning of a new era for the human rights movement. Until now, the lack of anything resembling an international criminal justice system restricted the options available to defend human rights. Human rights organizations could shame abusive governments. They could galvanize diplomatic and economic pressure. They could invoke international human rights standards. But rarely could they trigger the prosecution of tyrants or count on governments to use their police powers to enforce human rights law.

Slowly, that appears to be changing. Today, tyrants are increasingly likely to be indicted. As the International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda and the Former Yugoslavia and various national courts gradually gain custody of indicted suspects, a record of arrest, prosecution and punishment is being built. Meanwhile, at least in parts of the world, the international community seems more willing to deploy troops to halt massive slaughter. These trends are still halting and replete with problems of consistency and potential misuse. Africa seems to have been particularly neglected. But they foretell an era in which the defense of human rights can move from a paradigm of pressure based on international human rights law to one of law enforcement.

The growing willingness to transcend sovereignty in the face of crimes against humanity hardly means an end to the Westphalian system of government. Sovereign governments retain primary responsibility for preserving order, establishing the rule of law, and protecting human rights. This duty is important not only in its own right but also to prevent less severe human rights violations from erupting into atrocities-the least costly and most humane strategy. If governments fall short of these responsibilities, the human rights movement can resort to its usual techniques: exposure, denunciation, ostracism, and calls for sanctions. Yet, the past year suggests that, in the most extreme cases, new tools might be available as well. This introduction to Human Rights Watch's tenth World Report discusses these substantial changes in the global system for the defense of human right- both the promise they hold and the risks they carry.

Military Intervention

Certainly the most dramatic development in 1999 was the use of military force by regional and international bodies to stop crimes against humanity-that is, the most severe abuses committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack on a civilian population. It was only five years ago that the international community shamefully turned its back on genocide in Rwanda. Twice in the past year, in Kosovo and East Timor, members of the international community deployed troops to halt crimes against humanity. In East Timor, intense diplomatic and economic pressure secured the Indonesian government's consent to the deployment of a multinational force. In Kosovo, NATO bombing produced the Yugoslav government's agreement to the deployment of international troops. The two instances may signal a new readiness on the part of the international community to use extraordinary resources, including troops, to address crimes against humanity that are within its power to stop.

East Timor

After the U.N. announced on September 4 that East Timorese had voted overwhelming for independence in the U.N.-supervised referendum held on August 30, Indonesian army-backed militia went on a rampage of killing, arson, and destruction. Jakarta claimed it was trying to rein in the violence, but the evidence, including many eyewitness accounts, suggested army and police involvement in a coordinated campaign to drive out independent observers and then embark on a scorched-earth campaign that left unknown numbers dead and, in many places, over half of the homes and infrastructure destroyed. Hundreds of thousands of East Timorese were displaced, many of them forcedacross the border into Indonesian West Timor. The challenge to the international community was how to stop this violence and destruction if Jakarta would not.

The international community was rightly faulted for its inadequate precautions to avoid this bloodshed. Eager to take advantage of the window of opportunity afforded by then Indonesian President B.J. Habibie's surprise announcement in January 1999 that his government would allow East Timor to hold a referendum to determine its future, the U.N. in May brokered an agreement that gave the Indonesian government responsibility for maintaining security in East Timor through the referendum period. Instead, in the months leading up to the vote, Indonesian troops repeatedly stood by while local militia, many of which the army itself had organized, engaged in a bloody campaign of intimidation against independence supporters and U.N. workers. The international community, in turn, put inadequate pressure on Jakarta to disarm and demobilize the militia in advance of the referendum.

When massive violence erupted in early September, intervention by international troops was never a realistic option without the Indonesian government's acquiescence. Australia alone was willing to offer troops to lead an intervention, but it refused to act without the U.N. Security Council's approval, and the Security Council was unwilling to endorse military intervention without Jakarta's consent. International efforts thus centered on putting pressure on the Indonesian government either to stop the killing itself or to authorize others to do so.

At first the pressure was applied slowly, because donor governments were concerned that too insistent demands might derail Indonesia's democratization and promote separatism, even though one of the greatest threats to democratization and territorial integrity continued to be the Indonesian military's reluctance to be subjected to the rule of law. The U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mary Robinson, among others, helped to highlight the atrocities being committed in East Timor. Ultimately, and belatedly, the United States and the European Union, under substantial public pressure, cut off or threatened to terminate access to aid and weapons unless the atrocities stopped. The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund also held up funds because of pressure from donor governments and apparent fear that the violence in East Timor would further discourage international investment in Indonesia's already crippled economy. The message thus was sent that Indonesia could not benefit from international largesse if it was so blatantly flouting international rules prohibiting crimes against humanity. Only Japan among the major donors insisted on placing its economic ties ahead of the imperative of stopping bloodshed, although it did exert diplomatic pressure.

The combined pressure was sufficient to secure Jakarta's consent to the deployment of a multinational force in East Timor, though by then the army's and militia's scorched-earth campaign had left East Timor in ruins and largely depopulated. Moreover, tens of thousands of East Timorese had fled, often under duress, to West Timor, where no international troops were deployed.

In the meantime, the behavior of the unarmed members of the U.N. Mission in East Timor (UNAMET) was exemplary. Their brave sense of duty is best shown by contrasting it with the behavior of the armed U.N. troops defending the Bosnian town of Srebrenica in 1995. The U.N. troops in Srebrenica had abandoned the civilian population of the Security Council-declared "safe area" to be slaughtered by Bosnian Serb troops. Even their Bosnian staff members were forced to leave family members in the hands of the attacking forces. But many UNAMET representatives in East Timor insisted on bringing their Timorese staff with them as they fled toward Dili, the capital, and then refused to be evacuated from their headquarters in Dili until the local staff, their family members, and all Timorese civilians who had taken refuge in the compound were also evacuated.

The "Annan Doctrine"

The extent to which traditional prerogatives of sovereignty have given way in the face of crimes against humanity was well illustrated by the statements of U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan. In a widely remarked-upon speech to open the General Assembly on September 20, he insisted that sovereignty must give way to the imperative of stopping crimes against humanity-a courageous stand for a man who leads an organization of governments. Less noticed, but perhaps more revolutionary, was his statement of September 10 that senior Indonesian officials risked prosecution for crimes against humanity if they did not consent to the deployment of an available multinational force. This was such an important pronouncement that it merits being called the "Annan doctrine."

It has long been established that in certain instances, commanders of military forces can be prosecuted for atrocities committed by their troops. Articulated by the Nuremberg and Tokyo tribunals, this doctrine of "command responsibility" is now codified in the Geneva Conventions and their Protocols. It imposes criminal liability on a commander who knew or had reason to know that troops under his command were committing atrocities and who failed to take "all feasible measures" within his power to stop them.

These "feasible measures" were typically understood to mean ordering or deploying the commander's own security forces to halt abuses. But the emergence of a vigilant human rights movement is among the factors that have perversely encouraged what might be called the "death squad dodge." To avoid the opprobrium and potential criminal liability that comes with openly committing executions and torture, abusive militaries began to subcontract atrocities to irregular forces which the military could then claim were beyond its control. Examples of this phenomenon can be seen in the "death squads" of Central America in the 1980s, the Colombian and Serbian paramilitaries of the 1990s and, most recently, the militia created in East Timor by the Indonesian army.

Rather than enter into the murky debate about how much control the Indonesian government retained over the militia, Kofi Annan insisted that the government, on pain of criminal liability, either stop the killing itself or consent to the deployment of international troops who were willing to do so. If Jakarta refused to accept the international community's offer of assistance, he warned, it could not "escape theresponsibility of what could amount...to crimes against humanity. Or, in the words of the Geneva Conventions, the failure to allow an available multinational force into East Timor would leave Indonesian leaders open to international prosecution because they had not taken "all feasible measures" to stop the violence.

Secretary-General Annan's comments are not themselves binding. The international community must still find ways to give them force of law. Yet his logic resonates precisely because it corresponds with the developing view that there is no sovereign prerogative to commit or sponsor crimes against humanity. He thus has pointed the way toward precluding the death-squad dodge. If the Annan doctrine prevails, a government that claims to be unable to stop mass killing would have a criminally enforceable duty to invite a ready international force to lend a hand, at least so long as the force itself was committed to respecting human rights and humanitarian law. The incentive to commit atrocities by proxy would significantly diminish, and the barriers of sovereignty would no longer constrict the duty to prevent crimes against humanity.

Kosovo

The NATO bombardment triggered by atrocities in Kosovo was launched against the backdrop of Bosnia, where the international community had waited more than three long years before using decisive military force to halt genocide. Then, only the accumulated record of "ethnic cleansing"-the siege of Sarajevo, the slaughter of Srebrenica, the concentration camps, the rapes, the forced displacement-finally generated the political will to move beyond endless negotiation and appeasement, to transcend neutral humanitarianism, and to meet terror with significant force. The two-week bombing of military targets in Serb-held Bosnia territory in 1995 helped to end the bloodshed and produce the Dayton peace accord.

The international community's response in Kosovo reflected some lessons learned from Bosnia. Recognizing that Milosevic's method of fighting was to kill, rape and forcibly displace civilians, it acted this time soon after Yugoslav and Serbian troops began committing crimes against humanity. The massacres and forced displacement in 1998 and early 1999 were seen not as aberrations but as precursors of a larger round of ethnic slaughter. The deployment of the Kosovo Verification Mission (KVM) in October 1998 temporarily curtailed the violence and enabled hundreds of thousands of forcibly displaced Kosovar Albanians to return home before winter.

But Yugoslav and Serbian troops massed again in Kosovo in early 1999 and resumed their abusive ways. It was then that international negotiators finally stopped treating Milosevic as an essential guarantor of peace and insisted that NATO troops replace his forces in Kosovo and assume responsibility for law and order. Unlike East Timor, where economic pressure could be applied to secure Jakarta's consent, economic sanctions were already long in place against Yugoslavia stemming from its complicity in the Bosnian conflict. NATO was thus propelled more quickly to threaten military force to gain consent to the deployment of protective troops. To deny Yugoslav and Serbian troops the opportunity for Bosnia-style hostage taking as a way of deterring the use of force, the international community withdrew the unarmed KVM verifiers. Milosevic's continued intransigence led to a seventy-eight-day NATO bombing campaign, during which Yugoslav and Serbian forces murdered thousands, forcibly displaced hundreds of thousands, committed unknown numbers of rapes, and engaged in vast arson and destruction. The bombing campaign ended with the withdrawal of these forces from Kosovo, the deployment of international troops, and the return of the Kosovar Albanian refugees.

Military intervention might have been avoided altogether had the international community paid attention to Kosovo's plight during the preceding decade. The repression of Kosovo's ethnic Albanian population that followed the withdrawal of its autonomous status in 1989 sounded a clear but unheeded warning of trouble to come. But a world preoccupied by the conflict in Bosnia paid little attention to the largely peaceful protests of the Kosovar Albanians. Only with the emergence of the Kosovo Liberation Army and, given Milosevic's brutal history, the seemingly inevitable slide toward a ruthless counterinsurgency effort did the international community finally take note.

In addition, the international community's long misguided deference to Milosevic as a supposedly indispensable partner for peace in the Balkans, and its unwillingness to expose its troops to even modest risks in Bosnia, undermined the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia's potential for deterrence. When Bosnian Serb political leader Radovan Karadzic and military leader Ratko Mladic were indicted for genocide, NATO troops refused to arrest them. To this day, Karadzic is believed frequently to sleep undisturbed within a stone's throw of French troops in Bosnia. Moreover, the major Western powers, particularly Washington, London and Paris, refused to give the tribunal the intelligence evidence it needed to indict Milosevic for command responsibility for the atrocities of "ethnic cleansing" committed in Bosnia and Croatia. The international community thus sent a message that it was not terribly serious about applying international justice to Serb leaders. That lesson could only have emboldened Milosevic to embark on a new round of slaughter in Kosovo.

Once the decision was made to use force against Yugoslavia, NATO's military conduct raised separate and serious concerns. Even granted Milosevic's long history of slaughter, his recent record in Kosovo of murder and forcible displacement, and his new massing of troops within Kosovo, NATO's bombing seemed to accelerate plans for large-scale ethnic killing and dislocation. Yet NATO was clearly unprepared for this turn of events. With political constraints standing in the way of the nonconsensual deployment of ground troops, NATO depended on aerial bombardment to stop the killing. But the strategic bombing campaign that it pursued focused to a large extent on factories, basic infrastructure, and other strategic targets throughout Yugoslavia, even when their connection to troops in Kosovo was remote. Particularly at first, relatively little attention was paid to halting Yugoslav and Serbian military activity in Kosovo. Moreover, NATO's extraordinary efforts to avoid casualties among its pilots precluded the low-flying aircraft that might have helped to identify and strike the attacking forces more accurately. NATO's strategic bombing campaign undoubtedly disrupted troop movements and ultimately was an element in inducing surrender, but its timetable was too slow and its focus too diffuse to stop the atrocities in Kosovo before months had passed. Despite their suffering, KosovarAlbanians generally applauded NATO's action, but the question remained whether these beneficiaries of the NATO campaign might have been assisted more directly and effectively.

Also disturbing is that NATO seemed to play fast and loose with the requirements of international humanitarian law. This law, largely codified in the widely ratified Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Additional Protocols of 1977, is designed to spare noncombatants the hazards of war. NATO is bound by these basic rules whenever it goes to war. Particularly when it fights in the name of human rights, it should abide by these standards scrupulously.

Despite NATO's efforts to minimize civilian casualties, about 600 civilians were killed by NATO bombs, in some ninety incidents. Moroever, NATO sought to squeeze Yugoslavia's civilian population to pressure Milosevic to surrender. That rationale dangerously undermined the "principle of distinction" which requires that military attacks be directed against only military targets and not civilian objects. Many of the targets attacked-the electrical grid, heating plants, civilian broadcast facilities, bridges, refineries-disrupted civilian life in a way that was clearly "excessive in relation to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated," the standard of proportionality codified in Article 57 of Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions. The destruction of some of these targets did not even make an "effective contribution to military action" or offer a "definite "definite military advantage," the baseline tests for a legitimate military target codified in Article 52 of Protocol I.

The result was a dangerous inversion of the principles of humanitarian action. In part to avoid risks to its troops, NATO did not seem to take the most rapid or effective steps to achieve the paramount humanitarian goal-stopping the slaughter of Kosovar Albanians. Yet the means it did employ chipped away at what should be a sharp distinction between military targets and civilian objects and thus increased the risks for all civilians in future conflicts. Destructive echos of this approach could already be seen in 1999 in Russia's attacks in Chechnya and Israel's attacks in Lebanon. Thus, while NATO's actions in Kosovo showed a heightened willingness to override sovereignty to stop crimes against humanity, they signaled a disturbing disregard for the principles of humanitarianism that should guide any such action.

The Critique of Military Intervention

The use of military force to prevent severe human rights crimes has given rise to a range of concerns. The importance of scrupulously complying with international humanitarian law has already been noted. Another common concern is that military intervention might become a pretext for military adventures in pursuit of ulterior motives. Vigilance against such misuse of the human rights name is clearly warranted. Memories of the U.S. invasions of Grenada and Panama, for example, have not faded. But the interventions in East Timor and Kosovo gave fewer reasons for concern on this score than prior interventions.

In East Timor-where, as noted, economic and diplomatic pressure secured consent to military deployment-Western strategic concerns worked, if anything, against intervention. The Western powers were hardly looking for an excuse to upset the world's fourth most populous nation, a growing economic force, and the dominant power in Southeast Asia-particularly, as noted, at a time of democratization and separatist tension. Nor was sympathy for East Timor's claim of self-determination decisive, since the international community had largely tolerated Indonesia's occupation of the region for more than two decades. There was concern for the credibility of the U.N., which had pledged to oversee a referendum process that was violently disrupted, and Australia may have feared an influx of refugees. But the primary motive for intervention seemed to be genuine public anxiety over the plight of the East Timorese people before the rampaging militia.

In Kosovo, NATO's concern for its credibility may have contributed to its decision to begin bombing when Milosevic rejected the Rambouillet peace proposal. Worries about large refugee flows destabilizing Macedonia's delicate ethnic mix, producing cascading instability in the Balkans, and ultimately seeking entrance to the rest of Europe may also have driven NATO to seek the return of Kosovar refugees once Yugoslav and Serbian troops began forcibly expelling them in large numbers upon commencement of the bombing. Yet the common denominator in the multinational consensus behind NATO's action was fundamentally humanitarian, including fear that Milosevic would extend the sweep of genocide to Yugoslavia's southern province. Whatever mixed motives might have guided NATO's action, the desire to stop crimes against humanity was clearly a major goal.

One way of minimizing the pretextual use of military intervention would be to insist that the U.N. Security Council always grant prior approval. But as it functions today, with the five permanent members free to exercise their vetoes for the most parochial reasons, the council cannot be counted on to authorize intervention even in dire circumstances. China and Russia seem preoccupied by perceived analogies to Tibet and Chechnya. The United States is sometimes paralyzed by an isolationist Congress and a risk-averse Pentagon. Britain and France have let commercial or cultural ties stand in the way. If the council cannot change its culture, it risks losing its moral authority before the widely felt imperative that something be done to save people from crimes against humanity.

Another way to limit the misuse of military intervention would be to develop criteria for when it should occur. For example, Human Rights Watch considers advocating nonconsensual military intervention only when it is the last feasible option to avoid genocide or comparable mass slaughter. Governments might well adopt other criteria. But given the risk to life inherent in any military action, only the most severe threats to life should warrant consideration of an international military response. And even then, as noted, strict compliance with international humanitarian law should be imperative.

Some critics challenge humanitarian action in Kosovo and East Timor on the grounds of selectivity. Why intervene in these situations, they ask, and not in Angola or Colombia, in Chechnya or Sudan? Again, legitimate concerns with equity lie behind this objection. Yet, theworld should hardly deny a helping hand to people facing mass slaughter simply because it might not act to stop similar atrocities elsewhere. Instead, the international community must address its troubling tendency to ignore atrocities in certain regions, particularly sub-Saharan Africa. Widespread atrocities in Angola, Burundi, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Sierra Leone, and Sudan, to cite but a few examples, received nowhere near the attention they deserved in 1999.

When confronted with this problem of inconsistency, the Western powers too often hide behind the excuse of regionalism. According to this view, governments will assume the risks involved in stopping crimes against humanity only for their neighbors. It is said to be only natural that NATO limit its intervention to Europe and that only Australia was willing to take the lead on East Timor. Yet this narrow view leaves responsibility for parts of the world with some of the worst atrocities to those least equipped economically and militarily to end them. The atrocities in Sierra Leone, for example, were left to a Nigerian-led West African force, ECOMOG, with little Western assistance. The U.S. government's proposed solution for Africa is the African Crisis Response Initiative, a U.S.-trained African force designed to provide a local emergency response capacity. But this idea has received only tepid support in Africa, including initial rejections by Nigeria and South Africa. And without deeper Western involvement, it is unlikely to have the capacity to confront Africa's numerous, highly abusive conflicts.

Given the world's tremendous disparities of wealth and power, governments with the greatest resources should not pretend to have met their humanitarian obligations by passing the buck to those with the least. Not every human rights tragedy lends itself to military intervention. Indeed, Kosovo and East Timor may have been easier cases, because each had a colorable claim to self-determination and a local population that overwhelmingly favored intervention. Before using military force to stop crimes against humanity, planners at minimum should be confident that intervention will not make matters worse, by provoking a wider war or setting in motion a string of new atrocities. But if the use of military force to stop atrocities is to gain moral acceptance, those who initiate it must remain conscious of the desperate need for international assistance in parts of the world that are now mostly neglected. Victims of atrocities deserve effective assistance wherever they cry out for help.

The Emerging International

System of Justice

The past year significantly reinforced the trend toward an international system of justice for the world's worst human rights offenders. The highlights of this trend were progress toward the extradition and prosecution of Pinochet, the indictment of Milosevic, advances in prosecuting those behind the Rwandan genocide, and the remarkable momentum toward the establishment of the International Criminal Court. Important issues of international justice also arose in Cambodia, Sierra Leone, and East Timor. The international justice system is still rudimentary, capable of ensnaring only an occasional tyrant. But the progress made in 1999 left the world a considerably smaller place for those who commit the most heinous human rights crimes. It symbolized a growing international commitment to justice as a means of showing respect for the victims of serious abuse, building the rule of law at the international level, and deterring tomorrow's would-be gross abusers of human rights. Like the use of military intervention, the emergence of an international system of justice signals that sovereignty is no longer the barrier it once was to action against crimes against humanity.

Pinochet

The October 1998 arrest of Chilean General Augusto Pinochet yielded several momentous rulings by the British courts. Foremost was the definitive rejection of Pinochet's claim that, as a former head of state, he deserved immunity from prosecution. In a complicated decision in March 1999, the House of Lords reaffirmed an earlier ruling that Pinochet could be extradited to Spain for his role in torturing perceived political opponents. The Lords limited the scope of his prosecution to crimes that took place after December 1988, when Britain's ratification of the Convention against Torture took effect. Because many of Pinochet's abuses were committed a decade earlier, some feared that the ruling would preclude a courtroom accounting of his worst offenses. But a magistrate in October 1999 held that much of this material could be admitted into evidence, either to demonstrate a continuing conspiracy to commit torture that extended beyond December 1988, or to show the continuing mental torture of the families of victims whose earlier "disappearance" the military had never acknowledged.

Milosevic

If the Pinochet case represents the first international prosecution of a former head of state, the indictment of Milosevic by the International Criminal Tribunal for Former Yugoslavia was the first international attempt to prosecute a sitting head of state. This long-awaited indictment charges Milosevic with crimes against humanity committed by Yugoslav and Serbian troops under his command in Kosovo. Milosevic does not face immediate prosecution, since no one seriously proposes sending troops to Belgrade to arrest him. But there is reason to believe that he will see his day in court. The significant domestic opposition to his rule may succeed in replacing him, or he may find no feasible way to extend his term as Yugoslav president beyond the constitutionally mandated limit of mid-2001. The new government would then have a large incentive to surrender him for trial in the Hague, since many of Serbia's would-be international donors have made his surrender a condition for future non-humanitarian aid. Or, like the leader of the murderous Kurdish rebel organization, Abdullah Ocalan, who was bounced from country to country until his abduction by Turkish security forces in February 1999, Milosevic may find himself in perilous exile in a world that is increasingly unsympathetic to fugitive perpetrators of crimes against humanity.

Then-Chief Prosecutor Louise Arbour described the Milosevic indictment as the first "real-time" response to atrocities-a capacity she sought for the tribunal to maximize its deterrent effect. The tribunal's investigative response to the Kosovo crisis was still slower than it should have been, but the rapid-response goal is laudable. However, the tribunal's deterrent effect remains handicapped by Western ambivalence aboutapplying international justice to senior Serb leaders. Milosevic has still not been indicted for his role in Bosnia and Croatia, in large part because Western governments have not supplied the tribunal with the intelligence information it needs to prove his command responsibility. NATO's arrest of indicted Bosnian war crimes suspects has also been half-hearted. In the first ten months of 1999, NATO troops arrested six indicted suspects in Bosnia, including Momir Talic, a top Bosnian Serb general who was deeply implicated in the Srebrenica savagery. But they allowed former Bosnian Serb military leader Ratko Mladic, who directed the barbarity at Srebrenica, to escape to Belgrade, and they continue to refuse to arrest former Bosnian Serb political leader Radovan Karadzic, who reportedly remains in Bosnia in an area controlled by French troops. NATO's timidity is due in part to its continuing preoccupation with avoiding risks to its troops and in part to its misguided belief that the arrest of Karadzic might destabilize Bosnia-a belief that, by undermining the tribunal's deterrent effect, led directly to the destabilization of Kosovo.

Trials for the Rwandan Genocide

The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda added a third panel of judges and permitted the consolidation of cases in an effort to expedite the trial of those accused of complicity in the 1994 genocide. During 1999, the tribunal found three suspects guilty of genocide, making a total of five convicted so far, including the former prime minister, Jean Kambanda. Those found guilty were sentenced to prison terms ranging from fifteen years to life. The tribunal also secured the arrest of five more former ministers in the genocidal government, increasing the number in custody to more than half of the cabinet at the time.

A Swiss military court also tried a Rwandan local official who had fled to Switzerland after Rwandan victims accused him of participating in the genocide. Although the panel of judges found that Swiss law did not permit the official to be charged with genocide or crimes against humanity, they convicted him of war crimes in violation of the Geneva Conventions and sentenced him to life in prison. In Belgium, an investigating judge has been preparing cases against others accused of genocide in Rwanda. These cases are expected to come to trial in early 2000.

The International Criminal Court

Burgeoning support in 1999 for the International Criminal Court (ICC) represented another pillar of the emerging international system of justice. By late October, eighty-nine governments have signed the Rome treaty to establish the ICC, many have begun the complicated process of revising domestic legislation to permit ratification of the treaty, and substantial progress has been made in drafting the court's rules of evidence and criminal procedure and the elements of the crimes it will prosecute. Several international organizations in 1999 also endorsed ratification, including the European Union, the Council of Europe's Parliamentary Assembly, the Commonwealth Law Ministers, the Inter-Parliamentary Union, and the Francophonie summit. It is now entirely foreseeable that within two or three years the treaty will have secured the sixty ratifications needed to establish the court.

The major sour note in this account remains the United States. Although the U.S. government has been a strong backer of international justice for other people, it continues to display hostility toward any international court like the ICC that even theoretically could apply to U.S. citizens. Once more, President Clinton has allowed the Pentagon's parochial views on the subject, backed by unilateralist sentiment in Congress, to determine U.S. policy on an issue of historic importance.

The ICC treaty already contains numerous safeguards, many proposed by the United States, to avoid unwarranted prosecutions. Yet the Pentagon seems satisfied with nothing short of an ironclad exemption for U.S. servicemen-an exemption that the rest of the world naturally finds to violate the ideal of universally applicable justice on which the court is founded. The treaty amendments favored by the Pentagon, such as an exemption for any act declared to have been officially authorized by the suspect's government, would upset the delicate consensus behind the Rome treaty and introduce a gaping loophole that the world's tyrants would eagerly exploit. The court's potential to punish oppressors, deter would-be despots, and bring a modicum of respect to the victims of heinous abuse would be undermined.

Washington's position is suffused with irony. To begin with, the Pentagon's professed inability to tolerate ICC jurisdiction is at odds with its military campaign over Kosovo. NATO's war with Yugoslavia, like its 1995 bombing of Serb-held sections of Bosnia, was subject to the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia-a fact that seems not to have given the Pentagon much pause. Indeed, the Yugoslav tribunal has fewer safeguards against unwarranted prosecution than the ICC because the tribunal's jurisdiction is primary-it is empowered to supersede any national prosecution-while the ICC's jurisdiction is secondary-it must defer to any good-faith national prosecution.

In addition, given the many procedural safeguards in place, the best remaining way to protect against misuse of the ICC's powers would be to influence the culture in which these safeguards are applied. Yet the less engaged the U.S. government is with the court, the less influence it will have to shape that culture. The accelerating global enthusiasm for the court shows that the Pentagon's hope of "killing" it is delusional. There will be a court, and it will have jurisdiction over U.S. troops and commanders, whether Washington supports it or not. The sole open question is whether the United States will have any say in shaping the ethic by which the court exercises its powers. The Pentagon's rejection of the court, and hence of any direct influence over its evolution, ironically puts U.S. service members more rather than less at risk of prosecution.

Moreover, President Clinton's opposition to the ICC fuels the very isolationism that he has decried in the U.S. Congress. In October when the U.S. Senate rejected a treaty against nuclear testing, President Clinton spoke eloquently about the "new isolationism" that had infectedthe legislative branch. Others have described this approach as "armed unilateralism." Either name refers to the parochial and misguided view that in an increasingly interconnected world, the United States might go it alone, that in a world in which ideas and economics are the dominant currency of power, the United States, with all its reluctance to risk the lives of its soldiers, might secure its place solely through military might. Yet President Clinton's failure of leadership-his deference to Pentagon obstructionism not only on the ICC but also on such issues as the treaty to ban landmines and the optional protocol to stop the use of child soldiers-serves only to reinforce this ostrich-like vision of the world.

Other Justice Issues

On two other occasions-in Sierra Leone and Cambodia-the U.N. took important though qualified stands against efforts to compromise international justice standards. In East Timor, its support of justice was more tepid.

In Cambodia, the collapse of the Khmer Rouge raised the possibility of prosecuting its leadership for its inhuman 1975-79 reign. Hun Sen, the current Cambodian prime minister, was willing to allow prosecutions, but sought to control them by keeping them subject to the highly manipulable Cambodian judiciary. Yet precisely because of the Cambodian judiciary's lack of independence, Hun Sen also needed an international imprimatur for the trials to be considered credible. As of late October, Kofi Annan had rightly refused to provide the U.N.'s seal of approval for any prosecutorial plans that fell below international due process standards.

The negotiations focused on the process for selecting a mix of international and Cambodian judges. Secretary-General Annan wisely insisted that, if the U.N. were to lend its name to the tribunal, the U.N. must choose the judges and prosecutor. This was the only way of ensuring both that political considerations did not influence the selection of prosecutorial targets and that those people selected would receive a fair trial. Desirable as it would be to see the Khmer Rouge leadership in the dock, that should not occur at the expense of the high standards for independence and due process that the U.N. has set in the Rwandan and Yugoslav tribunals and the International Criminal Court. If the U.N. were to compromise these standards, it could expect other governments to insist on similar concessions. As of late October, discussions were ongoing between Cambodia and the U.N.

In Sierra Leone, the quest to hold highly abusive forces accountable was dealt an initial setback when the international community left the government of President Ahmad Tejan Kabbah no choice but to accept an amnesty for the perpetrators of unspeakable atrocities. The Revolutionary United Front (RUF), the rebel group headed by Foday Sankoh, killed tens of thousands, mutilated (usually by chopping off their limbs) thousands more, committed a range of sexual abuses and other atrocities, displaced hundreds of thousands, and wholly deserved prosecution. The U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mary Robinson, made an important contribution by visiting Sierra Leone and highlighting these atrocities. Yet because the permanent members of the U.N. Security Council refused to pay the (U.S.) $1 million a day that it allegedly cost the primarily Nigerian troops of ECOMOG to protect Sierra Leone from the RUF, let alone to deploy U.N. peacekeepers, Nigeria threatened to withdraw its troops. The Kabbah government thus had no choice but to accept a peace accord that amnestied the RUF and offered its ruthless leaders a share of power. This impunity, and the failure promptly to deploy U.N. troops, encouraged new butchery and placed the Sierra Leonean people at tremendous risk.

A U.N. mediator played a disturbing role in brokering this agreement. Once that role was publicly challenged, Kofi Annan established an important precedent by ordering the mediator to add a reservation to the agreement indicating that the United Nations saw the amnesty as applying only to domestic and not to possible international prosecutorial efforts. Given the devastation in Sierra Leone, its national courts are probably incapable in any event of bringing prosecutions for some time. Even the proposed Truth and Reconciliation Commission, if it is ever created, may well find progress difficult. From the perspective of a broader timeline, international justice thus remains the only meaningful option. But the Security Council chose to ignore this issue in passing a subsequent resolution on Sierra Leone. It also failed to establish an international commission of inquiry-the usual prelude to an international criminal tribunal-as was done for East Timor. At best, the U.N.'s refusal formally to accept amnesty for those behind the RUF's executions and mutilations means that these killers risk Pinochet-like prosecutions whenever and wherever they might travel, or be expelled, abroad.

In the case of East Timor, the same international community that worked to press Indonesia to accept the Australian-led international forces in mid-September seemed reluctant to hold the Indonesian military accountable for the atrocities that triggered the need for this deployment. The hesitation was apparently due to concern that too much pressure on the Indonesian army could backfire, even though Indonesian pro-democracy activists stressed that democratization could go forward only if the army were held accountable. On September 27, Asian countries as a bloc rejected or abstained from voting on a U.N. Commission on Human Rights resolution calling on the Secretary-General to set up an international commission inquiry into violations of humanitarian law in East Timor. The U.S. government and the European Union approved the inquiry but only on the grounds that it cooperate with Indonesia's National Commission on Human Rights, a body respected in Jakarta but not trusted in East Timor. The resolution passed, but the international commission appointed was weak, and its departure for East Timor was subjected to politically motivated dithering. Questions of whether key countries, like the United States and Australia, would share intelligence with the commission, and whether a new government in Jakarta would cooperate with it, remained unresolved at the end of October.

Justice, Peace, and Democracy

The developments of 1999 provided new evidence for the longstanding debate about the effect of pursuing justice on efforts to secure peace or establish democracy. Some have argued that justice may have a detrimental effect because a leadership threatened with trial and punishment may be reluctant to stop fighting or permit a transition to democratic rule. In fact, the events of 1999 tend to show not only thatjustice can be pursued without these anticipated costs, but also that the quest for justice can sometimes enhance the search for peace and democracy.

Milosevic is Exhibit 1 for the case that justice facilitates, rather than impedes, peacemaking. Already at Dayton in 1995, Milosevic showed himself willing to accept a peace accord without insisting on amnesty from prosecution for his complicity in atrocities in Bosnia and Croatia. Moreover, the Yugoslav tribunal's indictment of Karadzic and Mladic had helped make the Dayton accord possible by marginalizing the Bosnian Serb political and military leaders. Again in 1999, the tribunal's indictment of Milosevic for crimes against humanity in Kosovo proved no obstacle to his acceptance of a peace plan for the province. Indeed, by establishing Milosevic as an international pariah, the indictment may have helped to delegitimize him before his people, weaken his grip on power, and thus push him toward accepting NATO's terms for peace.

Similarly, the prosecution of Pinochet, despite the fears of some, proved not to have disrupted democratization in Chile. To the contrary, more progress was made in 1999 in extending the rule of law to the Chilean military than in the decade since he relinquished the presidency. Until Pinochet's October 1998 arrest in London, no crime covered by his 1978 amnesty had been prosecuted. But Pinochet's arrest broke the military's aura of invincibility. Suddenly, the Chilean courts began exploiting a legal detour around the amnesty to launch prosecutions of various military leaders.

Because the official perpetrators of a forced "disappearance" have, by definition, not acknowledged the victim's fate, the courts can consider the crime ongoing-a kidnapping without an end. Even if the victim was seized and "disappeared" before the 1978 amnesty, the military's ongoing refusal to provide this critical acknowledgment-its refusal to settle questions about the victim's fate and allow family members to mourn their loss and move on with their lives-extends the crime beyond 1978 and the amnesty's protection. Dozens of cases are now pending in the Chilean courts under this theory, making it possible for the first time to say that the rule of law is beginning to extend to the Chilean military.

East Timor presents a more qualified but still interesting example. Although no international mechanism of justice has been established to address the militias' rampage, the United Nations did initiate an international commission of inquiry to investigate Jakarta's role in the violence. In Rwanda and Bosnia (though not yet in the Democratic Republic of Congo), such commissions were precursors to the establishment of an international criminal tribunal. The naming of a commission for East Timor did not prevent the Indonesian government from accepting the deployment of a multinational force for the territory. Nor did the army block the election of the first president in the forty years of Indonesian independence chosen in a ballot that did not have a predetermined outcome. As in Serbia and Chile, an international focus on the crimes of the military leadership seems to have shaken rather than entrenched its grip on power.

A Reinforced Public Morality

The progress made in 1999 in standing up to crimes against humanity represents more than a doctrinal qualification of the prerogatives of sovereignty. Behind the advances in international justice and the increased deployment of troops to stop atrocities lies an evolution in public morality. More than at any time in recent history, the people of the world today are unwilling to tolerate severe human rights abuses and insistent that something be done to stop them. This growing intolerance of inhumanity can hardly promise an end to the atrocities that have plagued so much of the twentieth century. Some situations will be too complex or difficult for easy outside influence. But this reinforced public morality does erect an obstacle that, at least in some cases, can prevent or stop these crimes and save lives.

A key catalyst of this strengthened public morality has been the human rights movement-the network of organizations that in recent decades has sprung up in nearly every country-and its ability to capture attention and support from the press and public. The movement gains its adherents from its ability to speak to the most basic values of people around the world. By carefully investigating abuses and holding them up for public scrutiny under international standards, it helps to build and reinforce public judgments that this conduct is wrong. By monitoring and exposing the international community's reaction to these abuses, it generates public demands that something be done to counteract the worst tendencies of humankind.

In some countries, human rights organizations have gained large numbers of members and supporters. The millions of Colombians who took to the streets in October to protest the country's highly abusive war is but one example. More often, the membership of these groups is modest. Yet their power is less in their numbers than in their ability to project their values into the public debate and to change public perceptions of what can and should be done to combat abuse. The Mine Ban Treaty, which entered into force on March 1, faster than any other multilateral treaty, is a good illustration; by the end of October, eighty-nine governments had ratified the treaty.

Most human rights work addresses abuses that have not risen to the level of crimes against humanity. Indeed, an important goal of the human rights movement is to stop abuses before they multiply, to identify and halt the discrimination and repression that can be a precursor of crimes against humanity. This day-to-day human rights work has helped to build a strong public belief that human rights violations of any sort are intolerable. The past year showed how strong this public morality has become even in difficult cases, when it forced the international community to intervene in Kosovo and East Timor despite the lack of strategic interest and the powerful considerations militating against intervention.

Of course, this public morality will not always be enough to move governments. Sometimes countervailing forces will be too formidable. Further work is needed to solidify public judgments so that governments feel obliged to respond to serious human rights abuse moreconsistently. But as the millennium closes, the human rights movement's ability to capture and marshal the ideals of humanity makes it possible to hope for a future of greater respect for human life and the inherent dignity of each human being.

This Report

This World Report is Human Rights Watch's tenth annual review of human rights practices around the globe. Covering developments in 68 countries, it is released in advance of Human Rights Day, December 10, 1999.

The report covers events from November 1998 through October 1999. Most chapters examine significant human rights developments in a particular country; the response of global actors, such as the European Union, Japan, the United States, the United Nations, and various regional organizations; and the freedom of local human rights defenders. Other chapters address important thematic concerns.

The report reflects extensive investigative work conducted by the Human Rights Watch research staff throughout 1999. These researchers typically work in close partnership with human rights activists in the countries in question. Human Rights Watch reports published throughout the year contain more elaborate accounts of the brief summaries collected in this volume. The chapters here also reflect the work of the Human Rights Watch advocacy staff, which closely monitors the human rights policies of governments and institutions with the influence to curb abusive human rights conduct.

As in past years, this report does not include a chapter on every country where we work, nor does it discuss every issue of importance. The failure to include a country or issue often reflects no more than staffing and funding limitations, and should not be taken as commentary on the significance of the related human rights concerns. Other factors affecting the focus of our work in 1999 and hence the content of this volume include the severity of abuses, our access to information about them, our ability to influence abusive practices, and our desire to balance our work across various political and regional divides and to address important thematic concerns.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS

Despite the unmistakable progress made in standing up to the most severe abuses, the struggle to defend human rights remains a difficult and, at times, deadly battle. Each year we note with sadness our colleagues who gave their lives for the cause of human rights. Between November 1998 and October 1999, ten human rights defenders and two of their family members were murdered in circumstances that suggest they were killed because of their work. Three of the murdered human rights defenders were in Colombia, while one defender and his two sons were murdered by Serbian police in Kosovo.

In Antioquia, Colombia, Julio Gonzlez and Everardo de Jess Puerta, who worked for the Committee of Solidarity with Political Prisoners (Comit de Solidaridad con los Presos Polticos, CSPP), were forced off a public bus in July and shot by presumed paramilitaries. Colombian paramilitaries frequently act with the acquiescence if not active support of the Colombian army. In May, anthropologist and University of Antioquia professor Hernn Henao was also killed by three intruders who broke into a faculty meeting. Professor Henao, a human rights activist, had served as director of the Institute of Regional Studies (Instituto de Estudios Regionales, INER), a research center for the study of political conflict and community development. Daro Betancourt, a social scientist at Colombia's National Teaching University (Universidad Pedaggica Nacional) who ran a think tank on political violence, was forcibly "disappeared" in April. His body was found the following September in Bogot, showing signs that he had been executed.

In Kosovo, Serbian police came to the home of Bajram Kelmendi in March and beat him in the presence of his family. The police then took away Kelmendi, an Albanian human rights lawyer, and his two sons, Kastriot and Kushtrim. The police refused to give Kelmendi's wife, Nekibe, who is also a human rights lawyer, information on the whereabouts of her husband and sons, telling her that she should "ask NATO." The next day the bodies of the three men were found in a gas station outside Pristina. They had been shot dead. Bajram Kelmendi had defended many political prisoners in Kosovo and, shortly before his death, had taken up the defense of an Albanian-language newspaper that the police had closed.

In Northern Ireland, human rights lawyer Rosemary Nelson was killed in March by a car bomb a short distance from her home, not far from the school attended by one of her three children. Throughout the 1990s, Rosemary Nelson had frequently represented suspects accused of politically motivated offenses. Her clients were typically arrested under emergency laws, held in specially designed holding centers, and interviewed without access to an attorney. Nelson had frequently been the target of harassment, death threats, and intimidation, including threats on several occasions by members of the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC).

In Uzbekistan, Akhmadhon Turakhonov, a member of the Independent Human Rights Organization of Uzbekistan (IHROU), died in prison in June after being deprived of adequate medical care. Turakhonov, who had been in detention since late December 1998, was serving a six-year prison term for "attempted overthrow of the state" for his public criticism of the government.

Russia lost one of its leading human rights activists and anti-corruption campaigners in November 1998 when Duma deputy Galina Starovoitova was murdered near her St.Petersburg home. At the time of this writing, law enforcement agencies say that they are still investigating her killing.

In Sri Lanka, Neelan Tiruchelvam was assassinated in July by a suicide bomber believed to have been sent by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE). Neelan Tiruchelvam was an internationally respected human rights leader who had founded both the International Centre for Ethnic Studies and the Law and Society Trust, a human rights research and advocacy organization. As a Tamil member of parliament, Tiruchelvam had angered the LTTE by proposing an alternative to a separate Tamil state.

In Cambodia, Pourng Tong, 55, a volunteer for the Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association (known by its acronym, ADHOC), was killed in his home in Kandal province on December 19, 1998. He had been helping villagers resist evictions. A bodyguard for a company attempting to carry out the evictions allegedly shot Tong half a dozen times with an assault rifle. As of October, no one had been arrested for the murder.
AFRICA OVERVIEW

Two Steps Forward, One Step Back?

The year saw no seismic shifts for the better for human rights prospects in the continent. But in a relative sense the backdrop improved, thanks principally to the switch from military to civilian rule in Nigeria, and the successful second democratic elections in South Africa. Not surprisingly, the gloom elsewhere in the continent obscured these and a few other positive developments. But in a difficult environment, the changes, especially in Nigeria, which had been on the critical list for so long, gave some comfort. With their governments committed to human rights promotion and working jointly, Nigeria and South Africa-whose economic and military power by far outranked any other country in Africa-could provide the region with a more coherent vision of the future and a creative surge of political, economic, and cultural activity.

Nigeria Back in the Thick of Things

Fingers crossed, Nigeria went to the polls between December 1998 and February 1999. Few leaders had to preside over such a critical juncture of a nation's history as President Olusegun Obasanjo when he was inaugurated as president on May 29. After being sworn into office, President Obasanjo's first actions included sacking over 150 military officers, ordering a review of all the contracts that his predecessor signed during the year, and setting up an inquiry into human rights abuses. Even some of the fiercest critics of the governments who argued that it had yet to make lasting changes, acknowledged that there was greater individual freedom. At the international level, Nigeria regained credibility in international circles and found a new self-assurance after years of isolation as a pariah state.

Obasanjo had made a modest start in the circumstances but the hardest part was yet to come. It would take a long time to rebuild the moral fabric of Nigeria and its economic and political capacities. With a legacy of a kleptocratic culture that had left claims to good governance threadbare, Obasanjo was yet to take drastic measures to address the triple challenges of economic recovery, constitutional rehabilitation, and political stability. A host of issues remained unresolved: a ruined national economy, overburdened with foreign debt; the impoverished and environmentally degraded oil-producing Niger Delta seething with anger; past human rights abuses; a shattered civil service; an undermined and demoralized judiciary; collapsed infrastructure; the tangled mess of corruption previous military regimes left behind; and the role of the military.

South Africa Still on Course

It was also another good year for South Africa, as its continued transformation from an authoritarian and openly racist state to one concerned with individual rights remained on course. The trend towards maturation of a democratic culture and respect for human rights was confirmed by the successful second and largely problem-free all-race elections held in May, and the smooth succession of Nelson Mandela by former deputy president Thabo Mbeki as president and head of state. Although some statements by the new government caused concern, notably suggestions that individual rights might have to be abridged in the interests of fighting crime, generally South Africa retained its reforming drive and determined commitment to constitutionalism. But even for South Africa any judgment had to remain relatively tentative, as the government faced the huge challenge of addressing, in a hostile international economic environment, the vast inequalities in all aspects of life inherited from the previous regime.

Unfortunately, many countries in Africa did not benefit from any knock-on effect from these transitions. War between Ethiopia and Eritrea and in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC; formerly Zaire) raged on for most of the year. Civil conflicts continued in Angola, Burundi, Congo-Brazzaville, Guinea-Bissau, Namibia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, and Uganda-some attracting intervention from neighboring countries. An armed invasion over the Guinean border threatened to disrupt the shaky peace in Liberia, just emerged two years earlier from war. In countries not rocked by civil war, the outlook remained clouded by intolerance and political uncertainty. Even in Niger, which could be expected tobenefit directly from the transition in its southern neighbor, the trend to democratization seen in much of the continent continued to be defied. In April, a military coup led by commander of the presidential guard, Major Daouda Mallam Wank6, overturned the government of Ibrahim Mainassara, who had himself taken power by coup in 1996. Mainassara was assassinated during the coup, his death described as "an accident" by the new head of state. Presidential elections to return the country to civilian rule were held on October 17, and a run-off election, slated for November 24, had not taken place at this writing.

In southern Africa, however, prospects for long-term peace and prosperity appeared promising. Though democracy and peace did not necessarily correlate exactly, democratic rule in South Africa seemed to have created a more conducive ambience for progress elsewhere. For sure, a few countries, including Swaziland and most of all Angola, were yet to tackle basic reforms. But the progress of democratic transition during 1999 and previous years in Mozambique, previously one of Africa's isolated and backward countries, offered hopes for the future of democratic transitions elsewhere in the continent. With a reviving economy and relative political stability, the only clouds on the horizon were an incoherent political opposition, unanswered questions about war-time human rights abuses, and the fact that the benefits of rapid economic revival remained almost exclusively in cities though the overwhelming majority of Mozambicans continued to live in the countryside. Botswana's human rights and good governance record made it a bastion of stability in southern Africa. Malawi-despite an economic slowdown and political bickering-continued to make reasonable progress on the road from totalitarianism to competitive democracy and integration with the rest of the subregion.

But Zimbabwe continued to be rocked by major crises-economic decline, the battle over land ownership, and involvement in the Congo war. Under pressure from a grouping of civil society organizations embracing lawyers, church people, and human rights activists calling themselves the National Constitutional Assembly (NCA), President Robert Mugabe agreed that the country's constitution should be rewritten. Mugabe proceeded to appoint a Constitutional Review Commission to draft a new document by November, in time for elections scheduled for March 2000. But the NCA declined to be part of the official commission, which was dominated by the ruling party and subject to ultimate control by Mugabe, and instead decided to write an alternative constitution based on popular consultation. The government harassed and intimidated those working outside its control for constitutional reform. Laws restricting freedom of expression and assembly remained in place. Namibia was also rocked when so-called separatists attacked in its Caprivi strip on August 2. Government troops deployed to fight the rebellion reportedly committed widespread abuses, which at this writing were yet to be independently investigated. The state of emergency that was imposed in the wake of the violence was, however, lifted soon after the fighting died down.

There were also some countries outside the Southern African region that were making genuine strides towards accountable government, such as Benin, Ghana, Mali, and Tanzania. Within the past few years, these countries had begun to institute democracy and human rights reforms towards enhancing civic participation and accountable governance, as indispensable components for sustained growth.

Moving Forward, Dragging the Past

Confronted with the twin challenges of political and economic renewal, much of Africa made little headway in adjusting to the imperatives of democratic rule and respect for human rights. A key problem seemed to be that Africa was trying to forge ahead without attempting fundamental reforms to overcome the habits of the past. Yet experience continued to demonstrate that open democracies could not simply be slapped on top of rickety authoritarian systems.

Political leaders in many countries continued to demand personal loyalty and blocked meaningful institutional development needed for a democratic culture, including mechanisms for a peaceful transfer of power. Instead of building stability through economic growth and the construction of democratic institutions, some leaders counted on repression that smothered dissent, manipulated ethnic identities,tightened control on the press, employed dubious methods to crush the formation of independent opposition parties, and scripted elections.

Even the "new" leaders, hailed by some in the international community for bringing better leadership to places like Uganda, Rwanda, and Ethiopia, entrenched their positions through tactics that differed little from their more authoritarian neighbors. Uganda barred opposition political activity outside rare and carefully controlled places and times. President Yoweri Museveni's National Resistance Movement (NRM), in power since 1986, continued to govern through what it called the "movement" or "no-party" system of government, justifying its restrictions on political participation as essential to prevent a return to Uganda's violent past.

The NRM's direct access to state resources and the exclusion of the "movement" structures from the stringent regulations placed on political parties effectively prevented independent political parties from organizing for change through electoral action. In October, President Museveni promised to visiting British minister Peter Hain that he intended introducing multi-party democracy by the year 2007-five years after the next election, although he later denied that statement.

Others in the subregion appeared likely to follow Uganda's highly restrictive approach under the guise of gradual democratization. In early 1999, the Rwandan government, in power since 1994, organized its first elections. Generally hailed as successful, the elections departed from the usual Rwandan practice of voting by secret ballot. Nearly 90 percent of Rwandans physically lined up behind candidates who would represent them at the two most local levels of government. In some places, soldiers and civilian authorities used force or threats to try to compel those who were hesitant to vote or to stand for office. Although ready to concede citizens a voice in local government, authorities failed to consult them about decisions of national policy that were central to their lives, such as the imposition of compulsory "villagization." In mid-1999, national political leaders decreed that the current government would not step down at the end of its five-year mandate, as specified in the Arusha Accords of 1994, but would continue to rule for at least another four years.

The government of the DRC continued attempts to intimidate the political opposition, the free press, and the country's dynamic civil society and human rights movements, though it made cosmetic concessions to an ever retreating democratization agenda. It nominally lifted a ban on political party activities that it had strictly enforced since May 1997 by promulgating a law "liberalizing" political parties at the end of January, in advance of elections slated at the time for April 1999. Opposition parties were quick to reject the law on grounds of its failure to recognize preexisting parties, and the restrictive conditions it set to establish new ones. Seeming to be taking a leaf from Museveni's "movement system," President Kabila introduced Popular People's Committees (CPPs). Elected by local residents at the street, ward, district, and regional levels, the CPPs were mandated to implement government and local decisions throughout the country. Opposition leaders saw in the CPPs a vanguard "grassroots" movement that Kabila would use to legitimize his rule at the approach of elections. But the war provided an excuse for the government to delay the elections until the convening of the "national dialogue" on Congo's political future agreed upon in the peace accord.

There were also resemblances to Uganda's "movement system" in Ethiopia. On August 1, national legislative elections were proclaimed for May 2000. Voters would elect members of the two houses of Ethiopia's parliament from supposedly competitive lists presented by some sixty-five registered political parties. In fact, the ruling Ethiopian Peoples' Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) asserted strict control over the devolution of power to nine ethnically-defined federal states, through regional ethnic parties associated with it. Registered or unregistered political groupings which sought to retain their autonomy, or to contest ethnic federalism as championed by the EPRDF and enshrined in the 1995 constitution, continued to face uncompromising restraints.

Other seasoned autocrats made token gestures towards opening up the political system, all the while continuing to exclude participation. In Sudan, the government authorized political associations to register to obtain legal status, after a ten year ban decreed when it took power through a military coup in 1989. It timed state assembly elections so soon after, however, that the newly registered political parties balked at presenting candidates, resulting in what remained effectively a one-party state. Most party leaders stayed in exile, objecting to the registration act's requirement of loyalty to the model of an Islamic state. For its part, the Kenyan government continued to stall on promises of reform that would have brought greater democratization and used divide and rule tactics to emasculate the constitutional reform lobby.

Dreams of democracy continued to be dashed by manipulated, flawed, and opposition-boycotted elections. Reports abounded that competitors to incumbents were harassed, disadvantaged by government obstruction or partisanship, or disqualified on technicalities. Togo's March 21 parliamentary elections were run without the participation of the opposition, allowing the Togolese People's Party (RPT) to win seventy-seven of eighty-one seats. The opposition boycotted elections on the grounds that the new elections should not take place until a resolution on the previous year's presidential election had been reached. However, on June 29, all the opposition parties except Gilchrist Olympio's Union of Forces for Change (UFC) decided to drop their challenge to the presidential election in exchange for a rerun of the parliamentary elections and a vow from President Gnassingbe Eyadema, the longest serving president in Africa, that he would not be a candidate in the 2003 presidential election. At this writing, this agreement had already fallen apart as the two sides could not resolve which body would oversee the parliamentary elections.

The refugee situation in Guinea, caused by strife in neighboring Liberia and Sierra Leone, tended to mask political developments within Guinea's borders. At the time of writing the political crisis that began with presidential elections held on December 14, 1998, had not been resolved. While voter turnout for the election was high, it was characterized by a serious crackdown on the opposition leading to the detention of hundreds of activists and at least six deaths. The government also imposed a ban on street demonstrations, closed its borders, and on the day of the election closed the airport and seaports and imposed a travel ban. When the results were announced, with President Lansana Conte leading with 56 percent of the vote, the eighteen opposition members of the electoral committee resigned citing fraud. Alpha Conde, an opposition candidate, was arrested the day following the election for allegedly attempting to leave the country illegally. On December 30, he was also charged with treason. On February 23, his lawyer was sent back to France upon entering the country. At the time of writing Conde remained in prison. The government had promised a trial in September, but it had not taken place.

In Guinea-Bissau, a government of national unity was sworn in February, in accordance with a peace agreement signed in November 1998 to end a civil war that erupted in June 1998 between supporters of President Jo(o Bernardo Vieira and a military junta led by sacked army chief of staff Brigadier-General Ansumane Mane. But elections scheduled for March failed to take place, despite deployment of a 600-strong peacekeeping force from the Economic Community of West African States Military Observer Group (ECOMOG), and General Mane staged a new coup in May to oust Vieira and his supporters from the interim government. Speaker of the national assembly Malam Sanha was sworn in as acting president, and fresh elections were scheduled for November.

On March 7, Equatorial Guinea held its second "free" legislative polls since political pluralism was allowed in 1992. Longtime incumbent President Theodoro Obiang's Democratic Party of Equatorial Guinea won seventy-five seats in the eighty-seat single chamber legislature. However, the fact that many opposition leaders were in jail during the election cast doubts on the legitimacy of the election. Additionally, voters were forced to vote in public without the privacy of a voting booth.

In neighboring Gabon, the opposition refused to recognize the results of the presidential election of December 6, 1998, which were won by incumbent president Omar Bongo with 67 percent of the vote. Presidential elections in the Central African Republic were delayed twice before taking place on September19. President Ange-Felix Patasse won just over half the votes cast. The U.N. reported that voting went smoothly, but opposition candidates rejected the poll results even before they had been announced and demanded annulment of the ballot, accusing Patasse of having rigged the vote.

Even relatively politically open CLte d'Ivoire and Senegal had their fair share of election-related controversy. In Senegal, the ruling Senegalese Socialist Party won forty four of the forty seats contested in January 24 senatorial elections. But the polls were boycotted by all the major opposition parties except the Marxist grouping formed by the Party for Independence and Labor and the African Party for Democracy and Socialism (AJ/PADS), and the Liberal Party of Senegal. In CLte d'Ivoire, controversy surrounding the nationality of the leader of the Republican Party (RDR), Alassane Ouattara, triggered tension in Abidjan in September. Prime minister of CLte d'Ivoire from 1990 to 1993 and a former IMF Deputy Director, Ouattara was slated to be the main opposition candidate to President Henri Konan B6di6 in the year 2000 election. But the government claimed that he had forged evidence of Ivorian nationality and was actually from Burkina Faso. On August 26, the government began investigating his nationality and he was to be questioned on Sept 16. On Sept 14, police clashed and arrested hundreds of RDR supporters at Ouattara's residence.

But Benin's parliamentary elections on March 30, with thirty-five party or coalitionists vying for eighty-three parliamentary seats, were comparatively free of controversy. The election had a high voter turn-out and was generally regarded as free and fair. The opposition led by former president Nicephore Soglo won a one-seat majority, with forty-two of the eighty-three seats. The vote was split geographically, the opposition controlling the south and supporters of President Mathieu Kerekou the north. Cape Verde also ducked the trend of restrictive political control. The ruling Democratic Movement Party (MPD) planned to amend the constitution late in 1999. The amendments would, among other things, focus on strengthening basic human rights provisions, and improving the parliamentary system.

Attacks on the Independent Media

Fearing that further political openings, especially free political expression, would imperil incumbents, ruling regimes continued to crack down on dissenting voices. In many countries, independent journalists were routinely detained, beaten, or forced into exile. In conflict zones journalists were even more at risk. In Sierra Leone, seven Sierra Leonean and one United States reporter were killed by rebel forces during the January offensive. Several more were abducted and wounded. One reporter was executed by ECOMOG forces after being accused of being a rebel collaborator. At least eight journalists were arrested and detained for stories they had written, most following what government and ECOMOG claimed to be false and unsubstantiated reports involving security matters.

In Burkina Faso, Norbert Zongo, chief editor of the private weekly L'independant , was found dead in his car with three others in December 1998 under highly suspicious circumstances. Official investigations implicated several members of President Blaise Compaore's security entourage in the death. While controversy raged, the government continued to crack down on protests, marches, and demonstrations throughout the year.

Though the nongovernmental press in Sudan exercised more freedom despite frequent suspensions by the government press council, the president ordered the closure of an independent daily, Al Rai Al Akhar , on the eve of a mission by the U.N. special rapporteur on freedom of opinion and expression. He explained that he acted at the behest of Islamists and army officers who objected to the frequently-suspended paper's sarcastic treatment of martyrdom, among other things. Neighboring Ethiopia persisted in its practice of flouting media freedom by intimidating outspoken journalists with frequent jailing without charge. Radio stations in Ethiopia were government-owned. Addis Ababa journalist Tegegne was still detained despite paying bail. Yared Kemfe, twenty-four, the editor-in-chief of the newspaper Beza , was arrested on March5, 1999, in Harer, after writing an article describing the region as "an apartheid regime." The latest reports indicated that there were eight journalists still in jail in Ethiopia and several had been forced into exile.

Zambia also persisted in its intimidation and persecution of the independent media. The Post , a leading independent daily, was besieged by police on March 10, causing it to cease publication for the first time in seven years of its existence. The police action followed publication of a story headlined "Angola Worries Zambia Army," which criticized Zambia's military capability and preparedness in the face of a possible military attack from Angola. All the reporters, including editor-in-chief Fred M'membe, were later charged with "espionage." Although their case was committed to the High Court on April 16, no date was set for trial.

Repression of the press was also the order of the day in Zimbabwe. Mark Chavunduka, editor of the independent Standard newspaper, and reporter Ray Choto were arrested after publishing a report on an alleged military coup attempt in which twenty-three members of the Zimbabwe National Army had been detained for plotting to overthrow the government of President Mugabe. Despite several High Court orders calling for the immediate release of Chavunduka, the authorities failed to comply. The military stated, "The judge cannot direct us...anyone who meddles with military matters is subject to military matters." While in custody, Choto and Chavunduka were reportedly severely assaulted by military police trying to find out the sources of the coup story. They were later released on bail with visible signs of torture on their bodies, including cigarette burns, electric shocks, and submersion in drums of water.

Journalists also faced serious threats in Cameroon and continued to be subjected to expulsions, arrests, and criminal prosecutions in Angola, Burundi, CLte d'Ivoire, Guinea, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi, Mozambique, Niger, Rwanda, Swaziland, Tanzania, Togo, and Uganda.

Unending Wars, Infinite Mayhem

War plunged several countries into chaos and violence, precipitating massive waves of migration, both external and internal. Fueling conflict were small arms and light weapons procured through both covert and overt trade, often financed by proceeds from sale of access to Africa's treasure chest-illicit diamonds and other easily fungible natural resources. In Angola, Sierra Leone, and the DRC conflict was driven by competition for control of diamonds or oil. In the Niger Delta, discontent at the lack of development in the region despite its oil wealth fueled increasing unrest that had the potential, absent decisive action by the Nigerian government and oil companies to address the fundamental complaints, to lead to yet another armed insurrection on the African continent. In many conflicts, mercenaries operated, contributing greatly to state "impunity and irresponsibility," as noted by Enrique Bernales Ballesteros, the U.N. Commission on Human Rights' special rapporteur on mercenaries in a March report. War allowed a slew of diseases to flourish, including bubonic plague, hemorrhagic fever, polio, and cholera. AIDS emerged as the leading cause of death in Africa.

In West Africa the internal conflicts within Sierra Leone, Liberia, and Guinea continued to spill over the borders, further destabilizing the region. In Sierra Leone, the January offensive by rebels against the capital, Freetown, marked the most intensive and concentrated period of human rights violations in Sierra Leone's eight-year civil war. Liberia and Burkina Faso were once again accused by the U.N. and others of fueling the war, by supplying weapons to the rebels and allowing them to use bases outside Sierra Leone for attacks. The Revolutionary United Front (RUF) rebels deliberately targeted civilians, against whom they committed unspeakably brutal abuses. Nigerian and other soldiers with the ECOMOG West African peacekeeping force and government-backed civilian militias also committed serious abuses, although on a lesser scale. International pressure and stalemate in the war led to a May cease-fire and a July 7 peace agreement signed in Lom6, Togo. On October 22, the U.N. Security Council approved the U.N. Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). The operation, given an initial six month mandate, authorized the deployment of a 6,000-member U.N. peacekeeping force. UNAMSIL's mandate, under the U.N. Charter's chapter VII, included assisting the disarmament and demobilization process, ensuring the security of U.N. civilian personnel, assisting the delivery of humanitarian aid, and providing support for the new elections.

In Liberia, growing violence and insecurity threatened to reverse the tenuous peace established since 1997 after the end of the brutal seven-year civil war. Only two years after the U.N.-sanctioned election that brought Charles Taylor to power, the situation remained fragile and increasingly volatile. In August, the fighting intensified when rebels seized the towns of Kolahun and Voinjama in Lofa County, northern Liberia, killing hundreds and forcing thousands of Liberians and Sierra Leonean refugees to flee the area. U.N. warehouses and vehicles were looted and aid workers were evacuated. Nine hostages, including six foreign aid workers, were kidnapped during a border attack in Kolahun and held for several days before being released.

The sixteen-year civil war in Sudan that had killed an estimated 1.9 million people continued in the south, the east, and the Nuba Mountains in central Sudan, between government and the National Democratic Alliance (NDA), a 1995 coalition of armed opposition movements including the Sudan People's Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A), the southern-based rebel group that has fought the government since 1983. In 1999, the government of Sudan became for the first time an oil exporter. The oil came from the south, and its development was made possible by a peace agreement with the southern faction in the area with the richest oil reserves-and by a government policy of displacing civilians from the oil fields. One government minister, swiftly contradicted by a colleague, admitted that the new oil production would be used to finance the war. The government persistently bombed civilian property and relief sites, killing and injuring civilians and destroying scarce infrastructure. Government-backed armed militias continued to mount raids in which civilians were taken as slaves-and evidence began to surface that efforts by western Christian organizations to redeem slaves at U.S.$50 a head were funding a profitable business. The SPLA committed its own share of abuses: summary executions, including the March execution of three captured government employees and a Red Crescent tracing officer; diversion of relief and other food; and the enlistment of child soldiers. The only major glimmer of hope was the grassroots People-to-People reconciliation process that sought to end the debilitating south-south conflicts.

Estimated to involve 200,000 troops and to have cost U.S.$300 million, the Ethiopian-Eritrean war that started on May 6, 1998, persisted despite OAU, U.N., E.U., and U.S. efforts to rally the two sides around a framework agreement calling for a truce and Eritrean withdrawal from land occupied since the start of the conflict. The fighting was reported to have claimed as many as 50,000 dead and displaced hundreds of thousands of people.

Africa's third largest nation, the Democratic Republic of Congo, had been at renewed war since August 2, 1998, when Rwanda and Uganda invaded the country in alliance with disgruntled Congolese rebels. Zimbabwe, Angola, and Chad sent troops to defend President Laurent Kabila's government. Chad had since withdrawn and Angola had significantly reduced its commitment. Throughout the year, the DRC conflict continued to present the biggest security crisis in the continent, contributing to the worsening of the humanitarian situation in much of central and southern Africa. But, after protracted negotiations, the principal belligerents signed a shaky peace pact in Lusaka, Zambia, on July 14. There were few illusions that progress towards implementation of the Lusaka pact would be anything other than slow and painful. Even if the war did not resume, it would take decades for the area to gain a place among the more peaceful and prosperous parts of the continent.

The DRC crisis was compounded by two developments. First, an extraordinary deterioration in the state of Rwanda-Uganda relations suddenly precipitated a shooting battle between the two erstwhile allies. The original geopolitical aims and specifically the much-vaunted strategic partnership between Rwanda and Uganda seemed to have been replaced by a contest for regional supremacy. Secondly, it appeared that the DRC conflict was not just sucking in regional powers but sucking militia fighters out, as the conflict increasingly commingled with the internal conflict in Burundi.

Angola's two-decade civil war continued to drag on throughout the year without resolution in sight. The return to all-out war in December 1998 also represented the end of the uneasy peace process that began with the Lusaka Protocol in Zambia in November 1994. It was a peace process overseen by two U.N. peacekeeping missions, at a total cost to the international community of U.S.$1.5 billion. The renewed war looked set to be more vicious with both sides dug in for ferocious battles. The human cost since fighting resumed was impossible to determine with precision, but the United Nations estimated that nearly one million people were internally displaced because of the renewed conflict, 10 percent of Angola's population.

The Casamance crisis in Senegal continued throughout 1999. At the start of the year, the Movement of Democratic Forces of Casamance (MFDC), a secessionist movement fighting for the independence of the southern Senegalese region of Ziguinchor, demanded the unconditional release of all conflict-related prisoners prior to discussion. On January 22, Senegalese president Abdou Diouf visited Casamance, where he met with Father Diamacoune Senghor, the secretary-general of the MFCD. Three weeks later, President Diouf's government released 123 prisoners. At the end of April and May violence erupted in the Casamance with several government soldiers and rebels killed in each incident. The leaders of the MFDC met in Banjul, Gambia from June 22-24 and issued a communique demanding the "immediate withdrawal" of all Senegalese forces from Casamance, except those posted there before the conflict erupted in 1982. Rebels abducted about ten people, including civilians and soldiers, on August 13.

There were other less publicized violent conflicts which were no less devastating in Congo-Brazzaville, Burundi, Uganda, and Somalia. In the Republic of Congo, the fighting between rebel and government troops continued throughout 1999 in and around Brazzaville. The fighting claimed thousands of lives, but no exact numbers were known. The fighting had also created a humanitarian disaster in the Pool, Niari, Bouenza, and Lekoumou areas, with a combined population of roughly one million, as tens (possibly hundreds) of thousands of civilians fled into the forest to escape the fighting but were reported to be starving to death.

With negotiations among parties to the civil war in Burundi largely stalled, both Burundian security forces and rebels murdered, raped or otherwise injured or drove civilians from their homes. In mid-August, government soldiers killed 147 civilians in one place and seventy-four soon after in another location, both in Bujumbura-Rural Province. At the end of August, rebels killed thirty-eight civilians and the army retaliated by slaying twenty others. The Burundian army was reported to have stepped up counterinsurgency operations to counter rebel attacks, including forcing at least 200,000 villagers in Bujumbura-Rural into makeshift camps without food or water. In one week alone at the end of September, aid officials and displaced villagers said that at least one hundred villagers had died of disease in the squalid camps. The war within Burundi also became more closely linked to conflict in the Congo (DRC), as rebel forces linked up with others fighting in the neighboring country.

The Chadian government simultaneously sought a military solution to the armed rebellion in the north of the country led by former defense minister Youssouf Togoimi's Movement for Democracy and Justice in Chad, while denying that it existed. There were several clashes between government forces and rebels throughout the year.

Somalia continued to be divided among rival clans, and lacked a central government, though the self-declared state of Somaliland in the north enjoyed comparative stability. Violent periodic upsurges in fighting continued to take a heavy toll on the civilian population, and the September 26 murder of one of Somalia's best-known humanitarian workers highlighted the difficulty of bringing peace to the war-ravaged African nation. Doctor Ayub Sheikh Yerow, one of UNICEF's leading health and medical workers, was killed on September 15 when his vehicle was ambushed on the outskirts of the agricultural town of Jowhar. Both Ethiopia and Eritrea were reported to have supplied arms to different factions in the conflict.

Combat between the government army and rebel forces continued in northern and western Uganda, leaving local populations exposed to critical shortages of food, medicine and shelter. The inability of international aid agencies, including the World Food Program, M6decins Sans Fronti4res, and Action Aid, to continue their life-sustaining humanitarian activities in the affected areas severely aggravated the humanitarian disaster.

The Human Fall-Out

The commemoration in 1999 of the thirtieth anniversary of the OAU's Refugee Convention also marked the ignominious fact that Africa hosted the second largest refugee population worldwide. In 1998, the global number of people of concern to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) was reportedly 21.5 million, of whom 6.3 million were in Africa. Of the ten top refugee producers in the world, five were African: Burundi, Eritrea, Sierra Leone, Somalia, and Sudan. Africa also had some of the largest populations of internally displaced persons (IDPs). Sudan alone had approximately four million IDPs-the largest IDP population in the world. Angola's IDP population stood at some 1.6 million, of whom one million people were displaced in 1999. And one million people were estimated to have been displaced in Sierra Leone.

Some of the longest and most forgotten refugee crises were on the African continent, with recurring refugee movemes caused by conflicts spilling over into neighboring countries. Refugee crises in Africa invariably affected a whole subregion-and sometimes beyond. The Great Lakes crisis continued to spill over into eastern and southern Africa. The Horn of Africa countries continued to be producers and receivers of refugees simultaneously. And in West Africa, the interlocking conflicts in Sierra Leone, Liberia, and Guinea affected populations in all three nations. Ethnic minorities in Ethiopia and the Democratic Republic of Congo were subjected to harassment and even deportation on the basis of ethnicity, even where those deported were born and were active citizens of the expelling country.

Security and protection of refugees and internally displaced populations was one of the most serious problems in Africa. There was an alarming increase in the militarization of refugee settlements by armed elements, weapons flows, cross-border attacks, forced recruitment of refugee children, and attacks on refugee women and children in camps. In many African countries, refugee camps did not provide a safe haven. For example, in the Forecariah area in Guinea, there were five attacks by Sierra Leonean rebels on the refugee camps during 1999. The lack of an adequate response by African governments and the international community to separate out combatants from refugees in the camps exacerbated the problem and made refugee camps more likely targets for attack.

The security risk increasingly associated with hosting refugees from intractable regional conflicts resulted in a growing unwillingness by host governments to provide asylum and protection. Xenophobia and anti-refugee sentiment was increasingly prevalent on a continent with a generous history of hosting those fleeing conflict. Host countries sought ways to restrict freedom of movement and residence to refugees. Tanzania, host to the largest number of refugees in Africa and long known for its generous asylum policies, in 1998 passed a more restrictive refugee law and conducted forced round-ups confining Burundian and Congolese refugees to camps. In Kenya, refugees largely from Somalia, Democratic Republic of Congo, Burundi, Rwanda, and Sudan were regular targets of police harassment, forced round-ups, relocation to rural camps, arbitrary detention, and deportations. Despite these worrisome developments, both Tanzania and Kenya continued to host some of the largest refugee populations.

Defending Human Rights

The year saw the continued emergence and evolution of citizens' organizations working for human rights, providing Africans with important channels to monitor governments, defend their rights, and demand sustainable political, constitutional, and legal reforms.

In South Africa, the country's vigorous human rights community benefitted from an environment of respect for democracy and human rights, and freely monitored the government, despite occasional government hostility to NGOs. Nigeria too provided a vastly improved situation, which permitted the country's numerous and sophisticated human rights groups to operate freely throughout the year, in welcome contrast to the repression under the government of General Abacha. The work of the Transition Monitoring Group (TMG), a coalition of tens of NGOs which deployed more than 10,000 election observers throughout the country for the various stages of the election process, was particularly impressive.

In a positive development, after eight years of obstruction, the Ethiopian government in early May officially registered the Ethiopian Human Rights Council (EHRCO), the only monitoring group working openly in the country. EHRCO was also able to access its bank account which was frozen by the government during the preceding four years, but only after obtaining a court order for its release in January. The government continued to recognize several other organizations focusing on civic and human rights education.

However, in some countries, efforts to create a more decentralized civil society that could support an agenda of political and economic change continued to be stifled by legal and administrative regimes that put NGOs firmly under state control.

In contrast to its decision to register the Ethiopia Human Rights Council, the Ethiopian government continued to suppress the Human Rights League. Eight founding and board members of the league, and the organization's secretary, remained in detention for the second year after their arrest in October 1997. Similar repressive measures forced other monitoring groups underground or into exile, including the Ogaden Human Rights Committee, the Solidarity Committee for Ethiopian Political Prisoners, and the Oromo Ex-Prisoners for Human Rights.

The government of Burkina Faso was also on the offensive against local human rights activists who conducted a vigorous campaign for a trial for the killers of journalist Norbert Zongo. On April 6, the government withdrew diplomatic status from Halidou Ou6draogo, leader of the Burkina Faso branch of the forty-nation Inter-African Human Rights Union (UIDH), because he had "conducted activities that were not compatible with his status." The decision deprived the human rights leader, who is a citizen of Burkina Faso, of diplomatic immunity from prosecution and denied the organization diplomatic tax benefits. It also eliminated diplomatic tax benefits for the group. Three figures critical of the government were detained on May 17, 1999: Herman Yam6ogo, leader of the Alliance for Democracy and Federation-African Democratic Rally (released on May 20); Nana Tibo of the Sankarist Party; and Halidou Ou6draogo, also chairman of the Burkinab6 Human Rights Movement (MBDHP), and of the Collective of Opposition Labor Unionists and Members of the Civil Society (released on May 17). Yameogo was charged with inciting violence.

Fernando Gomes, president of the Human Rights League of Guinea-Bissau and vice-president of the national chapter of the F6d6ration International des Droits de l'Homme (FIDH), and Luis Nancassa, President of the Teachers Union and a member of organizations affiliated with both FIDH and the Organisation Mondiale Contre la Torture (OMCT), were mentioned on the radio on June 12, 1999, in statements by the military warning civil society leaders critical of the recent coup d'6tat.

Belying professions of openness and receptivity to civil society, the Ugandan government continued to control civil society groups through the manipulation of registration requirements requiring NGOs to be nonsectarian and nonpolitical. The government continued to refuse to register the Ugandan National NGO Forum, a broad consortium of national and foreign NGOs, and declared its May 1999 second general assembly "unlawful." Congolese human rights activists who were forced to flee to Uganda complained that security operatives from the Ugandan-backed Congolese Rally for Democracy (CRD) harassed them and kept them under surveillance in Kampala.

In Zambia too, the media in August carried reports of government plans to introduce stiffer legislation controlling NGOs, replacing the 1958 Societies Act. Following the May World Bank Consultative Groupmeeting in Paris the then Finance Minister Edith Nawakwi attacked NGOs, without mentioning their names, for campaigning against Zambia's efforts to secure donor funding. The government-controlled print media named the Zambia Independent Monitoring Team (ZIMT) and AFRONET. But the Zambia Independent Media Association (ZIMA) defended NGO initiatives noting that "the position of NGOs has always been consistent, clear and transparent."

Conditions for human rights activists were even worse in Liberia, Togo, Djibouti, and Cameroon, where activists were subjected to abuses including detentions, torture, and mutilations. In Liberia threats and intimidation against human rights groups increased in 1999. Like their Zambian counterparts, they were scapegoated for a freeze in donor aid. In February, the Catholic Justice and Peace Commission was attacked by politicians for publicizing wrongdoing by security forces, poor treatment of prisoners, and forced labor and child captivity in southeastern Liberia. In March, legislators from four countries took two nongovernmental human rights groups, the Catholic Justice and Peace Commission and the Fore-Runners of Children's Universal Development (Focus), to court on the grounds that the reports released by these groups were making it difficult for Liberia to receive international donor aid. In July, over one hundred former combatants stormed and looted the house of Commany Wesseh of the Center for Democratic Empowerment after he appeared on a radio talk show stating that the Liberian government, and not the U.N., was responsible for the reintegration of combatants. In July, an army colonel cautioned human rights activists, accusing them of sending "malicious and negative signals" to the international community. In April, unidentified men forced off the road the chauffeur of a human rights activist from the National Human Rights Center of Liberia, dragged the driver from the car, beat him up for half and hour, and then cut off one of his ears.

In Togo, Nestor Tengue, Francois Gayibor, and Brice Santanna, members of the Togolese Association for the Defense and Promotion of Human Rights (ATDPDH), were arrested on May 3 on suspicion of providing Amnesty International with information for a report detailing summary executions during political unrest in 1998. Antoine Koffi Nadjombe, a member of the Togo section of Amnesty International was arrested on May 14. The government had also attempted to arrest Arsene Bolouvi and Benjamin Adjoh members of ACAT (Action for Christians Against Torture)-Togo. Ameen Ayodele, a member of Amnesty International's Nigerian Section, was detained, tortured, and threatened with execution by Togolese security forces between May 19 and 27. Ayodele was traveling from Ghana to Nigeria via Togo on May 19. At the border post of Aflao between Ghana and Togo, he presented his Amnesty International membership card to the Togolese security forces as a means of identification, because all his other documents, including passport, had been stolen. The border police arrested him on suspicion of being "a spy" for Amnesty International in advance of Secretary-General Pierre San6's scheduled visit to Lom6 on May 21, 1999. San6's visit was subsequently canceled by the Togolese authorities. Ameen was to spend the next nine days in a cell, naked and deprived of food. He was beaten every day, as the Togolese authorities interrogated him about his involvement with Amnesty International in Togo.

The government of Benin became involved in this issue when two Benin-based human rights organizations issued contradictory statements regarding Amnesty International's report on Togo. Benin's government-funded national Human Rights Commission sided with the Togolese government; while the Benin Human Rights League stated that the dead bodies of Togolese dissidents did wash up on the beaches of Benin, as alleged by Amnesty International. On July 23 the government of Benin publicly asked for proof about locations where dead bodies of Togolese nationals were buried.

Abdoulaye Math, lawyer and president of the Movement for the Defense of Human Rights, a human rights group based in Maroua, the Far North Province of Cameroon, was arrested on February 27, 1997, after he had boarded a plane for Yaound6. He was traveling to the United States to attend a human rights training program and had just returned from Garoua, where earlier in the week he had organized a conference on human rights abuses in northern Cameroon. Math was charged with fraud and selling pharmaceuticalproducts without a licence. As of this writing, he reportedly remained in detention in the central prison in Maroua, pending review of his case.

Djibouti's most prominent human rights defender, Aref Mohamed Aref, was refused the return of his passport, which prevented him from attending an Amnesty International meeting in Dakar, Senegal, starting on 28 June. His passport was seized in December 1998 as he was about to depart for Paris to attend the World Human Rights Defenders Summit. Aref, a lawyer, was released early from a six-month prison sentence in May by the new president of Djibouti, Ismail Omar Guelleh. A well-known nonviolent critic of the government who had defended political prisoners, Aref had been imprisoned in February, shortly before the presidential election, on a criminal charge in connection with a business matter in 1994. The trial appeared to have been politically motivated and unfair-he was denied the defense counsel of his choice, there were numerous irregularities with the process, and his appeal was thrown out by the Supreme Court in a brief session with no advance notice or consultation with his legal representative. The Supreme Court also banned him from legal practice for five years, a judgment which he challenged in court.

And in Sudan it was a case of zero tolerance-no independent human rights organization existed in openly government-controlled areas, though independent attorneys continued to defend those few put on trial and churches attempted to defend their parishioners' rights. One independent attorney defending human rights cases was jailed four times during the year. The Dinka committee retrieving enslaved Dinka children was an underground human rights organization until it was incorporated into a government committee on abductions, set up following the 1999 session of the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, at which a consensus resolution on Sudan, making no mention of slavery, had been adopted. There were no human rights organizations in southern rebel-held areas, though nascent human rights groups monitoring abuses in the Nuba Mountains and in eastern areas under rebel control continued to develop.

Regional Organizations

Organization of African Unity (OAU)

The state of the continent offered a fine moment for the premier continental organization to deal more effectively with eruptions of violence and their associated human rights abuses. Yet the OAU policy leadership vacuum continued. Africa's major conflicts in Angola, DRC, Sierra Leone, and Ethiopia-Eritrea underlined the message that the OAU-a captive of a long legacy of institutional torpor and an inclination for weak compromises-would never become more effective unless it ceased to be a mere debating society. The challenge for South Africa and Nigeria would be to provide regional leadership for a more focused, decisive, and principled organization.

In the midst of multiple conflicts on the continent throughout the year, the OAU summoned or convened several meetings, issued several statements, launched a variety of initiatives and deployed numerous special envoys to flashpoints. An extraordinary summit was called for March in Ouagadougou to discuss "all the conflicts" on the African continent. Chief among these were said to be the conflicts in Congo-Brazzaville, the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), and Sierra Leone. The special two-day summit was, however, canceled, and a press statement from Burkina Faso's presidential office explained that it had not been possible "to reach a quorum necessary to hold a special summit."

The thirty-fifth annual summit of the OAU took place in Algiers in July. The three-day meeting, which was to be devoted to the search for solutions in armed conflicts and for mechanisms to avert wars on the African continent, was attended by forty-six heads of state and government. Its most notable resolution was a call for the exclusion of any government installed by military coup from the organization, as stipulated in its Harare Declaration of 1997. The widespread lack of mechanisms for the peaceful transfer of power, which observers believed to be a major contributing factor to the prevalence of military coups on the continent was not addressed. Moreover, it was ironic that a number of the African leaders present at thesummit had not ascended to power through the ballot box. The resolution would come into effect thirty days after fifteen of the OAU's fifty-three member states had signed and ratified it.

Finally, the fourth extraordinary summit of the OAU was held in Syrte, Libya where forty-four African leaders decided to form a continental union to face the challenges of globalization and development. The Syrte Declaration stated that the member states of the OAU were committed to the setting up of an African Union, in conformity with the ultimate objectives of the OAU Charter and the provisions of the treaty establishing the African Economic Community. Many states expressed skepticism at this goal in private. Libya presented a check for U.S.$4.5 million to clear the contribution arrears of seven states to the OAU so that no one would be deprived of the right to speak. The debtor nations helped were Comoros, Guinea-Bissau, Equatorial Guinea, Liberia, Niger, S(o Tome and Principe, and Seychelles.

On Sierra Leone the OAU's record was not illustrious. Though it offered to facilitate a dialogue between the government and rebels, and expressing its "unyielding support" for the government of President Ahmad Tejan Kabbah, the OAU failed to insist that impunity for human rights should end. OAU Secretary-General Salim Ahmed Salim paid tribute to the mediation efforts of Togolese president Gnassingbe Eyadema and other parties involved "in the search for a lasting solution to the unfortunate conflict in Sierra Leone," but proceeded to "morally guarantee" the Lom6 peace agreement that included a blanket amnesty for all abuses committed prior to its conclusion.

Apparently fearing to displease either side to the conflict in the Democratic Republic of Congo, the OAU and its secretary-general abdicated responsibility and retreated into the background, leaving President Chiluba of Zambia, acting on behalf of the Southern Africa Development Community and with the support of South Africa, to plod through mediation that finally led to the signing of a shaky peace agreement.

On Angola the OAU was seemingly content with high-level missions: one headed by Assistant Secretary-General Ahmed Haggag, who left Addis Ababa aiming to reconcile differences between Angola and Zambia; the other by the OAU secretary-general, who met Angolan President Jose Eduardo dos Santos to discuss the renewed war. Secretary-General Salim also made the customary appeal to the international community to provide humanitarian assistance to Angola to alleviate the plight of the population.

The OAU's efforts through its mediation committee on the Ethiopia/Eritrea dispute-Burkina Faso, Djibouti, and Zimbabwe-backed by the OAU's Central Organ for Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution, were relatively more robust and intensive. Having developed a "framework agreement" on resolving the border dispute, throughout the year the organization urged both parties to stop fighting immediately in order to give the agreement a chance. The plan included calls for an end to hostilities and the deployment of peacekeeping forces in the contested areas until a new border delineation was decided. At the time of this writing, only Eritrea had accepted the terms of implementation. In early September, Ethiopia rejected the terms of the agreement, saying they contradicted the original formula to end the war. Eritrea called the rejection "tantamount to a declaration of war," and in an address to the U.N. General Assembly on October 1, Eritrea's foreign minister urged the United Nations and the international community to condemn Ethiopia's threat to use force, to establish a short time frame for Ethiopia to respond to the peace package, and to immediately start implementing the OAU plan.

To its credit, the OAU held its first Ministerial Conference on Human Rights in Mauritius in April, preceded by a meeting of experts at the same venue. The conference reviewed the human rights situation in Africa, examined the root causes of human rights violations, and elaborated a collective vision for the future, laid out in a Declaration and Plan of Action adopted at the conference. African NGOs were not invited to the conference venue, despite lobbying for their contribution to be heard, though an NGO forum was convened by the International Commission of Jurists on behalf of the OAU and African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights in Nairobi, Kenya, prior to the ministerial conference, and fifteen NGO representatives were elected and attended the OAU conference as observers.

The conference was held less than a year after the adoption of a protocol to the African Charter on the establishment of the African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights. The protocol was adopted by the 34th Ordinary Session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government held in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, in June 1998, and which was signed immediately thereafter by thirty African States. The protocol, which to date had been ratified by two member states, Burkina Faso and Senegal, will enter into force after the deposit with the OAU Secretary General of fifteen instruments of ratification.

But at the time of this writing none of this activity seemed to have yielded dividends and the year's experience was dominated by disjointed and ineffective initiatives; especially those aimed at conflict resolution in Sierra Leone, Ethiopia/Eritrea, DRC, and Angola. The sorry state of the OAU once again highlighted the need for the development of a coherent workable strategic concept and policy with the requisite leadership.

The ability of Africa to act effectively in such cases as the war in the DRC required strong leadership. But even the most capable individuals would probably be handicapped unless OAU institutions were more effective. Some straightforward, though controversial improvements were needed. Two samples: member states ought to force reform of the secretariat, that so often managed to unite the continent only in disillusion; and member states should also accept more continuity in the chairpersonship, halting the annual rotations of leadership, even at the cost of every country not having a regular turn.

Southern African Development Community (SADC)

Following the South African-led intervention in Lesotho in late 1998 that could at best be described as seriously flawed, the year was better for SADC than the previous one. After the earlier years of a miscued foreign policy, South Africa started to clarify its identity and role in Africa and to develop a more coherent Africa policy framework. On taking office, President Mbeki appointed the outspoken and effective-though undiplomatic-former health minister Nkosazana Zuma as minister of foreign affairs, to replace the apparently absent Alfred Nzo. Mbeki and Zuma were both involved in attempts to broker peace in the DRC, and South Africa stated that it was prepared to send troops to the DRC as peacekeepers under certain conditions.

One of the most overt manifestations of this shift was that South Africa's battered relations with Zimbabwe seemed to be on the mend, boosting prospects for regional integration to operate as an engine of development, democratization, and peace. Progress was threatened, however, by Zimbabwe's heightening internal crisis, and in particular by its continued intervention in the war in the DRC.

One of the many causes of mistrust that defined South Africa's relationship with Zimbabwe and to a certain degree other SADC states, was limited access to South African markets. In September 1999, the government asked the South African parliament to ratify a ground-breaking regional free trade deal so it could come into effect at the start of the new millennium. The deal covered the nearly U.S.$6 billion of trade between South Africa and the other thirteen members of SADC. The other major cause of mistrust-SADC's Organ on Politics, Security, and Defense-appeared to have been resolved. Although SADC states agreed in 1996 to set up the organ, they had never been able to agree its mandate or a legal framework for it. A draft protocol, drawn up in 1997, was never ratified by SADC member states. The situation was further compounded when President Mugabe, as chairperson of the organ, committed troops in the Congo war in the name of SADC without prior consultation with all the other members of SADC. But at the August 1999 annual summit in Onlineuto, President Mugabe's chairmanship of the organ was reconfirmed, subject to the understanding that he would not act in its name without first consulting President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa, President Joaquim Chissano of Mozambique, and President Sam Nujoma of Namibia; respectively, the past, present, and future chairs of the SADC.

In 1999, SADC member states made important contributions to the early establishment of the International Criminal Court (ICC). While Senegal became the first state to ratify the treaty in February1999, SADC member states worked together to accelerate ratification in the sub-region. In July 1999, the South African Ministry of Justice convened a meeting in Pretoria for representatives of SADC states to discuss ratification in the region. The session developed a Model Enabling Act to guide states in drafting implementing legislation as well as a Statement of Common Understanding setting out their commitment to ratification. At the February and July-August sessions of the ICC Preparatory Commission, individual officials from SADC states assumed major responsibilities confirming their roles as prominent participants in the process.

Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)

ECOWAS, particularly through its defense organ ECOMOG, was the most important frontline actor in most trouble spots of its subregion. As ECOMOG wound up its activities in Liberia, its role in Sierra Leone grew, signaling that the regional peace-keeping force, originally created for the Liberian conflict, was likely to remain in existence for the foreseeable future. After suffering a series of setbacks in Sierra Leone in December 1998 and January 1999, ECOMOG troops regained control of Freetown from rebel forces, whom they pushed further east until the signing of a cease-fire on May 18. The ECOWAS chair, Togolese President Eyadema, and ECOWAS foreign ministers played an important role in brokering peace talks among Sierra Leone warring parties culminating in the signing of the Lom6 peace accord in July. ECOWAS was also named as one of five moral guarantors for the agreement. The accord itself called for the transformation of ECOMOG's mandate from military intervention to peacekeeping; and for ECOMOG and the U.N. to be responsible for the disarmament and encampment of all ex-combatants. Nigeria, under mounting domestic pressure to reduce its financial and troop contribution to the Sierra Leone conflict, insisted that the United Nations either transform the ECOMOG force into a U.N. peacekeeping force or financially support any continued ECOMOG presence in Sierra Leone. On October 22, as part of the U.N. Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), the Security Council authorized a 6,000-member U.N. peacekeeping force for Sierra Leone. ECOMOG forces would continue to provide security around Freetown even after the U.N. force was deployed and would work alongside UNAMSIL in disarming the warring factions.

Elsewhere ECOWAS was active on Niger and Guinea-Bissau. A May ministerial meeting discussed the situation in Niger, condemning the military coup in which President Mainassara was assassinated; stressing the need for an independent inquiry; pledging to support a transition process; recommending that ECOWAS' executive secretary should participate in an election process; and generally agreeing to assist Niger to restore constitutional order. In November 1998, a peace agreement to end the rebellion of General Ansumane Mane against President Vieira of Guinea-Bissau was signed at an ECOWAS summit in Abuja. The parties also agreed to the deployment of a 600-strong ECOMOG force. In May 1999, ECOWAS ministers agreed further measures concerning Guinea-Bissau: ECOWAS condemned the coup against ex-President Vieira and associated killing, looting, and destruction of property; requested safe passage for ex-President Vieira; thanked ECOWAS member states who supported ECOMOG operations in Guinea Bissau; formally withdrew ECOMOG from Guinea-Bissau; and agreed to monitor the situation. Heads of state of six ECOWAS countries met in September to discuss border frictions between Liberia and Guinea and to plan a meeting of the Mano River Union (Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone) in November to address mutual security issues. ECOWAS also continued to discuss the creation of a permanent structure for conflict prevention and resolution, with ECOMOG as its intervention force.

The Role of the International Community

Indifferent to a Continent in Pain

For the better part of the year, Africa appeared to have slipped off the world map. Crisis after crisis failed to attract the attention and serious concern of the international community. On those occasions whenAfrican issues registered on the radar screens of key decision makers and the media, the international community's response was belated and weak. When invoking the much-abused mantra "African solutions for African problems" the international community often insinuated that the non-African world should not intervene in so-called complex African problems, neglecting to recognize that though many African problems were African-made, others were colonial and cold war leftovers for which Africans could not be held exclusively responsible, and yet others were fueled if not caused by the developed world's hunger for Africa's rich mineral resources.

In great contrast to the new emphasis on accountability for human rights violations in the conflicts in Kosovo or East Timor, in Africa the international community either remained silent on war crimes or took actions that were clearly inimical to the rule of law and human rights. In the case of Sierra Leone, the international community facilitated an agreement that provided a blanket amnesty for all atrocities committed during the eight-year civil war. Although the U.N. secretary-general's special representative Francis Okelo included a hand-written reservation to the Lom6 accord, stating that the U.N. would not recognize the amnesty as applying to "international crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes, and other serious violations of international humanitarian law," this reservation was not reinforced by a Security Council resolution. The danger was that the Lom6 peace agreement would serve as a benchmark for conflict resolution elsewhere in Africa, inviting further violence in the face of such impunity. The dangers of such an approach were demonstrated in Liberia, an example of how incomplete and flawed interventions that bypassed accountability in the interests of peace were ultimately shortsighted. Two years after an internationally-endorsed peace process and election that ignored accountability for human rights violations, Liberia was threatened with a return to conflict, largely founded on unresolved issues from the previous civil war.

It was another bad year for Africa's refugees, many of whom subsisted without adequate assistance or protection. It seemed axiomatic that international efforts to assist refugees and seek solutions to their plight should be equitable and based on human need, regardless of the nationality, race, geographic, political, or military importance of the refugee population. Yet no African refugees received anything near the outpouring of international concern and assistance demonstrated during the Kosovo crisis. One estimate calculated that the international community spent U.S.$0.11 per refugee per day in Africa and an equivalent $1.23 per refugee per day in the Balkans. The international community spent $10 million per week on Kosovar refugees in neighboring Albanian and Macedonia. Meanwhile, in West Africa, a UNHCR annual appeal for $8 million only raised pledges of $1.3 million.

Many of the protection problems in the Balkans were identical to problems in Africa, such as location of camps too close to borders, but the international response was vastly different. In northern Albania, for example, UNHCR, rightly recognizing the serious risks to the security of refugees in the border areas, expeditiously embarked on a well-funded operation to move refugees away from the border. This scenario contrasted starkly with the situation in Guinea, where for the previous year and a half refugee camps had been located too close to the border with Sierra Leone and had been the target of repeated cross-border attacks and military incursions, during which refugees had been killed, abducted, and mutilated. For over a year, nongovernmental organizations had been calling on UNHCR to relocate refugee camps away from the border. In February 1999 UNHCR requested U.S.$6 million to move the refugees away from the border, but by July the organization had not received any contributions toward this appeal. Again, although the U.K. and World Bank promised money to support the disarmament process in Sierra Leone, others failed to match these pledges, which in any event compared poorly to other commitments. The U.K., asked to deploy peacekeeping troops to Sierra Leone said that it was fully committed in the Balkans, but subsequently found it possible to send 250 Gurkhas to East Timor.

United Nations

At the end of September, U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan presented a report to the Security Council, following up a report submitted eighteen months earlier on how to achieve peace and sustainable development in Africa. The report chronicled Africa's crises, but also "dramatic changes for the better," noting progress in South Africa, Mozambique, Nigeria, Liberia, Mali, and Algeria. The secretary-general called for the U.N. to give as much attention to Africa as to crises in other parts of the world.

The Security Council failed to respond to the RUF January offensive against Freetown, Sierra Leone, in which two to three thousand people were killed, and then failed again for months to adopt a resolution on the deployment of a peacekeeping force to Sierra Leone, despite ongoing cease-fire violations and the clear need for the international community to act quickly to ensure the Lom6 accord did not break down. On October 22, the U.N. Security Council approved the U.N. Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). The operation, given an initial six month mandate, authorized the deployment of a 6,000-member U.N. peacekeeping force. UNAMSIL's mandate, under the U.N. Charter's chapter VII, included assisting the disarmament and demobilization process, ensuring the security of U.N. civilian personnel, assisting the delivery of humanitarian aid, and providing support for the new elections. There were long delays too in Angola. Following the U.N.'s pull-out in February from Angola the Security Council finally approved on October 15 a six month follow-on mini-U.N. operation of thirty personnel in Angola: over half of the staff were designated as human rights specialists.

International Financial Institutions and Donors

Backed by a Group of Seven (G-7) agreement in June in Cologne to a complete overhaul of the system to accelerate debt relief, the IMF and World Bank announced an enhanced coordinated effort to support "deeper, broader and faster debt relief" so creating a "virtuous circle of debt relief, poverty reduction and economic development" for the world's poorest countries-the forty-two Highly Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC). The new program, intended to erase up to U.S.$100 billion in debt, forgiving 90 percent of the total, would replace an extensively criticized 1996 initiative. Because of exacting performance criteria, only two African countries, Uganda and Mozambique, had received any relief under the HIPC program three years following its launch. By relaxing the requirements for qualification, the new plan sought to allow three-fourths of the eligible countries into the program by the end year 2000. The eligible countries would include Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Republic of Congo, CLte d'Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mozambique, Niger, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Tanzania, Togo, Uganda, and Zambia.

In a September 29 offer which was more generous than the G-7/IMF/World Bank announcement, U.S. President Bill Clinton proposed to wipe out 100 percent of U.S. debt carried by poor countries that were moving to overhaul their economies and struggling to provide basic needs. British Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown indicated that Britain was also prepared-on a case by case basis-to go further than 90 percent, possibly up to 100 percent, where debt relief would finance poverty relief. Debt relief advocates opined that with the United States and the Britain both willing to forgive 100 percent of debts, the pressure would mount on the remaining G-7 nations-France, Japan, Germany, Canada, Italy-to make comparable commitments.

On the negative side, donors continued to deploy debt relief and aid inconsistently to encourage support for human rights, the rule of law, and democratization. In some cases, donors prioritized and compartmentalized corruption and economic reform issues as distinct from political accountability and other rights issues. Other donors seemed to reject the "full belly" thesis that civil and political rights were luxuries that could be put aside until the economy reached a certain degree of success, and acknowledged that meaningful exercise of economic and social rights in fact required principled protection of civil and political rights. But many had yet to take the next step to fully incorporate these components in tangible andconsistent ways into their own operating procedures. Many also appeared hesitant or unprepared to fully address the difficulties that must accompany the task of defending the universality of human rights. Only one thing was clear: "human rights, democracy, and good governance" became increasingly popular terms in donor rhetoric.

The British Foreign and Commonwealth Office began publishing annual reports jointly with the Department for International Development in 1998. The FCO addressed the full belly thesis specifically. The 1999 report juxtaposed the insight on the interdependence of rights that the framers of the Universal Declaration imagined with the Cold War's narrow, polarized conception: "it was by working for both sets of rights-for full bellies and for free minds-that they sought to lay the foundations for a more peaceful post-war world." The cold war polarization carried over into north-south divisions. "The British Government is committed to redressing the imbalance" between civil and political and economic, social, and cultural rights, holding both to be equal and interdependent. But Britain continued to donate generously to governments with patchy democracy and human rights records, including Ethiopia, Rwanda, Uganda, and Zambia where the abridgement of civil and political rights in the name of development and national unity were used by the political elite as a mechanism for preserving their own power and personal enrichment.

The Dutch government was the most categorical in rejecting the full belly thesis. This was made explicit in an August press release: "Upholding human rights is not a luxury that countries can afford only when they have achieved a certain level of socio-economic development." The Netherlands changed its bilateral aid policy in 1999, reducing the number of long term aid countries to nineteen (ten in Africa: Burkina Faso, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Ghana, Mali, Mozambique, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe; South Africa was included separately for "historical reasons"). Four selection criteria were named: sound socio-economic policy, good governance, level of poverty, and lack of access to money markets. The policy went on to specify that good governance "requires assessment of the quality of the management of public funds (including the extent of corruption in the country)." The level of democratization and respect for human rights would also be taken into account. But there was a qualifier: "This is not a question of assessing the situation at a given moment in time but of examining trends over a period of years, to determine whether the government is actively working towards improvement in both areas."

In a letter to the lower house of parliament, Minister for Development Cooperation Eveline Herfkens elaborated on the selection criteria. The screening process drew upon reports from not only the World Bank, IMF and U.N., but also NGOs, Human Rights Watch among them. Countries scores were adjusted downwards for weak governance. Sudan, Sierra Leone, Kenya, and Angola were removed for weak governance. CLte d'Ivoire was dropped because extra aid had not been shown to alleviate poverty. Zambia and Zimbabwe could have been removed, but because of the extent of current Dutch involvement, in the interests of continuity they were kept, with the plan to review the next year. But at the end September, aid to Zimbabwe worth U.S.$15 million a year was suspended, citing concerns over governance and economic policies. The Dutch government's action was matched soon after by the World Bank, which suspended discussion of disbursement of U.S.$140 million to Zimbabwe as long as reform targets set by the IMF were not met. At this writing the Netherlands had not removed Burkina Faso, Ethiopia, Uganda, or Eritrea despite clearly authoritarian tendencies that seemed to be inherently undemocratic in the longer term.

The Danish Minister for Development Cooperation, Poul Nielson, hosted a conference in Harare in September 1998 to assess the implementation of Danish development policy towards 2000, known as "Strategy 2000." In Strategy 2000 poverty was understood not only as lack of economic growth and social well-being, but also a lack of participation in the development process and the absence of a society built on the rule of law and good governance. There were clearly tones of the full belly thesis in the workshop report on cross-cutting themes. While the section "In relation to the protection of human rights and democratization" recognized that "most governments are not yet committed to sustaining human rights. Therefore civil society should be involved in promoting human rights." But the section added a qualifier:"democratization and respect for human rights are constrained by poverty, illiteracy and lack of education, and other such limitations.... Development aid conditionalities are undemocratic and abusive of human rights. Rather, policy dialogue and partnership should define the allocation of aid." DANIDA aid to Kenya was phased down, but aid to Burkina Faso, Eritrea, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe was maintained despite their spotty human rights performance.

Anglo-French Cooperation on Africa

At a summit in Saint-Malo, France in December, 1998, British and French foreign ministers adopted a declaration based on "a common vision of promoting positive change and respect for human rights democracy and the rule of law in Africa." Britain's Robin Cook and France's Hubert Vedrine traveled to Ghana and CLte d'Ivoire in March as a follow up to the Saint-Malo declaration. At the same time, Britain announced a joint U.S.$1.5 million program to finance research into fighting tuberculosis in West Africa. The joint trip was designed "to press home the new spirit of cooperation" between the former colonial powers. The two ministers pledged to defend "democracy, human rights, good governance, and development." In Abidjan, Cook and Vedrine met with their ambassadors from twelve African countries: Angola, Burkina Faso, the Central African Republic, Ethiopia, Gambia, CLte d'Ivoire, Malawi, Namibia, Nigeria, South Africa, Tanzania, and Zimbabwe.

But in a week long visit to Africa-taking in Guinea, Togo, and Nigeria-that was supposed to underline a shift in French policy, moving away from direct involvement with dictatorial regimes and emphasizing democracy and human rights, President Chirac sounded discordant with the letter and spirit of Saint-Malo. Prior to the trip, President Chirac said that he planned to stress the importance of establishing democracy and the rule of law. True, while in Guinea, Chirac did raise the case of detained opposition leader Alpha Conde with the president. However, while still in the country he said that "there is an African rhythm" to democratization that he was constrained to respect; and in Togo, Chirac criticized the opposition parties for boycotting the parliamentary elections and called an Amnesty International report on human rights abuses in Togo a "manipulation." During the first visit to Nigeria by a French head-of state, France and Nigeria agreed to establish a joint economic commission. Chirac also said that he supported Nigeria's bid to have a permanent seat on the Security Council.

International Organization of the Francophonie

Further signs that it might be business as usual for France in Africa emerged during the eighth meeting of the International Organization of the Francophonie that took place in Moncton, New Brunswick, Canada, in September. Even though it was heralded as a youth summit, human rights quickly became the centerpiece of the discussions. This was a direct result of several attacks by the media and nongovernmental organizations on Canada and the Francophonie's decision to include leaders from countries with deplorable human rights records, including the DRC, Rwanda, and Burundi. The high profile of human rights in the media pushed the issue not only onto the front page of the papers, but also into the speeches of the principal dignitaries: head of the organization and former U.N. Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali said his three main priorities would be human rights, the democratization of member states, and assistance to ensure good government in poorer countries; in his opening address French president Jacques Chirac said that he wanted the Francophonie to "respect human rights"; and Canadian prime minister Jean Chretien said that "respect for rights and fundamental freedoms" would be central to the priorities of the Francophonie.

Despite these encouraging statements, the final action plan and declaration of the summit remained vague, containing few concrete actions to promote and protect human rights within the Francophonie. The action plan included provisions to hold an international conference in the year 2000 on democratic practices, rights, and freedoms, and to sponsor independent observer missions to monitor elections in member states. However, there was no mention of the possibility of expelling or suspending members who abuse humanrights. The Francophonie charter contains no provisions on the suspension or expulsion of members, but if, as Prime Minister Chretien expressed, the Francophonie was to become a "French Commonwealth" then a constitutional change of this nature was exactly what would be required. Also missing from the final declaration was a democracy watchdog group for the Francophonie that Chirac had proposed in his opening speech.

Despite the absence of tough language in the final declaration, Chirac was content with the summit's progress on human rights. He stated that, "The Francophonie is a gentle force. At every stage, it takes another step in the right direction. We're not looking for anything spectacular." Boutros-Ghali, on the other hand, turned the tables on the critics labeling them as hypocrites when he said, "It is absolutely useless to promote national democracy if on the international level we have an authoritarian or undemocratic regime."

United States

It was a sobering year for U.S. policy toward Africa. The huge international response to Kosovo galvanized the attention of high-level policy makers and overshadowed the dire conflicts raging in Africa. The deepening complexity of many of the key crises furthered the marginalization of Africa on the international scene. In the U.S., the Clinton administration's effort to launch a new Africa policy aimed at bringing Africa into the world economy-symbolized by a partnership with Africa's "new leaders" and crowned by President Clinton's 1998 visit to the continent-unraveled as these very leaders descended into armed conflict with each other. The failure to integrate human rights concerns effectively into the U.S. focus on economic development and regional security ensured that U.S. policy would veer toward a largely reactive posture, focusing on crisis management and conflict resolution.

Six countries joined the U.S. in signing the Entebbe declaration in March 1998 affirming their mutual interest in promoting democratic participation and respect for human rights. But in 1999, four were at war: Ethiopia remained locked in a devastating border war with Eritrea; Uganda and Rwanda both sent troops to Congo in an effort to overthrow the government of Laurent Kabila, and later the two countries themselves came to the brink of war. Thus, the "core principles" of the Entebbe declaration proved to be largely empty commitments. The Africa Crisis Response Initiative (ACRI) was another casualty. Uganda and Ethiopia were suspended from participation throughout 1999 due to their involvement in armed conflicts. In addition, without South Africa and Nigeria, which rejected the initiative at the outset, its impact would be limited at best.

Nevertheless, the Clinton Administration continued to devote considerable energy toward bringing Africa into the mainstream of U.S. policy. In March, the U.S. hosted the first meeting of African and American ministers, the "U.S.-Africa Ministerial Partnership for the 21st Century." Several cabinet secretaries visited Africa during the year, and the number of U.S. government agencies involved in Africa grew to more than a dozen. The Africa Growth and Opportunity Act had cleared in the House of Representatives and as of this writing was pending in the Senate. An Africa trade representative was appointed in the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative. The administration also worked to return assistance to Africa to its previous levels-about U.S.$800 million. Secretary of State Albright identified the transition in Nigeria as a global priority where the U.S. should be engaged.

The Ethiopia-Eritrea war was the primary area where the U.S. deployed sustained, high-level diplomatic activity. Although these efforts, coordinated with the OAU, did not yield immediate success, they contrasted markedly with the U.S. response to most African crises. Sudan, one of the few African countries consistently to achieve some prominence in the U.S. foreign policy agenda, remained subject to very strict sanctions. But the questions raised by the August 1998 bombing of a pharmaceutical factory in Khartoum continued to make it politically difficult for the U.S. to provide significant leadership on human rights issues, and U.S. policy-apparently limited to isolating the government-caused increasing tension with the E.U. Sudan was the only country in Africa (of five worldwide) named as a "country of particular concern" under the1998 International Freedom of Religion Act. Other crises, principally Sierra Leone, Angola and the DRC, remained the domain of certain officials in the Africa bureau but failed to galvanize high-level policy attention.

In the Great Lakes, the administration tried to fend off accusations that it was biased in favor of Rwanda and Uganda, but apparently remained committed to the framework of the "new leaders" policy. Despite some statements early in the year highlighting the need for accountability and respect for human rights by all sides in the DRC conflict, these policy goals never gained much currency in U.S. policy.

The Work of Human Rights Watch

In 1999, the work of Human Rights Watch focused on identifying the root causes of the conflicts that were responsible for the deplorable human rights situation in Africa. By combining the documentation of present human rights violations with historical and political analysis the Africa division attempted to provide policy makers and the public with a balanced and accurate description of the conflicts that plagued the continent. We also continued to dedicate significant resources toward improving our relationships with local human rights groups and exploring ways that we could work together.

Human Rights Watch developed a three-track approach to developing valuable relationships with local NGOs. Firstly, we committed resources to visiting local NGOs, identifying their needs and interests, and undertaking collaborative projects. Secondly, Human Rights Watch provided leading African human rights activists with the opportunity to undertake collaborative projects with our staff, enabling them to learn about our organization and our work methodology from the inside out. Lastly, Human Rights Watch remained committed to protecting human right activists from abroad.

While our brief continued to cover all of Africa south of the Sahara and we strove to expand our monitoring of francophone countries, a nucleus of countries constituted the focus of intensive research and advocacy: Angola, Burundi, Democratic Republic of Congo, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Liberia, Nigeria, Mozambique, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sudan, Uganda, and Zambia. Additionally, the Africa division undertook cross-country thematic research on arms flows, national human rights commissions, the rights of children and women, refugees and the internally displaced, and prisons. We maintained a field monitoring office in Kigali, Rwanda and created a new field office in Freetown, Sierra Leone.

The publication of Leave None to Tell the Story: Genocide in Rwanda just prior to the fifth anniversary of the Rwanda genocide was a landmark event for the Africa division. This 800-page book documented the political process that led to the 1994 genocide, debunking the popular myths that it was the result of "long-standing ethnic hatred" or a "failed state." The report quickly became a major reference for judicial authorities, policy makers, the press, rights activists, and scholars of the region. A representative of Human Rights Watch discussed the main themes with senior diplomats and policy makers in Rwanda, United States, and throughout the European Union. We also provided the OAU's International Panel of Eminent Personalities and the U.N. Inquiry into the United Nations' role in the genocide with detailed presentations. A representative of Human Rights Watch also served as an expert witness at a genocide trial in a Swiss military court which resulted in a guilty verdict and a sentence of life in prison.

As the war in the Democratic Republic of Congo dragged on and drew in the neighboring countries, we actively followed these developments. Early in the year, we documented human rights abuses which were committed by both government and rebel forces. The publication of these findings led to a renewed discourse with the government and representatives of Human Rights Watch met with ministers from the Democratic Republic of Congo on four different occasions. As activists from Congo came under attack, we actively worked to get them out of detention through these meetings and other public and private statements.

In July, Human Rights Watch published its findings on the forced round-up of Burundian refugees in Tanzania. A representative went to Tanzania to speak with the Tanzanian government and UNHCR officials about the treatment of these refugees and the conditions of the camps. Refugee rights issues were also thefocus of an April mission to Kenya to examine police harassment, confinement to rural camps, and deportations of refugees. In October, Human Rights Watch released its first report on civil and political rights in Uganda, detailing government harassment and discriminatory legislation. Our work on Uganda focused on the legal prohibitions facing independent political parties, and a national referendum scheduled for June 2000 under conditions tailored to further entrench a "movement system" under which Uganda was increasingly indistinguishable from a one-party state.

Human Rights Watch worked extensively on the situation in the oil-producing communities of Nigeria. A representative of Human Rights Watch traveled to Nigeria in February to release the findings of our research into corporate responsibility and human rights abuses in the oil producing communities. These findings received extensive coverage in Nigerian and international media and were referred to throughout the year by policy-makers. In May, Human Rights Watch published a further short report detailing abuses that took place in a military crackdown in the Niger Delta in late December and early January. A representative of Human Rights Watch also took part in a panel on the Niger Delta at a U.S. State Department conference on Nigeria in May and testified before the Africa Subcommittee of the House of Representatives Committee on International Relations in August. Human Rights Watch also had a range of meetings with oil companies operating in Nigeria to discuss corporate responsibility for human rights abuses.

In Sierra Leone, Human Rights Watch initiated a successful campaign to raise the international profile of the eight-year civil war and the associated human rights abuses. With a new field office in Freetown, Sierra Leone, we extensively documented abuses committed by rebel and government forces during the Revolutionary United Front's assault on the capital, Freetown in January which were presented in a report released in June. Human Rights Watch also vigorously advocated for the inclusion of human right concerns in the U.N.-facilitated peace negotiations. In response to the inclusion of a general amnesty in the peace accords, Human Rights Watch wrote a score of letters to U.N. officials, national governments, and rebel leaders.

Our strong stance against the amnesty in Sierra Leone arose from similar experiences in other regions of Africa, particularly Angola. Human Rights Watch was able to release a landmark report on the Angolan conflict in September. We took aim at the inability of the United Nations to include human rights monitoring in the peace process and to enforce sanctions as crucial factors in the renewed conflict. Representatives from Human Rights Watch met with U.N. officials, members of the U.N. sanctions committee, and U.S. government officials. In October, a representative participated in a conference sponsored by the U.S. State Department and the National Intelligence Council concerning Angola.

Also in Southern Africa, Human Rights Watch wrote to the South African government during the year to express concern at the ANC's response to the report of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, and at proposals put forward by the Department of Home Affairs for the creation of reception centers where asylum seekers would effectively be detained. Human Rights Watch also commented to the Parliamentary Portfolio Committee on the draft Refugees Bill before it was passed in November 1998. A representative of the organization traveled to South Africa in July to conduct research into workers' rights on farms, and set up contacts with local groups working on behalf of farm workers and farmers for the purpose of future cooperation on a report detailing abuses on farms. Regarding Zambia, in May we actively advocated that donor countries should continue to attach clear human rights benchmarks to the release of balance of payments support in advance of the World Bank Consultative Group meeting.

In March, we released a major study of the human rights causes of the 1998 famine in Sudan. A representative of Human Rights Watch attended an NGO conference in Kampala in February, a Nuer-Dinka peace and reconciliation conference in southern Sudan in February, a conference of religiously-based groups working on Sudan in Germany in May, and others to press for the adoption of the recommendations made in the study. In August, we fielded a second mission to southern Sudan and were able to visit Khartoum aswell. In Khartoum, a representative participated in a conference sponsored by the government and UNICEF on the elimination of slavery, and in southern Sudan our representative investigated human rights violations associated with the war. Our Sudan research also focused on religious freedoms. In September, a representative made a presentation on religious human rights at a conference discussing the 1998 U.S. International Freedom of Religion Act and in June attended a conference on religious freedom in Sudan in Indianapolis.

Also in the horn of Africa, Human Rights Watch fielded a mission to Eritrea in April and May of this year to interview Ethiopians of Eritrean descent who were forcibly deported as a result of the war between these two countries.

ANGOLA

Human Rights Developments

Angola returned to all-out war in December 1998. The human cost of the war in 1999 was impossible to determine with precision, but the United Nations estimated that more than 2.1 million people had been displaced. The appalling levels of death and destruction were in large part consequences of the widespread and systematic violations of the laws of war for which conflicts in Angola were previously notable. Both the government and rebels, the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) were responsible for these violations. In particular, indiscriminate shelling of besieged cities by UNITA resulted in destruction of property and the death of over one thousand civilians.

The ruling Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA) held its fourth Congress in Luanda from December 5 to 10, 1998. At its opening President dos Santos stated that the only path to lasting peace was the total isolation of UNITA leader Jonas Savimbi and his movement. The president called for termination of the U.N. Observer Mission in Angola's (MONUA) mandate and an end to the Lusaka peace process. MONUA withdrew for safety from all UNITA-held areas on December 6.

Just prior to the opening of the congress, the government launched a military offensive in central Angola with air raids on Bailundo and Mungo, followed by attacks on Andulo. Subsequently UNITA forces launched their own attacks and inflicted heavy casualties on the government's forces and on civilians. In the Huambo and Kuito sectors the government was forced to withdraw and in Kuito only escaped further losses because UNITA's mechanized units ran out of fuel. The widening hostilities spread, with laying of new mines and the indiscriminate shelling of Malanje, Kuito, and Huambo by long-range UNITA artillery.

Two U.N. aircraft were shot down near Huambo, on December 26 and on January 2, 1999, resulting in the deaths of fifteen passengers and eight crew members respectively. Both aircraft, chartered by MONUA, went down in areas of active military operations. The two warring Angolan parties denied any responsibility for these incidents and initially showed no inclination to assist search and rescue operations. U.N. investigations of the wreckage of both planes established that they had been tampered with and that there had been efforts to conceal them; the flight recorders had been removed.

On January 27, the National Assembly passed a resolution declaring Jonas Savimbi "a war criminal and international terrorist." It called for legal procedures leading to Savimbi and his direct collaborators being held accountable, in criminal and civil law, both nationally and internationally.

On January 29, President dos Santos appointed a new cabinet and temporarily assumed the functions of prime minister and commander-in-chief of the FAA. At the inauguration ceremony of the new government, the president stated that Angola had to wage war to achieve peace.

On January 26, UNITA occupied the provincial capital of Mbanza Congo in the north, although this appeared to have been retaken on February 12 by government forces. On January 30, UNITA captured theCapenda hydroelectric project, about 50 kilometers south-west of Malanje. After initial successes a second offensive to capture Bailundo was stopped by UNITA in early March resulting in a significant loss of equipment to the rebels and the reported loss of 1,000 men. Fighting continued in central and northern Angola and in mid-September the government launched its third offensive against UNITA, Operation Cacimbo.

The effects of the conflict led to more human displacement. According to the U.N. the numbers of internally displaced persons had reached 1.7 million persons, 15 per cent of the total population, with additional flows of refugees into the Democratic Republic of Congo, Namibia, and Zambia.

On July 24, the Angolan authorities issued an arrest warrant for Savimbi on charges that included rebellion, sabotage, murder, and torture. The warrant also accused Savimbi of kidnapping, robbery, and the use of explosives - including planting of landmines at sites used by civilians. U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan criticized the warrant saying it was "wrong," and that "you make peace with enemies, and to make peace you have to have communications, either directly or through third parties."

Mine warfare intensified after hostilities resumed in December 1998 and mines were used by both sides, although Angola had signed the Ottawa Mine Ban Treaty in December 1997. This also flew in the face of Angola's strong rhetorical support of an antipersonnel landmines ban. Human Rights Watch received numerous reports in 1999 of renewed landmine warfare in central and northern Angola. At the first meeting of the State Signatories of the Ottawa Landmine Ban Treaty in Onlineuto on May 3-7, 1999, the Angolan government delegation justified the renewed use of landmines saying it was "at war."

Human rights violations in Angola increased throughout the year and were at a much higher level than in 1998. UNITA maintained tight control of the population in the areas it controlled and continued to prevent the enjoyment of greater freedoms through arbitrary killings, threats, forced conscription, and the demand of sexual services. In December, UNITA military forces briefly occupied the town of Cunje and killed twenty-five civilians. In April, when some thirty villagers attempted to return to their homes in the village of Muconda in Lunda Sul province UNITA caught them and killed twenty-five of them with knives and machetes.

NGO workers were also targeted. On April 14, Save the Children/USA's Kuanza Sul manager Antonio Ferreira and church NGO worker Pastor Manuel Gabriel were killed by axes during an ambush on the Gabela - Sumbe road. Fereira suffered heavy cuts on his jaw, neck, and spine and was pierced in the heart with a pointed instrument. Pastor Gabriel was murdered with sharp objects and his body mutilated. Mutilations had not been common in Angola's long history of conflict but with the return to war appeared more common place. For example on December 5 two men caught by UNITA had their ears cut off and were sent to the government with a message.

The abductions of civilians by UNITA was commonplace. People of all ages were abducted, but abductees and witnesses point to young men, women, and young girls and boys as preferred targets. In December 1998 two priests and six nuns were reportedly abducted after UNITA took control of Chiguar, Bie province. Foreign workers for commercial firms were also abducted for forced labor or as a political tool to obtain protection or ransom payments or to close down commercial operations. On November 8, 1998 UNITA attacked the Yetwane diamond mine which was partly owned by the Canadian company Diamond Works. Eight people were killed and ten were also abducted, including South African Doug Larsen and

Briton Jason Pope.

On May 12 UNITA claimed to have shot down an Antonov AN-26 near Luzamba and captured its three Russian crew. This was followed on July 1 by a UNITA claim to have shot down an Antonov-12 aircraft in northeastern Angola and captured its five Russian crew. UNITA had attempted to negotiate with the Russian government over their release.

The private property of civilians was frequently pillaged and their homes intentionally burned in violations of the laws of war. For example UNITA looted all moveable properties and left booby traps and landmines when it withdrew from Vila Nova in December.

UNITA since December had besieged the cities of Huambo, Kuito and Malanje and indiscriminately shelled them. There was no sign that in any of these barrages UNITA was targeting only military positions, but ther shelling appeared intended to sow fear and demoralize civilians in addition to closing airports and the access they provided for relief aid. Civilian houses lost roofs, and one church was hit in these attacks. UNITA appeared to have used 120mm artillery in these bombardments. The bishop of Malanje had reported that more than 1000 people had been killed and 700 injured in Malanje by the shelling. On one occasion in March over a hundred shells landed in the city. Because of UNITA's siege Malanje suffered from lack of food, with supplies only for 94,000 of the more than 200,000 people displaced by the fighting displaced by the fighting elsewhere who had swelled its population.

The government embarked upon a crackdown on UNITA supporters after the resumption of all-out war. On January 9 two UNITA deputies, Carlos Alberto Calitas and Daniel Jose Domingos were arrested by police. This was followed on January 13 when three more, Joao Vicente Vihemba, Manuel Savihemba, Carlos Tiago Candanda were also picked up. On February 2 the National Assembly lifted the deputies' immunity and they were told they were being held under the provisions in the penal code for those who posed a threat to state security. On May 21 Manuel Savihemba was released but the other four deputies continued to be in jail. Human Rights Watch monitored the trial, which appeared to follow a special procedure not established by law and to drag on. There were also concerns for the health of four of the deputies

Human Rights Watch received a stream of reports indicating government troops too violated the laws of war. For example the government admitted its forces had been indiscriminate in their aerial bombing of Mbanza Congo in February 1999, while its aircraft also bombed other UNITA towns. On December 16, 1998 prisoners were reportedly paraded through Kuito in army vehicles as bystanders called on soldiers to cut their throats; parading prisoners constituted humiliating and degrading treatment under the laws of war. The International Committee of the Red Cross attempts to gain access to prisoners in this conflict had shown little progress at time of writing. In February 1999 after the government retook the city of Mbanza Congo from UNITA, government forces were reportedly responsible for the killing of several civilians who had stayed behind.

The government's inability or unwillingness to pay the majority of its army and police personnel resulted in widespread extortion and theft. Government personnel frequently confiscated food, including donated relief supplies, livestock, and personal property, often after forcibly depopulating areas and robbing the displaced people. Relief efforts in Kuito after UNITA's siege was lifted were hampered by looting when the aid workers withdrew: government troops looted the World Food Program warehouses and the warehouses of the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), Handicap International, and the U.S. charity CARE's warehouse was also looted in this three-day looting frenzy by government troops in mid-December 1998. Human Rights Watch also interviewed an eyewitness who described the stripping of crops from fields by government troops near Uige in March 1999, and a man who said he was shot in the legs for not immediately offering his possessions to hungry soldiers.

The government persisted in its strategy of manipulating the reporting of UNITA human rights abuses, even as those abuses had been of a severity needing no exaggeration to merit concern and outrage. For example when the C-130 U.N. aircraft was shot down on January 2, 1999 the government claimed that UNITA was holding seven survivors. When the U.N. search team reached the crash site late, however, it concluded that all the passengers and crew had been killed in the crash. In July the government claimed that UNITA had massacred up to one hundred people in Chipeta. However an investigation by the U.N. concluded that those reports were no more than government propaganda.

With the return to war, the space that opened up for independent media and foreign journalists based in Angola was eroded away again in 1999. On January 11, two Angolan journalists from Radio Morena in Benguela were arrested by police for having rebroadcast a news program that featured UNITA Secretary General Lukambo Gato. Radio Ecclesia, which broadcast the Africa program of the Portuguese radio station Renascenca, also became the target of police attention for broadcasting material that included UNITA officials. Foreign journalists including reporters from Portugal's Diario de Noticias and the BBC World Service received threats about their coverage of UNITA.

The government issued a formal warning on January 21 when Minister for Social Communication (Information) Pedro Vaal Neto warned that licenses to publish would be revoked if the independent media continued to cover stories about young people not wanting to be conscripted into the armed forces.

The harassment of the media continued throughout the year. In August Radio Ecclesia was raided twice by police after it rebroadcast an interview with Jonas Savimbi. The editor of the independent newsletter Folha 8 , William Tonet was also told that he can not leave the country in August and detained in October and the editor of Agora was warned to keep his paper out of controversial issues. A number of other independent and state media journalists were also warned to keep their reports pro-government.

The renewed conflict and accompanying human rights abuses and violations of laws of war were being fueled by new flows of arms into the country. The government became once again a prime arms purchaser in sub-Saharan Africa. The government paid for its arms purchases through bank loans, oil profit remittances, and mining and other concessions. With the decline of international oil prices in the first half of 1999, the government was short of cash and used some of the U.S.$870 million of funds generated from signature bonus payments on three oil exploration and concession blocks. The multinational oil companies BP-Amoco, Exxon, and ELF had a dominant role in these blocks. Russia, the Ukraine, Belarus featured as prime sources of arms to the Angolan government.

UNITA also purchased weapons and fuel from foreign sources as well by using revenue generated by diamond sales. Such purchases violated an international arms and oil embargo imposed by the U.N. in September 1993 and a diamond embargo in June 1998. Albania, Bulgaria, Romania, Ukraine were sources of supplies for UNITA and sanctions busting operations worked through Cote D'Ivoire, Burkina Faso, Togo, Central African Republic, Kenya, South Africa, Uganda, and Zambia.

Defending Human Rights

With the country back at war in 1999 the churches became bolder than in the past in their calls for peace and an end to human rights abuses. In January the Catholic Church issued a strongly worded pastoral letter, stating flatly that the war did not represent the people's voice, that both sides neglected the welfare of their troops, and that the troops on both sides stole from the people. A number of Catholic bishops subsequently called for reconciliation and condemned human rights abuses. At the end of its congress in Lubango in July the bishops issued a further denouncement of the war. The conflict "has become twice-deadly...it kills with weapons and kills with hunger" the bishops said. Indiscriminate attacks on civilians and aid workers were acts of "cowardly banditry," the statement added. They also criticized those who provided weapons to the Luanda government and UNITA rebels, and said the conflict was fed by greed for Angolan petroleum and diamonds.

Several peace initiatives were also launched by, among others, the Angolan Reflection Group for Peace (GARP) and the Angolan Group for the Promotion of the Culture of Peace (GAP). Both these groups sought to buildup a culture of human rights and call for accountability for past rights abuses.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

By early 1999 following the outbreak of war and the shooting down of two U.N. aircraft, the secretary-general decided that the U.N. Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA) could do no more. He recommended that its mandate be terminated on February 26 to be followed by a phased withdrawal. The Security Council opposed this, calling for a continued multidisciplinary U.N. operation in Angola. MONUA's mandate expired in February and the U.N. special representative in Angola, Issa Diallo, left Angola on March 15, marking the end of the peacekeeping operation. For the next five months the U.N. negotiated with the Angolan government over permission for a follow-up U.N. operation. Eventually in late July the Angolan government permitted a thirty-strong United Nations Office in Angola (UNOA) which would include twelve human rights specialists.

The U.N. also focused its efforts on trying to open up neutral humanitarian corridors for relief aid. For much of the year the Angolan government opposed this but by August it had moderated its position to show some interest in assisting aid distribution. In January Canada's ambassador to the U.N., Robert Fowler, took over the Angola Sanctions Committee. Fowler toured southern Africa in May and Europe in July, and made nineteen preliminary recommendations. At the end of July, two ten-person expert panels were convened, with an initial mandate of six months.

The U.N.'s human rights division, which had done little during much of the Lusaka peace process, improved in late 1998, helped by the hiring of a human rights professional to head it. However, the return to war in December curtailed its activities dramatically and it had in 1999 been unable to play the role envisaged for it, performing little serious investigative work on rights abuses; publishing no findings, and discouraging journalists from talking to it.

European Union, Norway, and Canada

The European Union (E.U.) had played a supportive role in the Angolan peace process but lacked the leverage of the United States. Portugal, the former colonial power and a member with Russia and the U.S. of the "Troika" monitors in the peace process, continued to play an important role but disappointingly was not active in pressing rights issues. During the year the E.U. issued a number of communiques which included condemnations of human rights abuses by both sides.

United States

Angola in 1999 was the U.S.'s second largest site for investment and third largest trading partner in sub-Saharan Africa. The majority of this trade was from Angolan oil production, which exceeded 750,000 barrels per day. U.S. investment in the petroleum sector was valued at over $4 billion, with billions more of investment planned. The U.S. continued to be Angola's largest trading partner, purchasing 50 per cent of its oil exports.

On October 28, 1998 U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Susan Rice visited Angola on the second leg of a seven-nation tour in the region. The U.S. delegation visited Angola to discuss the Angolan peace process and the current situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). Bilateral relations had cooled so much by this stage that Rice failed to see President dos Santos or any official of substance. During her visit Susan Rice proposed the creation of a Bilateral Consultative Commission to broaden and deepen the engagement between Angola and the United States, a proposal the Angolan government later responded to positively in December, leading to further discussions between the two governments. U.S. Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Witney Schneidman then visited Angola to discuss trade issues and how to proceed with the Bilateral Commission.

Schneidman arrived in Angola on February 12 for a three day visit. His primary focus was to discuss bilateral economic relations and the current situation of the war, and urged support for a continued U.N. presence in Angola. Schneidman's visit represented a new U.S. policy focus toward Angola, emphasizingtrade and commerce and down-playing controversial issues such as human rights. The U.S. Assistant Trade Representative for Africa, Edward Casselle visited Luanda in July to encourage more business.

Senior Angolan government officials met with their U.S. counterparts on June 30 and July 1 in Washington D.C. as a first step toward establishing a Bilateral Consultative Commission to expand cooperation between the two countries. The first meeting of the Bilateral Consultative Commission was held September 30 in Washington D.C during which the main focus was trade and investment.
BURUNDI

Human Rights Developments

Negotiations among parties to the civil war in Burundi initially spurred hopes that the six-year-old conflict might end, but, by late October 1999, the discussions had yielded little and both rebels and the Burundian army stepped up military action around Bujumbura, the capital, and in the southeast. As in previous years, all parties to the war massacred civilians, adding several thousand more to a toll that now exceeds one hundred thousand victims. Combatants maimed, raped, or otherwise injured thousands of others and drove tens of thousands from homes which were destroyed. In an effort to deprive rebels of local support, Burundian authorities ordered more than 300,000 people into regroupment camps where they suffered from lack of food, water, and medical attention. Rebels, aiming to end foreign assistance to the local population, warned foreigners to leave Burundi. In early October, rebels killed two U.N. aid workers, along with seven Burundians, thus causing the U.N. to halt activities outside of Bujumbura and withdraw all nonessential staff from Burundi. During the year, the war in Burundi became more closely linked to conflicts in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), where Burundians fought on both sides, and in Rwanda. Rebels against the Rwandan government reportedly joined Burundian rebels in their attacks on Bujumbura and elsewhere.

The Tutsi minority, dominant for centuries, had rebuffed efforts by the Hutu majority to participate more fully in power, whether through political means or by force. In the worst such case in 1972, the Tutsi-dominated army massacred as many as 200,000 Hutu following Hutu attacks on Tutsi.

In 1993, Burundians elected their first Hutu president, Melchior Ndadaye. In what appeared a model transition, the Tutsi Major Pierre Buyoya ceded power, but in October 1993, Tutsi soldiers murdered Ndadaye and other high officials. Hutu in many communities, sometimes directed by local officials, massacred thousands of Tutsi. The army slaughtered thousands of Hutu, sometimes in places where no Tutsi had been killed.

Under heavy international pressure, the military restored civilian rule, but the government failed to counter violence by Tutsi militia in the city and attacks by predominantly Hutu opposition groups in the countryside. In 1996, Buyoya took power again, pledging to restore order. The surrounding nations imposed an embargo on Burundi, seeking to force Buyoya to restore constitutional government and to negotiate with insurgents. With a "partnership" established between Buyoya and elements of the internal opposition and with negotiations under way, organizers of the embargo ended the restriction on trade at the start of 1999, but the badly damaged economy failed to revive.

Under Buyoya's direction, authorities forced hundreds of thousands into "regroupment" camps in late 1996 and 1997. After strong international protests, they dispersed most of the camps by late 1998, but with the increased combat in mid-1999, authorities once again insisted on regroupment in regions surrounding the capital and in the southeast. Similarly, in September 1999, they called for increased reliance on local self-defense forces, in operation for several years, and they stepped up the distribution of firearms to civilians, mostly Tutsi civilians.

The two strongest groups of insurgents, the National Council for the Defense of Democracy- Forces for the Defense of Democracy (CNDD-FDD) and the Party for the Liberation of the Hutu People (PALIPEHUTU), have slain thousands of civilians, both Tutsi and other Hutu in struggles with each other as well as with government forces. Originally based largely in the DRC, many rebels left following disruption of their bases during the Congo war and resumed attacks from new bases in Tanzania.

Throughout the year, soldiers attacked civilians in reprisal for attacks by rebels. In early November 1998, government troops killed at least 101 and perhaps many more in Mutambu commune, province of Bujumbura-rurale, after rebels had killed five persons in the area. Soon after, government soldiers killed dozens of civilians at Muresi in Makamba province and at Mubone in Kabezi commune in January.

Several weeks later, rebels struck in the province of Bubanza, killing twenty-four and wounding twenty, and soon after killed twenty-five persons in a displaced persons camp at Rumonge, south of Bujumbura. Rebels also increased their attacks in the southern provinces of Bururi and Makamba. In mid-January 1999, rebels killed at least twenty-two civilians and burned more than 400 houses in Kibago and Mabanda communes.

Attacks diminished in late January and February, but resumed in late March, with new violence in the east, particularly in the province of Ruyigi. In June and July, rebels killed civilians more frequently on the roads around the capital. In one incident, eighteen civilians perished after a bus was attacked and burned, reportedly by PALIPEHUTU insurgents. Rebels also hit a military barracks near Buyoya's residence, thus demonstrating the potential to strike at crucial targets.

In mid-August, government soldiers killed 147 civilians in one place and seventy-four soon after in another location, both in Bujumbura-rurale. At the end of August, rebels killed thirty-eight civilians and the army retaliated by slaying twenty others. The next week, rebels killed another fifteen people south of the capital and soon after killed thirteen more in Makamba, in southeastern Burundi.

Divisions among the contenders, sometimes due to policy differences, sometimes due to personal rivalries, produced the unwieldy number of eighteen different parties to the peace negotiations. Factions of the important Front for Democracy in Burundi (FRODEBU) and Party for Union, Progress and Nation (UPRONA) disapproved of the talks and a number of small radical Tutsi parties challenged concessions made by the government in the process. The wings of CNDD-FDD and PALIPEHUTU political party with the greatest military strength did not participate in the negotiations, although the government engaged in less formal exchanges with them. Foreign donors, who had paid more than $2 million for the talks, as well as many Burundians were disappointed at the lack of progress by year's end. They criticized politicians for delays which gave them additional per diem payments while costing victims their lives. The death in October of former Tanzanian president Julius Nyerere, who had moderated the talks, further clouded prospects for a negotiated settlement.

Most Burundians had suffered from some kind of ethnically-motivated attack or had family members who had so suffered. Extremists on each side were quick to assign guilt to everyone in the other ethnic group, accusing them of genocide, a term charged with special importance since the 1994 genocide in neighboring Rwanda. Some 10,000 Burundians were in jail, most of them accused of or convicted of crimes against Tutsi in 1993 or since. The judicial system was heavily dominated by Tutsi, which helped to explain why few Tutsi had been arrested for crimes against Hutu and why Hutu did not expect justice in the current situation. Approximately five hundred persons were tried in the last year, reducing somewhat the backlog of cases that had overwhelmed the judicial system, but 75 percent of detainees had yet to be tried.

Prisoners were housed in facilities meant to accommodate only about one third the number of present occupants. In addition to severe overcrowding, prisoners suffered from ill-treatment and lack of food and medical care, such that imprisonment could in many cases be described as inhumane and life-threatening.

In the past, most trials fell short of international standards of due process. But the presence of U.N. human rights observers at some 60 percent of the trials and the more frequent appearance of witnesses,organized with the help of the human rights group Iteka, improved the quality of the proceedings. The nongovernmental organization Avocats sans Frontieres provided foreign attorneys to assist the small number of Burundian lawyers available to defend the accused.

In the most publicized case of inadequate justice this year, a court in May acquitted thirty-eight persons of charges of having participated in the murder of President Ndadaye. Those acquitted were all important persons or high ranking officers, while five junior officers and soldiers were found guilty and sentenced to death. Seventy-two other persons were condemned to between one and twenty years in prison. In light of the substantial evidence against some of those acquitted, the prosecutor announced that he would appeal the decision.

In June, the legislature adopted changes to the penal code permitting lawyers to consult with detained persons before their first appearance in court and imposing new measures to prevent ill-treatment of detainees as well as lengthy and arbitrary detentions.

Under international pressure, military authorities investigated a few of the worst massacres reportedly committed by soldiers, but apparently in only one case were two soldiers arrested. They had not been brought to trial. In another case, a soldier was arrested for killing at least six and perhaps as many as thirteen civilians at a displaced camp in October.

Authorities kept tight control over the press. In June they arrested the director of the independent news agency Azania and they detained the head of New Press for twelve days. In September, the defense minister reportedly told soldiers to consider journalists as enemies who were supporting the rebels. After international protest, he denied having made the statement.

Defending Human Rights

Local human rights organizations continued to operate without apparent obstruction. Iteka, the oldest and best established, published information on military abuses, criticized proposed legislation to limit the freedom of association, and alerted the international community to the danger of imminent and large-scale violence after the increase of combat in July and August. The Burundian Association for the Defense of Prisoners continued effective work on improving prison conditions.

The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights maintained a small group of observers to assist the judiciary and visit prisons. They also monitored violations of international humanitarian law by parties to the conflict.

The Role of the International Community

The international community provided continuing humanitarian assistance to Burundi as well as diplomatic and financial support for the negotiations. Most donors cut all development assistance at the time of the embargo and promised its resumption only after negotiations had been successfully concluded, a position reiterated in September. In October, however, France announced a grant of about $3 million for reconstruction in war-torn areas and for programs for human rights and justice. Soon after the World Bank pledged $12 million to further reconstruction. During the year, the U.S. and other donor governments, the E.U., and Secretary-General Kofi Annan denounced violence against civilians and the regroupment policy and called for investigations into the worst massacres. In September, the E.U. urged the U.N. human rights operation to assist in investigating the August massacres reportedly perpetrated by Burundian soldiers and the U.S. called on the Burundian government to permit investigations by local and international human rights investigators into these killings.
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO

Human Rights Developments

The Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) in May entered its third year under the autocratic rule of President Laurent Desir6 Kabila, and struggled in August to find a negotiated settlement to a devastating year-long war. The conflict, which initially pitted government troops against the rebel Congolese Rally for Democracy (Rassemblement Congolais pour la D6mocratie (RCD)), drew in many regional forces, including the Rwandan, Ugandan, and Burundian armies on the side of the RCD rebels, and the Angolan, Zimbabwean, and Namibian militaries in support of the Kabila government. About a dozen armed groups from the DRC as well as neighboring states also became embroiled in the conflict, including the traditional militia groups known in eastern Congo as the Mai-Mai who struck alliances of convenience with the government out of resentment at the occupation of their region by foreigners. The government was credibly reported to have recruited elements of the extremist Hutu militia and former Rwandan army which had perpetrated the 1994 genocide in their country in which at least 500,000 Tutsis and moderate Hutus were slaughtered.

A military stalemate left the DRC government in control of only the western half of the country. The government claimed that the rebel movements that continued to control the eastern part of the country merely fronted for a foreign invasion by Rwanda, Uganda, and Burundi. These rebel backers claimed that their military presence in the DRC was needed to protect their own national security against extremist ethnic militia operating from safe havens in the DRC to destabilize them. The three countries had invoked the same argument when, in 1996 and 1997, they supported President Kabila's own campaign to oust former dictator Mobutu Sese Sekou. They turned against their former ally when he took steps in August 1998 to end his dependency on them and turned to the same policies of ethnic exclusion towards DRC's ethnic Rwandan nationals adopted by Mobutu, while recruiting exiled Rwandan genocidaires into his own forces. Battle weariness of foreign actors was a contributing factor in the conclusion of a cease-fire agreement in Lusaka in early July. As the national war entered into a relative lull, hostilities flared up unexpectedly in late August in Kisangani between two RCD factions, and their respective backers Rwanda and Uganda.

The government's attempts to intimidate the political opposition, the free press, and the country's dynamic civil society and human rights movements led to severe restriction on the freedoms of expression and association. The government made cosmetic concessions to an ever retreating democratization agenda. It nominally lifted a total ban on political party activities that it had strictly enforced since May 1997 by promulgating a law "liberalizing" political party controls at the end of January, in advance of elections slated at the time for April 1999. Opposition parties were quick to reject the law on grounds of its failure to recognize preexisting parties, and the restrictive conditions it set to establish new ones. The law, for example, gave broad powers to the ministry of interior to suspend or disband parties "in the event of violation of the law and emergency or the risk of serious public disorder."

President Kabila in April disbanded his own Alliance of Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Congo (ADFL), at the head of which he seized power, after accusing its members of "opportunism" and "self-enrichment." The president introduced at its place the Popular People's Committees (CPPs). Elected by local residents, the CPPs were mandated to exercise local government powers throughout the country. Opposition leaders saw in the CPPs a new incarnation of the vanguard grassroots movement that Kabila previouslyespoused through the ADFL, and as a means to legitimize his rule at the approach of elections. But the war provided an excuse for the government to delay the elections until the convening of the "national dialogue" on Congo's political future that was pledged in the peace accord. This in turn became a contentious issue as the rebels and the nonviolent opposition alike charged the government with seeking to derail the process.

Government security agencies routinely used the broad accusation of partaking in "political activism" to arbitrarily arrest and detain scores of mid- and local-level opposition activists. Four activists of the opposition Parti Lumumbist Unifi6 (PALU) who tried on January 30 to mark the recent legalization of political activities by displaying their party's flag were immediately arrested. On May 17, security services arrested nine other members of PALU and threw them in different lockups. Joseph Kapika, a spokesperson of the main opposition party, the Union for Democracy and Social Progress (UDPS), was arrested in early February following his criticism of the law on political parties during a Voice of America interview. His case was later referred to the Military Order Court on unspecified charges. Fifteen UDPS members arrested on May 28 during a gathering of their party were made to undress at the police station and were whipped. Similar crackdowns occurred in Lubumbashi, the second largest city, where several leaders of the UDPS regional chapter were detained in the last week of July. Three of them were transferred in mid-August to Kinshasa. All of these activists from PALU and UDPS continued to be detained at the time of writing. Others who were freed after shorter detention periods from police and military lockups reported that they were subjected to daily whippings and other forms of cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment and torture. Prominent leaders of the opposition were effectively reduced to silence after long periods of harsh and degrading detention.

Outspoken journalists were the targets of various forms of harassment. In mid September, security agents prevented Modest Mutinga, editor of the independent newspaper Le Potentiel , from leaving the country to attend two conferences abroad on free expression and good governance. On March 15, he was arrested and detained for fifteen days upon his return from attending similar fora. Thierry Kalumba, editor of the Vision newspaper, was arrested in mid January for a story on weapon supplies to the rebels. In March he was sentenced to four years in prison by the Court of Military Order for "divulging state secrets."

Weakened by decades of neglect and corruption, the judicial system remained incapable of protecting the citizens from the unbridled actions of the security agencies; nor was it able to guarantee the exercise of basic freedoms protected under Congolese law and international human rights conventions to which the DRC had subscribed. The notorious Court of Military Order, originally established in 1997 to improve discipline within the army, increasingly handed down heavy sentences to civilians on questionable political and security convictions. The court had ordered the execution of 250 people in its two years of existence. There was no appeal to its decisions.

By October, more than 500 former Tutsi internees, whom authorities had rounded up in the capital and Lubumbashi following the outbreak of war in 1998, were able to leave the country peacefully to Rwanda and Burundi, or to seek asylum in Europe and North America. The government authorized their departure following protracted negotiations with the U.N., the International Committee of the Red Cross, and its bilateral partners. It was not clear whether those who had rightful claims to Congolese nationality would be allowed to return in the future.

Forces of the Congolese Rally for Democracy on several occasions massacred scores of civilians. They killed on December 3 at least fifteen civilians, most of them palm oil traders who were heading to a local market, near the village of Lemera in south Kivu. Over the New Year, they massacred up to 500 civilians in and around the village of Makabola in the same region, including workers of the local Red Cross Society, and priests and their families. In mid March, they reportedly massacred at least 109 villagers in the locality of Burhinyi in south Kivu. All these killings reportedly followed losses the rebels sustained in fighting with the Mai-Mai in the vicinity of the targeted villages. The RCD repeatedly promised to investigate these and other similar incidents, and to punish perpetrators, but failed to deliver on such promises.

The rebels cracked down on dissenting voices in areas under their respective control in much the same way as the government did by seeking to intimidate opinion leaders through detention, harsh and degrading treatment, and travel restrictions. Unlike the government, however, the rebels did not accommodate any level of nonviolent political opposition.

Attempts by both the government and rebel alliances to quickly build dependable Congolese armies for their respective camps reportedly led to extensive recruitment of child soldiers throughout the country. Abuses against women by all parties were rampant, and they were frequently the target of sexual violence including rape. Local activists, who assisted some of the victims by arranging medical attention, confirmed the exposure of some in the group to HIV by HIV-positive soldiers. Other rape victims suffered rejection from their husbands and communities.

Defending Human Rights

Both the Kabila government and the rebels stepped up their harassment of Congolese human rights activists during the year in an attempt to intimidate and silence independent witnesses to their abuses. Human rights defenders who were forced to flee the Congo encountered increasing risks in neighboring countries.

On May 29, the Kinshasa police arrested Laurent Kantu Lumpungu, chairman of the independent Association of Prison Officials which had been critical of poor prison conditions and ill-treatment, while he was visiting the capital's central prison and took him to the police station where he was ill-treated. He continued to be arbitrarily detained by mid-October at the same prison he was inspecting for his organization. Government agents on June 25 ransacked the office of Voice of the Voiceless, a leading national monitoring group, following damning reports by the organization on government abuses.

On June 15, 1999, rebel soldiers broke into and ransacked the office of Groupe J6r6mie, an independent monitoring and civic education organization based in Bukavu. J6r6mie had just issued statements criticizing the deterioration of educational and other social services in rebel areas. Raphael Wakenge, of the leading human rights organization H6ritiers de la Justice, Kizito Mushizi and Omba Kamengele, journalists of Radio Maendeleo-which is owned and operated by NGOs,-were detained late August in Bukavu, on charges of "eavesdropping on military communications," and "intelligence with the enemy." Radio Maendeleo and H6ritiers had angered rebel authorities earlier by independently reporting on human rights and political developments in the region. In Kisangani, the rebels in late August briefly detained Claude Olenga, chairman of Commission Justice et Lib6ration, and another member of the group for their suspected opposition to the rebel cause.

The Role of the International Community

Southern African Development Community

Zambia took the lead in mediating the conflict in the DRC on behalf of the Southern African Development Community (SADC). After protracted negotiations, the government and rebels, and their respective foreign allies, agreed on a deal that state actors signed on July 10, although the rebels only signed on in late August after violent internal confrontations. The deal needed significant backing from the U.N. and other leading international actors if it was to succeed in ending the war. It addressed Congo's internal political crisis by providing for a national dialogue by the government, the rebels, and the nonviolent political opposition to agree on new political order for the country. It also addressed the security concerns of Rwanda, Uganda, and Angola by committing all parties to identify and disarm members of armed groups from these countries operating in the DRC and to hand over suspected "genocidal" elements to international prosecutors. The agreement did not provide for accountability for abuses by the RCD rebels and their backers. It also failed to recognize or take into account the grievances of the Mai-Mai and other armedgroups involved in the conflict. The accord provided for a joint military commission to oversee its implementation, and for a peacekeeping force with a significant U.N. participation to enforce it on the ground. The international body appeared ill-disposed to a peace-enforcement role as initially requested by the mediators.

United Nations

In January, the DRC's representative to the U.N. charged that the Security Council had made no efforts to put an end to the war raging in his country beyond "making statements." In the months that followed, an undeterred U.N. Security Council repeatedly expressed concern about the continuing war in the DRC in resolutions and presidential statements, but failed to take action to stop it. The council viewed the conflict as threatening to regional peace, security, and stability, and deplored its disastrous humanitarian consequences. This recognition notwithstanding, the U.N. persisted in keeping a low profile in the search for peace, and in the peace mission once the belligerents reached a truce. The council expressed strong support in its communications for the regional mediation process led by Zambia on behalf of SADC and the OAU. In an April resolution, the council welcomed the secretary-general's decision to appoint a special envoy for the peace process for the DRC and requested him to work closely with his OAU counterpart to promote a peaceful resolution to the conflict.

Following the signing of the Lusaka cease-fire agreement, the Security Council unanimously adopted a resolution on August 6 authorizing the deployment for three months of up to ninety U.N. military liaison personnel in the capitals of the belligerent states. Their mandate included the establishment of contacts with the joint military commission formed by the belligerents to oversee the implementation of the truce. The limited mandate reflected the reluctance in the U.N. to consider a peace enforcement operation under Chapter VII of the U.N. Charter, and a certain preference for a military observation mission.

In the meantime, the U.N. Commission on Human Rights maintained its efforts to positively influence human rights developments on the ground. Roberto GarretJn, the U.N. special rapporteur for the DRC, returned to the country in February and again in August at the invitation of President Kabila's government. He had been banned since March 1997 after implicating forces of then rebel leader Kabila and their allies of the Rwandan Patriotic Army in the massacre of thousands of Hutu refugees. The government thereafter systematically obstructed the work of the Investigative Team set up by the U.N. secretary-general to circumvent the ban on the special rapporteur, leading to the premature closure of that investigation as well. The fallout between the DRC and Rwanda appeared to have disposed the DRC government for more cooperation with the U.N. In his first meeting with the special rapporteur, on August 28, President Kabila agreed that the investigation could proceed when the security situation allowed, and promised his country's cooperation. The president also promised to investigate reports of rampant arbitrary detention and abuse of detainees that the rapporteur raised. "We will investigate the reasons for their detention and then take a decision on whether or not to free them," explained Bernard She Okitundu, the DRC's human rights minister. Despite the concrete steps that the government took during the year to resume its cooperation with the U.N. and to engage leading international human rights organizations in dialogue, this and similar pledges by the government failed to translate into tangible human rights improvements.

The special rapporteur traveled on both occasions to areas controlled by the main rebel faction. In February he described the situation of fear under which the population lived in eastern Congo due to wide-scale violations of humanitarian law by the rebels and their allies and by irregular militia opposed to them. The rapporteur secured the rebels' agreement to the establishment, as of August, of a branch office at Goma, under the U.N. Human Rights Commission's Field Office in Kinshasa, to monitor the human rights situation in the region. The Field Office in Kinshasa undertook several initiatives during the year to facilitate and encourage dialogue and consensus building between the government and human rights groups around anational program for the promotion and defense of human rights. A workshop supported by the office in August recommended the abolition of the Military Order Court.

The U.N. Commission on Human Rights decided on April 27, 1999, to extend the mandate of the special rapporteur for the DRC for another year. It also resolved to request him and the special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, and a member of the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances to investigate the killings of refugee in 1996-1997.

European Union

Like the U.N., the E.U. opted for a low-key role in the mediation efforts. In February, and again in June, the E.U. presidency expressed on the E.U.'s behalf strong support for regional mediation efforts and condemned the acts of violence perpetrated against civilians by all the parties since the war started. The June presidential declaration pledged support to the plan for "national debate" proposed by President Kabila for bringing about peace. However, the E.U. conditioned its eventual assistance on the independent organization and inclusiveness of the forum. A resolution issued in April by the African, Caribbean, and Pacific-Joint Assembly strongly condemned rampant abuses in the war. The assembly called on all the parties to respect international humanitarian law, and immediately halt the fighting and seek a negotiated settlement.

The E.U. in a presidential declaration welcomed the July 10 Lusaka peace agreement and called on the rebels to sign it. Provided that the belligerent parties themselves respected their own accord, the E.U. pledged support for its implementation, particularly in the areas of resettling civilians displaced by the war, fostering national reconciliation in the DRC, and supporting the country's rehabilitation plans. This pledge was reiterated in a September 3 presidential declaration welcoming the rebels' signing of the accord.

In June the European Commission issued a communication to the European Council and Parliament reviewing the E.U.'s economic cooperation with countries at war in the DRC The report was intended to avoid the misuse of development funds provided by the E.U. for military purposes. The E.U.'s assistance to the DRC was largely humanitarian, with pledges of funding for the establishment of a state of law, provided that the DRC registered progress along the lines established by the Lome Convention.

United States

The administration directed its energy to the support of the Lusaka mediation process led by President Frederick Chiluba. The skepticism in regional circles about a more direct involvement of the U.S. in the mediation effort was largely bred by the perception that the U.S. had for too long unconditionally supported the leaders of Uganda and Rwanda.

The U.S. issued a strong statement of concern on November 13, 1998 about Rwandan refugee movements from neighboring countries into the DRC, where hundreds were reported to have been recruited by the warring factions. The U.S. publicly condemned the Makabola massacre on January 7, and called on the rebels to investigate the massacre report and to grant independent investigators access to its site. A statement on March 4 condemned war-related human rights abuses by all sides, and called for accountability and the respect of the Geneva Convention regarding the treatment of civilians and noncombatants. The State Department returned to the issue in a March 26 statement by expressing alarm at continued massacre reports from rebel areas, and widespread abuses by the government. On April 1, the U.S. welcomed the national dialogue on Congo's political future announced by President Kabila, but warned that it should be a transparent process.

However, the U.S. interest in pressing for accountability and human rights improvements appeared to have waned as the DRC plunged further into chaos. Peace and regional security became the primary focus in the U.S. public diplomacy. There were scant references to violations by the belligerents and to their obligations to abide by international human rights and humanitarian standards in subsequent statements issued by the Department of State in support of the regional peace process.

The U.S. in fiscal year 1999 dedicated $ 15 million in supporting programs aimed at encouraging judicial and democratic reforms, and fostering broad-based economic growth and environmental protection, in addition to substantial humanitarian assistance.
FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA

Human Rights Developments

Ethiopia fought its former ally Eritrea in the world's deadliest war in 1999, over a border dispute that erupted in 1998. The war continued to have drastic humanitarian consequences, and contributed considerably to the worsening of an already dire human rights situation.

The government, led by the Ethiopian Peoples' Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) since the ouster of former dictator Mengistu Haile Meriam in 1991, announced national legislative elections for May 2000, the first since 1995. Voters would elect members of the two chambers of parliament from lists presented by some sixty registered political parties. The EPRDF, however, maintained strict control over Ethiopia's nine ethnically-defined federal states through regional ethnically-defined parties affiliated to it. Political groupings which sought to preserve their autonomy or to oppose the system of ethnic federalism enshrined in the 1995 constitution continued to face severe restrictions. The EPRDF ignored calls in late August by representatives of the All Amhara People's Organization (AAPO) and the Southern Peoples Union for greater say in organizing the elections. The opposition Council of Alternative Forces of Peace and Democracy in Ethiopia, and the Oromo National Congress publicly expressed fears that the government would deny them equal access to the state controlled mass media and the right to campaign without harassment.

The war with Eritrea contributed to a considerable worsening of the human rights and humanitarian situation in the country. An estimated forty to fifty thousands soldiers were believed to have been killed, wounded, or captured on both sides. Fierce fighting resumed in February 1999 after a lull that lasted from September which the two parties used to recruit and train about half a million conscripts and to rearm on the open market. Ethiopia recaptured the disputed "Badme triangle" that Eritrea had occupied in the first phase of the war.

By October 1999, civilians directly affected by the war in Ethiopia included, according to government figures, some 400,000 villagers displaced or evacuated from the border area. Some 41,000 Ethiopian nationals left Eritrea by October, many of them under duress: they said they were fleeing discrimination and feared for their own safety as the war intensified. Many also experienced severe war-related economic hardships in Eritrea. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in Eritrea accompanied about half of the departures; the others having occurred before its involvement began in September 1998. Ethiopia initiated as of June 1998 a draconian program of roundups and deportations of those Eritreans and Ethiopians of Eritrean origin authorities deemed to be a threat to national security. Tens of thousands were affected. The acute humanitarian crisis resulting from the war was further compounded by intense drought conditions in the east and southeast of Ethiopia that threatened an estimated five million people with hunger in 1999. After an initial alarmingly slow response, donors by early October had pledged most of the emergency food aid needed to prevent starvation.

On July 5 and 6, Ethiopia deported another three thousand people of Eritrean origin, many of them children and elderly people. They arrived in Eritrea weakened by many days of detention and a rough road trip, and complaining of the confiscation of their properties. Their arrival signaled the resumption of themass deportations which had slowed to a trickle since hostilities resumed in February and brought the number of deportees until then to 60,000.

The government in July held that it had a legal right to deport those Ethiopians of Eritrean origin who had voted in the 1993 referendum on the independence of Eritrea, and registered those who remained behind as aliens in August. It argued that under the Eritrean referendum proclamation only those who had opted for Eritrean citizenship were eligible to vote-although any such a choice would have been contingent upon, and meaningful, only after being ratified by each individual after Eritrea had gained its independence. With its own nationality law barring dual citizenship, the government declared that it therefore considered referendum voters to be foreigners. However, Ethiopian authorities failed to declare at the time of the referendum that participation in it would constitute a formal renunciation of Ethiopian nationality. Furthermore, many of the deportees were children and elderly persons who neither voted or conceivably posed credible security threats. The Ethiopian government's position also belied its own role in facilitating the referendum and endorsing its result. At the time of Eritrean independence, the two states and ruling fronts were the closest of allies. They focused on forging close technical, political, and security ties and accorded low priority to sensitive issues such as the demarcation of the border, and the nationality status of Ethiopians of Eritrean origin. The deportees who had in fact voted in the referendum, whether for or against independence, were being retroactively punished for an act that the Ethiopian government had at the time facilitated and encouraged. The judiciary appeared to have had no role in the deportation process. It reportedly provided no recourse to the victims to challenge their arrest and subsequent forcible deportation, to defend a claim to Ethiopian nationality, or to respond to the accusation of being national security threats. Incidents of torture or other deliberate physical harm during the deportations were limited in number, according to testimonies of the deportees. Ethiopia granted the ICRC regular access to Eritrean prisoners of war and hundreds of civilian internees.

As the war appeared heading to a costly deadlock, each party sought to outflank the other on the military and diplomatic fronts. Low-level insurgencies led for years by the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF) for self determination in Oromia region intensified in the wake of the war with Eritrea. Ethiopia accused Eritrea of arming and training new batches of OLF insurgents and sent troops backed by tanks into neighboring Somalia in May and June to flush them out, and to punish warlords suspected of giving them sanctuary. The intervention force also sought to dislodge the fundamentalist Al-Ittihad Al-Islami (Islamic Unity), which launched cross-border raids into southern Ethiopia from strongholds in Somalia. Ethiopian forces at the same time made several limited incursions into northeastern Kenya to tackle OLF elements that were operating there, leading to security tensions with that country as well. At the same time, the Ethiopian government made no secret of its encouragement of a new alliance among exiled Eritrean opposition groups aimed at toppling the Eritrean government. The sprawling war fronts highlighted the potential for the regionalization of the war. All parties in these conflicts admittedly made extensive use of antipersonnel landmines. Civilians were the main victims in the minefields that mushroomed across the entire region.

The government's efforts to suppress political dissent and armed insurgency led to widespread human rights abuses. The government continued to grant the ICRC access to places of detention and to cooperate with its efforts to assist the detainees. However, it continued to deny the humanitarian agency access to police lockups in the capital, particularly the cells of the Central Investigation Department from which reports of routine abuses of detained suspects continued to emanate. The ICRC reported assisting in 1998 at least 10,000 people imprisoned in connection with internal security matters and the 1991 change of regime. The trial of thousands held since the fall of the Mengistu regime for crimes associated with it were still pending in the capital and different states by year end, although most had been held for the last eight years awaiting the beginning of their trials. A few dozen former officers and air force pilots were, exceptionally, released on bail in August.

In late December 1998 the government authorized seventy-one-year-old Asrat Woldeyes, chairman of the opposition AAPO, to leave for medical treatment abroad. His health had steadily deteriorated during five years in jail following questionable convictions for political and security crimes. The government, however, had previously resisted pressing appeals from his supporters and the international community for his release on humanitarian grounds. He died on May 14 in a hospital in Philadelphia.

The court in mid-June sentenced to fifteen years imprisonment Taye Wolde Semayat, the former head of the Ethiopian Teachers' Association (ETA), for political and security crimes. The government continued its drive to eliminate the independent ETA and promote in its place a pro-government teachers' union.

By mid year, ten journalists remained in prison, most of them since 1997. Two more were detained during the year. The arbitrary detention of journalists for writings and opinions the government did not approve of remained a potent tool of government control. Leaders of the Ethiopian Free Press Journalists' Association were forced into exile, and so were many other independent journalists who were repeatedly detained and punished with heavy fines for attempting to do their jobs.

Defending Human Rights

After eight years of obstruction, the government in early May officially registered the Ethiopian Human Rights Council (EHRCO), the only openly operating monitoring group in the country. EHRCO was also able to access its bank account, which the government had blocked during the preceding four years, but only after obtaining a court order for its release in January. The government continued to recognize several other organizations focusing on civic and human rights education. But the government continued to suppress the Human Rights League, a monitoring organization established in December 1996 by members of the Oromo community. Eight founding and board members of the league, and the organization's secretary, remained in detention for the second year after their arrest in October 1997. Like other Oromo detainees, they were charged with collaboration with the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF). Similar repressive measures forced other monitoring groups underground or into exile, including the Ogaden Human Rights Committee, the Solidarity Committee for Ethiopian Political Prisoners, and the Oromo Ex-Prisoners for Human Rights. Nonetheless, these groups continued to investigate human rights abuses on the ground and to publish their findings regularly.

Some fifty-five Oromo elders and leaders of cultural and social organizations of their community also remained in detention since late 1997. Court hearings of their cases on charges of conspiracy with the OLF were repeatedly adjourned, prolonging their exposure to cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment in pretrial detention.

Ethiopian officials met with representatives of Human Rights Watch on several occasions during the year, but the government declined to grant its representatives the entry visas requested to conduct an on-site investigation of human rights observance in the context of the war. The government in October 1998 had authorized a monitoring mission by Amnesty International, but emphatically rejected its findings in official statements and reports in February and again in August.

The Legal Affairs Committee of the House of Peoples' Representatives published a draft document on the establishment of a Human Rights Commission and Office of the Ombudsman in three main local languages and distributed it to the public from April 27 to May 3 to encourage public participation in shaping the two national institutions. The committee said it wanted them established before the May 2000 elections.

The Role of the International Community

Ethiopia and Eritrea pursued the war relentlessly despite persistent and intensive truce efforts from the O.A.U., the U.N., the United States, and, to a lesser degree, the European Union, not to mention several bilateral initiatives. The political leadership in both countries appeared determined to obtain key strategicadvantages on the battlefield before engaging in a meaningful search for peace. The pressures exerted on them appeared minimal compared to the massive diplomatic pressures that succeeded during the year in ending or averting other deadly conflicts in Kosovo, the Indian subcontinent, and East Timor.

Organization of African Unity (OAU)

The November 1998 OAU proposal of a framework agreement for a peaceful settlement of the war addressed the humanitarian problems resulting from the conflict by requiring signatories to put an end to measures directed against the civilian population and to refrain from any action which can cause further hardship and suffering to each other's nationals. The proposal would commit the two parties to addressing the war's negative socioeconomic impact on civilians, particularly the deportees. It called for the deployment of human rights monitors by the O.A.U. in collaboration with the U.N. as a means to establish a climate of confidence between the two parties. Ethiopia accepted the plan immediately. Eritrea expressed reservations but finally accepted it after suffering battle field losses in late February. However, differences of interpretation of the proposed agreement kept the two parties at odds and continued to fuel the fighting.

The O.A.U. and other mediators used the lull in the fighting brought by the onset of the rainy season in July to intensify their efforts. This led to the introduction at the O.A.U.'s July summit in Algiers of "modalities" for the implementation of the framework agreement that sought to resolve the differences of interpretation and build confidence between the two parties. While both declared their acceptance of the "modalities," they continued to question each other's commitment to peace. Eritrea again raised the need for compensation of the deportees in its acceptance speech. Ethiopia considered this as an attempt to alter the substance of the modalities and threatened to resume fighting if Eritrea insisted on introducing "preconditions and amendments."

The O.A.U. in August presented the two countries with detailed "technical arrangements" for the implementation of the O.A.U.'s framework agreement and its modalities. Eritrea accepted the plan. Ethiopia first signaled its dissatisfaction with the details, and ultimately rejected some elements of the arrangements, a position that Eritrea considered was a "declaration of war." On September 13, President Negasso Gidada insisted that the war could only end with a return to the status quo ante that would require Eritrea's unconditional withdrawal from the disputed areas over which the Ethiopian president demanded the restoration of his country's sovereignty.

United Nations

The U.N. Security Council in a January 29 resolution affirmed that the O.A.U.'s framework agreement provided the "best hope" for peace. It urged Eritrea to accept the proposal, and called on both parties in the strongest terms to undertake urgent measures to improve the humanitarian and human rights situation. Ethiopia said it was "encouraged" by the resolution.

Despite the strong appeals, hostilities resumed only weeks later. The Security Council in a February 10 resolution demanded that Ethiopia and Eritrea stop fighting and that other states immediately end all arms sales to both sides. In response, the Ethiopian parliament passed a special resolution that expressed "its deep anger at the injustice done to Ethiopia" by the Security Council, and deplored "the attempt to deny Ethiopia, a victim of aggression...the right to self defense." The Eritrean government affirmed that, though it was committed not to start war, it reserved "the legitimate right to self defense in the face of aggression."

The president of the Security Council in a press statement on June 23 expressed dismay at the escalating conflict, especially that both countries were continuing to buy weapons while much of their populations faced famine. He reminded the two governments that it was their primary responsibility to feed their peoples and repeated the council's calls for "an immediate and unconditional cease-fire," and for the imposition of an arms embargo on both countries.

European Union

The E.U.'s presidency issued statements condemning the major outbreaks of fighting in February and June. Other statements released by the presidency almost monthly since November 1998 persistently expressed full support for the O.A.U.'s mediation effort, and repeatedly urged the parties to halt the war and to negotiate a peaceful settlement on the basis of the O.A.U.'s proposals. On March 9, the European Council of Ministers adopted a common position imposing an embargo on the export of arms, munitions, and military equipment to Ethiopia and Eritrea, and on September 30 extended that ban until March 31, 2000. An E.U. ministerial delegation traveled to Addis Ababa and to Asmara in February to push for a cease-fire and a return to the O.A.U.'s mediation process. The E.U. made substantial monetary and in kind donations for the relief of civilians affected by the conflict in both countries.

United States

War between Ethiopia and Eritrea, two of its closest allies in the continent, was deemed to pose serious threats to U.S. interests in the entire region and led to the most sustained high-level attention by the Clinton Administration of any conflict on the continent. The U.S. failed to match this active involvement in the mediation efforts by equally forceful human rights interventions and instead carried on with its prior practice of not criticizing either party for the rampant human rights abuses that took place in the context of the war.

The U.S. and other major donors had in the past extended significant resources to support political and economic development programs in the two countries. They were the lynchpins in the U.S.-led plans for the military and diplomatic containment of the government of Sudan, considered by the U.S. to be an exporter of radical Islam and a supporter of international terrorism. They appeared to play a key stabilizing role in the search for peace in east and central Africa. The war reversed all this. It drained the resources of the two countries, and effectively slowed down their economic growth rates. Humanitarian emergencies and the looming famine added to the cost of the conflict. Sudan declared its neutrality in the conflict, and received immediate dividends as the two parties competed in normalizing their relations with its Islamist government and scaling back their support to its exiled opposition. The war spilled over into Kenya and threw Somalia into renewed fighting. Anthony Lake, the U.S. lead mediator as of October 1998 and a former national security advisor, shuttled between the two capitals several times, coordinating his efforts closely with the O.A.U. and the U.N. Experts from the three mediators worked closely together to finalize the most detailed and technical of the peace documents, the "technical arrangements" that Ethiopia ultimately rejected. Efforts during a late August visit to Addis Ababa by Lake and Susan Rice, the assistant secretary for African affairs at the State Department, to persuade the Ethiopian leaders to accept the arrangements appeared to have failed.

President Clinton expressed concern in January at the huge military buildup along the common border between Ethiopia and Eritrea. He again issued a statement expressing disappointment at the resumption of hostilities in February. On July 27, a presidential statement welcomed the announcement by the O.A.U. that the two parties had accepted the modalities for the implementation of its framework agreement.

The U.S. scaled back its direct financial assistance to both countries due to the war. It suspended its balance of payment support to Ethiopia and froze the training of Ethiopian troops within the U.S.-led peacekeeping training program under the African Crisis Response Initiative. However, Ethiopia continued to benefit from the International Military Education and Training (IMET), with the only limitation being that they could not receive training in their country but had to come to the U.S. In addition, $2.9 million was provided out of the Frontline States initiative for the maintenance of two C130s, which were delivered just before the outbreak of hostilities. The sale of two other C130s which had not yet been delivered, remainedon hold. U.S. development assistance to Ethiopia was not affected by the freeze. It totaled about $43 million for fiscal year 1999, in addition to substantial food aid.
KENYA

Human Rights Developments

Kenya remained in a state of worsening political and economic crisis as the government continued to stall on promises of reform that would have brought greater democratization. While some cosmetic changes were made by the government of President Daniel arap Moi, little or no genuine progress was achieved in diminishing the absolute power enjoyed by the executive branch. For the fourth year in a row, the standard of living for the average Kenyan dropped. In the political arena, the government adeptly derailed the grassroots constitutional reform lobby that threatened its monopoly by dividing the reform constituency and reducing its momentum. The government selected ruling party and opposition politicians to serve on an Inter-Parties Parliamentary Group (IPPG) with responsibility for constitutional change, while excluding the broad-based National Convention Executive Council (NCEC), a pro-democracy coalition of opposition parties, human rights, religious, and nongovernmental groups, from participation in the reform process. President Moi continued to push for a less consultative constitutional review process through the Parliament, which he led through his party's majority there. Throughout 1999, the reform crisis remained unresolved and the year was characterized by distrust, infighting, and a lack of consensus on the constitutional reform process.

As the international donor community's attention on human rights diminished and was replaced by an almost exclusive concern with corruption, the government continued to make efforts to give the appearance of economic reform. Among other things, President Moi created a Law Reform Coordinating Committee, cut government ministries from twenty-seven to fifteen, and appointed a new head of the Civil Service. None of the grand gestures made by the President Moi in 1999 addressed civil and political rights abuses.

The link between corruption and eroded respect for human rights was most evident in the judiciary, the provincial administrations, and the police. The government had always used the judiciary for political ends. In September, the sudden death of Chief Justice Zachaeus Chesoni, resulted in the appointment of the public prosecutor, Bernard Chunga, as chief justice. The appointment of Chunga, known for his zealous prosecution of government critics, caused an uproar in the legal community and appeared to signal a serious step backwards for judicial independence.

Complaints of police harassment, use of excessive force, torture, and deaths in custody continued. Police violently dispersed political rallies, sometimes seriously injuring people. In June, a peaceful opposition rally was broken up with tear gas and live bullets by police resulted in dozens of injuries, including a broken arm and hip injuries to two opposition Members of Parliament. In August, police stormed a mosque in Mombasa in search of an arsonist, resulting in five deaths and injuries to fifteen who were attending a wedding. Refugees and migrants were also regular targets of police harassment, relocation to rural camps, arbitrary detention, and deportations.

Even more disturbing was the growing reliance on state-sponsored gangs to break up meetings and rallies of government critics. Although both ruling party and opposition parties created their own civilian security groups, one of the most notorious was Jeshi la Mzee, an offshoot of the ruling party youth wing allegedly organized by ruling party Assistant Minister Fred Gumo. Jeshi la Mzee became renowned for disrupting pro-democracy and opposition meetings and terrorizing peaceful protesters. In June, a peaceful rally was broken up by an armed gang that seriously injured peaceful demonstrators. Press photos of one of the attackers beating up Rev. Timothy Njoya (resulting in the dislocation of his arm), was later identified as being the same person who had earlier in the year abducted and roughed up David Makali, editor of theindependent Expression Today , the day after his magazine published a story linking Mr. Gumo to a drug cartel.

Although a wide array of independent and outspoken newspapers were able to publish relatively freely, the independent media was not exempt from retaliation. In August, Tony Gachoka, editor of the Post on Sunday , was jailed for six months on contempt of court charges for articles that alleged that the chief justice had accepted a bribe in the Goldenberg case, the country's largest corruption scandal implicating high-ranking government officials. Three of the seven judges that sat in Gachoka's case were mentioned in his articles. The magazine was fined one million shillings (approximately U.S.$14,000) and banned from publishing until the fine was paid in full.

State-sponsored political violence since 1991 against members of ethnic groups perceived to support the political opposition resulted in the displacement of some 400,000 people. The authorities consistently failed to provide adequate security to those under threat or to hold those responsible for the violence accountable. In June, a presidential Commission on the Ethnic Clashes wound up after eleven months of hearing evidence, including from Human Rights Watch, about the violence between 1991 and 1998. At the outset, the commission showed promise as the lead counsel called witnesses that testified to the role of government officials in instigating and allowing the violence. However, in late 1998, President Moi installed Bernard Chunga as lead counsel, resulting in weaker witness testimony, and complaints by the Catholic Justice and Peace Commission that it was being prevented from testifying. As of October, the commission's findings had not been released.

Defending Human Rights

A wide array of local human rights organizations were engaged in monitoring human rights in Kenya. Although these organizations were able to function, they periodically came under attack from the government for their work. In 1999, Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch were able to visit Kenya unimpeded. In September, however, the U.S. League of Women Voters and local women's groups were prevented by the provincial administration from holding meetings with women in Rift Valley Province. In October, U.N. Special Rapporteur for Torture Nigel Rodley was denied entry to a maximum security prison despite government assurances of access.

The government-sponsored Human Rights Standing Committee, formed in May 1996, generally maintained a low profile and its strained relationship with the human rights NGO community continued. Since its creation, the Committee had issued six private reports for the president. It issued its first public report in December 1998, a general overview of human rights laws and definitions, with only cursory reference to human rights abuses. Its section on the 1997 political violence in Coast Province was more comprehensive. In August, the Kenyan government signed the Rome Statute for the creation of an International Criminal Court.

The Role of the International Community

In the lead-up to the 1997 election, Kenya's main donors played a positive role in pushing the government to concede to domestic calls for genuine pluralism. However, since the election, international attention to the human rights situation steadily declined. During 1999, as in the previous year, strong public statements by donors and the international financial institutions focused almost exclusively on Kenya's worsening economic situation and its dismal record on corruption. World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF) funding remained suspended since 1997 pending progress on corruption. In July, the IMF held discussions with the government as it had done the previous year, but did not renew funding.

The approach of the international community-in prioritizing and compartmentalizing corruption and economic reform issues as distinct from political accountability and other rights issue-fell short of addressing the key issue, absolute executive control, at the heart of Kenya's political crisis. Some donors and the international financial institutions did call for "good governance" and stressed its importance to economic growth. In September, the British High Commissioner stated that the economy would only recover with good governance. The European Union welcomed the trimming of the government ministries as a necessary step towards economic recovery, and also noted that "political reforms would have to be given equal weight." However, in their use of this catch phrase they stopped short of using their leverage to more strongly call on the government to end the political crisis and to permit the constitutional and other reforms that would lead to good governance. The Dutch government was the only government that took a strong unequivocal stance, announcing in September that it would cut all aid to Kenya over three years due to "bad governance, human rights abuses, and impeded democratization."

United States

Although human rights concerns remained on the U.S. agenda, trade and economic concerns as well as international terrorism tended to take precedence over human rights. As other donors, the U.S. focused its attention on criticizing corruption. Following the bombing of the U.S. Embassy in Kenya in 1998, the U.S. also brought strong pressure to bear on the government to address the unimpeded flow of arms and suspect foreign nationals into Kenya. One negative offshoot of this valid security concern, was the growing indiscriminate police harassment of migrants and refugees in Kenya. In June, the U.S. gave U.S.$11 million in compensation to families of the victims of the U.S. Embassy bombing amid complaints by some Kenyans that the U.S. marines had blocked rescue efforts by and of Kenyans.
LIBERIA

Human Rights Developments

Liberians were subjected to human rights abuses by government police and security forces as well as violence at the hands of Liberian rebels in an incursion from Guinea and armed groups in a spill-over from the Sierra Leonean conflict. Growing violence and insecurity threatened to reverse the tenuous peace established since 1997 after the end of the brutal seven-year civil war. Two years after the United Nations-sanctioned election that brought former warring faction leader Charles Taylor to power, the peace situation in Liberia remained fragile. The incomplete implementation of the peace accords, particularly with regard to demobilization; a general amnesty to faction fighters for egregious abuses committed "in the course of actual military engagements"; and the wholesale enrollment of fighters from Taylor's former faction into the country's restructured police and security forces contributed to make this situation increasingly more volatile.

Liberians continued to report regular harassment, extortion, mistreatment, and torture by the police and armed forces. Following his inauguration, President Taylor rejected the peace accord provision that provided for an open and transparent restructuring of the security forces by the West African peacekeeping force. Instead, former Taylor faction fighters were placed in the security and police forces without serious efforts to provide training or to meet pledges to incorporate members from the other factions. Former Taylor fighters were also permitted by the government to create security firms for hire by private sector companies. There were complaints of general lawlessness by both government forces and the private security companies. In one of the more egregious incidents, a group of armed soldiers in search of a missing man stormed Dambala village in the western part of the country in March, and beat and detained men, rapedwomen and looted homes. The military acknowledged that looting had occurred, but denied the allegations of violence. An investigation was set up, however, no security officer had been held responsible by October. In August, a new police chief, Paul Mulbah, was appointed following the death of Joe Tate, who was notorious for his disregard of human rights. Human rights groups in the capital, Monrovia cautiously welcomed the new appointment.

Although an independent press functioned in Liberia, it came under attack. In February, a Liberian newspaper editor and his business manager were badly beaten by members of the Special Security Service. In March, the police attempted to coerce journalist Isaac Manyongai of the Heritage to disclose his source for a story about a South African businessman who was alleged to have strong ties with Liberian officials. In April, Criminal Court A ordered criminal contempt charges and the arrest of the staff of the Independent Eye on the grounds that the newspaper had published a derogatory statement about the court. Star Radio, an independent station managed by the Swiss nongovernmental organization Fondation Hirondelle had its shortwave license withdrawn in October 1998 and since then has no longer been able to broadcast outside Monrovia.

Armed opposition to the government remained a serious threat to sustained peace. Barely a year after the war had ended, there were two outbreaks of violence in Monrovia in 1998 in which state security forces battled with supporters of faction leader Roosevelt Johnson's officially disbanded United Liberation Movement for Democracy in Liberia (ULIMO-J), eventually forcing him to flee the country. The precise number of casualties was unknown, although there were reports of mass graves of ethnic Krahns who were indiscriminately targeted as ULIMO supporters by the security forces. Following the violence, some thirty people were charged with treason. In April 1999, thirteen were convicted of treason, amid charges of irregularities in the legal process and ill-treatment in custody. Although treason carries a mandatory life sentence in Liberia, the sentence was commuted to ten years' imprisonment by the judge on the grounds that there was a "need for genuine reconciliation." A group of nine military officers, also arrested in September 1998, was brought before a court martial board on charges of sedition for allegedly supporting the former rebel faction. Defense lawyers complained of harsh treatment of the accused, who were being held in deplorable conditions in military prison without access to their relatives

The internal conflicts within Sierra Leone, Liberia, and Guinea continued to spill over the borders, further destabilizing the region. In the early part of 1999, the Liberian government was accused of fueling the war in neighboring Sierra Leone by helping the Sierra Leonean Revolutionary United Front (RUF), a charge it strenuously denied. Former Taylor faction fighters reportedly fought alongside the RUF, thwarting the efforts of the West African regional peacekeeping force to restore peace. In December 1998, Foreign Minister Monie Captan conceded that Liberians were involved in Sierra Leone, but stressed that it was without the backing of the government. President Taylor, in turn, accused Sierra Leone of providing a safe haven to Liberian rebels intent on destabilizing his government.

After being accused of supporting rebel activity in a neighboring country, the tables turned in April and August when Liberian rebels operating from neighboring Guinea carried out attacks in Lofa Couny, northern Liberia. Although not confirmed, the rebel attacks were thought to be led by former fighters from the ULIMO-K and other factions. Full-scale fighting including artillery barrages occurred during the two offensives as the Liberian army attempted to regain control, causing civilian deaths and displacement. In April, armed men from neighboring Guinea attacked a Liberian border town, looted, and held hostage for two hours foreign diplomats and aid workers, including the Dutch ambassador, the first secretary of the Norwegian Embassy, a European Union (E.U.) representative, and eleven aid workers, before releasing them to Liberian soldiers. In August, the fighting intensified when rebels seized the towns of Kolahun and Voinjama in Lofa County, killing hundreds and forcing thousands of Liberians and Sierra Leonean refugees to flee the area. By September, thousands of Sierra Leonean refugees and Liberians were trapped in cross fire, resulting in the death of some 600 and displacement of over 10,000 civilians and Sierra Leoneanrefugees. U.N. warehouses and vehicles were looted and aid workers were evacuated. Nine hostages, including six foreign aid workers, were kidnapped during a border attack in Kolahun, northern Liberia and held for several days before being released. The government accused the Guinean government of permitting Liberian rebel forces to operate in Guinea, while the Guinean government made counter-allegations that Liberia was harboring Guinean rebel groups that attacked its villages close to the border. Some looting was also carried out by Liberian security forces sent to the area to quell the violence.

There were some 90,000 Sierra Leonean refugees in Liberia, of which 35,000 were affected by the fighting in Lofa County. In July, Sierra Leonean refugees began leaving the camps in Liberia for Sierra Leone reportedly due to constant harassment and intimidation by Liberian police and army. Thousands of others fled the fighting and sought refugee further inside Liberia. By September, the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) had begun to relocate them to established camps elsewhere in the country.

At the end of September, the Liberian Government announced that its forces had regained complete control of Lofa County, and President Taylor and Guinean president Lansana Conte signed an agreement at an Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) emergency mini-summit aimed at easing the growing tension between the two countries. Guinea had threatened to retaliate after Liberian troops reportedly crossed into Mashanta, Guinea in September, killing twenty-eight civilians. Under the agreement, the two governments agreed to compile and exchange lists of government opponents and set up a joint security committee.

Voluntary repatriation of the estimated one million refugee and internally displaced Liberians continued. In September, UNHCR estimated that some thirty thousand refugees had repatriated since January 1999 bringing the total number of repatriations since May 1997 to 120,530. Although accurate statistics on the return of internally displaced populations were difficult to obtain, the Liberian Refugee, Repatriation and Resettlement Commission estimated in September that 110,000 displaced persons living in camps had returned to their home areas and that an estimated 40,000 displaced persons remained in Monrovia. One of the major reasons cited for the slow return was the lack of funds to build housing for returnees.

Defending Human Rights

Human Rights defenders in Liberia have increasingly come under attack with threats and intimidation against human rights groups for reporting on abuses increasing in 1999. President Taylor and other high-ranking government officials attacked human rights groups for publicizing abuses and blamed the human rights community for the withholding of international aid. In February, the Catholic Justice and Peace Commission was criticized by politicians for publicizing wrong-doing by security forces, poor treatment of prisoners, and forced labor and abduction of children in southeastern Liberia. In March, legislators from four countries took two non-governmental human rights groups, the Catholic Justice and Peace Commission and the Fore-Runners of Children's Universal Development (Focus), to court on the grounds that the reports released by these groups were making it difficult for Liberia to receive international donor aid. In July, over one hundred former combatants stormed and looted the house of Commany Wesseh of the Center for Democratic Empowerment after he appeared on a radio talk show stating that the Liberian government, and not the U.N., was responsible for the reintegration of combatants. Although some were arrested by the police, they were later released without charge. In July, an army colonel cautioned human rights activists, accusing them of sending "malicious and negative signals" to the international community.

In April, unidentified men in a vehicle forced off the road the driver of a human rights activist from the National Human Rights Center of Liberia, dragged him from the car, beat him up, and then cut off one of his ears. Although the perpetrators of this incident were unknown, the Taylor faction was known during the war for cutting off one ear as punishment for infractions by its own forces. The National Human Rights Center of Liberia, an umbrella organization made up of several human rights groups, issued a statementsaying: "When the Taylor government falsely accuses human rights organizations of driving away foreign investors with their reports, it must look at its own security forces for giving it a bad name. It is not human rights organizations who go about beating people, killing them, disappearing them, terrorising ordinary folks and cutting their ears off. It is the barbaric security forces."

Despite these attacks, the emergent human rights community that had functioned only in Monrovia during the war continued to expand its activities. The organizations included the Catholic Church's Justice and Peace Commission, the Center for Law and Human Rights Education, the Liberian Human Rights Chapter, the Association of Human Rights Promoters, Liberia Watch for Human Rights, the National Human Rights Monitor, the Movement for the Defense of Human Rights, the Liberia Civil and Human Rights Association, Liberia Democracy Watch, the Civil Rights Association of Liberian Lawyers, Fore-Runners of Children's Universal Development, the Center for Democratic Empowerment, and the Association of Female Lawyers in Liberia.

The government National Human Rights Commission created in 1997 was virtually inactive. In May, the commission's chair Hall Badio stated that a lack of funds, staff, and logistical capacity had paralyzed the commission, making it difficult for it to investigate and monitor human rights cases in the country.

The Role of the International Community

Donors continued to insist that aid to Liberia would be dependent on improvements in microeconomic reporting, fiscal discipline, and respect for human rights. The international community was further concerned by evidence of Liberian support for Sierra Leonean rebels.

Much of the international attention to Liberia in the early part of the year focused on pressuring the Taylor government to withdraw its support to the Sierra Leonean rebels. In December 1998, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) committee of five met in Ivory Coast to discuss the situation in Sierra Leone and Liberia's involvement in the conflict. ECOMOG force commander Timothy Shelpidi bluntly stated that Liberia was "aiding the rebels in Sierra Leone" using former members of Charles Taylor's disbanded faction. The U.S. also spoke out strongly, accusing Liberia of a "violent war of terrorism against the people of Sierra Leone." The U.N. Security Council was more muted in its condemnation of the participation of outside forces in the fighting in Sierra Leone, but stopped short of naming Liberia, and called upon all countries to abide by the U.N. arms embargo against the Sierra Leonean rebels. A month later, in January 1999, the U.N. Security Council more strongly condemned all those who supported the Sierra Leonean rebels, including through arms and mercenaries, particularly from Liberian territory. The U.S., U.K., and the German Presidency of the European Union also strongly protested Liberia's role in destabilizing Sierra Leone. In January 1999, U.S. State Department spokesperson James Ruben said that the U.S. had evidence of Liberia's support to the Sierra Leonean rebels. The Liberian link to the war in Sierra Leone was again at issue in April, when information emerged about a substantial arms shipment to Liberia in violation of the U.N. arms embargo. The U.S., together with Nigeria, the U.K., and Sierra Leone, brought this to the attention of the U.N. sanctions committee, which apparently questioned some of the countries involved. At this writing, it is not clear what further actions are contemplated. The Liberian government responded strongly against the international pressure and withholding of support. In January 1999, the Liberian government accused the U.K. and the U.S. of undertaking a "campaign intended to internationally isolate, economically strangulate and diplomatically destroy Liberia." In August, President Taylor blamed the international donor community for "encouraging corruption" by denying the war-ravaged country international assistance. In August, the government called on the international community to lift the U.N. ban on arms sales to Liberia to allow it to purchase weapons following the rebel incursions over the Guinean border.

United Nations

The United Nations Department of Political Affairs retained a small U.N. Peace-Building Support Office (UNOL) following the withdrawal of the U.N. observer mission in July 1997, to serve as a focal point and coordinate post-conflict U.N. peace-building activities in Liberia as well as to provide advisory services to the government in defining post-conflict priorities, to raise international funds for Liberia, and to coordinate and liaise between the government and the international community. This unit remained in Monrovia during 1999 under special representative Felix Downs-Thomas, but maintained a low profile and was not a prominent player in raising human rights issues. UNOL's mandate did not explicitly include monitoring or investigation of human rights abuses, however, it assisted in police training and made recommendations on the draft legislation for the creation of the government human rights commission. In September, the government, ECOMOG, and UNOL were involved in resuming a weapons destruction program which had been suspended during the fighting in Lofa County. An estimated 18,000 weapons were destroyed.

Economic Community of West African States Cease-Fire Monitoring Group (ECOMOG)

ECOMOG continued to retain a scaled down presence in Liberia due both to the end of the war in Liberia as well as to its increased mobilization in Sierra Leone. However, relations between the Liberian government and ECOMOG remained strained both because of Taylor's refusal to allow ECOMOG to train and restructure the Liberian armed forces in accordance with the peace accords and allegations that Taylor was undermining peacekeeping efforts in Sierra Leone by supporting the rebel alliance that ECOMOG was seeking to defeat. Relations hit an all-time low in May when President Taylor accused ECOMOG of plotting to overthrow his government, a charge denied by ECOMOG commander Maj. Gen. Felix Mujakperuo. By mid-1999, ECOMOG had closed its Liberia operations, but retained ECOMOG troops in Liberia to monitor the Sierra Leonean situation.

United States

A rift in U.S.-Liberian relations followed the September 1998 outbreak of violence in Monrovia when Liberian security forces were responsible for wounding two Americans in a shooting incident outside the U.S. Embassy , and the war in Sierra Leone further strained relations. The U.S. and other international donors made clear that there would be no resumption of non-humanitarian assistance to Liberia until an investigation into the September events had been conducted. Tensions further increased at the end of 1998, when the U.S. publicly accused Liberia of actively supporting Sierra Leonean rebels and threatened to take punitive measures, which were not publicly disclosed, against the Taylor government if such support did not cease. This represented the first time that the U.S. publicly linked Taylor's government to the Sierra Leonean rebels, and the message was repeated when the Liberian foreign minister visited Washington in February 1999. However, as Taylor publicly supported the peace process in Sierra Leone, the U.S. made new attempts to engage with him.

The Liberian government requested the U.N. to conduct an investigation into the September 1998 events, and its report was finally published in August. Although the report did not attribute blame for the incident, it has cleared the way for a multi-donor assessment mission to be discussed under the auspices of the World Bank.

In March, the U.S. State Department released its annual report on human rights for 1998 which accurately noted that Liberia's human rights record was poor due to disregard for civil liberties by the Taylor government. The Liberian government sharply rejected the report, saying that it was not credible and blaming local human rights groups for compiling negative reports on the country.

The U.S. sought to provide approximately (U.S.) $27 million in assistance to Liberia during financial year 1999, the bulk being some $10 million in development assistance aimed at capacity-building anddemocratization and $13.8 million in food aid. However, Congress put a hold on $1.2 million of aid designated for strengthening civil society and supporting the legislature, and for protecting and promoting human rights.

In July, the U.S. announced that it was ending the Temporary Protected Status (TPS) program for Liberians on September 29, 1999, which had allowed some 10,000 Liberians in the U.S. since 1991 to remain and work in the U.S. However, in September, President Clinton granted Deferred Enforced Departure (DED) for Liberians, which will provide temporary relief for one year.
MOZAMBIQUE

Human Rights Developments

Mozambique prepared for presidential and parliamentary elections scheduled for December that were expected to be a litmus test of how sustainable the eight-year old peace was. In addition to being an election year there were a number of positive human rights developments although heavy-handed policing and appalling prison conditions continued to be a problem.

On August 31 President Chissano confirmed that polling would take place on December 3 and 4. Registration began on July 2 and ended on September 17 during which over 6.9 million (83 percent) of the estimated 8.3 million eligible electors signed up. Joaquim Chissano was presidential candidate of the ruling Front for the Liberation of Mozambique (FRELIMO). The Mozambique National Resistance (RENAMO) on August 2 entered into an alliance with ten parties not presently represented in parliament to form a single opposition list, the Electoral Union. Three other coalitions and ten other parties were to contest the elections.

Witnesses described some intimidation. On June 12 at a campaign rally RENAMO general secretary Jo(o Alexandre urged RENAMO supporters in the central district of Chibabva to give a beating to a local administrator, and at the same event a RENAMO parliamentary deputy, Rui de Sousa, beat up a FRELIMO supporter who was accused of ripping up RENAMO party leaflets. RENAMO also maintained an armed force of 150 men in Inhaminga, Sofala province who prevented FRELIMO supporters from campaigning freely. RENAMO, in turn, complained that the police and FRELIMO cadres had intimidated its supporters in Xai Xai and in Tete.

As in previous years police behavior remained a serious concern and continued to be the source of the majority of complaints Human Rights Watch received. In January the Nampula public attorney's office started an investigation following allegations of summary executions carried out in the local cells of the Criminal Investigation Police (PIC) in Nampula. Unlike previous years there were more efforts outside Onlineuto to discipline abusive police officers. On May 31 a court in the northern province of Cabo Delgado found a local police commander in Chiure guilty of illegally detaining reporter Fernando Quinova in 1998 and was sentenced to six months imprisonment. Quinova had been held without charge for twenty-three days in a police cell but managed to escape and walked for two weeks through the bush until he reached the provincial capital, Pemba. He complained to the provincial police, but he was rearrested when he returned to Chiure on February 15 and charged with slandering the police and "leaking information." Neither charges existed under Mozambican law. In 1998, 322 police officers were dismissed for "ethical misconduct."

The criminal justice system remained overburdened. Public attorney's offices throughout the country handled 15,789 cases in 1998, a decline on the 1997 figure, but criminal charges prosecuted in 1998 had increased to 8,802 due to an increase in the total number of public attorneys and to their greater commitment and productivity. There remained severe delays in bringing suspects to trial, with many suspects not brought to a magistrate within the requisite forty-eight hours. During 1998 18,715 were deprived of their freedom-but only 4,923 of these were actually serving sentences passed by a court; 5,969were detained on the orders of courts and were awaiting trial. This contributed to severe overcrowding in prisons. According to the attorney-general's March 1999 report "the only use of these prisons is for learning and planning new crimes." The report stated that most cells contain two or three times the number of people for which they were built.

On December 10, 1998, during a ceremony marking the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, President Chissano announced that his government was conducting an inquiry into prison conditions with a view to ascertaining the number of detainees who had been held beyond the legal limit for pretrial detention, the number of detainees without trial, and the number of illegal detentions.

In the same speech, President Chissano outlined his government's aim to strengthen state legal institutions, through providing better equipment and more staff and retraining members of the police force. The Minister of Education Arnaldo Nhavoto announced on the same day that from the year 2000 human rights would be introduced as a discipline in its own right into the national education system for pupils from first to seventh grades.

Landmines and child soldiers were widely used in Mozambique during the 1977-1992 civil war. In April an international conference on the use of children as soldiers occurred in Onlineuto and the Mozambican government offered to present the conferences final declaration to the 1999 Organization of African Unity (OAU) summit and to request the OAU secretariat to disseminate it to all foreign ministers. In May the first meeting of states parties to the 1997 Ottawa Mine Ban Treaty took place in Onlineuto hosted by Mozambique.

Defending Human Rights

The Mozambican Human Rights League (LDH) focused on poor prison conditions and campaigned for an enquiry into alleged extrajudicial executions by police in Nampula and other cases brought to its attention. The Association of Human Rights and Development (DHD) in December 1998 called for "concerted action" between the government and civil society to focus on checking the abuse of power in the prisons, bribery in public institutions, sexual abuses and forced marriages.

The Role of the International Community

On June 30 Mozambique became the fourth country to earn relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor Country (HIPC) debt initiative when the World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF) approved U.S.$3.7 billion in relief from external creditors. The HIPC package provided some $800 million more than had been agreed in April 1998. The savings would be used to increase health and education for Mozambicans, seven in ten of whom lived in poverty.

In May Switzerland signed a new U.S.$1.1 million project agreement to assist a police upgrading project. Spain, Netherlands, and Germany had already contributed to a three year UN Development Program project aimed at reforming the police.

United States

President Chissano visited the U.S. in early December 1998 and saw senior administration officials including President Bill Clinton. During this visit Mozambique and the U.S. signed a Bilateral Investment Treaty. During 1999 the U.S. continued to be the largest bilateral donor in Mozambique and maintained one of USAID's largest programs in sub-Saharan Africa.

NIGERIA

Human Rights Developments

The situation in Nigeria improved substantially over the year. The interim government of Gen. Abdulsalami Abubakar that took office following the death of Gen. Sani Abacha in June 1998 departed to a large extent from the pattern of repression of the former government and oversaw a transition to the first civilian government for sixteen years. Between December 1998 and February 1999 Nigeria held local, state, and federal elections, leading to the inauguration of Gen. Olusegun Obasanjo (a former military ruler) as president on May 29, 1999. Immediately before the new government took office, General Abubakar repealed decrees allowing detention without trial, suspending constitutional guarantees of human rights, and barring the courts from reviewing executive acts. Nevertheless, serious concerns remained, including defects in the electoral process and the lack of a democratically drafted constitution, as well as the heritage of military rule-in particular, ongoing security force abuses.

Following local government elections held in December 1998, three parties passed the requirements to contest state and federal elections in the new year. Although most international and domestic observers of the elections welcomed their peaceful completion as an important step forward in the return of Nigeria to civilian government, some also noted the serious flaws in the process. These irregularities included vastly inflated figures for voter turnout, stuffing of ballot boxes, intimidation and bribery of both electoral officials and voters, and alteration of results at collation centres. The irregularities were widespread, but were particularly serious in the Niger Delta region. In addition, the party primaries, including the presidential primary of the Peoples' Democratic Party (PDP) which led to the selection of Obasanjo as the presidential candidate, were marked by blatant purchasing of votes. At local and state level, candidates selected by party members from the district were frequently peremptorily replaced at the instance of party leaders. Election tribunal proceedings to determine disputed results were similarly marked by fraud. The newly elected local, state, and national institutions immediately began to make their voices heard, though corruption scandals marked a number of those elected.

The constitution that came into force on May 29 was promulgated by General Abubakar only three weeks before the new government was inaugurated, following an unrepresentative drafting process that took place virtually without consultation with the Nigerian people. The 1999 constitution was finalized by a panel appointed by General Abubakar and adopted by the military Provisional Ruling Council. There was a consensus among Nigerian civil society organizations that the process by which the constitution was adopted was illegitimate and that the arrangements in relation to a number of crucial areas, including human rights and the rule of law, independence of the judiciary, the structure of the Nigerian federation and the system for revenue allocation and resource management, were not acceptable. Section 315(5) of the new constitution, for example, provided that "Nothing in the constitution shall invalidate" a set of laws, including the controversial National Security Agencies Act and Land Use Act, which it also stipulated could only be repealed or amended by a special majority of the National Assembly and Senate. The constitution failed to provide for the national human rights commission established under General Abacha, which had, against all the odds, been able to carry out some useful work under military rule. On September 9, the National Assembly announced the initiation of a review of the constitution.

All remaining high-profile political prisoners were released by General Abubakar before the handover to civilian rule, including military and civilian detainees convicted by military tribunals in unfair trials of involvement in alleged coup plots in 1990, 1995, and 1997. Sheikh Ibrahim El Zak-Zaky, a radical Muslim leader, was released in December 1998, after more than two years in detention. Several close associates of General Abacha arrested after his death remained in detention, facing charges linked to serious human rights violations and massive theft of government funds. In October, General Abacha's son Mohammed andsecurity chief, Major Hamza al Mustapha, appeared in court charged with the June 1996 murder of Kudirat Abiola, wife of former presidential candidate Moshood K.O. Abiola who had himself died in detention in July 1998.

Immediately before the handover of power to President Obasanjo, General Abubakar announced the repeal of a number of military decrees that had permitted a wide range of acts in violation of international human rights law and the Nigerian constitution, including the notorious Decree No.2 of 1984, permitting indefinite detention without trial. Other laws continued to reflect their military origins and infringe on the rights of the Nigerian people, including the Public Order Act and the National Drug Law Enforcement Agency Decree. In July, in the case of Chima Ubani vs. Inspector General of Police , the Court of Appeal overruled a fifteen-year-old precedent to hold, retrospectively, that the powers contained in Decree No.2 were contrary to the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights.

On becoming head of state, President Obasanjo announced the appointment of a seven-member panel chaired by a retired Supreme Court judge, Justice Chukwudifu Oputa, to investigate "mysterious deaths" and assassinations and other human rights abuses under the military governments in office since 1984 and to make recommendations to redress past injustices and to prevent future violations. The panel was widely welcomed by human rights groups in Nigeria, though it was not clear exactly what mandate, powers, or budget it would have, or the date by which it would complete its investigation and present a report. In October, the scope of the investigation was moved back to 1966, therefore taking in the abuses of the Biafran war. The panel had already received submissions on several thousand cases, most of them from Ogoniland.

Obasanjo also appointed panels to look into appointments and contracts made during the period leading up to the handover to civilian rule, when billions were reportedly stolen, and into failed contracts and fraudulent land transactions under successive military governments. An anti-corruption bill was introduced to the national assembly, and steps taken to reduce corruption in the fuel distribution sector; for the first time in years Nigerian cities had gasoline freely available at the pump. Other panels were appointed to investigate "cult" violence at Obafemi Awolowo University in Ile-Ife and to look into means for poverty alleviation. Demonstrating a determination to bring the armed forces under control, Obasanjo announced the removal of several hundred army officers in June, and in August plans to cut the military in size from 80,000 to 50,000 over four years.

The new civilian government made commitments to respect the rule of law. The minister of justice announced that the government intended to respect court orders issued against it, unlike military governments in the past, and proposed reforms to the judiciary, including the reconstitution of the Judicial Services Commission. The government appointed a national prison reform committee to advise on prison conditions, and 1,400 prisoners were released soon after, adding to the several thousand prisoners freed from overcrowded jails over the previous year, many of them held for years without trial. Despite the releases, prison conditions remained life threatening. A reorganization of the police was promised, and a number of states disbanded the notoriously abusive paramilitary anti-crime units established under the military government, replacing them with units that did not include soldiers. The methods used by the new units seemed, however, to resemble those of their predecessors. On June 25, for example, Adewale Adeoye, a journalist with Punch newspaper and chairman of Journalists for Democratic Rights, was arrested by members of the Lagos State Rapid Response Squad, which replaced the paramilitary "Operation Sweep." He was beaten and detained overnight, together with sixteen other people apparently arbitrarily selected for the purpose of extracting bribes to be released. Across the country, the security forces continued to carry out more widespread and serious abuses, including summary executions and torture.

The rights of women in Nigeria were routinely violated. The Penal Code explicitly stated that assaults committed by a man on his wife were not an offence, if permitted by customary law and if "grievous hurt" was not inflicted. Marital rape was not a crime. Child marriages remained common, especially in northernNigeria, with consequent serious health effects for children subjected to early pregnancy or to intercourse prior to sexual maturity. There were continued reports of trafficking of Nigerian women and girls into Europe and other destinations. Women were denied equal rights in the inheritance of property. It was estimated that about 60 percent of Nigerian women were subjected to female genital cutting. Child labor, especially in domestic work, often completely unpaid, remained common.

In Ogoniland, home of the Movement for the Survival of the Ogoni People (MOSOP), of which Ken Saro-Wiwa was leader before his execution in November 1995, MOSOP was from late 1998 able to organize freely for the first time since 1993. The new government promised to return the bodies of Saro-Wiwa and his co-accused to their families. Elsewhere in the Niger Delta, however, unrest and repression escalated. Youths from the Ijaw ethnic group, the fourth largest in Nigeria, adopted the Kaiama Declaration on December 11, 1998, which claimed ownership of all natural resources found in Ijaw territory; other ethnic groups issued similar statements. There was an increase in kidnappings of oil company staff in hope of ransom payments, protests aimed at improving oil company and government response to community needs, and violence among neighboring communities over matters such as the location of local government headquarters or oil facilities, crucial in the distribution of oil resources. In response, large numbers of soldiers and paramilitary Mobile Police were deployed across the delta throughout the year. The security forces both failed to protect civilians from violence in many cases, and also themselves carried out serious violations of human rights, including summary executions. As elsewhere in Nigeria, security force action was often indiscriminate, or targeted at those who had not committed any crime but had protested oil operations in exercise of their rights to freedom of expression, assembly, and association. During a military crackdown in late December 1998 and early January 1999 in response to largely peaceful protests in support of the Kaiama Declaration, dozens of young men were killed, most of them unarmed. Others were tortured and inhumanely treated; many were arbitrarily detained for several weeks.

In another incident in January 1999, two communities in Delta State were attacked by soldiers, using a helicopter and boats commandeered from a facility operated by Chevron, following an alleged confrontation that took place at a nearby Chevron drilling rig. More than fifty people may have died in these incidents. Chevron made no public protest at the killings. In May and early June 1999, violence flared up once again in and around Warri, Delta State, where there had been serious conflict since 1997 among the Ijaw, Itsekiri, and Urhobo ethnic groups. As in the case of similar violence that flared up in July between the Hausa and Yoruba ethnic groups in both Sagamu, in the south west, and Kano, in the north of the country, there were persistent allegations that senior figures in the military had fueled the conflict. In September 1999, soldiers shot dead tens of civilians in Yenagoa, capital of Bayelsa State, following confrontations with protesting youths.

President Obasanjo visited the delta area in June 1999 and held discussions with local leaders. He promised to bring greater development to the delta, and introduced to the National Assembly a bill to establish a Niger Delta Development Commission. Leaders of the ethnic groups based in the Niger Delta, however, rejected the bill for failing to address their concerns surrounding revenue allocation and resource control. In September, Obasanjo visited the delta again, when protests by local people brought exports from the new liquefied natural gas terminal at Bonny to a halt for several days.

More than ten thousand Nigerian troops were deployed in Sierra Leone as the major part of the Economic Community of West African States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) peacekeeping force. During the January rebel offensive against Freetown, and at other times, they were responsible for human rights violations against rebels and civilians, including summary executions. Nevertheless, the presence of the Nigerian soldiers protected many civilians against atrocities committed on an enormous scale by the rebels. In August, Obasanjo ordered the progressive withdrawal of Nigerian soldiers from Sierra Leone, unless the U.N. was prepared to pay their costs.

Defending Human Rights

Nigeria's numerous and sophisticated human rights groups were able to operate freely throughout the year, in welcome contrast to the repression under the government of General Abacha. Several dozen human rights, pro-democracy, and other nongovernmental groups, joined together to form the Transitional Monitoring Group (TMG), which deployed more than 10,000 election observers throughout the country for the various stages of the election process. The TMG produced by far the most useful analysis of the elections, and continued to operate afterward, to monitor progress towards democratic reform. Many individual human rights groups were active in proposing legal and other reforms to the new government. On May 6, 1999, Mazino Uzuazebe, head of a Kaduna-based organization, Martin Luther King's People, was shot dead at his home. The motivation for the killing was not clear.

The government-appointed National Human Rights Commission, created in 1996, held or attended a number of meetings to discuss human rights issues, some of them arranged by nongovernmental human rights groups such as the Constitutional Rights Project. The commission also recommended reforms to General Abubakar, while he was head of state, including the repeal of repressive decrees such as those allowing detention without charge, and (unsuccessfully) the inclusion of provision for the commission in the new constitution. By October, the commission had yet to take advantage of the new government to establish a higher profile for its work.

The Role of the International Community

A large number of international delegations from the U.N., OAU, E.U., Commonwealth, Francophonie, and other bodies observed the elections, the greatest number being present for the presidential elections in February. Although some international delegations, notably the United States' Carter Center and National Democratic Institute, expressed serious concern over defects in the process, most accepted the results fairly uncritically. While still president-elect, General Obasanjo went on an extensive tour of European, Asian, and African countries and the United States, seeking support for his incoming administration. A wide range of heads of state and other dignitaries attended his inauguration as president in May. Both the U.S. and the European Union and its member states began to reengage with Nigeria following the installation of the new government, focusing especially on assisting reform of civil-military relations.

Reestablishing potentially the most important bilateral relationship on the continent, President Nelson Mandela of South Africa visited Nigeria in January to attend the summit of the Economic Community of West Africa States; President Obasanjo attended President Thabo Mbeki's inauguration in South Africa in June, his first foreign trip as head of state; and in October the first meeting of a South Africa-Nigeria binational commission was held.

The Commonwealth

Nigeria's suspension from the Commonwealth, imposed in 1995, was lifted with the handover of power to a civilian government, in accordance with the recommendation of the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group (CMAG), meeting in April. A Commonwealth delegation observed the elections, and gave technical assistance to the electoral commission.

United Nations and Bretton Woods Institutions

The U.N. special rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Nigeria, Soli Sorabjee, was finally allowed to visit the country at the end of November 1998. His report to the 1999 Commission on Human Rights noted improvements in the situation and made recommendations for further reforms. The commission voted to discontinue its consideration of the situation in Nigeria and did not renew the mandate of the special rapporteur. Like other international bodies, the U.N. provided Nigeria with technicalassistance and sent an observer mission during the elections. U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan visited Nigeria in July and met with President Obasanjo.

Several World Bank delegations visited Nigeria following the transfer of power to a civilian government, including bank president James Wolfensohn in October, discussing poverty alleviation and provision of basic services, privatization, reform of the procurement system, as well as the restructuring of the oil sector. In May, after international creditors queried a missing U.S.$2.7 billion from Nigeria's foreign reserves, Nigeria committed itself to an economic program monitored by the International Monetary Fund and to transparency in the management of public resources, in exchange for future consideration of IMF credits. Another IMF delegation visited in July and offered a U.S.$1 billion standby loan pinned on clear evidence of market reforms.

A "direct contacts mission" from the International Labor Organization (ILO) visited Nigeria in 1998 and reported to the ILO Governing Body in November, noting improvements in the situation but recommending further steps to ensure respect for freedom of association. The Governing Body voted to suspend a commission of inquiry appointed to consider Nigeria's respect for freedom of association. In March, the ILO Committee on Freedom of Association considered longstanding complaints against Nigeria and welcomed the release of trade unionists, repeal of certain decrees limiting trade union activity, and the election in January of representatives to the National Labour Congress to replace a sole administrator appointed by the previous government. The committee recommended further reform to ensure freedom of association, in particular the system of trade union monopoly established by the Trade Unions Act.

European Union and its Member States

In November 1998, the E.U. Council of Ministers voted to repeal all sanctions imposed on Nigeria following the November 1995 executions of Ken Saro-Wiwa and eight other minority rights activists, except those relating to arms sales and military cooperation. In June 1999, the E.U. lifted all remaining sanctions and resolved to focus future cooperation on poverty alleviation, promotion of democracy and good governance, anti-corruption measures, and the integration of Nigeria into the global economy.

The E.U. and member states, especially the United Kingdom, gave substantial support to the transition program, including assisting in funding the TMG and the electoral commission, and sending an election observation team of one hundred people. Reportedly, a number of members of the team protested the overly favorable assessment given in the official E.U. statement on the elections. General Obasanjo traveled to the U.K. and France during March, and met with Prime Minister Tony Blair and President Jacques Chirac. Foreign Secretary Robin Cook traveled to Nigeria following the elections, and a five-man British military team visited in May to assess the needs for military reform, backed by a commitment to spend _750,000 (about U.S.$1.2 million) in a first tranche of assistance. The Department for International Development also committed funds to poverty alleviation and community based projects. President Chirac visited Nigeria in July, as part of a tour of five African states, and agreed with President Obasanjo to set up a joint economic commission.

United States

The U.S. Agency for International Development gave substantial funding to the transition program, including to the TMG. The National Democratic Institute, the International Republican Institute, and the Carter Center sent delegations to observe the elections. In May, the National Endowment for Democracy presented its annual democracy award to the TMG.

With the inauguration of a civilian government at the end of May, U.S. sanctions against Nigeria were lifted, allowing for the resumption of military assistance to Nigeria, including under the International Military Education and Training (IMET) program. Export-Import Bank financing for U.S. exports also resumed for Nigeria. Although Nigeria was in March deemed not to be in compliance with requirementsfor counter-narcotics certification under Section 481 of the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA), the administration issued a national interest waiver, thus allowing the U.S. to support assistance to Nigeria in six multilateral development banks and to restore FAA and Arms Control Export Act assistance to Nigeria. Although direct flights to Nigeria remained banned due to safety concerns, progress in addressing these concerns was reported.

Secretary of State Albright hailed Nigeria's transition as one of the most vital in the world for U.S. national interests, and a large number of U.S. officials visited Nigeria following the end of military rule. U.S. Under-Secretary of State for Political Affairs Thomas Pickering visited in May. A large Interagency Assessment Team, led by Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Amb. Howard Jeter traveled to the country in June. In July, a delegation from the Department of Transportation visited. In August, Energy Secretary Bill Richardson visited Nigeria and signed a memorandum of understanding with Nigerian Energy Minister Bola Ige which called for Nigeria to begin privatizing state energy companies and remove trade and investment barriers. In return, the U.S. would provide short-term aid to help alleviate oil, gas, and electricity shortages. An eight-man military team visited in August to explore possible assistance to the Nigerian armed forces in connection with professionalization and establishing civil-military relations. In October, Secretary of State Albright traveled to Nigeria, and pledged greater financial support for its ongoing transition.

U.S. assistance, which totaled some U.S.$25 million in FY 1999, focused on health issues, civil-military relations, democratic institution-building, and strengthening civil society, as well as development projects in the Niger Delta. The House Committee on International Relations Subcommittee on Africa and the Senate Foreign Affairs Committee held hearings on Nigeria in July and October, respectively, at which Human Rights Watch testified.

Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports

The Price of Oil: Corporate Responsibility and Human Rights Violations in Nigeria's Oil Producing Communities , 2/99

Crackdown in The Niger Delta , 5/99

RWANDA

Human Rights Developments

By late 1999, the Rwandan government had largely put down an insurgency which had operated out of northwestern Rwanda and adjacent areas of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) for the past eighteen months. In doing so, its troops killed tens of thousands of people, many of them civilians, and forced hundreds of thousands of Rwandans to move into government-established "villages." The Rwandan government had invaded the DRC in mid-1998, purportedly to ensure its security, but after having destroyed rebel bases near the border, it sent troops hundreds of miles into Congolese territory. As Rwanda scrambled to control Congolese territory and resources, its troops clashed repeatedly with soldiers of its erst-while ally, Uganda.

With the suppression of the insurgency and a July 1999 cease-fire in the DRC war, the on-going conflict that began in 1990 seemed to have ceased once more. At that time, the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF), composed largely of Tutsi refugees who had spent decades in exile, launched a war against the Rwandan government, then dominated by Hutu, who form the great majority of the Rwandan population. The Tutsi had been driven from Rwanda during the 1959 Hutu revolution which ended longstanding Tutsi rule.

In 1994, in a desperate bid to recoup ground lost to a growing internal opposition and to the RPF, the Rwandan government carried out a genocide that killed more than half a million Tutsi. After being defeatedby the RPF in 1994, the genocidal government led some two million Rwandans into exile, more than half of them to Zaire (now the DRC). In refugee camps there, remnants of the defeated army rearmed, recruited new forces, and began incursions into Rwanda. In 1996, Rwandan troops helped Zairean Tutsi overthrow the Zairean government in the first DRC war, in the process dispersing the camps, massacring tens of thousands of unarmed civilians, and killing thousands of soldiers and militia. Some 600,000 camp residents returned to Rwanda, where some of them launched an insurgency that posed a serious threat to the current government by mid-1997.

The government then revived Local Defense Forces, officially sanctioned paramilitary groups that had existed from mid-1994 to mid-1995. During 1999, it expanded these forces to more than 7,000 men. After brief training, they were charged with patrolling their neighborhoods to suppress purportedly anti-government activity, some of them armed with firearms, others with machetes. Many of the forces were Tutsi, but in regions where Tutsi were few, Hutu were also called to serve, some of them against their will.

During 1998, as part of its effort to suppress the insurgency, the government moved hundreds of thousands of people in the two northwestern prefectures into supervised camps. At the end of 1998, the government ordered the displaced to relocate once more, this time to officially designated "villages." Since 1995, the government had been resettling Rwandans returned from outside the country and the internally displaced in "villages," refusing to allow them to live in the dispersed homes customary in Rwanda. They insisted that villagisation would promote economic development and improve delivery of services to the population. As applied in the northwest, however, the program appeared to be meant primarily to reduce the likelihood of a new insurgency. By late 1999, 94 percent of the population of Kibungo and 60 percent of the population of Mutara, both prefectures in the east, had been moved into villages, as had 40 percent of the population of the prefecture surrounding the capital of Kigali. In addition 94 percent of the people of the northwest who had been in camps had been moved into villages and others, still in their own homes, had been ordered to destroy them and move to the new sites, where they were obliged to live in temporary shelters, under plastic sheeting, while building new houses. Persons who resisted these orders were fined or imprisoned. Despite government promises, most sites offered no services (water, schools, clinics) and residents often had to walk much farther to cultivate their fields.

By late 1999, many land claims from the relocation remained unresolved. Farmers in the northwestern prefecture of Ruhengeri were cultivating less than 60 percent of available arable land. About 60 percent of the population of the northwestern prefectures was malnourished (compared with 40 percent elsewhere in the country) and more than half a million still depended on foreign food aid near the end of the year.

In early 1999, the government which had been in power since 1994 organized its first elections. Nearly 90 percent of adult Rwandans voted for officials at the two most local levels of government. The elections, carried out by lining up behind candidates, departed from the usual Rwandan practice of voting by secret ballot. In some places, soldiers and civilian authorities used force or threats to try to compel hesitant persons to vote or to stand for office. In a case documented by a local human rights organization, a man was jailed for two days in the northwest after he had declined to serve in a post to which he had been elected against his will.

Although ready to concede citizens a limited voice in local government, authorities failed to consult them about decisions of national policy that were central to their lives, such as the imposition of villagisation.

In mid-1999, national political leaders decreed that the current government would not step down at the end of its five-year mandate, as specified in the Arusha Accords of 1994, but would continue to rule for at least another four years. If the government as a whole was to stay, some of its members had already been replaced. In December the minister of state for internal affairs fled the country after her brothers were arrested on charges of aiding the insurgents and shortly after, the Minister of Justice also chose exile,apparently after his repeated efforts to curb military interference in judicial decisions had failed. In February, the government was reshuffled, with those dismissed reportedly accused of corruption and incompetence.

National political leaders also removed four members of the National Assembly, charging them with involvement in the genocide, links to the insurgency, or corruption. They subsequently obliged other parliamentarians to resign or simply removed them, until finally about one third of the National Assembly had been replaced, all by individuals designated by party leaders.

In July 1999, the entire Supreme Court was replaced, after the judges were removed or pressured to resign, reportedly charged with responsibility for the stagnation of the judicial system.

Trials of persons accused of genocide moved at a snail's pace during 1999, although this was due less to any supposed inadequacy of the Supreme Court than to problems at the lower levels of the system. Prosecutors, judges, and investigators were poorly paid and subject to pressure and sometimes to threats from all sides. Many left government service, and among those who continued, absenteeism and slow rates of work were major problems. Fewer than 2,000 persons had been tried since the trials began nearly three years ago. A program to persuade accused persons to confess in return for possible reductions in sentence had attracted some 9,000 persons, but their willingness to confess had made little difference in the number of cases resolved.

When the current government took power, the judicial system lacked both the personnel and the means to prosecute the numerous cases of genocide. The international community subsequently contributed some $40 million to assist in delivering justice, an investment that had a relatively small return in part because the delivery of justice was highly politicized. Persons from the top to the bottom of society were accused of genocide, anti-Tutsi activities, or links to the insurgents whenever personal or political enemies wanted to threaten them. During 1999, the president and the prime minister themselves were thus accused, but remained in power and were not brought to trial.

In early May, the RPF publicly condemned survivors for falsely accusing others of genocide, but failed to note that RPF leaders themselves also sometimes resorted to false charges for their own ends. In some cases, survivors who spoke out against false accusations or testimony were harassed by other survivors who wanted the accused persons condemned. A witness at a trial in Butare declared in court that some persons, including judicial personnel, had attempted to persuade him to give false testimony. Threatened immediately after with arrest, the witness went into hiding.

During an April reburial ceremony for genocide victims, President Pasteur Bizimungu called on all Hutu to apologize for the genocide, thus suggesting all bore some responsibility for the crime. After remarks about conflicts between the Catholic Church and the government, he announced that Bishop Augustin Misago had been accused of genocide and stated that the Catholic Church should send him away, even if he were innocent. In this highly politicized context, Misago was arrested the following week and reports circulated that the archbishop of Kigali would be similarly charged.

The Rwandan genocide law charged the Kigali prosecutor with preparing a list of all persons suspected of crimes that fell in the first and gravest of four categories of possible genocidal offenses. Those so categorized were generally supposed guilty and were more likely to be condemned to death after trial. The first list, issued in 1996, had many errors, including citing individuals who were dead before the genocide began. In mid-1999, the prosecutor was to issue a revised list, removing 800 names and adding some 900 others. At the last moment, publication was halted because the revised list too contained errors.

According to government statistics at the start of 1999, Rwandan jails held some 150,000 persons: 135,000 were charged with genocide and 15,000 with other crimes. Construction of new facilities and expansion of old ones reduced overcrowding somewhat in a few of the central prisons, but prisoners in others, including in communal jails, live in inhumane conditions of overcrowding and lack of sanitary facilities. At Butare prison more than fifty persons died in a typhoid epidemic in the space of a few weeks.Two nongovernmental organizations, Prison Reform International and Dignity in Detention, introduced work programs which improved conditions somewhat in a few facilities.

Under steady pressure from the international community, Rwandan authorities announced in October 1998 that ten thousand detainees whose files contained no substantial proof of guilt would be released. By October 1999, some 3,500 detainees were released, many of them elderly, infirm, or young. In some communities, judicial personnel sent lists of persons proposed for release to local officials who then invited the community to present evidence against them. If such evidence was obtained, the persons were not released. Some 4,500 young people were detained for genocide committed when they were between the ages of fourteen and eighteen years old. They and 200 others who were younger than fourteen when the supposed crimes were committed remain in a training school.

Throughout much of 1999, Rwandan authorities discussed the establishment of a new form of popular justice based on gacaca, a customary mechanism for conflict resolution. Judges would be elected at the level of cell, sector, commune, and prefecture. Those accused of crimes from the least serious category, category four, would be tried at the cell level, those of category three at the sector level, and those of category two at the commune level. Appeals would be heard at the level of the prefecture. Those accused of category one crimes would be tried in the usual formal court proceedings. The proposed system provided no safeguards for the accused, such as the right to legal counsel.

During 1999, the number of cases of persons who "disappeared" at the hands of authorities diminished. But the police did engage in a number of sweeps, such as one in Kigali in June, where hundreds of persons were detained on the pretext of lacking necessary identity papers or residence permits.

One journalist was detained for several months after having criticized a military officer in print. Another, incarcerated since 1997, was unexpectedly released in mid-1999. A third, critical of the authorities, fled Rwanda early in the year, saying that his life had been threatened.

The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, much criticized for slowness in prosecuting persons accused of genocide, this year adopted procedures to expedite trials and established a new panel of judges to assist the two already seated. During 1999, the court found another three suspects guilty of genocide and sentenced them to terms varying from fifteen years to life in prison. The tribunal also arrested five more former ministers in the genocidal government, thus increasing the number of those in international custody to more half the cabinet at that time. Frequently criticized for the large number of vacancies among its professional staff, the tribunal reformed recruitment procedures and reduced the vacancy rate from 36 to 9 percent. Judge Louise Arbour finished her term as prosecutor and was replaced by Judge Carla DelPonte. In the first criminal prosecution in a national court outside Rwanda, a Swiss military court found a Rwandan burgomaster guilty of violating the Geneva conventions and sentenced him to life in prison.

Defending Human Rights

Rwandan human rights organizations, weakened by the death or flight into exile of some of their leaders in 1998, grew stronger in 1999. The trial observers team of the Rwandan League for Human Rights (LIPRODHOR) provided a continuing record of genocide trials and evaluated how well the proceedings were conducted. Also under LIPRODHOR sponsorship, a team visited communal jails, reporting both to local officials and to the public on abuses in these facilities, and another began monitoring how persons released from custody were treated when they returned to their communities.

The government named seven members to the first National Human Rights Commission. Among them only the president and one other had any previous human rights experience and government officials outnumbered representatives of the civil society. They undertook training at a human rights law program in Europe before beginning their duties.

The Role of the International Community

Still burdened by guilt over the genocide, the international community ignored reports of abuses and supported the Rwandan government generously, hoping thus to achieve stability in the region. During 1999, about 45 percent of the budget was paid for by foreign aid. Among the larger donors was the World Bank, which gave $75 million for economic reforms (plus $5 million for another specific program), and the United Kingdom which pledged $70 million of unrestricted funding over a period of ten years. The U.S. provided $10 million to support justice, $3 million of it for a public relations campaign to win popular support for gacaca. The Netherlands contributed $6.7 million for education and civil service reform. In July, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, and Norway all indicated they would increase their assistance to Rwanda.

Recognizing that the DRC war was disrupting the entire region, the European Union (E.U.) threatened to cut aid to the parties to the conflict, but in the end only suspended assistance for a short time. Following warnings from a U.N. commission on arms trade in the region that the flow of weapons risked stimulating war in the Great Lakes region, the E.U. stressed the obligation of member states to prohibit arms exports that would have that result. In a common position announced in July, the E.U. laid much of the responsibility for ending the DRC war on Rwanda and at least reminded Rwanda of its obligations to abide by international humanitarian law, although it did not explicitly condemn any of the massacres attributed to Rwandan troops. Concerning developments within Rwanda, the E.U. indicated its approval of Rwandan local elections by offering to pay for the training of those elected and urged further elections at higher levels within two years. In connection with the genocide trials, it asked Rwanda to release detainees without files, as had been promised, and to use restraint in imposing and executing the death penalty. Concerned about the proposed introduction of gacaca, the E.U. cautioned that the program might violate international human rights standards and urged recognition of the accused's right to a defense. Concerned also about villageization, the E.U. affirmed the need for planning, for popular consultations, and for equitable distribution of land in order to avoid human rights violations.

The U.S. was widely seen as a key supporter of the Rwandan government. In July Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Susan Rice reacted against this characterization of U.S. policy, insisting that the U.S. showed no favor for Rwanda in the DRC war. The U.S. did attempt to bring all parties to the war to a settlement, but its continued military training programs for Rwandan soldiers, like the absence of firm, explicit condemnation of abuses in the DRC and in Rwanda indicated continued important support for the Rwandan government.
SIERRA LEONE

Human Rights Developments

In January l999, rebels from the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) launched an offensive against the capital Freetown, capturing it from government troops and soldiers from the Nigerian-led peacekeeping troops of the Economic Community of West Africa States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG). The battle for Freetown and ensuing three week rebel occupation of the capital was characterized by the systematic and widespread perpetration of all classes of atrocities against the civilian population, and marked the most intensive and concentrated period of human rights violations in Sierra Leone's eight-year civil war. Government and ECOMOG forces also carried out serious abuses, including over 180 summary executions of rebels and their suspected collaborators.

After withdrawing from the capital in January, the RUF continued to commit large scale violations as they moved eastward, particularly in the villages around the towns of Masiaka and Port Loko. The massive displacement of civilians fleeing the fighting and the continued attacks by the RUF led to severe shortages in food and medicines for the 2.6 million people caught behind rebel lines.

In the months following the offensive, and as a result of intense international pressure, the government and RUF rebels entered into a dialogue which resulted in a ceasefire on May 18, and on July 7 the signing of a peace accord in Lom6, Togo. The accord, brokered by the United Nations, Organization of African Unity (OAU), and ECOWAS, committed the RUF to lay down its arms in exchange for representation in a new government. It also included a general amnesty for all crimes committed during the civil war, and mandated the formation of a truth and reconciliation commission (TRC) and a national human rights commission. While a disarmament process is currently underway the peace process was marred by cease-fire violations, missed deadlines, infighting within rebel ranks, and noncompliance by the RUF with several commitments, such as the release of all civilian abductees. As of October, little progress had been made toward establishing either the TRC or the human rights commission. While mandated to be established ninety days after the signing and submit its report twelve months later, government clarified that it did not want the TRC to begin work until the process of disarmament and demobilization of ex-combatants was complete.

The January offensive brought to the capital the same atrocities witnessed in Sierra Leone's rural provinces over the last eight years, as the RUF murdered at least two thousand civilians. Victims were usually chosen at random, though there was some targeting of particular groups, such as Nigerian nationals, unarmed police officers, journalists, and church workers. The horrific practice of mutilation and, in particular amputation of hands, arms, lips, legs and other parts of the body was widespread until the signing of the Lome peace accord. In January, the rebels cut off the limbs of some one hundred civilians, including twenty-six double arm amputations. An unknown number died before being able to receive medical attention. The rebel attacks around Masiaka and Port Loko produced at least another forty-four victims of mutilation, including seven double arm amputations. In a village near Masiaka, fifty-seven civilians were burned alive in late April.

The RUF perpetrated systematic, organized, and widespread sexual violence against girls and women. The rebels planned and launched operations in which they rounded up girls and women, brought them to rebel command centers, and then subjected them to individual and gang rape. Young girls under seventeen and particularly those deemed to be virgins were specifically targeted. While some were later released or managed to escape, at this writing hundreds continued to be held in sexual slavery after being "married" to rebel combatants. Well over one hundred of the girls became pregnant. Numerous girl children under the age of twelve died as a result of rape.

More than 3,000 children and 570 adults were reported as missing following the January offensive. Hundreds more were abducted as they moved through the villages around Masiaka. The abductees were often subjected to hard labor, forcibly recruited into the military, and compelled to become sexual partners to male combatants. While the Lom6 peace agreement called for the immediate release of all prisoners of war and "noncombatants," the RUF had only released under one thousand of these civilians at this writing. In Freetown, Masiaka, Rogberi, and near Kenema, the rebels also made frequent use of human shields, both while advancing towards ECOMOG positions and as a defense against ECOMOG air power.

The RUF also systematically set urban dwellings and entire villages on fire as they withdrew. In Freetown, entire city blocks, embassies, government buildings, factories, churches, mosques, and historical landmarks were set alight; housing authorities registered the destruction of 5,788 homes and residential buildings. The towns of Masiaka and Songo were also set on fire as were scores of villages in their environs. There was some destruction due to indiscriminate bombing by ECOMOG jets, particularly in the northern town of Kambia.

The RUF also frustrated the delivery of humanitarian relief to the 2.6 million civilians residing in areas under rebel control, despite the provisions of the July 7 peace agreement for all sides to "guarantee safe and unhindered access by humanitarian organizations to all people in need." Once delivery began, rebels on several occasions ambushed and looted trucks and boats loaded with relief supplies. In August, rebels fromthe ex-Sierra Leonean Army faction allied with the RUF took hostage forty-two members of a U.N.-led delegation comprised of ECOMOG, religious leaders, aid workers, and journalists who had gone to the Occra Hills to receive abducted children.

ECOMOG troops, and to a lesser extent members of the civilian militias supporting the government known as the Civil Defense Forces (CDF) and Sierra Leonean Police also committed atrocities. During the January offensive, ECOMOG and government forces routinely executed RUF prisoners and their suspected collaborators or sympathizers. There were at least 180 such executions. Prisoners taken by ECOMOG, some of whom had surrendered and many of whom were wounded, were frequently executed on the spot often with little or no effort to establish their guilt or innocence. Officers to the level of captain were present and participated in the executions. ECOMOG officials have yet to initiate a formal investigation into these killings. Following the January offensive, there were no reports of further ECOMOG executions though there were a few reports of rebel prisoners being executed by members of the CDF.

Around the towns of Bradford and Moyamba, at least one group of Kamajors, the largest and most powerful of the CDF forces, went on looting raids, sometimes posing as rebels, in which several civilians were killed and boats were attacked. There were several civilian deaths reported during clashes between the Mende and Temne tribes around "Mile 91" and Yele, and in chiefdom clashes between rival groups of Kamajors around Moyamba and Yonibana.

All sides in the conflict showed little respect for prisoners of war, with extrajudicial execution following surrender being common. Following the Lom6 peace accord, in which the immediate release of all prisoners of war was mandated, the government showed far better compliance than the RUF. At this writing the government had released 158 prisoners and ECOMOG had released sixty-one. In contrast, at this writing the RUF had only released twenty-nine of the several hundred ECOMOG prisoners they admittedly had in detention. Both the RUF and ECOMOG committed violations of medical neutrality, particularly during the January offensive.

Children continued to be subjected to all forms of violence and to be recruited as combatants by both rebel forces and the CDF. Following the signing of the accord, the CDF had, as of October, demobilized over one hundred and registered hundreds more for eventual demobilization. While the RUF had admitted that approximately 30 percent of their forces are under eighteen no official demobilization had taken place.

The situation for the some 480,000 Sierra Leoneans living as refugees in Guinea and Liberia deteriorated during the year. Following several cross border attacks by the RUF on Guinean villages and towns in March, April and May, Guinean authorities reacted by harassing, detaining, and in some cases deporting Sierra Leonean refugees they accused of being rebels or sympathizers. Refugees in Guinea, particularly the some 100,000 living close to the Sierra Leonean border, suffered food shortages and were at risk of cross border attacks. Dozens of refugees were killed or abducted in these attacks.

For the 90,000 Sierra Leonean refugees living in Liberia, the 35,000 living in northern Lofa county became vulnerable to attack by both Liberian insurgents and Liberian security forces when fighting between the two erupted in August. Officials of the United Nations High Commission for Refugees said in September that they would not facilitate the repatriation of Sierra Leonean refugees until the process of disarmament and demobilization of rival forces was completed and security assured. At this writing the United Nations estimated the number of IDP's in Sierra Leone to be over 500,000.

Journalists suffered considerable danger and harassment from all sides. Seven Sierra Leonean and one United States reporter were killed by rebel forces during the January offensive. One journalist was executed by ECOMOG forces in January after being denounced as a rebel collaborator. In April, May and June, at least five journalists were harassed and detained for stories they had written, and in July two journalists were arrested by ECOMOG after it alleged arms and ammunition were found in the offices of a local newspaper. The charges were later dropped.

Defending Human Rights

Numerous nongovernmental human rights organizations operated in Sierra Leone, including Forum of Conscience, Network Movement for Peace and Justice, Campaign for Good Governance, and Prison Watch. In l997, twenty-seven groups formed a coalition called the National Forum for Human Rights (NFHR). Most of these groups lacked proper funding, expertise, and institutional support. With a few exceptions, their activities focused on human rights education for the public and providing social work services for individuals in both war-related and non-war-related cases. Both because of lack of organization and fear of retribution, the local NGOs were generally reluctant to denounce abuses by or take a stand against abuses by rebels or government. None of them publicly denounced the peace accord's general amnesty. Several local human rights defenders received threats from and were targeted by the RUF during the January offensive.

The governmental National Commission for Democracy and Human Rights (NCDHR), formed in 1996, made significant contributions in human rights education, but it was perceived by the population to be too close to the government and unwilling to openly confront controversial issues. The commission also lacked both the powers to ensure requisite independence, such as the power to subpoena witnesses and to receive documentation, evidence, or records; and the expertise within the areas of documentation, monitoring, and advocacy. It did, however, operate a successful legal aid clinic which mainly addressed violations of economic and social rights unrelated to the war. It was hoped that the "autonomous quasi-judicial national Human Rights Commission" provided for by the Lom6 accord would address some of these deficiencies.

A significant effort to bring about unity and solidarity of purpose among the governmental and nongovernmental Sierra Leonean human rights community had been made by the Human Rights section of United Nations Observer Mission to Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL). This was formalized through the formation of the Human Rights Committee in January l999 which brought local human rights groups, international NGOs, NCDHR, and U.N. agencies together for information sharing and advocacy.

The Role of the International Community

Sierra Leone's human rights emergency provoked wide condemnation from the international community and served to galvanize diplomatic efforts to bring about a negotiated solution to the eight-year civil war. The U.N., ECOWAS, and OAU, directly facilitated the Lom6 peace agreement, which was also unofficially supported by the British, American, and Nigerian governments. The willingness of all international parties to the accord to accept the inclusion of a general amnesty stood in sharp contrast with the standards of justice enforced in other conflicts, such as Kosovo and East Timor.

ECOMOG and ECOWAS

At this writing there were approximately 12,000 predominantly Nigerian ECOMOG troops in Sierra Leone, with small Ghanaian and Guinean contingents. The cost of maintaining the troops (allegedly U.S. $1 million daily) was borne mostly by Nigeria. ECOMOG troops continued to provide security for the country's highways and airports, and in August began working jointly with the Sierra Leonean Police to combat rising crime. In addition to its support for the military role of ECOMOG, ECOWAS foreign ministers, particularly Togolese President Eyadema who, during the peace talks served as ECOWAS chairman, played an important part in brokering the peace talks which culminated in the signing of the Lom6 accord. The accord called for the transformation of ECOMOG's mandate from military intervention to peacekeeping and responsibility for the disarmament and encampment of all ex-combatants. However, ECOWAS states, particularly Nigeria-under considerable domestic pressure to reduce its financial and human commitment to Sierra Leone-demanded that the United Nations either convert the ECOMOG forceinto a U.N. peace-keeping force or financially support any continued ECOMOG presence. At this writing, the future of ECOMOG in Sierra Leone was unclear.

United Nations

After being forced to evacuate all international members of its mission and having its premises burned during the January offensive, the United Nations Observer Mission to Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL) went on to play a pivotal role in facilitating the Lom6 peace agreement. High profile U.N. visits by Secretary-General Kofi Annan in July, High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson in June, High Commissioner for Refugees Sadako Ogata in February, and Special Representative for Children in Conflict Olaro Otunnu in September showed the organization's commitment to and helped focus attention on Sierra Leone. The U.N. secretary-general's Special Representative Francis Okelo appended a hand-written disclaimer to the Lom6 accord stating that the U.N. would not recognize the accord's amnesty provision as applying to crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes, and other serious violations of human rights and humanitarian law. The U.N. failed to seek a protocol to clarify this disclaimer and the U.N. Security Council did not reaffirm the invalidity of the amnesty's limitations under international law in its resolutions. On October 22, the U.N. Security Council approved the U.N. Mission inSierra Leone (UNAMSIL). The operation, given an initial six month mandate, authorized the deployment of a 6,000-member U.N. peacekeeping force. UNAMSIL's mandate, under the U.N. Charter's chapter VII, included assisting the disarmament and demobilization process, ensuring the security of U.N. civilian personnel, assisting the delivery of humanitarian aid, and providing support for the new elections.

The human rights section under the UNOMSIL mission was mandated under the July 30 resolution to be expanded to fourteen human rights monitors and to include technical support for the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and the national Human Rights Commission. In August, U.N. consultants carried out assessment missions to Sierra Leone for both institutions and made recommendations to the government which at this writing had yet to be made public. In August, the high commissioner for human rights appointed a consultant to explore the relationship between the TRC and a possible future international commission of inquiry into human rights violations in Sierra Leone.

UNICEF made a significant contribution to the monitoring of children's rights violations, advocacy and care for child victims of war. The United Nations Development Programme continued its support of a human rights education program with the governmental National Commission for Democracy and Human Rights.

The European Union, United Kingdom, and United States

In April the European Union Joint Assembly adopted a resolution condemning the January rebel offensive, atrocities inflicted on the civilian population, and the use of child soldiers. In February, Commissioner for Humanitarian Aid Emma Bonino visited Sierra Leone and called for more humanitarian aid. The E.U. welcomed the signing of the Lom6 accord, and called upon all parties to adhere to the terms of the agreement. Since l998, the European Commission had given Sierra Leone more than U.S.$140 million for development and rehabilitation projects (over five years), providing U.S.$22 million for emergency assistance for humanitarian assistance in Sierra Leone and for Sierra Leonean refugees in Guinea since the beginning of the year.

Both the United Kingdom and the United States played a significant role in military and political developments. On January 19, the U.K. described the January offensive as "more than a week of looting and anarchy in which the rebels amply demonstrated their brutality which repeatedly has blighted Sierra Leone." The U.S. made a similar statement on March 23 stating that the RUF "has purposely and systematically terrorized and brutalized tens of thousands of innocent civilians as a terror tactic to furtherits efforts to overthrow a democratically elected government." Both governments continued to publicly advocate for the "dual track" approach, military and negotiation, to end the war. However, particularly after the January offensive, considerable pressure was applied to both the RUF and especially the government of Sierra Leone to seek a negotiated solution. Pressure was also applied, particularly by the U.S., on the governments of Liberia and Burkina Faso to stop providing military action and logistical support to the RUF. The U.S. ambassador to Sierra Leone and a U.K. representative were present in Lom6 throughout the two month negotiation process and were influential in directly shaping parts of the agreement. The U.K. also took a leading role in facilitating the Sierra Leone Contact Group formed in November l998 to bolster international support for Sierra Leone. At this writing the Contact Group had met three times: November l998 in London, April l999 in New York, and July l999 in London.

The U.S. and U.K. continued to be the largest providers of humanitarian assistance to Sierra Leone. The U.S.'s total humanitarian and emergency contribution in 1999, including grants to NGOs and aid agencies, was U.S.$35.7 million. The U.S. also contributed U.S.$10 million in aid to ECOMOG in the form of nonlethal logistical assistance. For its part, the U.K., since January, contributed U.S.$50 million during 1999, including assistance for ECOMOG, training and equipping of the new Sierra Leonean army, and U.S.$16.5 million for the Disarmament, Demobilization, and Rehabilitation program. British military personnel began training the new Sierra Leonean Army in May and were expected to continue until March 2000. In coordination with the Commonwealth Secretariat, the U.K. provided funds for training and administration of the Sierra Leonean Police, including the provision of the Inspector General.
SOUTH AFRICA

Human Rights Developments

South Africa held its second all-race elections in May 1999, with only minor problems reported during the polling. As predicted, the African National Congress (ANC) won a large majority (66.36 percent of the vote), and former deputy president Thabo Mbeki succeeded Nelson Mandela as president and head of state. The ANC chose to maintain the format of a government of national unity, though no longer constitutionally obliged to do so, and leader of the Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) Mangosuthu Buthelezi and other IFP members were reappointed to cabinet positions. The Democratic Party, however, became the official opposition with 9.55 percent, one percent ahead of the IFP; the "New" National Party, the former party of government, gained only 6.87 percent (compared to 20 percent in 1994).

On December 10, 1998, the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the South African government announced a National Action Plan for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, and ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. South Africa also made declarations under article 41 of the ICCPR recognizing the competence of the Human Rights Committee to consider interstate complaints, and under articles 21 and 22 of the Convention against Torture recognizing the competence of the Committee Against Torture to consider both individual and interstate complaints. In July 1999, Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development Penuell Maduna announced that cabinet had decided to request parliament to approve South Africa's accession to the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid. In October, cabinet also approved the ratification of the ILO Convention on the Prohibition and Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour.

The Truth and Reconciliation Commission completed its hearings of witness testimony about past human rights abuses and presented its report to President Mandela at the end of October 1998. While finding that apartheid was a crime against humanity and that the previous government was responsible for most of the human rights violations during the period 1960 to 1994, the commission also found that the ANC and other liberation movements had committed gross abuses during the armed struggle. Both former president F.W. de Klerk and the ANC challenged the report in court; de Klerk was successful in having a short section naming him as a perpetrator of abuses removed. Several thousand applications for amnesty to the commission remained outstanding, and hearings of amnesty applications were set to continue into 2000, when a supplement to the report would be published. Among notable decisions during the year, the killers of black activist Steven Biko were denied amnesty in February.

The Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD), set up in 1997 to investigate or oversee the investigation of complaints against the police, reported 219 deaths in custody of a total 756 deaths in custody or as a result of police action while in the hands of police from April 1998 to March 1999. In November 1998, the government launched a comprehensive new policy to prevent torture, offering some hope that these figures might fall in the future. Following the Western Cape ICD's March 1999 arrest of a police officer alleged to have committed a serious assault, police in the region obstructed the ICD's work, for example by refusing to appear on identity parades or to make statements. In May, the Gauteng office of the ICD recommended the prosecution of twenty-two policemen filmed assaulting suspected criminals by a BBC documentary crew. In July, new minister for safety and security Steve Tshwete commented that a yet-to-be implemented amendment to the Criminal Procedure Act restricting the right of the police to use deadly force to cases where death or serious injury was threatened might have to be revisited because it would give too much protection to criminals.

South Africa's first national policy on prosecutions was made public in January, intended to guide prosecutors in decision making and provide consistency in handling of criminal offenses. The Prevention of Organised Crime Act, passed in 1998, came into effect in January, creating new offences related to racketeering and providing for the confiscation of the proceeds of unlawful activities. After several attempts to invoke the act to confiscate assets were ruled invalid by the courts, amendments were the government introduced an amending bill to parliament to provide that the law had retroactive effect. In the meantime, assets seized from Piet Meyer, the head of the police organized crime unit in KwaZulu-Natal, who was arrested and charged with various offenses relating to fraud and racketeering, and from Wouter Basson, the apartheid government's chemical warfare expert, had to be returned. On September 1, President Mbeki launched a new anticrime unit, the Directorate of Special Investigations, dubbed the "Scorpions."

Important new legislation restructuring the prison service and bringing prisons law into line with the constitution was passed in late 1998. The act partially came into effect in February 1999, but many sections relating to treatment of prisoners remained unimplemented by October. A Judicial Inspectorate for prisons, provided for by earlier amending legislation and incorporated into the new act, began operations during the year, though the first judge appointed resigned almost immediately. He retained a part-time role, pending the delayed appointment of a replacement, and oversaw the progressive appointment of civilian prison visitors across the country. With the prison population at 146,278 on December 31, 1998, against approved accommodation for 99,294 inmates, prisons remained seriously overcrowded and plagued by prisoner violence. A prison building program led to the award in March of the first contracts to run private prisons, but the budget for the Department of Correctional Services was cut overall. Following a Constitutional Court ruling that prisoners had the right to vote, prisoners participated in the May elections, as they had in 1994. In August, a High Court ruling restored to prisoners awaiting trial various privileges that had been removed in a November 1998 departmental decision, but the department said it would appeal the order.

In November 1998, the Department of Justice launched a training program on violence against women for court staff. The ground-breaking Domestic Violence Act, improving the system of award andenforcement of court orders restraining perpetrators of violence in the home, and the Maintenance Act were both signed into law in December 1998, but neither had been brought into effect by October 1999. The government stated that the delay was caused by the cost of drafting regulations and training personnel to implement the new provisions. The Child Care Amendment Act, passed in March, prohibited the commercial sexual exploitation of children.

Despite fears that the KwaZulu-Natal region would suffer yet another upsurge in political violence during the period leading up to the 1999 election, the vote passed relatively peacefully. In the long-troubled midlands region, nevertheless, serious problems continued. Former ANC leader Sfiso Nkabinde, acquitted in 1998 on charges of sixteen murders, was shot dead in January 1999, and retaliatory killings followed. In August, several people were arrested for Nkabinde's murder, including a bodyguard for the ANC mayor of Richmond, Andrew Ragavaloo. After many years of failures in investigation of violence in the midlands area, the arrests were a success for an investigative unit formed in November 1998 under the deputy director for public prosecutions in KwaZulu-Natal, Chris Macadam.

New refugee legislation became law in December 1998, which addressed many concerns about defects in the existing system for determining asylum applications, while failing to provide asylum seekers with the right to a hearing by those who would adjudicate their case. The act had not yet been brought into force by October 1999. The National Consortium on Refugee Affairs, including both NGOs and the national Human Rights Commission, strongly criticized a plan proposed by the Department of Home Affairs for all asylum seekers to be kept in two remote detention facilities while their applications were decided. More positively, new Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs Penuell Maduna stated in June that he identified with the plight of refugees and that South Africa must fulfil its obligations under international law. In February, the Cape High Court ruled that the Aliens Control Act unfairly discriminated against gay and lesbian couples by denying foreign partners of South Africans the right to live and work in South Africa. The case was heard on appeal by the Constitutional Court in August, and judgment was reserved. In March, the government published a white paper which proposed new structures and policies for immigration, while shifting enforcement emphasis "from border control to community and workplace inspection." In March, the national Human Rights Commission published a report, based on research carried out in collaboration with the NGO Lawyers for Human Rights and the University of the Witwatersrand, on conditions in the private detention facility where foreigners await deportation. The report documented widespread corruption in the deportation process and serious allegations of police abuse of deportees. In July, the South African and Mozambican governments announced the creation of a joint working group to monitor conditions of detention and repatriation of Mozambican immigrants in South Africa. Meanwhile, xenophobic attacks on foreigners continued, as did police abuse and police failure to protect them.

In January, the government brought into effect a law, aimed at mercenary outfits such as Executive Outcomes, prohibiting private military training or operations on South African soil. In April, the last South African troops deployed in Lesotho in a botched military intervention by the Southern African Development Community (SADC) in September 1998 were withdrawn. Before leaving office, President Mandela took a farewell tour of several European countries, acknowledging the contribution of the Scandinavian states and the Netherlands to the anti-apartheid struggle. However, he explicitly declined to raise the human rights practices of China during a visit there in May. South Africa played a key role in negotiating the extradition of the Libyan suspects in the Lockerbie bombing, leading to the lifting of U.S. sanctions against Libya, and was prominent in talks to end the war in the Democratic Republic of Congo. South Africa defended its first annual report to the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights in April, and hosted a SADC conference on the International Criminal Court in June.

Defending Human Rights

South Africa's vigorous human rights community continued to monitor; occasional government hostility to NGO criticism was counteracted by strong collaboration in government-NGO partnerships elsewhere. The constitutionally guaranteed South African Human Rights Commission (SAHRC) and the Commission on Gender Equality carried out valuable work during the year, as did other statutory monitoring mechanisms, such as the Independent Complaints Directorate. Perhaps the greatest challenge faced by the ICD was substantial public hostility, reflected in some ministerial statements, to measures to protect the rights of alleged criminals from police brutality and arbitary use of lethal force.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

The office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights, under a project in operation since April 1998, offered technical assistance to the SAHRC, the Department of Justice, the police, the Department of Correctional Services, and the army, as well as to Justice College, for training for magistrates and judges, the Centre for Human Rights at the University of Fort Hare, and the Commission on the Restitution of Land Rights. A manager for the project was based at the SAHRC's headquarters in Johannesburg. In addition, the Pretoria office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees gave logistical and other support to the SAHRC's work on xenophobia.

European Union

On October 11, an agreement on development and cooperation between the E.U. and South Africa was signed in Pretoria after three-and-a-half years of negotiations. In addition to trade issues, the agreement encouraged support for democracy and the rule of law, respect for human rights, and the promotion of social justice. The E.U. also funded a major technical assistance program on training for labor market skills. The E.U. Foundation for Human Rights in South Africa continued to fund a number of human rights and development projects with money from the European Commission's Programme for Reconstruction and Development in South Africa. The Association of European Parliamentarians for Africa (AWEPA) funded a program launched in November 1998 to regularize the legal status of the estimated 250,000 former Mozambican refugees in South Africa. Individual E.U. members also made bilateral contributions to human rights initiatives. Several European ministers and heads of government traveled to South Africa during the year.

United States

The U.S. Agency for International Development's Program for South Africa focused on six strategic areas, including democracy and governance; funds made available during the 1999 program amounted to approximately U.S.$47 million. The U.S.-S.A. bilateral commission met in South Africa in February, cementing close relations between the Clinton administration and Pretoria. Following the meeting, a new committee focusing on law enforcement was announced, and U.S. training and assistance for the criminal justice system. South Africa participated in the U.S.-Africa ministerial meeting held in Washington D.C. in March. The U.S. assisted in Operation Blue Crane, a peacekeeping training exercise held in South Africa in April by members of the Southern African Development Community.
sUDAN

Human Rights Developments

The government of Sudan remained a gross human rights abuser although it took positive steps to address some abuses. Advances included the admission that abduction and forced labor (although applying the term "slavery" to this was decried) existed and required government action, ratification of the Chemical Warfare Convention, and permission for a U.N. needs assessment in of the Nuba Mountains. The sixteen-year civil war continued in the south, in the Nuba Mountains, and in the east of Africa's largest country between the Islamist government and against the National Democratic Alliance (NDA), a coalition of armed opposition movements. Settlement proved elusive because of difficult issues of religion and the state, economic and political marginalization of minorities, and the diversity of Sudan's Arab and African, Muslim and non-Muslim population of thirty million.

A major development in the south came from a "People-to-People" reconciliation process sponsored by the New Sudan Council of Churches in the south. The Nuer and Dinka, the two largest tribes in the south, were on opposite sides of the war since 1991 when the Sudan People's Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A) split. In March their representatives concluded a peace covenant, agreeing to specific human rights goals. The Nuer, seriously split by armed conflicts among and within Nuer sections that were partly fostered by the government, began to come together through the same process. This grassroots development, seen as the means to end debilitating south-south conflicts, could reduce the atrocities committed against Nuer and Dinka civilians by armed groups, while threatening the government's "divide and destroy" policy.

The Sudan People's Liberation Army, the principal armed movement of the south, committed its share of abuses. After the international community demanded the release of four captives, the SPLA reported they "died in cross fire." It permitted an ethnic conflict between Dinka SPLA forces and Didinga farmers to fester until it blew up. Efforts to establish an independent judiciary in SPLA-controlled areas were undercut by high-level interference.

Government Abuses

Torture remained a serious problem. A journalist badly tortured during a month of security detention showed visible wounds on release. The government did not accede to the Convention Against Torture, and amnestied former president Nimeiri on his return from exile when victims' families threatened to sue.

Impunity was the rule. The people of northern Wadi Halfa unsuccessfully demanded a public trial for a commander and forty soldiers who stormed a wedding party in July, beating the guests. A university student supporting the opposition was shot dead in December 1998 during clashes with Islamist students. Witnesses identified a member of the Islamist group Hamas as responsible, but there was no investigation.

The judicial system was instead used against political opponents of the government, whose fair trial rights were not respected. Fr. Hilary Boma, chancellor of the Archdiocese of the Catholic Church in Khartoum, Fr. Lino Sebit, and twenty-four others (six in absentia) were tried in a military court for conspiracy and sabotage; only one of the accused was in the military. The charges were based on confessions defendants said were elicited through torture during which three detainees died. The court martial was adjourned midtrial in January 1999 for an appeal challenging its jurisdiction over civilians. The Constitutional Court ruled in late July that a military court had jurisdiction over civilian defendants at the discretion of the minister of justice. The minister told Human Rights Watch in August that he would transfer the case to a civilian court, and this measure was subsequently confirmed.

Conditions in the Omdurman Women's Prison were so bad that sixteen children living with their prisoner-mothers died of diseases inside the prison.The government released 827 of 1,200 women prisonersfrom the prison, built to house 200. Three Muslim women prisoners went on hunger strike to protest prison food.

The government permitted political associations to register after a ten year ban imposed when it took power through a military coup in 1989. It timed state assembly elections so soon after, however, that the newly registered political parties declined to present candidates, resulting in the continuance of one-party control of the National Congress (previously known as the National Islamic Front), into its tenth year in power. Most party leaders remained in exile, and most parties continued to function only from exile, objecting to the registration act's requirement of loyalty to the National Congress Party's version of an Islamic state.

The nongovernmental press exercised more freedom despite frequent suspensions by the government press council, until the president ordered the closure of an independent daily, Al Rai Al Akhar , on the eve of a mission by the U.N. special rapporteur on freedom of opinion and expression. The president objected to the frequently-suspended paper's supposedly sarcastic treatment of martyrdom, among other things.

The rights to freedom of assembly, association, and expression were violated through arrests and bans on meetings, protests, and unregistered organizations. In April, lawyers trying to hold a political meeting at the bar association were detained, although the only one tried and sentenced for "disturbing public peace and order" was acquitted on appeal. In Dongola, authorities jailed eight persons protesting the state's failure to maintain Nile embankments which had left 50,000 homeless. In September, eleven opposition politicians arrested for holding a press conference to announce a new (unregistered) party were acquitted of disturbing public order.

Two large Sufi Muslim religious brotherhoods, the Ansar and the Khatmiyya, were associated with the banned Umma and the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) opposition parties. The religious leaders were intermittently detained and harassed, particularly the Ansar imams who insisted on preaching that the government was not correctly practicing Islam.

The government had a policy of harassment of Christian churches and believers. Apostasy, or conversion by Muslims to another faith, was a capital crime. A Nuban detained for apostasy in 1998 remained in prolonged arbitrary detention.

The top-level discourse of "jihad" created a climate of intolerance despite respect for all religions shown by some officials. The police dispersed a crowd of Islamists shouting insults over loudspeakers outside the Coptic Church in Khartoum. But police did not intervene when Islamist students attacked a Christian book display at a University of Khartoum event in February. Four Christians and three Muslims reportedly were injured. The Islamists destroyed the Christian materials, worth U.S. $2,000, burning some books and throwing religious materials into the Nile. The army occupied the Catholic printing press, the only one in the garrison town of Wau, in December 1998, detaining seven, of whom one was a priest and another a religious brother; the two religious were held for twelve days without charges. The government expelled a Canadian Catholic priest working in the Khartoum slums without giving any reason.

The Khartoum state government continued to destroy Christian structures and prevent new Christian construction in the capital. In the past ten years it bulldozed thirty to fifty Christian churches, centers, and schools in the slums because they lacked construction permits. In fact the government rarely granted permits to Christian denominations to build anything, while freely granting permits for mosque construction. The Catholic Club was confiscated by the government in late 1998.

Two churches and schools of the Episcopal Church teaching, 1,400 children, were destroyed in a Khartoum suburb. Five Catholic schools in Khartoum North, serving 3,800 children, were scheduled for demolition but the children and their parents resisted. By August the state government appeared to target for closure all Catholic schools providing (free) primary through eighth grade education for 48,000 mostly southern and Nuba students in poor neighborhoods.

In June the government secured an eviction order requiring the Episcopal bishop and all other church personnel to vacate immediately Omdurman property it owned and used as diocesan headquarters. The church sued for trespass in 1997 when the health ministry reneged on agreements that its use of a church building for a child care center was only temporary. The ministry started new construction there without church permission, and was backed up by armed security agents. In 1999 the ministry produced a purported confiscation decree dated July 1997, of which the Episcopal Church did not receive notice. The case was appealed to the Supreme Court.

In western Kordofan, many officials targeted Christians and their centers. In one place, four Christian religious centers were burned down and fifty Christian youth were lashed by the authorities. Police ignored a complaint identifying suspects in the Popular Police Forces in the arson of one prayer center. Elsewhere, a tribal chief told Catholics that he did not want a Christian church in his area and that they should demolish their prayer center. His police conducted a mass arrest of all present in the center, including women and children, dragging them to the police station where many were beaten.

Sudan had the largest internally displaced population in the world, estimated at four million, almost half in Khartoum. Starting in 1992, several hundred thousand displaced were forcibly removed into deplorable conditions in four "temporarily authorized" displaced camps outside Khartoum. The government announced in 1999 that 230,000 living in one camp would be relocated to a new site to make way for a private agricultural scheme, despite concerns that conditions in the new site were not fit for human habitation.

Public order police frequently harassed women and monitored women's dress for orthodoxy. Women guards were posted outside universities to assure women students wore the prescribed baggy garments. In June the public order police raided a riverside picnic and detained twenty-five Nuba students whom a public order court convicted of publicly meeting without public order police permission. The nine women students also were convicted of wearing an indecent or immoral uniform (trousers). The court sentenced the students to forty lashes each and fines; the women were flogged despite a decree that women would no longer be flogged except for crimes such as adultery or drinking alcohol.

War-Related Abuses

Government of Sudan

The Land Mines Convention, signed in 1997, was not ratified and the government had not destroyed all antipersonnel landmines as required. The government refused the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) access to those detained in connection with the conflict; failure to take rebel soldiers prisoner pointed to a policy of secret summary execution.

The government persistently bombed civilian installations and relief sites, killing and injuring civilians and destroying scarce infrastructure. It bombed a hospital in SPLA-held Yei more than fifteen times, with frequent civilian casualties. Other medical centers were bombed, some with cluster bombs in June. Despite the Sudan government's unilateral declaration of a comprehensive cease-fire until October 15, the government bombed the rebel-held Nuba Mountains in central Sudan in August, wounding twelve children and four women. Despite a mutual famine area cease-fire, on May 16, 1999, a government Antonov dropped twenty-four cluster bombs on Akak in Bahr El Ghazal, next to a relief food drop zone, killing a ten-year-old girl and injuring a boy.

Eastern NDA rebel areas reported that in January the government displaced 12,000 people through indiscriminate artillery and aerial bombardment. In March a government offensive in the east displaced 3,500 people from several villages which it burned. The government in turn accused the NDA of displacing tens of thousands of civilians on the eastern front as well. Both sides used antipersonnel landmines.

The government also armed tribal militias to use as proxy fighting forces. It claimed that it did not violate the cease-fire when on January 28, 1999 sixty Arab Baggara militia members (muraheleen) attacked Bararud in Bahr El Ghazal on horseback, killing ten people and looting the medical compound and feedingcenter. Deniability wore thin when the muraheleen and government army jointly attacked the village of Akoch Payam in Bahr El Ghazal, killing thirty persons at an airstrip food distribution and abducting seventy-five persons to use as slaves.

The resurgence of slavery was an outgrowth of the war and the arming of the muraheleen, who were incorporated into the army in 1989. They were allowed to keep all cattle and people they captured as war booty while guarding the military's supply train to the south or on freelance raids.

The government denied all slavery allegations until May 1999, when it acknowledged the problem of "abduction and forced labor of women and children" and set up a committee to address it, including a Dinka nongovernmental activist experienced in locating and retrieving Dinka children from slavery. It held a three-day workshop in late July, attended by a diverse group. Its early work was marred by the security forces' detention of a Sudanese UNICEF employee researching slavery.

Western anti-slavery groups "redeemed" slaves; one group claimed to have freed a total of 15,400, at a maximum price of $50 per head, with payments made to middlemen. UNICEF denounced buying human beings for any purpose.

In 1997, the government signed a Khartoum peace agreement with former rebel forces, and named Nuer ex-rebel leader Dr. Riek Machar head of the southern government prior to a southern self-determination referendum in four years. Dr. Machar claimed in 1999 that the government had materially breached the agreement. A chief complaint was that the government made Nuer warlord Paulino Matiep a general in the government army and supplied his militia, which repeatedly clashed in Unity state with Machar's ex-rebel army, the South Sudan Defense Forces (SSDF).

The government distrusted Dr. Machar partly because he supported the Nuer-Dinka reconciliation meeting held in March in Wunlit, Bahr El Ghazal. Thereafter, General Matiep purged Machar officials from public life: he expelled Unity state's elected governor; detained at his military base senior state officials and numerous others; and allegedly assassinated two state ministers, traders, and others.

Under the 1997 Khartoum peace agreement the SSDF had exclusive military and security control in the areas they were occupying when the agreement was signed, including the oil-rich Nuer area south of Bentiu, capital of Unity state. Government moves to station troops there in May 1999 sparked SSDF attacks. The oil companies withdrew from the oil fields south of Bentiu and have not returned as of this writing. Fighting raged up and down Unity state between the SSDF and Matiep; the government backed up Matiep with arms and air power. After the initial attack, the SSDF steered clear of attacks on government troops. Tens of thousands of Nuer civilians fled, many burned and looted out of their homes, as Matiep's forces killed and abducted young women; both sides recruited child soldiers. Many Nuer found sanctuary and assistance in Dinka areas with chiefs who had signed the Wunlit Nuer-Dinka peace and reconciliation agreement in March. In August, Dr. Machar, treading a very fine line, threatened to resign from the government because of its violations of the peace agreement.

By then, the government was celebrating the first shipment of crude oil exported from Sudan, which came from the Nuer oil fields north of Bentiu. The first sabotage of the 1,600 kilometer oil pipeline to the Red Sea occurred shortly thereafter. In September the SSDF and Matiep/government forces resumed fighting and a top Matiep commander staged a coup and captured the Matiep base, causing even more uncertainty. Kerubino Kuanyin Bol, a gross human rights abuser who switched sides several times, was killed.

In western Darfur, the sedentary Masaalit farmers, African Muslims, complained they were victims of nomadic Arab nomads' militias armed by the government. After the government gave thirty new government posts to Arabs, marginalizing the Masaalit majority, there were reports of hundreds of nomad militia attacks on Masaalit villages, killing hundreds, displacing thousands, destroying villages and looting livestock as the nomads, facing repeated drought, migrated to Dar Masaalit earlier each year, before the Masaalit crops could be harvested.

In January 1999, during a confrontation, angry Masaalit farmers shot at Masaalit and Arab tribal heads who came to restore calm, killing an Arab chief. The Khartoum government claimed that the Masaalit were an SPLA fifth column, and sealed off Dar Masaalit. Reportedly the Arab militias then killed more than 2,000 Masaalit. The government set up special courts to try leaders of the clashes, sentencing fourteen people to death, and sponsored a tribal reconciliation conference which concluded that 292 Masaalit and seven Arabs were dead; 2,673 houses burned down; and large numbers of livestock looted, with the Masaalit suffering most. The Arab tribes refused to pay compensation. A peace pact was signed in June but the Masaalit complained of further militia attacks; one in July killed 309 people. About 29,500 fearful Masaalit refugees remained in eastern Chad, where the Arab militias reportedly came to kill eighty Masaalit refugees in mid-1999.

The Sudan-based and -supported Ugandan rebel group, the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), committed gross abuses of human rights in its Sudanese camps and in Uganda against some 10,000 Ugandan children it abducted, including murder, torture, and sexual abuse. Sudan admitted after long denials that it helped the LRA, saying it did so in retaliation for Uganda's support of the SPLA.

SPLA

On February 18, 1999, the SPLA captured three government employees said to be "spies" and a Red Crescent tracing officer, and two ICRC expatriates with them, who strayed into SPLA territory. Although the ICRC personnel were released, the SPLA later claimed that all four Sudanese captives were killed during an unsuccessful rescue attempt. It refused to release the bodies, making it likely that the four had been murdered.

The Didinga of Chukudum in the Eastern Equatoria region of southern Sudan were deeply dissatisfied for years with the SPLA garrison in their town, claiming mistreatment by the Bor Dinka who dominated the garrison and whose families lived in nearby displaced persons camps. There was a history of summary executions and retaliations by both sides. On January 10, 1999, a personal clash between a Dinka SPLA officer and a Didinga SPLA officer resulted in the death of the Dinka officer. The next day, Didinga fled for the mountains, fearing retaliation. On January 13, fighting broke out, and the SPLA took the town. A peace-making delegation appointed by the SPLA was not heeded; the SPLA claimed the Didinga were in league with a government militia. In April, fighting started again. A cease-fire was finally declared in August and the SPLA agreed to remove landmines it planted in the area.

SPLM leaders admitted SPLA responsibility for food diversion at a U.N.-convened May meeting on the 1998 famine. They also sharply criticized international blunders. In Ajiep, a major relief distribution center during the famine, some 800 bags of food (fifty kilos/bag) were stolen from the airstrip, the work of warlord Kerubino's soldiers, police from Wau, and SPLA deserters. The SPLA was blamed for not restoring order after it was notified of this problem. In Ajiep only 41 percent of the food was left for the community after the chiefs, commissioners, and SPLA had taken their cut, and that lay undistributed for weeks. The SPLA took 30 percent, more than they needed to feed their troops, those at the meeting said. This was the area in which the diversion problem was the largest magnitude: Ajiep had the highest mortality rate during the famine.

Visitors to SPLA areas continued to see armed SPLA youth who looked younger than eighteen. Although UNICEF had a program for demobilization of child soldiers, the SPLA was not known to have demobilized any of the child soldiers in its ranks.

Marial Nuor, an SPLA major in military intelligence, was investigated by the SPLA after he detained elderly foreign nuns and a priest for two weeks in 1996, causing an international uproar. Marial, in charge of SPLA recruitment in Yirol, had allegedly also killed two soldiers, three recruits, and tortured an old man to death. He was convicted by a court martial-for mutiny when he evaded arrest. He was imprisoned briefly, and then was under "open arrest." At the request of the old man's family, Marial was sent back toYirol in 1999 and tried in a civilian court. He was convicted and sentenced to five years in jail and fined. Several months later, however, he was freed when the SPLA ordered him to conduct more recruitment in Yirol. After he threatened his fellow officers and bragged of his untouchability, he was again punished: with a transfer from Yirol.

Defending Human Rights

No independent human rights organization existed in government-controlled areas. Independent attorneys defended those few put on trial for sabotage and conspiracy and related charges. Churches attempted to defend their parishioners' rights. The Dinka committee retrieving enslaved Dinka children was an underground human rights organization until it was incorporated into the government committee on abductions.

Human rights monitors operated in the SPLA areas of the Nuba Mountains and in the NDA area of Menza on the eastern front. There were no human rights organizations in southern rebel-held areas. The Nairobi-based South Sudan Law Society and women's organizations raised human rights issues in various forums. The Egyptian government threatened to close the Sudan Human Rights Organization in exile in Cairo following its report on slavery in Sudan.

The Role of the International Community

United States

The U.S. policy of isolating the Sudan government lost diplomatic ground following the U.S. August 1998 bombing of a Khartoum factory in retaliation for the bombing of two U.S. embassies in Africa by attackers it associated with Sudan. The U.S. refused to divulge key evidence leading it to conclude the factory possessed chemical weapons. After the factory owner sued in U.S. courts, the U.S. unfroze his U.S. assets rather than make disclosures.

A 1997 executive order imposing stiff sanctions on all financial transactions between U.S. and Sudanese persons and entities continued. The State Department accused both government and opposition forces of human rights abuses. The ambassador appointed under the 1998 International Freedom of Religion Act prepared to scrutinize Sudan.

The House of Representatives passed a resolution condemning human rights abuses by the government, and urging support for the armed opposition. The draft language regarding no-fly zones and supply of antiaircraft guns to the SPLA was dropped from the resolution.

The U.S. president appointed a special envoy for Sudan to focus on human rights, humanitarian relief, and reinforcing the peace negotiations sponsored by the Inter-Governmental Authority on Development, an East African body. There were no U.S. diplomatic personnel based in Sudan. Because of its bombing of Khartoum, the U.S. did not take the lead on resolutions on Sudan's human rights abuses in international fora.

European Union

The German government as president of the E.U. negotiated a consensual human rights resolution with the Sudan government at the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, with the Germans arguing that it would lead to human rights improvements. The consensual agreement dropped the language of prior resolutions referring to "slavery and slavery-like practices" and "denial of the freedoms of religion, expression, association and peaceful assembly" and substituted other language: "abduction of women and children to be subjected to forced labour or similar conditions" and "cases of severe restrictions on the freedom of religion" in government areas while urging a permanent high commissioner on human rights office in Sudan.

E.U. countries rushed to do business in Sudan, particularly in the petroleum sector, despite fears that oil development would only fund more weapons acquisition. The E.U. decided to broaden its assistance from strictly emergency assistance to "humanitarianism plus." In June the French government promised to side with Sudan within the E.U. The representative of the E.U. to Sudan noted in September that Sudan had takenpractical steps that will lead to the full normalization of relations with the EU, and cited the formation of a government fact-finding committee on slavery.

The U.K. reopened its embassy, closed since anti-U.S. protesters stormed it. For unexplained reasons, criminal charges against a Sudanese doctor accused of torture in Sudan, brought in Scotland where the doctor worked in 1997, were dropped in May.

United Nations

The U.N. continued its massive emergency assistance program for Sudan. The U.N. Commission on Human Rights condemned human rights violations in Sudan in April 1999 and renewed the mandate of the special rapporteur. The U.N. Committee on Non-governmental Organizations voted to revoke the speaking privileges of the NGO Christian Solidarity International (CSI), known for its slave redemptions, after CSI calendared the SPLA rebel leader to speak on its behalf. The matter is on appeal to the U.N. Economic and Social Council.
UGANDA

Human Rights Developments

President Yoweri Museveni's National Resistance Movement (NRM), in power since 1986, continued to govern through what it called the "movement" or "no-party"system of government, justifying its restrictions on political participation as essential to prevent a return to Uganda's violent past. The NRM's direct access to state resources and the exclusion of its "movement" structures from the stringent regulations placed on political parties guaranteed the NRM's political dominance, and effectively prevented independent political parties from organizing for change through electoral action. Violent opposition groups of several years standing fought in the north and west of the country, and renewed rebel activity emerged in eastern Uganda. These groups, particularly the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) in the west, continued to carry out brutal assaults on civilians, brutalizing, killing, looting, and abducting adults and children alike. The Ugandan army was also responsible for serious abuses against civilians in areas of conflict, for which individual soldiers were rarely held to account.

The government continued its constitutional ban on independent political activities, prohibiting political parties from holding party conferences, public rallies, sponsoring candidates in elections, and opening branch offices. The Ugandan parliament, elected under the restrictive movement system, continued to assert its independence, censuring high-level government officials for corruption and questioning Uganda's military involvement in the Democratic Republic of Congo. The official Ugandan Human Rights Commission carried out credible investigations into many human rights abuses, including police and military abuses as well as poor prison conditions.

The Referendum Bill was passed in June, setting the stage for a June 2000 referendum which threatens to further entrench the restrictive movement political system. However, the phrasing of the question which will be put to voters remains to be finalized. All six major independent political organizations vowed to boycott the referendum, stating that human rights cannot be limited even by majority mandate, and that the referendum would not be free and fair because the NRM would not allow them to canvass support for their position. Observers noted that the continuing restrictions on the right to campaign against the movement system and the NRM's near complete dominance of the political sphere in Uganda would mean that voters would not be able to make a well-informed choice.

Programs of political and military education, popularly known as chaka-mchaka , were resurrected in the aftermath of the 1996 presidential and parliamentary elections. The chaka-mchaka programs took placethroughout Uganda in anticipation of the June 2000 referendum, providing the NRM with a state-sponsored platform from which to spread its partisan political program and its message opposing independent political parties and pluralism. In September, six parliamentarians from Masaka district made a formal protest to President Museveni, alleging that civilians in their district had been forced to participate in chaka-mchaka courses at gunpoint, and had been required to pay fees for attending the course.

The Political Organizations Bill, originally introduced in 1997 to spell out in greater detail the restrictions under which political parties will operate, was withdrawn from Parliament in June, ensuring that the stringent constitutional restrictions on political party activities will remain in place during the campaign period for the June 2000 referendum. In its current form, the Political Organizations Bill would continue many of the restrictions on political parties, including preventing them from sponsoring candidates and holding public rallies during elections.

Opposition politicians were harrased and occasionally arrested. Karuhanga Chapaa, chair of the opposition National Democrats Forum, was arrested and later convicted of sedition after allegedly making anti-Museveni comments at a political rally. Chapaa was also warned by a district commissioner to stop engaging in "illegal political activities" after attending another rally in the district. Wasswa Lule, a member of parliament, was arrested and interrogated by police in January after suggesting that President Museveni should be investigated for corruption. Several seminars by the Foundation for African Development, a group closely associated with the opposition Democratic Party, were interfered with by police, including one in Moyo district in January where three FAD officials were detained for twenty-eight hours.

Conflict with rebel forces continued in many areas of Uganda. Active rebel groups in 1999 included the West Nile Bank Front (WNBF), Uganda National Rescue Front II (UNRF-II), and the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), all operating from Sudanese rear bases and supported by the Government of Sudan, and the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), operating in the Rwenzori mountains in Western Uganda and Eastern Congo. Rebel groups reemerged in Eastern Uganda including the Anti-Referendum Army (ARA), the Uganda Salvation Army (USA), and the Citizen's Army for Multiparty Politics (CAMP).

In northern Uganda, rebel activity associated with the Lord's Resistance Army decreased significantly after the rebel group returned to its camps inside government-held Sudan in February. However, the momentary cessation in fighting did not improve the lives of the thousands of children abducted by the LRA and kept at their Sudanese bases for use as child soldiers and sex slaves. Since 1996, the majority of civilians in northern Uganda have been moved into "protected camps" by the Ugandan Peoples' Defence Forces (UPDF), using a significant amount of force when civilians refused to comply. More than 300,000 civilians continue to live in these camps, where civilians are nominally more secure, but security is often inadequate to protect against LRA attacks. Access to housing, water, food, health care, and education in the camps is limited, and the camp populations remain dependent on international humanitarian organizations for subsistence. Sudan continued its active support for the LRA, allowing the LRA to operate from territory under Sudanese government control, supplying the LRA with food and weapons, and often placing Sudanese government soldiers in the vicinity of LRA camps.

In western Uganda, the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) continued their abusive campaign in the Rwenzori mountain region, brutalizing and killing civilians and looting. Hundreds of civilians were killed in ADF raids and ambushes on unprotected civilian homes throughout the year. Some of those killed by the ADF were mutilated, sometimes by beheading. Civilians, both adults and children, were abducted during ADF raids to serve as porters or for forced recruitment into the rebel army. ADF attacks were focused around the town of Bundibugyo, which experienced an ADF offensive from February to July resulting in many civilian deaths. International aid agencies including the World Food Program, Medecins Sans Frontieres and ActionAid were repeatedly forced to suspend their life-sustaining humanitarian activities in western Uganda due to security threats, and the local population suffered from shortages of food, medicine, and shelter as well as repeated cholera outbreaks caused by poor sanitation and overcrowded livingconditions in displaced persons camps. Nearly 100,000 civilians remain internally displaced because of this conflict in the southwest, a significant increase over the past year.

The UPDF was also responsible for serious human rights abuses, including arbitrary arrests and detentions, torture, and summary executions. UPDF soldiers who committed abuses held accountable for their actions. UPDF soldiers reportedly executed five children who were suspected of involvement in the ADF rebel movement in Fort Portal in January. In February 1999, the badly mutilated body of Patrick L. Ocan was found by relatives near Gulu, bound at the hands and feet. Ocan, who was reportedly last seen in UPDF custody days before his death, appeared to have been castrated, and had several stabwounds and a gunshot wound to the head.

Civilians continued to be frequently detained, and regularly abused, at army facilities without legal grounds or any form of civilian oversight. During court proceedings relating to torture allegations published in the Monitor newspaper, army officials from northern Uganda casually admitted that civilian women are regularly "punished" at army facilities by having their heads forcibly shaven with blunt razors.

Rebel activity reemerged in eastern Uganda for the first time since the defeat of the Uganda People's Army in the late 1980s. In mid-1998, a previously unknown rebel group named the Uganda Salvation Army/Front (USA/F) began carrying out small-scale attacks on prisons and other government facilities in the East, leading to an increased deployment of government troops in the area. In May, a rebel group calling itself the Citizens Army for Multi-Party Politics (CAMP) claimed responsibility for an attack on a police post near the town of Lira which left one policeman dead. Brigadier Smith Opon Acak, the former chief of staff in Milton Obote's army, was killed by UPDF soldiers during what UPDF claims was a raid on a CAMP rebel training camp near Lira. Yet another rebel group, the Anti-Referendum Army (ARA), announced its existence after Parliament passed the referendum bill. In August and September, hundreds of ethnic Karimojong including many children and women died in inter-ethnic fighting related to cattle-rustling raids. The UPDF intervened in the Karimojong fighting in September, attacking waring Karimojong with helicopter gunships and causing heavy casualties.

In March, eight foreign tourists and a park warden were killed in Bwindi National Park, reportedly by Hutu rebels from neighboring Rwanda. President Museveni vowed to "catch or kill" the rebels, and the Ugandan army pursued and killed a number of suspected rebels in the neighboring Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). Urban terror attacks continued in Kampala, with some thirty bomb attacks in or near Kampala claiming at least fifty-five lives since 1997. The National Army for the Liberation of Uganda (NALU), a little known rebel group, repeatedly claimed responsibility for the bomb attacks. Increasing insecurity in many parts of Uganda and threats made by rebel groups against U.S. nationals caused the U.S. Peace Corps to suspend operations and evacuate its volunteers in May.

Uganda executed twenty-eight condemned prisoners, convicted of murder or aggrevated robbery, by hanging on April 29, ending a moratorium on executions in effect since 1996. Among the executed was Hajji Musa Sebirumbi, a former National Security Agency (NASA) agent and Uganda People's Congress official during the second government of Milton Obote, who was convicted in 1989 of the 1981 murder of five peasants who refused to disclose the whereabouts of Museveni's NRA guerrilla soldiers.

Prison conditions in Uganda were severe and at times life-threatening, especially in rural prisons were prisoners faced high mortality rates due to inadequate food and unsanitary conditions. Ugandan authorities continued to abuse serious security related charges such as treason to hold suspects in lengthy pre-trial detention, rarely respecting the 360-day limit on pre-trial detention for capital charges. Suspects regularly spend years in pre-trail detention on the flimsiest of evidence, making the right to a speedy trial virtually meaningless.

Idi Amin, who was responsible for a reign of terror in Uganda during his military dictatorship (1971-1979), continues to live in Saudi Arabia and has never been called to account for the widespread human rights abuses committed during his rule.

Defending Human Rights

Uganda has a large number of active human rights organizations, mostly based in the capital Kampala. Local human rights organizations showed an increasing interest in monitoring and advocacy activities, compared to their past focus on less contraversial human rights education activities. The increased monitoring activity of the human rights community is at least partly due to the work of the governmental human rights commission, which has demonstrated that the government is willing to allow some monitoring of sensitive human rights issues such as abuses by the army and security organizations. Government continues to control civil society groups through the manipulation of their registration, requiring NGOs to be nonsectarian and nonpolitical. The government continues to refuse to register the Uganda National NGO Forum, a broad consortium of national and foreign NGOs, and declared its May 1999 second general assembly "unlawful." NGOs groups with ties to political organizations, such as the Foundation for African Development, faced frequent harassment and interference with their seminars and public events. Threatened Congolese human rights activists who were forced to flee to Uganda complained that security operatives from the Ugandan-backed Congolese Rally for Democracy (CRD) harrased them and kept them under surveillance in Kampala.

The Role of the International Community

As Uganda prepared for a referendum on its restrictive political system scheduled for June 2000, the European Union (E.U.) and the United States (U.S.) increasingly expressed concerns about violations of political freedoms in Uganda. This increasing dialogue between the international community and Uganda on freedom of association, assembly and expression represented a clear change from the past, when the international community steered clear from raising concerns about Uganda's political system and mostly limited its concerns to abuses associated with rebel conflict in Uganda. However, this increased rhetoric about the need to respect political freedoms and the rights of civil society in Uganda was rarely matched by any specific action. While the international community publicly stated that it wanted a free and fair referendum, it did not publicly protest when the Ugandan government continued to create legal obstacles that made a free and fair referendum impossible.

United Nations

The grave abuses of civilian populations, particularly the large-scale abductions of children, by rebel groups operating in western and northern Uganda continued to be a prominent concern of the United Nations. As in 1998, the United Nations Commission on Human Rights adopted a resolution on the abduction of children in northern Uganda at its 1999 session, calling upon the LRA to cease abducting children and release children being held by the rebel group. UNICEF and the U.N. special representative of the secretary-general for children and armed conflict, Olara Otunnu, continued to work for an end to abductions of children by rebel groups and for the release of children in rebel hands. The U.N. Security Council was briefed by Otunnu and Ugandan diplomats on rebel abuses against children in Uganda during the debate leading to a Security Council resolution urging greater protection for children in armed conflict.

European Union

The E.U. and its member states became increasingly vocal about human rights abuses and governance issues in Uganda, publicly rebuking Uganda on several occasions. This public dialogue between the E.U. and Uganda presented a clear break with the past, when the E.U. had remained mostly quiet about Uganda's human rights problems and had structured its relationship with Uganda around development programs. However, the statements made by various officials from E.U. member states were often contradictory, suggesting that there was little consensus on how to address human rights issues in Uganda.

During a December 1998 donor meeting in Kampala, then E.U. president Austria presented a strong statement on the need for democratization to the Uganda authorities. The statement informed the Ugandan government that the E.U. would closely monitor "developments between now and the referendum in 2000."

The April executions of twenty-eight prisoners led to statements of protest by the E.U. and the United Kingdom, with the United Kingdom stating it was "deeply shocked" and the E.U. calling for the abolition of the death penalty in Uganda.

Britain's Secretary for International Development Clare Short expressed support for the June 2000 referendum during a visit in May, stating that "Ugandans have a right to choose what they want," a position which ignores the manipulation of the referendum issue by the NRM and the fact that opposition political parties will not be able to canvass support for their position in the referendum. Clare Short also stated that she had reached an "understanding" with Museveni on military spending, but refused to make the details of this understanding public.

Dutch Minister for Development and Cooperation Eveline Herfkens took a more forceful position during an August visit to Kampala, threatening to cut off Dutch aid if Uganda did not reduce defense expenditures. The Dutch Minister also reportedly criticized the NRM for extending its transitional period, dismissed the referendum as being devoid of fairness, and urged stronger measures to end corruption. The Dutch government had just approved US $38 million in aid for Uganda, and wanted to ensure that the money would not subsidize increased military spending.

United States

Uganda's involvement in the conflict in neigboring conflict, and increasing concerns about corruption and the anti-democratic tendencies of the NRM, led to a noticable distancing by the United States (U.S.). After hosting President Clinton and other high-profile visitors in 1998, Uganda received scant attention from the United States in 1999, and the Clinton administration significantly toned down its characterization of President Museveni as a "new leader." However, President Museveni did receive regular visits of U.S. envoys to discuss the war in neighboring Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) because of the involvement of Ugandan troops in that conflict. Senator Paul Wellstone of Minnesota inserted an amendment in the 1999 Defense spending bill, condemning the abduction of children by the LRA and urging Sudan to use its influence to secure the release of children in LRA captivity.

In her June parting speech to the Ugandan parliament, outgoing U.S. ambassador Nancy Powell spoke about the importance of basic freedoms such as freedom of speech, religion, association, and the press. While implicitly accepting the idea of a referendum on fundamental human rights in her speech, the outgoing ambassador did express the need for "a clear and open campaign process, a level playing field, and complete fiscal transparency." Ambassador Powell had rarely publicly raised such issues during her tenure.

Uganda received approximately $50 million in direct bilateral aid from the U.S., including programs on education, food security, health, and the environment. In addition, some $25 million was provided in food aid. Uganda's involvement in the DRC conflict led to diminished contacts with the U.S., including a reduction in military-to-military ties. Uganda continued to receive some $300,000 in military training under the International Military Education and Training (IMET) program, although its participation in the African Crisis Response Initiative (ACRI) continued to be informally suspended because of its military involvement in the DRC.
ZAMBIA

Human Rights Developments

With a persistent background of political polarization and economic problems, Zambia's human rights record remained poor. The independent media came under attack and human rights nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and political opposition parties came under threat of deregistration.

The government continued to promise its bilateral donors that it wanted to improve its rights record. In its National Capacity Building Program for Good Governance document produced prior to the May 1999 World Bank Consultative Group meeting in Paris the government promised many reforms, but with no real sense of its priorities and no convincing demonstration of the government's commitment to good governance. As if to underscore the government's lack of transparency over this initiative, the good governance document only became public after the Consultative Group meeting.

This good governance document was weakened by the government's failure even to acknowledge initiatives such as the introduction of the State Security Bill in parliament in August, which would have created conditions amounting to a permanent state of emergency, had it been enacted. The bill provided for a suspect to be detained without charge for fourteen days and that the period of detention could be extended as many times as necessary with the authority of a magistrate. After stiff opposition from NGOs and back-bench members of parliament the bill was withdrawn.

On February 27, 1999, President Chiluba fired Foreign Affairs Permanent Secretary Dorothy Mulwila after her husband had become the UPND's deputy leader. All the opposition parties continued to face restrictions on their exercise of the freedom of association. The Public Order Act punished breaches and its provisions on unlawful assembly with it up to five years imprisonment and continued to be enforced with bias against the opposition parties. Opposition parties were either denied permission to assemble or had their meetings canceled on public security grounds. The ruling MMD continued to hold meetings, rallies, and pro-government demonstrations without permits.

In May 1999 the administrator of the Show Society of Zambia ordered the UPND out of the Show Ground. The Show Society claimed that it had a policy of not allowing political parties to operate in the grounds, yet the MMD operated from the same premises in 1991 prior to the multiparty elections.

Teddy Nondo continued to serve as Deputy Commissioner of the Drug Enforcement Commission despite accusations that he carried out torture in 1997. The Human Rights Commission recommended, in its March 30, 1998 report on allegations of torture of detainees following the 1997 coup attempt, that officers accused of the offense of torture-including Nondo-be retired in the public interest but advised against instituting criminal proceedings. Torture was forbidden, by article 15 of the Zambian Constitution and after some foot dragging, the government withdrew the reservations it had entered on the Convention against Torture, Cruel, and Inhuman Treatment (CAT), on February 19.

Reports of police torture continued. On August 2, twenty-six-year old Violet Tembo died after being tortured by police officers at Lusaka's Los Angeles Police Post. Tembo, eight months pregnant, was detained on July 23 and released on July 27. She was detained to assist police in locating her husband, Ackim Ngoma, a security guard at Galaun Holdings Ltd. After investigations and inquiries by the Zambian based NGO AFRONET, Police Officers Nyimbiri and Mfuzi, accused of torturing Nchimunya, were arrested.

On March 10 and 11, six journalists from the Post newspaper were detained by the police for publishing a story headlined "Angola Worries Zambia Army." The story criticized Zambia's military capability and preparedness in the face of a possible military attack from Angola. All the reporters, including editor-in-Chief Fred M'membe, were later charged with "espionage". Although their case was committed to the High Court on April 16 no date was set for trial. The government's intention was questioned as two of thejournalists, Lubasi Katundu and Amos Malupenga, were on leave at the time of their arrest while Rueben Phiri and Mukalya Nampito were out of the country.

The Zambia Human Rights Commission remained active on noncontroversial issues. It continued to issue statements about human rights abuses, notably employment grievances and prison conditions, but avoided direct criticism of the government. Of the 960 complaints handled since inception, 797 of the cases were labor related.

Defending Human Rights

Various NGOs monitored and reported on human rights violations. AFRONET published its second detailed annual human rights report in 1999. A one-day review meeting of Zambia's governance performance was held by NGOs in Lusaka in May. The meeting concluded with a communiqu6 issued prior to the World Bank Consultative Group meeting in Paris. On return from Paris, then Finance Minister Edith Nawakwi attacked these NGOs without mentioning their names. The government-controlled print media criticized the Zambia Independent Monitoring Team (ZIMT) and AFRONET for campaigning against Zambia's donor efforts.

Role of the International Community

Throughout 1999, the Southern African Development Community (SADC) was steadfast in support of President Fredrick Chiluba's mediation efforts in the war in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). The European Union and the United States also supported the Zambian government's efforts, which had the blessing of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the U.N. Security Council.

In May 1999, Zambia's cooperating partners emphasized the immediate importance of good governance, including the protection of human rights, freedom of the press, fighting corruption, and institutional capacity building. Premised on satisfactory economic and governance performance, Zambia's external partners disclosed plans to make available at least U.S.$240 million in balance of payment (BOP) support, and an additional U.S.$390 million in project assistance. By September 1999, bilateral donors had not disbursed all the pledged balance of payment support. The May 1999 Consultative Group meeting agreed to hold the next round of talks in Lusaka.

The World Bank for two years running had linked Zambia's aid program to progress in economic reform and governance. The World Bank claimed that significant progress had been made in economic reform, but identified governance related issues, the privatization of the remaining assets of the Zambian Consolidated Copper Mines (ZCCM), and civil service reform as top items for urgent action. The Zambian government, again, was urged to take swift and decisive action on alleged human rights violations associated with police interrogations and accusations of torture in the aftermath of the October 1997 coup attempt. So far, no action has been taken against any officer. Rather, High Court Judge Japhet Banda sentenced fifty-nine of those accused in relation to the coup attempt, to death on September 17.

The release of additional funds by major donors was conditional on the outcome of a commission of inquiry set up by the government to investigate the alleged torture after the 1997 coup attempt. Judge Japhet Banda, headed the commission and had yet to begin the inquiry.

European Union, Norway, Canada, and Japan

The European Union has responded more favorably to Zambia's economic recovery program during the year. In August the E.U. released U.S.$44.1 million for the structural adjustment program and reconstruction of roads. Germany released half of a U.S.$10.5 million grant for debt relief that had been withheld since 1996.

The United Kingdom, while emphasizing the importance of upholding democracy and human rights, canceled U.S.$75.5 million of the debt owed to the U.K. and rescheduled for twenty-four years repaymentto U.S.$106.6 millions. The U.K. pledged U.S.$20 million at the last Consultative Group meeting to be linked to real progress in the sale of Zambia Consolidated Copper Mines (ZCCM). The U.K. indicated willingness to contribute towards implementing the Capacity Building for Good Governance document through the Department for International Development (DFID).

Scandinavian governments maintained that they would only release balance of payment support to Zambia if the Zambian government stood by its promises to improve its human rights and governance record. Denmark had for two years running not released balance of payments support, citing lack of adherence to good governance standards ,and lack of respect for human rights as a major obstacle. The Danish Ambassador to Zambia Mads Saandau-Jensen noted that "the Danish government has placed emphasis on good governance and human rights as a condition in previous meetings."

In August, the Japanese government also released U.S.$36 million in balance of payment support but at the same time called for an improved human rights record.

United States

The United States policy focused on Zambia's economic recovery program and efforts to promote democracy. The U.S. is not a major donor to Zambia. In March, the U.S. signed an agreement for $20 million in fresh assistance towards improvement of the health sector with particular emphasis on HIV/Aids and immunization.
AMERICAS OVERVIEW

Human Rights Developments

The October 1998 arrest in London of Chile's former military ruler, Augusto Pinochet, rekindled hopes for victims of human rights abuses around the world. The case marked a significant step forward in the struggle to achieve justice for egregious human rights violations, spawning the development of similar efforts to pursue former dictators enjoying retirement in the comfort of impunity. Accustomed to seeing impunity as the norm, human rights activists worldwide were encouraged by Pinochet's detention. In Latin America, in particular, impunity for major violations continued to be one of the principle obstacles to human rights protection. Although democracies in the region remained stable for the most part, human rights violations took place throughout, nowhere more brutally than in Colombia. And even as the Pinochet precedent broke new ground, fresh challenges to international human rights mechanisms arose.

Significantly, Chile did not face political instability as a consequence of the legal action taken against the general in Spain and the United Kingdom. Opponents of the Spanish prosecution had predicted dire political consequences if it moved forward, in part as a means to pressure the two European countries into ensuring that Pinochet was returned to Chile without facing charges in Spain. Yet by the end of October 1999, Chile was preparing without turmoil for a presidential election in December in which Pinochet was not a major issue. Meanwhile, judges detained and charged numerous former officers of his government for grave human rights abuses. Moreover, a majority of Chileans, according to public opinion polls, believed that Pinochet should be brought to account for the human rights violations that accompanied his coup.

The regional pattern of elected governments was interrupted only in Cuba, where Fidel Castro celebrated in January his fortieth year in power on the island, giving no sign of loosening the reins of power. Indeed, the March sentencing of four dissidents to terms ranging from three and a half to five years in prison furnished a sharp reminder of the government's intolerance of criticism. As this and other prosecutions demonstrated, the political opening that accompanied Pope John Paul's January 1998 visit to Cuba did not survive the year. Cuban law continued to infringe basic rights, including those of free expression and association, and government interference in the courts undermined the right to a fair trial.

Although democratic rule was well entrenched in the region, no country illustrated better than Colombia that the existence of an elected civilian government did not necessarily result in the protection of human rights. Not only did the armed conflict there show no signs of abating, despite a major peace initiative launched by President Andrs Pastrana, but human rights violations proliferated as the fighting intensified. Guerrillas used territory ceded them by the government to further war, rather than talk peace. Paramilitary groups working in some areas with the tolerance and even open support of the military continued to massacre civilians, commit targeted assassinations, and spread terror. Guerrillas, too, flouted international humanitarian law, kidnapping and executing civilians and carrying out indiscriminate attacks. Desperate Colombians throughout the country fled the violence, with narrowing possibilities of finding refuge, food, or medical care. Meanwhile, Washington moved forward with plans to supply massive amounts of military aid to Colombia.

In Peru, the chronic weaknesses of many of the country's political and judicial institutions contributed to human rights violations. The frailty of the judiciary and legislature, to a large degree the work of Fujimori, permitted the president to exercise ever-increasing authoritarian control. He continued during the year to prepare the ground for his second reelection bid in voting scheduled for 2000, although the legality of a third term remained dubious. Government-inspired campaigns of hostility and intimidation of independent media outlets continued to hinder the expression of political views, while judges whose decisions threatened government interests faced sudden transfers out of their posts. Hundreds of Peruvians unjustly convicted or facing trial for terrorist offenses remained in high-security prisons under an extremely harsh prison regime. Although Fujimori had earlier allowed the establishment of an Ad Hoc Commission to review cases and recommend presidential pardons for those unjustly convicted, he authorized only seven pardons out of more than fifty cases forwarded to him by the commission in the first eight months of 1999. As described in more detail below, Peru also took unprecedented steps to defy the Inter-American Court of Human Rights.

Unlike in Peru, where the weaknesses of political and judicial systems were the outcome of political design, in Haiti the debility of democratic institutions-and the consequent vulnerability of human rights-resulted more from political chaos. Infighting among erstwhile allies in the Lavalas movement continued to stymie institutional development, stalled since the June 1997 resignation of Prime Minister Rosny Smarth. The country's political crisis deepened in January 1999, when President Ren Prval abruptly dismissed Parliament and named a new prime minister and cabinet. Political violence and killings by police-although nowhere near the levels reached during military governments-mounted. Elections intended to resolve the crisis were postponed until March 2000. The justice system remained largely dysfunctional, unable to establish a bulwark against human rights violations and woefully delayed in processing Haiti's burgeoning prison population, the vast majority of which remained in pretrial detention.

Police violence reached disturbing levels in Haiti, after dropping for two years running. In addition to several reported extrajudicial executions, the Haitian National Police apparently engaged in the first cases of forced "disappearance" since the end of military rule. In Guatemala as well as Haiti, dramatic law enforcement failures led ordinary citizens to dispense their own crude form of justice through the lynching of suspected criminals.

In Venezuela, the December 1998 presidential elections were won by former army Lt. Col. Hugo Chvez Fras, creating uncertain prospects for human rights and democracy. Chvez had led an unsuccessful military coup in 1992, gone to prison, and then returned to public life as a political reformer crusading to rid the country of its notorious problems of corruption, political mismanagement, and poverty. A constituent assembly to write a new constitution was formed in April; it later declared the political, legislative, and justice systems to be in emergency, assuming extraordinary authority to intervene. Democratically elected members of Congress were prohibited by the assembly from meeting and exercising their authority. Chvez eventually permitted Congress to assume some of its functions, and the country stepped back before abrogating the rule of law. Indeed, some endemic human rights problems, such as arbitrary arrests, dropped dramatically thanks to the Chvez government's decision to stop conducting police raids in poor neighborhoods. Nonetheless, terrible prison conditions and police violence, including the commission of extrajudicial executions, persisted.

Overall, the region's democracies demonstrated difficulties in handling the demands of guaranteeing public security and justice while at the same time respecting human rights. Security issues remained paramount in the public discourse as police forces failed to protect crime-weary populations. Officials and aspiring politicians were quick to scapegoat human rights protections as the cause of rising crime, rather than examining its real causes: impunity for powerful criminals, the persistence of desperate poverty, and corrupt and ineffective courts and police. In Argentina, aspiring or actual government officials competed with each other to justify unlimited brutality in the suppression of crime. Vice President Carlos Ruckauf, the ruling Justicialist Party's candidate for governor of Buenos Aires province, recklessly urged police to "kill murderers" and "shoot criminals," while independent candidate Luis Patti warned that if criminal suspects "want their rights respected, they should go to Costa Rica." These comments were especially inflammatory in the context of rising police violence against civilians, as was the case in Buenos Aires province.

In Mexico, too, political, business, and even religious leaders spoke out against human rights defenders, blaming human rights guarantees for exacerbating crime by protecting criminals to the detriment of law-abiding citizens. One successful candidate for governor ran a get-tough-on-crime campaign ad proclaiming that "human rights are for humans, not rats." In this context, Mexico's federal government in February and March approved constitutional reforms that would weaken human rights protections in the fight against crime. Changes in Mexico's legal procedure for challenging the actions of authorities, known as amparo , would expand the circumstances in which prosecutions could move forward despite the violation of due process guarantees. These reforms, once approved by a majority of Mexican states, would also make it easier for prosecutors to obtain arrest warrants by lowering the evidence of crime required.

In Mexico many human rights violations were compounded by the indifference of prosecutors and judges to abuses committed against criminal defendants. While the former fabricated evidence or overlooked abuses by police or soldiers, the latter sought ways to sentence defendants without acknowledging these problems. The key to judges' ability to do so was the principle of "procedural immediacy." Whereas in most countries procedural immediacy means that statements made in front of a judge are more credible than those made elsewhere, in Mexico, it was interpreted to mean that statements made first in time were assigned greater weight. This resulted in the awarding of greater weight to statements made by defendants in police custody, often under torture, undermining the value of any subsequent retractions before judges.

Police killings of civilians remained at high levels in Brazil's major cities, although some areas showed improvement. Rio de Janeiro police killed fewer civilians after the appointment of a new security chief and the creation of an ombudsman's office. In So Paulo state, however, figures for the first three months of 1999 suggested police violence would rise for the third straight year in a row. Meanwhile, the failure of several high profile prosecutions of police for extreme cases of brutality did not bode well for establishing accountability for such crimes.

Peru's President Alberto Fujimori, the region's most authoritarian elected civilian leader, demonstrated his contempt for international human rights norms when he announced in late May that his government would not comply with a judgment of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights. The court, a judicial arm of the Organization of American States, had ordered Peru to grant a fair trial to four Chileans who had been convicted by Peru's faceless military courts of "treason," an aggravated form of terrorism in Peru. The summary trial the Chileans had received, the court ruled, violated numerous due process provisions of the American Convention on Human Rights. Two weeks later, Peru's Supreme Court declared that it would not carry out a similar court judgment regarding a Peruvian woman denied basic fair trial guarantees by a faceless military court. Judgments of the Inter-American Court are legally binding; thus Fujimori's announcement brought Peru into direct defiance of the inter-American system of human rights protection. While other governments had delayed implementing remedies ordered by the court, none had previously refused to adhere to them.

Fujimori subsequently made matters worse when he announced that Peru would withdraw from the compulsory jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court, an action unprecedented since the founding of the court in 1979. The court had become the last resort for Peruvian human rights victims, given persistent government interference in the Peruvian judiciary and amnesty laws that prevented accountability for past human rights violations.

While Fujimori's government openly defied the court, a movement to expand the use of the death penalty in several Caribbean nations continued, similarly undermining regional adherence to international human rights protections. Trinidad and Tobago hanged ten convicted murderers in June and July alone, including a high-profile series of executions that sent nine alleged gang members to the gallows. In carrying out six executions during the year, Trinidad and Tobago ignored an injunction issued in 1998 by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, which had ordered the country to hold off until after the court had reviewed the cases in detail. St. Lucia, the Bahamas, Antigua and Barbuda, and Guyana said they would follow suit, arguing that hangings were needed to reduce soaring crime rates. In spite of international pressure and efforts by human rights defenders, regional support for capital punishment remained strong, with an estimated approval rating of 70 percent in Trinidad and Tobago and 88 percent in Barbados. At this writing, reported murder statistics for the Caribbean did not indicate that the recent surge in executions had deterred serious crime.

Efforts to remove stumbling blocks to the use of the death penalty-including internationally established legal protections for death row inmates-revealed a marked defiance of international norms among Caribbean governments. In late 1998, Guyana amended its ratification of the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights such that death row inmates could not submit their cases to the U.N. Human Rights Committee. The move came after the committee suggested freeing two death row inmates because of due process violations in the trials that resulted in their convictions. Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago announced their intent to withdraw from the American Convention on Human Rights, a move that would effectively eliminate important remedies for people in those countries who wished to use the inter-American human rights system to have their rights respected. Meanwhile, frustrated by British attempts to curb use of the death penalty among former colonies, several Caribbean governments plan to replace the Privy Council, a London-based panel of law lords serving as the region's highest court, with a newly created Caribbean Court of Justice. Already dubbed a "hanging court" by detractors, the new judicial body was scheduled to open in October 2000.

Strengthening of Universal Jurisdiction

The Pinochet case greatly reinforced the principle of universal jurisdiction for crimes against humanity. In this regard, the March 1999 decision by London's House of Lords that former heads of state are not shielded by immunity for egregious crimes like murder and torture marked a significant international legal precedent. Universal jurisdiction is particularly useful for countries where grave internal divisions limit the possibilities for achieving justice for powerful wrongdoers within the nation's borders.

In the Pinochet case, universal jurisdiction offered the possibility of trial by a court that was truly independent of the powers the former military chief could bring to bear inside Chile, where he continued to exert tremendous influence over the still-powerful armed forces.

Although Chile refused to cooperate with the efforts of Spanish magistrate Baltasar Garzn in the Pinochet case, its record of cooperation with efforts to establish an International Criminal Court (ICC) was noteworthy. On September 11, 1998, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the military coup that brought Pinochet to power, Chile signed the Rome Statute for the establishment of the court. Chilean officials said the nation's own experience contributed to their government's enthusiastic adhesion to the ICC project. A bill to ratify the statute was at this writing under debate in the Chilean Congress.

Support for the ICC grew in the region during 1999. Delegates engaged in increasingly active negotiations at meetings of the Preparatory Commission to draft rules of procedure and evidence, and as part of the so-called like-minded group promoting early ratification of the Rome Treaty. In March, Trinidad and Tobago became the first country in the region to ratify the treaty. In addition to Chile, advances toward ratification were made in Argentina, Bolivia, and Venezuela.

Defending Human Rights

Throughout the region a growing network of human rights organizations, neighborhood groups, and religious associations worked to protect human rights with few impediments imposed by governments or other forces interested in silencing human rights criticism. Cuba and Colombia stood as the starkest exceptions in this respect. Yet other countries, including Chile, Mexico, and Peru, saw monitors threatened. Throughout the region, only Cuba imposed harsher legal restrictions on foreign human rights monitors than Mexico.

In Cuba, the relatively small number of individuals and organizations promoting human rights were obliged to keep an extremely low profile as the price of being allowed to exist. The continued prosecution and sentencing of advocates of peaceful reform made clear the limits of political space for human rights work in Cuba. The Cuban government sentenced four leaders of the Internal Dissidents' Working Group to up to five years in prison in March. The leaders had been in pretrial detention since 1997 when the group released a paper analyzing the Cuban economy, political structure and human rights record.

As has sadly been the case in prior years, Colombia's harsh environment for human rights defenders translated into threats, intimidation, and murder. During the first nine months of the year, two human rights defenders, Julio Gonzlez and Everardo de Jess Puerta, were killed and dozens of others threatened. Two academics who worked in support of human rights were also murdered. Several human rights groups were forced by threats into closing their doors. Paramilitary leader Carlos Castao's forces also took hostage four rights monitors and Sen. Piedad Crdoba, a strong human rights defender, in a bid to force the government to negotiate with the group. All five were later released unharmed. Dozens of other human rights defenders faced death threats.

Although the Colombian government promised to provide U.S. $4 million in assistance to human rights groups, the money was slow to materialize, short of what was promised, and often short-lived. The money was slated for protective measures including the provision of bulletproof glass for the offices of human rights organizations, radios, taxis, and police protection.

In Guatemala, the situation of human rights monitors remained bleak as President Alvaro Arz did not even muster rhetorical support for their work amidst frequent death threats and acts of intimidation. In a reckless act, given the threatening climate in which they operate, Arz used the occasion of the annual OAS General Assembly meeting to lambast unnamed nongovernmental organizations as "cloaked instruments for foreign politics." Meanwhile, the murder in April 1998 of Bishop Juan Jos Gerardi, founder of the Catholic church's principal human rights office in Guatemala, continued to cast a long shadow as every significant witness, and finally the government's prosecutor, Celvin Galindo, was forced to flee the country because of threats. At this writing, no one was in custody for the slaying.

In Haiti, well-known human rights defender Pierre Esprance was shot in the knee and shoulder by drive-by shooters as political violence deepened. In Brazil, human rights defenders faced harassment and threats. A witness in the trial for the 1996 murder of human rights attorney Gilson Nogueira was slain as the trial proceeded. Defenders were threatened with death in Peru and Mexico as well as in Chile, where those openly supporting the Pinochet prosecution were repeatedly targeted.

Official ombudsman's offices in some areas enjoyed great credibility due to their independent and diligent work on behalf of human rights. Among these were the office of the People's Defender in Peru, headed by Jorge Santistevan, as well as human rights commissions created by state, municipal, and federal legislatures in Brazil. With notable independence, these commissions looked into allegations of human rights abuse, monitored the conduct of state agents, and publicly denounced abuses.

The Role of the International Community

Organization of American States

The human rights protection mechanisms of the Organization of American States received a boost in December 1998, when Mexico and Brazil formally accepted the compulsory jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights. Nonetheless, this important development was subsequently overshadowed by Peruvian President Fujimori's recalcitrant position toward the court. The public reactions of governments in the region to Peru's withdrawal from the court were muted, compounding the potential of the Peruvian action to weaken the system.

After receiving formal notification that Peru intended to withdraw from the court's jurisdiction, OAS Secretary General Csar Gaviria issued a statement that failed to clearly repudiate the action. Rather, he praised the Peruvian government's anti-terrorist policies that were at the heart of the court case against which Peru had reacted. However, he subsequently issued a strong condemnation of the action, referring to the proposed withdrawal from the court's jurisdiction as a "step backward," and calling Peru's failure to implement the court's rulings an even more urgent problem for the inter-American system to overcome.

The OAS itself failed to set punitive sanctions for Peru's behavior, although within the context of the OAS Permanent Council several countries expressed their dissatisfaction with Peru.

In September, the Inter-American Court declared Peru's withdrawal from the court's jurisdiction inadmissable, a decision that was to enable the court to continue hearing cases against Peru regardless of Fujimori's decisions. "There is no norm in the American Convention [on Human Rights] that empowers States Parties to withdraw their declaration of acceptance of the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court," the court found.

United States

The armed conflict in Colombia received increasing attention from policy-makers in the United States as 1999 progressed, becoming the chief focus of U.S. foreign policy in the region. More high-level U.S. diplomats, congressional delegations, CIA officials, and military officers visited Colombia during the year than at any other time in recent history. The topics of aid to Colombia and human rights violations figured squarely on the agenda. Republicans in Congress and the administration of President Bill Clinton, a Democrat, sparred over how best to shore up the Colombian government within the framework of the so-called Leahy amendment, which conditioned U.S. counternarcotics aid on the human rights records of the units to receive aid.

The debate over Colombia was shadowed by the link between leftist guerrillas and the trade in illegal drugs, as the U.S. Southern Command contended that the guerrillas were

"narco-traffickers" and therefore legitimate targets of the drug war. This point of view, although exaggerated, was largely accepted by influential sectors within the State Department and Congress. While proving a convenient concept for streamlining policy, the contention failed to take into account the oftentimes larger role played by other groups-including right-wing paramilitaries engaged in battling guerrillas-in drug trafficking.

In July, White House drug advisor Gen. (Ret.) Barry McCaffrey outlined a proposal to double U.S. aid to Colombia to almost $600 million, much of it for the Colombian army. By mid-1999 the United States had reviewed the human rights records and approved aid for the Colombian navy, the air force, five army units, and a new anti-narcotics battalion. However, the focus on military aid, and not support for civilian institutions, threatened to turn some American officials into apologists for the military's human rights record. Human rights and support for peace efforts became increasingly secondary components of U.S. policy. In general, the methods used by the United States to screen Colombian security forces remained largely secret, severely hindering efforts to evaluate the success of U.S. law conditioning aid on respect for human rights.

U.S. policy concerns appeared premised on the idea that pumping money into the drug effort as a way to fight leftist guerrillas would hasten the arrival of peace and stability in Colombia. However, the premise failed to factor in the army's still-pervasive shielding of human rights criminals and support and tolerance of paramilitaries. Already by the time General McCaffrey traveled to Colombia, the United States had begun sharing sensitive intelligence on guerrillas with the Colombian army. Although the State Department said that it had received "explicit assurances" that the intelligence "will be used only for the purposes for which it is intended and will not be shared with any outside groups," no explanation was made of the mechanisms by which the United States could ascertain that intelligence would not be passed on to paramilitaries. In the past, the Colombian army had provided intelligence to paramilitaries, who used the information to commit atrocities.

During 1999, the United States was also forced, with great reluctance, to focus on issues related to the prosecution of Augusto Pinochet. The White House said little when Pinochet was arrested in London, but when the Spanish extradition request gained momentum in Europe, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright expressed sympathy for Chile's position, asking that the country be allowed to balance reconciliation and justice on its own terms. In essence, this meant that the United States supported the Chilean government's effort to have Pinochet returned to Chile despite the lack of any real possibility that he would stand trial there.

United States government authorities at first dragged their feet in response to an official Spanish request for documentation on human rights violations in Chile, made under the terms of the bilateral Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty. Then in February the Clinton Administration requested that U.S. agencies declassify and release such documents. In June, an estimated 5,300 documents were released, revealing the depth of the knowledge the United States had at the time about serious human rights violations committed under Pinochet's command. The documents also confirmed the inconsistency between what the U.S. government knew and what it said and did on human rights cases from that period. In addition, the documents supported contentions made by human rights defenders that Pinochet was directly in command of the secret police, whose actions were responsible for a majority of the abuses committed during the period of military rule.

A second batch of more than 1,000 documents was released in October, revealing more details about what the United States knew. Of the documents released, a State Department memo from August 1976 deserved particular attention, because it revealed that the U.S. intelligence may have been linked to the murder of U.S. citizen Charles Horman, who was killed by Chilean security forces after the coup. The document explained: "There is some circumstantial evidence to suggest: U.S. intelligence may have played an unfortunate part in Horman's death. At best, it was limited to providing or confirming information that helped motivate his murder by the GOC [Government of Chile]. At worst, U.S. intelligence was aware the GOC saw Horman in a rather serious light and U.S. officials did nothing to discourage the logical outcome of GOC paranoia."

In September, the U.S. Department of Justice sent a rogatory letter to the Chilean Supreme Court asking for cooperation with the U.S. investigation into the 1976 car-bomb murder in Washington, D.C., of Orlando Letelier, a former minister in the government of Salvador Allende, overthrown by the Chilean military, and U.S. citizen Ronni Karpen Moffitt.

Since Pinochet's arrest in London, the official policy of the United States was to insist that the matter was between the United Kingdom, Spain, and Chile. This misplaced neutrality presupposed wrongly that the promotion of justice in general and the prosecution of a man ultimately responsible for the murder of U.S. citizens and a terrorist attack in Washington, D.C., was of no importance to the United States.

The Work of Human Rights Watch

The Americas division of Human Rights Watch continued to focus its work on a core group of priority countries, while also taking up the issue of the Pinochet prosecution. We published the results of investigations into abuses in Brazil, Chile, Cuba, and Mexico, and followed up on the issues raised in publications from prior years. The release of reports provided the basis for intensive advocacy campaigns designed to engage policy-makers in processes of reform to promote human rights. In Colombia, Chile, Guatemala, Mexico, Panama, the executive director of the Americas division met with high-level government officials to press our concerns.

During the year we also sent dozens of letters to government officials throughout the region urging them to institute improvements in human rights protection. In doing so, the division focused on important individual cases of human rights abuses that permitted advocacy on broader issues related to U.S. policy, military justice systems, the failures of criminal justice systems, and myriad other topics.

In conjunction with the legal and advocacy departments of Human Rights Watch, the Americas division developed legal briefs submitted in London in support of the arrest and extradition of Pinochet. With leave from the House of Lords, Human Rights Watch submitted three briefs in the case. At the same time, we worked to stimulate public support for the prosecution in Chile, the United States, Spain, and the United Kingdom, developing multiple briefing and advocacy documents.

In November 1998, the division released The Limits of Tolerance: Freedom of Expression and the Public Debate in Chile . The report, published in English and Spanish, detailed the enduring legacy of restricted freedom of expression following the period of military rule in Chile. The publication found that the country had failed to bring its laws into line with international human rights standards, continuing to apply laws inimical to those norms.

In December we released Behind Bars in Brazil , an analysis of appalling conditions of confinement, including prisons, jails, and police lockups in Brazil, which had the largest inmate population in Latin America and one of the largest in the world. Overcrowding, riots, hostage-taking, and killings formed part of the penal crisis, but the government failed to institute reforms to remedy the problem.

Ending a busy three-month period of report releases, in January we published Systemic Injustice: Torture, "Disappearance," and Extrajudicial Execution in Mexico . The document, released in English and Spanish, detailed the ways in which Mexico's justice system, understood to encompass police, prosecutors, and judges, failed to apply human rights standards in criminal prosecutions, thereby exacerbating the country's serious human rights problems.

Human rights violations in Cuba received comprehensive analysis in the June report Cuba's Repressive Machinery: Human Rights Forty Years After the Revolution . The report was published in English and Spanish and detailed the ways in which Cuban law restrict human rights and how, in practice, authorities stifle free expression, association and assembly and silence dissent.

In October 1999, we published When Tyrants Tremble: The Pinochet Case , an analysis of the impact of the arrest of the former dictator in Chile, and its current and future relevance to international law.

ARGENTINA
Human Rights Developments

Police violence remained rampant in Argentina during 1999 and most cases resulted in impunity for the perpetrators. Although in a limited number of cases investigations were begun into alleged police brutality, few of these resulted in sanctions against those involved, due in part to a lack of political will and to the fact that police, responsible for investigations, were rarely willing to pursue cases actively against their colleagues. Equally disturbing were statements by several government officials or candidates for office that appeared to justify unlimited brutality in the suppression of crime. Serious human rights violations by the police came at a time of rising criminal violence, an increased number of police killed in shootouts, and presidential and gubernatorial elections to be held on October 24, in the run-up to which candidates frequently sought to capture votes by expressing their intention of taking a "hard line" on crime.

According to the local human rights organization Center for Legal and Social Studies (Centro de Estudios Legales y Sociales, CELS), 140 people were killed by the police in the Federal Capital and Greater Buenos Aires area during the first half of 1999, in comparison with eighty-six in the second half of 1998. In the city of Buenos Aires alone, thirty-eight civilians and eight police officers were killed in the first six months of 1999, while in Greater Buenos Aires the number of deaths reached 102 and twenty-six, respectively. While this increase came in the context of an important rise in criminal violence, including the killing of police officers, CELS noted that the problem of police killings was aggravated by the lack of training of police personnel, and by the fact that these killings were very rarely investigated and did not lead to sanctions against the officers involved.

In this context, Vice-President Carlos Ruckauf, candidate of the ruling Justicialista Party for the governorship of Buenos Aires province, called for a stronger police response to high levels of public insecurity, recklessly stating that he considered it necessary to "kill murderers" or to "shoot criminals." The principal independent candidate for the governorship of Buenos Aires, Luis Patti, mayor of Escobar and a former police commissioner charged with torturing criminal suspects in the early 1990s, proposed the use of armed civilian vigilantes against rising crime, and defended the use of torture or other irregular police procedures in interrogation. During a television program broadcast in August, Patti dismissed concerns about the human rights of criminals saying, "if they want their human rights respected, they should go to Costa Rica."

In August 1999, the Ministry of Interior announced a new resolution allowing police officers to shoot criminal suspects without first identifying themselves and giving the order to halt, in cases where they consider that doing so could put them or others at serious risk, a judgment left up to the officer involved. Such a move was dangerous in light of the lack of adequate training of police personnel and their knowledge that their decision to shoot to kill was unlikely to be investigated later. The resolution did not modify the existing requirement that off-duty police officers carry their regulation weapons, a requirement that led to a disproportionate number of deaths of officers, criminal suspects, and innocent bystanders when off-duty police intervened in apparent crimes.

A September 1999 incident illustrated many of the concerns relating to police procedure in Argentina. On September 16, a group of some six armed men took six hostages in a branch of the Banco Nacin bank in the town of Ramallo, Buenos Aires province. Three of the hostage-takers attempted to leave the building with three hostages at 4:00 a.m., driving away in the bank manager's car. Police, who had failed to block roads or take other steps to prevent a possible escape, opened fire on the occupants of the car indiscriminately, killing two hostages and one bank robber. One of the hostages, the bank manager, was killed by a shot fired by a member of the police at point blank range after the car had come to a halt. A second bank robber, taken to the local police station, was found hanged in his cell some twelve hours later. No one admitted to having given the order to fire, and no one was able to explain the many errors made by police.

Some police officers involved in the events attributed the bloodshed to the fact that they had never received any training in how to react in a hostage situation. Governor Duhalde, who described the events as "a massacre," suspended three chief commissioners and disbanded the Special Operations Group (Grupo Especial de Operaciones, GEO), while all of the 150 officers involved were placed under investigation. Provincial Justice Minister Osvaldo Lorenzo resigned as a result. The investigating judge subsequently declared publicly that members of the Provincial Police were involved as accomplices in planning and carrying out the bank robbery, and had apparently provided maps of the interior of the bank and information on the contents of the safe. The case highlighted both the inefficiency and lack of training of the police forces involved, their over-eagerness to resort to lethal force even where the lives of hostages were thus endangered, and the lack of success of Governor Duhalde's previous efforts to restructure and control the Provincial Police, as well as the apparent continued involvement of police agents in criminal activities.

Accusations of torture against the Federal Police and Buenos Aires Provincial Police continued. Jos Luis Ojeda, who had denounced torture by the Federal Police in 1996, was shot in April 1999 by an unidentified man who warned him not to continue to speak of torture, part of a pattern of threats and attacks suffered by Ojeda over the past three years. In August, an investigation was opened in the case of a group of police officers from the first provincial police station in San Martn, accused of having tortured a group of five youths with beatings and partial asphyxiation in July. Also in August, two witnesses who testified in the case of a 1996 attack on the home of Senator Eduardo Menem alleged that the Provincial Police in Tigre had tortured them in order to force them to incriminate certain detainees in the case. In May, three provincial police officers from the fifth police station in Beccar were detained due to allegations that they had tortured a group of prisoners in late March. The public prosecutor who received the complaint, Maria Ema Prada, received telephoned death threats. While these steps to investigate violations were welcome, at this writing they had not resulted in any concrete sanctions against the officers involved.

In another blow to the Buenos Aires Provincial Police, in May a federal judge ordered the detention of six former members of that force in connection with their participation in the bombing of the Jewish community organization AMIA in 1994. Allegations of use of excessive force were not limited to criminal suspects: on September 6, the Buenos Aires Provincial Police fired rubber bullets at a group of secondary school students in La Plata celebrating the anniversary of the school, and arrested ten.

In a rare conviction of police accused of human rights violations, on May 17 the First Appeals Court in La Plata sentenced three provincial police officers to prison in connection with the August 17, 1993, disappearance of journalism student Miguel Bru, who was determined on the basis of witnesses' testimonies to have died under torture in police custody, although his body was never found. Subcommissioner Walter Abrigo and Sgt. Justo Lpez were sentenced to life imprisonment for the crime and Commissioner Juan Domingo Ojeda and Officer Ramn Ceresetto sentenced to two years for seeking to conceal the crime. Only Abrigo was sent to prison, however, due to the length of time the others had already served before sentencing. Lopez was freed pending appeal, having served more than three years before trial. One of the witnesses, Jorge Ruarte, was fired upon three days before the trial began, and had received threats as early as December 1998.

The Federal Police and Buenos Aires Provincial Police were not the only police forces accused of brutality during the course of 1999. In La Rioja, two young men were found dead in police cells while in custody of that province's police force. On March 29, nineteen-year-old Cristin Leonardo Ruz was found hanged in his cell at the Direction of Investigations, having apparently committed suicide using his scarf. The lawyer representing Ruz alleged he had died under torture. The lawyer cited other detainees who stated that when Ruz's body was found hanging in the cell, his feet were touching the ground and his knees were bent; those detainees also claimed that they had all been tortured with electric shocks and asphyxiation. The autopsy confirmed that Ruz had been asphyxiated, and that the marks on his neck could not have been made by the scarf. Ruz had allegedly worked for a political opponent of La Rioja Governor Angel Maza, and his death occurred shortly before internal elections to nominate gubernatorial candidates for 1999.

A second case was reported in June, when twenty-one-year-old Aldo Francisco Luna allegedly committed suicide by hanging himself with his long-sleeved shirt in the seventh police station in La Rioja, although an autopsy indicated he had died of a heart attack rather than hanging. Relatives alleged that he had been beaten in custody, and the personnel on duty at the time were placed under preventive arrest, although at this writing no action had been taken against them.

In Tucumn province, the provincial police used excessive violence to repress August and September demonstrations by public employees who were protesting the fact that they had not received their salaries for several months. Some forty people were injured in these incidents; one man later died of a heart attack. Similar repression of public sector protests occurred in Neuqun, where journalists accused provincial police of deliberately firing on them with rubber bullets when they were covering the protests on three separate occasions, in March, July, and September.

Threats and violence against journalists were less widespread in 1999 than in previous years, although disturbing incidents continued to occur. Several cases of threats and attacks on journalists were reported in Corrientes province throughout the first half of 1999 in the context of a political dispute between former governor Ral Romero Feris and the current provincial administration. Two journalists in Mendoza were threatened by provincial police in March while covering the trial relating to the death of Sebastin Bordn, last seen in police custody; also in March, local journalist Diego Spina was beaten and threatened with death while covering the arrest of former Morn Mayor Carlos Rousselot in Greater Buenos Aires.

In April, journalist Eduardo Kimel received a suspended sentence of one year in prison and a fine of U.S. $20,000 in connection with his book The Massacre of San Patricio -about the 1976 murder of five Pallotine priests and seminarians-after former Judge Guillermo Rivarola sued him for slander over statements about his role as investigating judge in the case.

Investigations into human rights violations under the military governments that ruled from 1976 until 1983 also continued in 1999. In one case in a federal court concerning the disappearance of 2,000 people in La Plata, a former forensic expert of the Buenos Aires Provincial Police confirmed for the first time that the armed forces had made use of planes and helicopters to throw the dead or drugged bodies of disappearance victims into the Rio de la Plata, the river which runs along the Buenos Aires coast.

In a landmark ruling, the Supreme Court on August 30 upheld a lower court decision that former junta member Adm. Emilio Massera must pay compensation of $120,000 in a civil lawsuit brought by Daniel Tarnapolsky regarding the 1976 disappearance of his parents and two brothers during the dictatorship. The court also ordered the state to pay $1,000,000 to Tarnapolsky. The decision could potentially affect other former high-ranking officers pardoned by President Carlos Menem or exempted from criminal trial by the Due Obedience and Full Stop laws adopted during the presidency of Ral Alfonsn, paving the way for similar civil actions.

Defending Human Rights

Much of the ongoing investigation of past violations related to the continuing actions of nongovernmental organizations such as the Grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo (Abuelas de Plaza de Mayo). In March the Grandmothers demanded compulsory DNA testing in the case of a former Navy officer detained for the illegal appropriation of the child of disappeared parents, after the Grandmothers had located the child in question.

The Grandmothers also played a prominent role in the case brought by federal Judge Adolfo Bagnasco regarding over 200 missing children of disappeared families. This case was brought by the Grandmothers and CELS on the argument that there had been a systematic plan to abduct the children of disappeared prisoners and that these cases did not fall within either the 1985 juntas trial (due to lack of sufficient evidence at the time) or the later Due Obedience and Full Stop laws, but instead constituted ongoing crimes for which the statute of limitations had not run. Among the former officers placed under house arrest in the case were Gen. Jorge Videla, Adm. Emilio Massera, Gen. Cristino Nicolaides and Gen. Reynaldo Bignone, while former junta member Gen. Leopoldo Galtieri and the present governor of Tucumn, former Gen. Antonio Domingo Bussi, were also expected to be charged. Both Videla and Massera rejected the charges on the grounds that they had already been judged, while Nicolaides stated that he would have tried to stop the kidnapping of children if he had known about it, and that he recognized the legitimacy of the investigations into these cases.

The Role of the International Community

European Union

European courts continued to bring charges against former Argentine military officers regarding violations under the last dictatorship, although at this writing the Argentine authorities had not cooperated in these efforts, alleging that foreign courts lacked jurisdiction. Moreover, the Argentine government fully supported the government of Chile in its efforts to prevent the prosecution of former dictator Augusto Pinochet by Spanish Judge Baltazar Garzn. Former Gen. Guillermo Surez Mason, head of the First Army Corps during the repression, was called to testify before the Italian courts regarding the disappearance of Italian citizens in Argentina during the 1970s, including the daughter of Grandmothers president Estela de Carloto. In March 1999, Spanish Judge Garzn accused the former dictatorship of carrying out genocide against members of the Jewish community, on the basis of information received from the Spanish human rights group Commission of Solidarity with the Relatives of the Disappeared (Comisin de Solidaridad con Familiares de Desaparecidos, CO.SO.FAM), which cited the 1,260 Jewish victims included in the CONADEP report. Garzn also received information from the Grandmothers on four children disappeared in Argentina in the context of his investigations into "Operation Condor."

New charges were also brought against Admiral Massera, including a case before a Paris court relating to the disappearance of two French nuns in 1977. Also in late March, an Argentine federal judge accused the Foreign Ministry of deliberately failing to take steps to comply with a request from a Swiss court for the extradition of Massera, in connection with the disappearance of Swiss citizen Alexis Jaccard in 1977.

Organization of American States

In May 1999 the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights called on the Argentine government to clarify the circumstances of the 1991 death of Sergio Schiavini in a shootout with the Buenos Aires Provincial Police. In 1997, the fifteen police officers who had been charged in the case and who had also been responsible for evidence-gathering were acquitted in the Argentine courts. In March the Inter-American Commission took up the case of violations of the right of freedom of thought and expression relating to Supreme Court decisions against journalists Horacio Verbitsky and Toms Sanz. In September, the commission received a petition regarding the 1994 terrorist attack on the AMIA in which eighty-six died, calling on the government to explain apparent negligence in both preventive measures and subsequent investigations, which could have amounted to violations to the right to life and to justice.

In his first report, published in April, the Inter-American Commission's special rapporteur on freedom of expression expressed concern about a number of Supreme Court decisions in Argentina that limited freedom of expression, including the case of journalist Eduardo Kimel.

In May, the Argentine government failed to comply with the period set by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights to pay compensation to the relatives of Adolfo Garrido and Ral Baigorria, both disappeared by the Mendoza Provincial Police in 1990.

United States

The U.S. Department of State's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1998 accurately described the human rights situation in Argentina.
BRAZIL

Human Rights Developments

While cases of violent abuse, including repeated instances of police torture and summary execution of civilians, fatal rural violence, and prison riots made headlines throughout 1999, the failure of judicial authorities to successfully prosecute recent violations in the face of overwhelming evidence constituted the major human rights development in 1999. The most important example was the August acquittal of three military police officers who had commanded an April 1996 operation in which military police killed nineteen landless peasants blocking a highway in Par state. That incident - in which coroners' reports demonstrated that the police had hacked several of the landless to death with their own farm tools and shot others at point blank range - had become a symbol of the deadly violence by authorities in the context of rural conflicts, and its prosecution was closely followed by Brazilian civil society and the media. Despite the removal of the case to the state capital to assure independent jurors, a Belm jury of seven acquitted defendants Col. Mrio Colares Pantoja, Maj. Jos Maria Oliveira and Capt. Raimundo Jos Almendra of all charges on August 19.

Efforts to prosecute the military police officers responsible for extreme police brutality in the Favela Naval neighborhood in Diadema, So Paulo state in early March 1997 also suffered setbacks. These images, filmed by an amateur cameraman and broadcast throughout Brazil and internationally, showed police officers extorting, beating, torturing, and shooting persons randomly stopped at a roadblock. In one instance, after beating and humiliating the occupants of one car, Otvio Loureno Gambra shot at the departing vehicle, killing Mrio Jos Josino. The Justice Tribunal of So Paulo, the state's highest appellate court, overturned Gambra's murder conviction in June.

In August, a Rio de Janeiro jury acquitted former military police officer Roberto do Amaral of twenty counts of homicide and convicted him of just one count for his role in the August 1993 police massacre of twenty-one residents of the Vigrio Geral shanty town. Despite overwhelming evidence of Amaral's involvement in the events (the jury found that he was present and that he killed one victim), the verdict assured his release, given the time he had served in pretrial detention prior to the proceedings. A month later, another Rio jury acquitted defendant William Alves of all charges in the case. In October, yet another Rio jury convicted Adilson Saraiva da Hora; da Hora was sentenced to seventy-two years and was expected to appeal the decision. Six years after the incident, only sixteen of the fifty-one defendants in the case had been brought to trial, with a total of four convictions and twelve acquittals.

In June, a trial judge dismissed homicide charges against four military police officers in connection with the killing of three unarmed squatters during a May 1997 police operation to evict several hundred homeless families from an abandoned housing complex in the Fazenda da Juta neighborhood in So Paulo. Despite video images showing that the police responded to the squatters-who were armed only with sticks and rock-with lethal force, the prosecutor and judge ruled that insufficient evidence of the defendants' illegal behavior had been demonstrated.

Police killings of civilians continued at high levels in Brazil's major cities, although some areas showed improvement. Rio de Janeiro police killed fewer civilians after the appointment of a new public security chief, Col. Josias Quintal, and the creation of an ombudsman's office, led by noted prison reformer Julita Lemgruber. During the previous administration of Gov. Marcello Alencar, security chiefs Nilton Cerqueira and Noaldo Alves had promoted and paid bonuses to police officers for "acts of bravery," frequently resulting in the killing of suspects. Rio Governor Anthony Garotinho appointed a special investigative commission after a Rio daily reported in July that 259 of those killed by the police from 1993 to 1996 had no prior police record. At this writing, however, the commission had not determined whether these cases should be reopened.

In So Paulo, figures released by the state secretariat of public security showed that the police killed 317 civilians in the first seven months of 1999, suggesting that by year's end, the number would rise for the third consecutive year. Despite measures taken by civilian authorities in So Paulo in recent years to control police abuse, shocking cases still seized headlines. In the dawn hours of February 17, the last day of Carnival, three young men, Paulo Roberto da Silva, twenty-one, Anderson Pereira dos Santos, fourteen, and Thiago Passos Ferreira, seventeen, disappeared in So Vicente in So Paulo state. Witnesses reported seeing a police vehicle stop the youths; others saw the same vehicle enter an area of dense brush in nearby Praia Grande later that morning. A police search uncovered the bodies fifteen days later. All three had been killed with a single gun shot wound to the head, fired at point-blank range. Authorities arrested seven police in connection with the killings.

On August 25, four police officers stopped three youths in downtown So Bernardo do Campo, in the greater So Paulo metropolitan area. The police took the youths -aged fifteen to eighteen-to a deserted area, forced them to undress and shot all three, leaving them for dead. Despite being shot twice, sixteen-year-old Anderson Arajo Silva survived and managed to call for help. The case provoked a significant reaction from So Paulo nongovernmental organizations and the media, as well as discussion about the possible involvement of police in execution-style killings. In So Paulo, through early September, media sources had recorded nearly fifty separate incidents in which three or more persons were killed by police.

A key component in this continued violence was the lack of effective control of abusive military police. A study released by the So Paulo State Police Ombudsman (Ouvidoria) in September demonstrated that the internal review process of the military was especially lax for commissioned officers. From 1971 until July 1999, only twenty-eight officers had been expelled or sanctioned with a loss of rank in So Paulo. Of these, only one held the rank of colonel or higher. At this writing, the National Secretary of Human Rights was working on a constitutional amendment that would allow state governors, rather than the military police themselves, to determine the loss of rank or expulsion of commissioned officers.

Rio police suffered from a similar lack of oversight. A study released in September by the Rio de Janeiro daily O Globo indicated that the internal review procedures to oversee police abuse of civilians were utterly ineffective. Journalists studied all fifty-three inquiries turned over by the internal affairs division of the civil police concerning allegations of torture against sixty-seven officers in the two years and four months between the passage of Law No. 9.455, which created the crime of torture, and August 1999. The inquiries contained statements and other evidence detailing abuses including electric shocks, rape, near-drownings and beatings. In all but one case, the inquiries had not yet been concluded; in the one instance in which a conclusion was reached, the authorities opted to dismiss the case.

The banality of police brutality was highlighted when twenty-year-old Hlio Pereira da Silva Jnior was apparently beaten to death by police in the northeastern state of Alagoas for stealing a soft drink. According to press reports, Silva was arrested on April 8 when, after hitching a ride on the back of a vehicle transporting soft drinks, he opened one of the bottles. After several days in which Silva's family alleged he was held incommunicado and beaten severely, the police released the young man on April 11. Due to the abdominal pains Silva was suffering from the beatings, his family took him to a local hospital a few days later where he died.

On September 22, the Federal Chamber of Deputies voted overwhelmingly to expel Deputy Hildebrando Pascoal from the federal legislature based on his alleged pivotal role in a death squad in the Amazon state of Acre that had claimed as many as 150 lives since the early 1980s. It was reported that Pascoal, a former commander of the Acre state military police had directed the death squad, had maintained close ties to drug trafficking operations, and had participated directly in some killings that had been investigated by federal prosecutors since at least 1997, but little had been done to hold Pascoal responsible for these crimes. In mid-1999, a congressional commission of inquiry to investigate drug trafficking began probing into the charges against Pascoal. The commission heard witnesses who recounted Pascoal's alleged involvement in the killings, including one in which he reportedly directed henchmen who severed the limbs of the victim with a chain saw, and others who told of Pascoal's alleged role in the May 1992 murder of Gov. Edmundo Pinto. A day after Congress' expulsion order (which terminated Pascoal's immunity from prosecution), a federal court in Rio Branco, the capital of Acre state, issued an arrest warrant and federal police took Pascoal into custody in Braslia on September 23.

Pascoal was the second federal deputy expelled from Congress in 1999 based on suspicion of criminal behavior. Earlier in the year, the lower house approved a motion to remove Deputy Talvane Albuquerque, who, as runner-up for a seat from Alagoas state, became a federal deputy when Deputy Ceci Cunha was killed hours after officially assuming the post. Albuquerque was immediately suspected of involvement in the murder; the Chamber of Deputies' investigation found that Albuquerque had hired killers to eliminate Ceci Cunha, elected in October 1998, thus clearing the way for his entrance into the chamber.

The landless rural poor, led by the Movement of Landless Laborers (Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra, MST), continued to intensify land occupations aimed at forcing the government to accelerate land reform, which resulted in increasing violence directed at the leaders and participants in this movement. According to the Pastoral Land Commission (Comisso Pastoral da Terra, CPT), from 1997 to 1998, the number of land conflicts rose from 736 to 1,100. In the same period, the number of persons involved in these conflicts more than doubled from its 1997 level of 506,053 to reach 1,125,116 in 1998. Also on the rise from 1997 to 1998 were the number of people killed in land disputes: while thirty were killed in 1997, forty-seven were slain in 1998. In 1998, forty-six more laborers suffered attempts on their lives, eighty-eight received death threats, thirty-five were tortured, 164 suffered physical attacks and 207 others sustained bodily injury. Killings in land conflicts continued in 1999; partial data from the CPT indicated that seventeen had been killed through August.

Although figures for 1999 were not yet available, CPT data for 1998 indicated that the trend toward reduction of forced labor had not abated. The number of registered instances of forced labor fell from seventeen to fourteen, while the number of people involved fell from 872 to 614. These figures were well below the tens of thousands of laborers found to have been forced into labor in the mid-1990s. The reduction in reports of forced labor were attributed to an effective federal investigation program and joint government-civil society efforts to inform rural laborers of their rights.

Detention conditions continued to violate international norms as severe overcrowding, abysmal sanitary facilities, and lack of legal and medical assistance provoked riots in police lockups, jails and penitentiaries throughout the year. The latest census figures -from 1997-showed that while Brazilian prisons had capacity for just over 74,000 inmates, they held more than 170,000. Unofficial estimates suggested that growth in the prison population since 1997 outpaced prison construction. This mismatch resulted in the continued use of police lockups-designed for short-term detention-as long-term facilities. Throughout the year, prisoners rioted, took hostages or initiated hunger strikes to demand that minimally humane conditions of incarceration be provided or that they be transferred from police lockups to penitentiaries. On July 19, in Una, Minas Gerais state, 317 prisoners took twenty hostages and demanded that their cases be reviewed to determine whether they should be freed or paroled, that a judge be present, and that they be transferred to other detention centers. A few days earlier, 150 detainees at the anti-narcotics police station in Belo Horizonte began a hunger strike to demand a population reduction at the severely overcrowded facility, as well as the reinstatement of visits, which had been suspended.

The lack of space in detention facilities continued to be extreme even in So Paulo, which was scheduled to complete by the end of 1999 an ambitious prison construction program that included twenty-four facilities with more than 18,000 spaces. By mid-1999, the number of prisoners in police lockups and jails, the majority of whom were supposed to be transferred upon inauguration of the new facilities, reached 30,000, the same figure as mid-1997. Despite the construction, prison capacity in So Paulo, where roughly 40 percent of the nation's prisoners were held, could not keep pace with the growth of the prison population, condemning the state to the continued use of makeshift detention centers run by the police authority.

In November 1998, Congress passed Law No. 9.714/98, expanding the universe of convicts eligible for non-prison sentences. Though an important legal measure to reduce overcrowding, the law had little impact on sentencing for several reasons. First, the percentage of convicts eligible for non-prison sentences remained relatively small; second, most states lacked the requisite infrastructure to supervise community service and similar non-prison sentences; and third, most judges preferred to mete out prison terms. In So Paulo state, for example, according to the United Nations' Latin American Institute for the Prevention and Treatment of Offenders (Instituto Latino Americano das Naes Unidas para a Preveno do Delito e Tratamento do Delinqente, ILANUD), fewer than 200 of a total of 1,700 available slots for non-prison terms were being utilized in September.

Conditions of detention for juveniles also remained well below international standards as well as the minimum guarantees established in Brazil's progressive Children's and Adolescents' Statute (Estatuto da Criana e do Adolescente). A series of riots in detention facilities for adolescents in So Paulo demonstrated the state's inability to maintain security in the facilities or guarantee minimum standards of decent accommodations for the youths held there. In May, juveniles took two hostages in a riot that lasted nine hours at the Tatuap complex in So Paulo. In July, two days of rioting facilitated the escape of 280 juveniles from the same complex, whose thirteen centers held 1,400 inmates in space meant for roughly 800. In August, fifty detainees escaped from the Imigrantes detention center in the southern zone of So Paulo. In September, some 500 detainees escaped from the Imigrantes center during two days of rioting. At the time of the riots, the center held more than 1,300 juveniles in space designed for fewer than 400. In the midst of the September rioting, footage from television camera crews overflying the center showed guards at these detention centers using batons to beat juveniles who had already been subdued and stripped to their underwear.

Also in September, military police caught Paulo Roberto de Souza, the director of the Instituto Padre Severino (IPS), a detention center for juveniles in Rio de Janeiro, mostly naked in his office with a detainee, aged seventeen, who was completely naked. The police arrested de Souza and then released him a few days later pursuant to a judicial order. Other boys at the facility told reporters that de Souza frequently sexually abused juveniles held there; three gave statements to police detailing sexual abuse they had suffered at the hands of de Souza. Juveniles held at the IPS and another Rio de Janeiro juvenile detention center (the Escola Joo Luis Alves) had reported sexual abuse involving supervisory staff since at least 1996. Human Rights Watch, in conjunction with a group of Rio-based nongovernmental organizations, reported these abuses to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights in May 1996, yet little had been done to improve conditions at the facilities.

The federal government appointed Joo Batista Campelo to head the federal police despite credible reports of his involvement in torture during the military dictatorship. Prior to the June 15 ceremony that confirmed Campelo as the head of the federal police, credible reports surfaced, including contemporaneous medical records and witness statements, alleging that Campelo had overseen torture sessions inflicted on former priest Jos Antonio Magalhes Monteiro in 1970. Further evidence indicated that he coerced other witnesses and manipulated police inquiries in the same investigation. Monteiro stated in numerous fora, including the Human Rights Commission of the Federal Chamber of Deputies, that Campelo was aware of the torture that he suffered (which included electric shocks and beatings) and that on one occasion Campelo helped place Monteiro on the "parrot's perch," a torture device common in Brazil. President Cardoso was obliged to request Campelo's resignation after just three days in his post.

Defending Human Rights

A vast network of human rights organizations, religious groups, neighborhood associations, and unions worked to document and denounce violations of human rights without formal legal impediment throughout the year. Nonetheless, several who demonstrated the courage to accuse officials responsible for abuses faced intimidation, including meritless law suits, harassment, threats, and even murder.

A November 1998 federal police raid of land owned by former police officer Otvio Ernesto Moreira, witnessed by Human Rights Watch, turned up the murder weapon used to kill human rights attorney Gilson Nogueira in Rio Grande do Norte state in October 1996. The ballistic test results, made public in January 1999, resulted in the arrest of Moreira, an immense step forward in the struggle against impunity in the Nogueira case. Just two months later, however, one of the key witnesses in the case, Antnio Lopes, a transvestite known by the name Carla, was murdered. Events in this case reportedly led to several lawsuits against Human Rights Watch in Rio Grande do Norte state, although at this writing notice had not been served. Apparently, the lawsuits alleged defamation and were related to Human Rights Watch's reporting on this case.

The passage of federal legislation facilitating the protection of witnesses in danger constituted an important legal measure in the fight against impunity. The legislation, signed into law on July 13, authorized change in identity for witnesses whose testimony places them at risk and permitted sentence reductions for defendants who cooperate with prosecutors. However, the law excluded those with past convictions from its benefits. By year's end, the federal government was expected to establish joint civil society-government witness protection programs based on the PROVITA system already in existence in Pernambuco state in Par, Mato Grosso do Sul, So Paulo, and Rio de Janeiro.

Human rights commissions of state, municipal, and federal legislative bodies, though governmental by definition, acted with notable independence throughout 1999, reviewing allegations of abuse, overseeing police, prisons and other state agents, and denouncing abuses to prosecutors and the media. The human rights commission of the Federal Chamber of Deputies reclaimed its central place in the defense of human rights nationally with the reelection of Deputy Nilmrio Miranda to its presidency in March. Miranda and other members of the commission and staff worked closely with nongovernmental organizations throughout Brazil to publicize violations and pressure local authorities to investigate and punish those responsible. This commission provided a forum for denunciations of Campelo's role in torture during the military dictatorship and prompted President Cardoso's decision to revoke his appointment.

The Role of the International Community

European Union

The European Union continued to finance a range of nongovernmental organizations dedicated to the defense of human rights in Brazil in 1999. Member states of the E.U., both individually and collectively, privately encouraged Brazil to comply with international human rights norms through regular meetings with federal officials in Brazil and on official government trips to Europe.

The Swedish government, the Dutch Red Cross, and the International Committee of the Red Cross continued to finance and implement a national police training program with the cooperation of Brazilian federal and state government authorities. The second phase of the program, completed in December 1998, instructed 324 military police officers on professional policing techniques, including non-lethal methods of response to violent situations, and human rights, with the goal of enabling them to return to their home states as instructors on these matters. The third phase, to be concluded by June 2000, will train an additional 400 instructors from all twenty-six Brazilian states and the federal district.

United States

In 1999, the U.S. gave relatively little direct assistance to Brazil. For fiscal year 1999, Congress approved US $1.2 million in counternarcotics assistance For fiscal year 1999, Congress approved $225,000 for Brazil through the International Military Education and Training (IMET) program; only $206,000 had been spent at this writing. The administration requested $225,000 for IMET for fiscal year 2000.

During the year, the U.S. government sponsored educational visits to the United States for human rights activists, attorneys, and community organizers, as well as visits to Brazil by U.S. experts on children's and women's rights and racial discrimination. The State Department's chapter on Brazil in its Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1998 accurately portrayed the human rights situation in Brazil.
CHILE

Human Rights Developments

The coalition government of President Eduardo Frei struggled in its final year to cope with the twin challenges of Chile's first recession in fifteen years and the complex political problems posed by the arrest in London of former dictator Augusto Pinochet. Divisions over Pinochet's legacy rose immediately to the surface as embassies were besieged by furious protesters, national flags appeared overnight in prosperous neighborhoods, and for a few tense weeks fear of a return to violence stalked the Santiago streets. Yet apart from moments of extreme tension when court verdicts were announced in London, Chileans adapted to these momentous developments with little overt violence. Pinochet and his legacy of human rights violations, a theme purposefully avoided by the government for several years, were front page news for most of the year.

Pinochet's arrest, and the ensuing legal battle over his extradition to Spain, were the fruit of a three-year investigation conducted by Spanish magistrate Baltasar Garzn into systematic violations of human rights, including murder and torture, under Pinochet's seventeen-year rule.

Immediately after Pinochet's arrest in October 1998, his British lawyers won a habeas corpus appeal to the High Court, which held that Pinochet, as a former head of state, was immune from legal process in the United Kingdom. On appeal, Britain's highest court, the House of Lords Judicial Committee (the Law Lords) reversed the ruling. In a dramatic judgment handed down on November 25, 1998, the House of Lords concluded that sovereign immunity did not extend to crimes against humanity. Unusually, the court granted leave to intervene in the hearing to four concerned organizations, including Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch. Pinochet's counsel challenged the November 25 decision on grounds that one of the Law Lords, Lord Hoffmann, a director of Amnesty International's charity division, might have been biased against General Pinochet. In a decision almost without precedent, another panel of Law Lords vacated the November 25 decision, ruling that as an intervenor Amnesty International was in practice a party to the appeal. On March 24, 1999, a third panel of Law Lords pronounced General Pinochet's arrest to be lawful and consistent with Britain's obligations under the United Nations Convention against Torture, ruling that as a former head of state Pinochet did not enjoy immunity from extradition on charges of torture and conspiracy to torture. But the Law Lords held that Pinochet could only be extradited for acts of torture or conspiracy to torture committed after December 8, 1988, when the United Kingdom ratified the Convention against Torture. On April 15, British Home Secretary Jack Straw approved the extradition proceedings, arguing that the reduced charges were serious and sufficient for extradition, and that Spanish jurisdiction was valid in the absence of a competing request from the Chilean government. Pinochet remained under house arrest in an exclusive private estate in the county of Surrey. On October 8, a magistrate committed Pinochet for extradition on thirty-four charges of torture and one of conspiracy to torture. He ruled that Pinochet's conduct before 1988 could be examined in proving the conspiracy.

The Chilean government refused to recognize the jurisdiction of the Spanish court from the beginning of Judge Garzn's investigation and failed to cooperate with it. Indeed, the government had tried to ease Pinochet's passage through Europe with a diplomatic passport attributing to him a special official mission. Engaging counsel in London after Pinochet's arrest, the government intervened in defense of the Chilean state in the House of Lords (not, it insisted, in Pinochet's defense), and lobbied Home Secretary Straw to allow Pinochet to return to Chile, arguing that Chilean courts were competent to judge him and had a superior right to do so over Spanish courts. In practice, however, no charges had been brought against the former dictator since he stepped down in March 1990. In January 1998, Santiago Appeals Court Judge Juan Guzmn Tapia began investigations into more than forty criminal complaints filed against Pinochet. As a senator-for-life under the constitution he introduced in 1980, Pinochet enjoyed full immunity from criminal process. In October, Judge Guzmn sent Pinochet a list of seventy-five questions about the crimes that he was required to answer. Before he could be charged, however, the Supreme Court had to first rescind his parliamentary immunity.

Apart from his parliamentary immunity, Pinochet was also protected by an amnesty proclaimed by the military government applicable to crimes committed between September 11, 1973, the date of the military coup that overthrew the government of Salvador Allende, and March 1978, when the nation-wide state of siege was lifted. Eighty percent of the approximately 3,000 extrajudicial executions, "disappearances," and deaths under torture committed by state agents throughout the military government date from this period, according to figures published by a government commission in 1996.

The strength of pro-Pinochet sentiment among the country's two most powerful groups, the armed forces and the business community, coupled with Chile's undemocratic constitution, had severely limited the power of two successive elected center-left governments to introduce much needed human rights reforms. By the time of Pinochet's arrest, a modus vivendi had been established with the military, an unstated assumption of which was that no legal action would be taken against the former ruler. President Eduardo Frei opposed the jurisdiction of the Spanish court from the beginning of Garzn's investigation in 1996. Although the government said it was merely advocating the principle of territorial jurisdiction, its position reflected the same fear of political instability that repeatedly slowed human rights-related reforms over the last decade. Having maintained in its interventions in the House of Lords in January that only Chilean courts had the right to try Pinochet, the government took no measures to remove legal barriers to his prosecution at home. By October no Chilean court had charged him with any offense.

While strategies to bring Pinochet home occupied both government and opposition, Pinochet's arrest also generated much discussion about justice and reparation for victims of human rights violations committed under his rule, a topic swept under the carpet for years. In this new and more open climate, the courts issued several key decisions limiting the effects of the 1978 amnesty law, which had hitherto prevented prosecutions for crimes during the coup and its violent five-year aftermath. In July the Supreme Court unanimously upheld the detention and prosecution of five senior army officers, including a general once close to Pinochet, for their participation in a series of mass killings in October 1973. Amid military discontent at this ruling and the increasingly frequent citation of officers for court appearances in other cases, Defense Minister Edmundo Prez Yoma organized a series of trust-building meetings in August between representatives of the armed forces, lawyers who litigate for relatives of victims of human rights violations, and representatives of civil society. Even its proponents recognized, however, that this initiative's purpose was ill-defined and its chances of success limited.

Freedom of expression continued to be restricted by laws introduced by Pinochet or predating his rule that inhibit political debate. Most of the parties making up the Concertacin government coalition, however, strongly opposed the censorship in April of a book considered defamatory by the country's former chief justice. Members of congress from the ruling coalition parties proposed legislation to amend provisions of the Law of State Security that prohibit criticism of government officials and permit prior censorship.

Due to differences of legal interpretation by the Chilean courts, the amnesty law had been applied selectively and extraordinarily inconsistently in past years. Seventy-seven cases, involving 261 victims, had been closed by the courts, but hundreds of cases remained open for investigation. The position of the armed forces and their parliamentary allies was that the amnesty should be implemented to close the books forever on excesses committed by both sides. Relatives of the victims of human rights violations, and the center-left parties in Congress closest to them, wanted the courts to provide truth and justice. Taking a middle position, politicians close to Frei believed that closing the books forever was unethical and that achieving truth and justice was unrealistic. They considered that the most pressing moral issue was to discover the fate of the "disappeared." To overcome the refusal of those implicated in human rights violations to cooperate with the courts, they argued, guarantees should be devised to ensure that the identity of those providing information would be withheld and no legal reprisals would follow their declarations. The most positive developments were in the courts. In December 1998, a judge ordered the arrest of eight former members of the National Information Center (Central Nacional de Informaciones, CNI), successor to Pinochet's notorious secret police, the National Directorate of Investigations (Direccin Nacional de Informaciones , DINA), for the 1987 deaths of seven people, an incident known as the Albania Operation (Operacin Albania). CNI agents detained, tortured, and killed the suspects, and then dressed the scene to make it appear that they had been shot in combat. Although not covered by the amnesty law, the case had been under military jurisdiction until the Supreme Court transferred it to a criminal court judge in March 1998. A long-stalled investigation into the 1982 murder of trade unionist Tucapel Jimnez was shaken back to life by the Third Chamber of the Santiago Appeals Court when it removed from the case a judge linked by family ties to the CNI. By September, Gen. Humberto Gordon, a former CNI director and member of the military junta from 1986-1988, and Brig. Roberto Schmied, the commander of the CNI's metropolitan division, were among eighteen suspects charged in the case.

In July 1999, Judge Carlos Cerda of the Fifth Chamber of the Santiago Appeals Court indicted Edgar Ceballos Jones, former head of air force intelligence, for the murder and "disappearance," respectively, of Communist Party leaders Alfonso Carreo Diaz and Jos Luis Baeza Cruces in July 1974. Judge Cerda argued that the facts had to be exhaustively investigated before the amnesty question could be considered, noting that Baeza's continued disappearance made it impossible to establish that the crime was committed within the period covered by the amnesty law. Ceballos Jones was arrested on February 3 and detained in the air force hospital.

On June 8, Judge Juan Guzmn Tapia, investigating more than thirty criminal complaints against Pinochet and other members of the military junta, ordered the arrest on kidnaping charges of five senior retired army officers: Gen. Sergio Orellano Stark, Brig. Pedro Espinosa Bravo (who was already serving a prison sentence for the September 1976 car bombing murder of Orlando Letelier and Ronni Mofffitt in Washington, D.C.), and Cols. Marcelo Morn Brito, Sergio Arredondo, and Patricio Daz, who were implicated in the so-called Caravan of Death case, a notorious episode involving the extrajudicial execution of seventy-five prisoners in October 1973. They were members of a helicopter-borne commando task force, acting with authority from Pinochet himself, which toured prisons in the north and south of Chile, removing inmates from their cells and secretly executing them. In view of the fact that the bodies of nineteen of the victims had never been located, Judge Guzmn held that their abduction was still current, and hence excluded from the amnesty law. The five former officers were detained in military bases.

On July 20, the Supreme Court unanimously rejected a habeas corpus appeal against the officers' arrest and upheld the doctrine underlying Judge Guzmn's decision, namely that "disappearance" is a permanent crime until the victim's death is legally ascertained. In theory, this meant that the officers could be convicted unless the fate of the nineteen unaccounted-for victims could be established. In several of these cases, former Pinochet government ministers, who had since become members of the Senate, were called to give evidence.

The July Supreme Court decision produced a hostile reaction by pro-military senators, who accused the court of remaking the law. The armed forces held a three-day conclave at a beach resort to discuss its implications. On July 23, the four service chiefs met Defense Minister Prez Yoma to press the government to seek a political solution to the matter. In August Prez Yoma announced his idea of establishing a dialogue between relatives of the victims, to be represented by the Group of Relatives of the Disappeared (Agrupacin de Familiares de Detenidos Desaparecidos, AFDD), and delegates of each of the four branches of the armed forces. The AFDD immediately rejected the invitation to participate in what they saw as a negotiation aimed at preserving impunity. The group held its first sessions at the end of August, excluding the AFDD but including four representatives of the armed forces, lawyers litigating human rights cases, human rights experts, representatives of religious institutions, and other civilians. Formal expositions by the representatives of army Commander-in-Chief Ricardo Izurieta and navy chief Adm. Jorge Arrancibia did not betray any change of institutional position, despite a softening of language. Izurieta's insistent denials that the army had any information about the whereabouts of the "disappeared" fell like a shadow over the talks.

Chilean courts requested the extradition of at least two suspects in human right crimes. In April the Supreme Court authorized a request for the extradition from France of Galvarino Ancavil, a former civilian CNI agent wanted in the Tucapel Jimnez case. In August a court issued a request for the extradition from the United States of DINA agent Armando Fernndez Larios, allegedly a member of the Caravan of Death, who had served time in U.S. prisons for his role in the Letelier-Moffitt assassination.

The press continued to be restricted by anti-defamation laws and other legal norms limiting freedom of expression. Within hours of its April 13 launch, police removed from bookshops The Black Book of Chilean Justice by journalist Alejandra Matus, an expos of venality and improper conduct in the upper echelons of the judiciary. Behind the banning order was former Chief Justice Servando Jordn, one of the targets of the book, who accused Matus and the publishers, Planeta, of defamation under the Law of State Security. Matus left for Buenos Aires and subsequently the United States after learning of her imminent arrest.

Also charged were Bartolo Ortz, manager of the publishing house Planeta, and Carlos Orellano, its editor. Police arrested both of them on June 16 and held them for two days. The court summoned for questioning prominent journalists who had read or exhibited extracts from the book on television.

The action against Matus and Planeta was taken under the Law of State Security, which prohibited what it deemed offensive criticism of government authorities. Following the storm caused by Judge Jordn's action, a group of congressmen presented a bill to eliminate provisions of the Law of State Security that made it an imprisonable offense to insult government officials and allowed the confiscation and banning of publications. Although this was the first parliamentary effort to revise these authoritarian provisions since the return of democracy, amendments to the bill made its passage under the current administration unlikely. Among the proposals under discussion was the inclusion in the penal code, rather than the security law, of an article to criminalize the defamation of government authorities.

By October, Matus's book was still banned from Chilean bookshops, although the full text was available on the Internet and pirate copies circulated. The special rapporteur on freedom of expression of the Organization of American States, Santiago Cantn, visited Santiago on June 23, advancing a trip scheduled for August, on receiving news of the arrest of the Planeta editors. Apart from this egregious case, there were no other reports of defamation prosecutions under the Law of State Security, a notable improvement on 1998.

Defending Human Rights

Chile's much-depleted nongovernmental human rights community campaigned vigorously to defend the Pinochet prosecution and played a vital role in providing information to the Spanish court. The atmosphere turned ugly in the final three months of 1998, when scores of politicians, journalists, former political prisoners, and human rights activists received anonymous death threats, many by e-mail. Members of congress who supported the Pinochet prosecution were "bombarded" by death threats, in the words of Socialist Party leader Ricardo Nez, who was threatened himself. After being repeatedly menaced in October 1998, Carmen Soria, daughter of Spanish diplomat Carmelo Soria, who was murdered by Pinochet's agents in 1976, followed diplomatic advice and took her family to Spain.

On December 27 various members of the Corporation for the Rights of the People, (Corporacin por los Derechos del Pueblo, CODEPU) received threatening messages by e-mail, sent by a group calling itself the Fatherland and Liberty Nationalist Front (Frente Nacionalista Patria y Libertad). The messages said: "People like us are not going to allow communists/socialists like yourselves to get away with it, take care because your elimination is close." CODEPU was an outspoken defender of the Pinochet prosecution and its lawyers represented relatives of the victims of the Caravan of Death. On November 13, an anonymous message from a group calling itself Organized Extreme Right (Extrema Derecha Organizada) was posted on the Internet, in which the authors threatened human rights lawyer Hernn Montealegre, and claimed responsibility for a bomb-hoax and an incendiary attack on an Antofogasta newspaper.

During the last week of November 1998, a fax arrived at the office of broadcaster Jos Gmez Lpez at the University of Chile radio station, awarding him the "Red Tie Award, just like some friends of yours in Quilicura were given a few years ago in Quilicura." This was a reference to three communists whose throats were cut by police agents in 1985.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

In March, the U.N. Human Rights Committee published its Concluding Observations on Chile's reports on compliance with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The committee expressed concern at the undemocratic composition of the Senate, which, it stated, "impedes legal reforms that would enable the State party to comply more fully with its Covenant obligations." During the same month, High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson said of the second House of Lords decision: "The ruling today by the United Kingdom's highest court in the case of Senator Augusto Pinochet is a vigorous endorsement of the view that torture is an international crime subject to universal jurisdiction. National courts can try torturers even when the crime has been committed elsewhere."

European Union

Following Pinochet's detention in London, Belgium, France, and Switzerland also moved to prosecute the general and filed extradition requests of their own. Members of the European Parliament, reacting to the arrest, urged Spain to seek Pinochet's extradition as quickly as possible.

United States

The White House said little at Pinochet's arrest, and when pressure in Europe for his extradition mounted, the State Department went to Chile's defense. Refusing to comment on the judicial aspects of the case, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright called in November 1998 for understanding of Chile's dilemma: "In Chile, the citizens of a democratic state are wrestling with a very difficult problem of how to balance the need of justice with the requirements of reconciliation ...[and] I think significant respect should be given to their conclusions." However, while keeping its distance on the extradition issue, the administration decided to help the truth-telling process.

On February 1, the White House issued a directive ordering U.S. agencies to collect and review for release documents "that shed light on human rights abuses, terrorism, and other acts of political violence in Chile." On June 30 the government released an estimated 5,300 declassified documents relating to events during the period from 1973 to 1978, from agencies including the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Central Intelligence Agency, and the Defense Department. Thousands more documents from the pre-coup period were promised later in the year. The U.S. made declassified files available under a bilateral Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty to Judge Garzn, and to Argentinean judge Mara Servini de Cubra, who was investigating the 1974 assassination of former Chilean army commander Carlos Prats in Buenos Aires. The judge determined that Argentina had jurisdiction over the case and informed Pinochet that he should appoint a lawyer.

Although heavily censored, the released documents confirmed the direct chain of command between Pinochet and the head of the DINA, Manuel Contreras. They also showed that U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger had received detailed intelligence about the extent and gravity of human rights violations, even as the U.S. continued to shower the Pinochet government with military and economic assistance. Freedom of information advocates in the U.S. continued to press the White House to declassify documents still withheld, particularly by the CIA and the Defense Department.

Justice Department prosecutors continued to investigate the Letelier-Moffitt murder case. On September 1, 1999, a rogatory letter was sent to the Chilean Supreme Court asking for cooperation with the U.S. investigation. The letter allegedly requested, among other things, documentary evidence collected by Supreme Court Justice Adolfo Baados during the investigation that led to the conviction of Contreras and Espinoza. According to Chilean press reports, the Justice Department also requested tapes of reported conversations between Pinochet and Contreras, potentially crucial evidence in establishing the role of Pinochet in the assassination of Letelier and Moffitt.

COLOMBIA

Human Rights Developments

Armed conflict intensified in Colombia as negotiations between the government and guerrillas stalled. The administration of Andrs Pastrana was slow to develop a plan to improve human rights protections even as guerrillas used territory ceded to them not to talk peace, but to further war. Paramilitary groups working in some areas with the tolerance and open support of the armed forces continued to massacre civilians, commit selective killings, and spread terror. Guerrillas also flouted international humanitarian law, executing and kidnapping civilians and carrying out indiscriminate attacks. Throughout the country, Colombians fled political violence, with waning chances of finding refuge, food, and medical care. Repeatedly, the conflict crossed borders into Panama, Brazil, and Venezuela, heightening regional tensions and prompting talk of a future multilateral intervention.

The departments of Antioquia, Meta, Santander, and Bolivar remained among the most dangerous. Victims ran the gamut of Colombian society. In 1999, paramilitaries were considered responsible for 78 percent of the total number of human rights and international humanitarian law violations, according to the Colombian Commission of Jurists (Comisin Colombiana de Juristas, CCJ), a human rights group. For their part, guerrillas were credited with 20 percent. State forces were linked to 2 percent.

Some government officials claimed that the military's ties to paramilitary groups were severed and cited the low percentage of violations credited to state forces acting alone. However, the percentage does not reflect state forces that routinely assisted paramilitary atrocities. Indeed, cooperation between army units and paramilitaries remained commonplace. For instance, government investigators detailed direct collaboration between the Medelln-based Fourth Brigade and paramilitaries commanded by Carlos Castao. Repeatedly, paramilitaries killed those suspected of supporting guerrillas, then delivered the corpses to the army. In a process known as "legalization," the army then claimed the dead as guerrillas killed in combat while paramilitaries received their pay in army weapons.

The Bogot office of the U.N. high commissioner for human rights reported in 1999 that despite many similar credible reports , the government failed to act consistently to break ties and pursue paramilitaries. "Signs of the lack of willingness to combat the paramilitary groups effectively include the fact that the location of many of their assembly and training sites is public knowledge on the part of the population and the authorities," its report noted.

The debate over percentages also leaves unaddressed continuing criminal activity by military intelligence, which government investigators linked to a string of high-profile killings and death threats, including the August murder of humorist Jaime Garzn. Although the brigade that centralized military intelligence was reportedly dismantled in 1998 because of human rights crimes, government investigators believe intelligence agents continued to threaten, kidnap, and kill. In one of at least eight cases, for example, investigators linked the 1998 kidnapping and later murder of an Israeli businessman to Thirteenth Brigade intelligence officers.

Increasingly, armed clashes were mixed and prolonged, as groups attacked, counterattacked, and allied on battlefields that included farms, villages, and towns. For instance, fighting over several weeks in June between paramilitaries belonging to the Peasant Self-Defense Forces of Crdoba and Urab (Autodefensas Campesinas de Crdoba and Urab, ACCU) and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia, FARC) caused dozens of civilian casualties near Juan Jos, Crdoba. Fighting finally ended with the army called in to repel guerrillas, while ignoring the paramilitaries whose headquarters was nearby. As soldiers exited a transport helicopter on June 22, they were ambushed by guerrillas, who killed thirty-five, some apparently executed after surrendering.

The security forces failed to halt both paramilitary and guerrilla incursions into towns where civilians were frequently killed. However, soldiers pursued guerrillas once an attack was reported. In contrast, although paramilitaries often announced plans to attack publicly and well in advance, authorities not only failed to act to stop killings, but rarely pursued paramilitary units even when they remained in the region after massacring noncombatants.

This pattern was clear on Colombia's border with Venezuela. Despite repeated attacks by the ACCU beginning in May 1999, authorities failed to take effective measures against them. To the contrary, there were credible reports of collusion between the security forces and the ACCU, which traveled freely, passing army bases, police barracks, and army check points.

Thousands of civilians fled to Venezuela, where Colombian authorities promised to take action against paramilitaries. Yet even as families prepared to return, ACCU leader Castao repeated his threats to "clean" the region of guerrillas. By August, a dozen massacres and dozens more targeted killings raised the civilian death toll to over 150 people.

On September 1, the Colombian government cashiered Gen. Alberto Bravo, head of the Fifth Brigade and responsible for the region, along with the departmental police chief and the head of the regional Administrative Security Department (Departamento Administrativo de Seguridad, DAS), the security force run by Colombia's executive branch.

Paramilitary killings were stark in their savagery. In January, for example, paramilitaries reportedly dragged twenty-seven worshipers out of a church in Playn de Orozco, Magdalena, then riddled their bodies with bullets . That same week, authorities registered over one hundred killings attributed to paramilitaries, who mutilated some of their victims and dumped bodies into rivers to destroy evidence.

The Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances transmitted to the Colombian government fifty new cases of "disappearances" carried out in 1998. They occurred mainly in northwest Colombia and the department of Santander. Most of the abductions and detentions leading to "disappearances" were carried out by paramilitary groups. In a few cases, the army was allegedly responsible for the detention.

The Human Rights Unit of the attorney general's office was among the most effective government institutions combating paramilitaries. In 1999, that office reported that 161 persons accused of involvement in paramilitary activities were arrested. Seventy-five members of the security forces were under arrest for alleged involvement in human rights crimes.

Success came at an increasingly high price, however. In 1998 and 1999, a dozen officials from the Technical Investigations Unit (Cuerpo Tcnico de Investigaciones, CTI) of the attorney general's office were murdered or forced to resign because of threats related to their work on human rights. Prosecutors were forced to abandon their posts and seek refuge abroad because of threats, including by military officers being investigated for paramilitary ties.

In February, seven CTI agents were briefly held by the ACCU, which claimed in a statement released to the press that the agents were carrying out a strategy "imposed by the subversives and now institutionalized as part of their overall strategy to seize power." The statement went on to threaten government investigators with death.

The government took some steps toward purging the military of suspected human rights abusers. On April 9, President Pastrana cashiered Gen. Rito Alejo del Ro and Gen. Fernando Milln, who were both being prosecuted for alleged support for paramilitary groups. At this writing, the Attorney General's office continued to pursue a case against Del Ro for alleged support to paramilitaries who carried out dozens of massacres and selective killings in the Middle Magdalena and Urab regions.

However, a similar case against Milln remained before a military tribunal. Given the long- standing practice of these tribunals, the case was likely to end in impunity. The attorney general's office and the Procuradura, which investigates allegations against government employees, also found evidence implicating soldiers under Milln's direct command as well as police and DAS agents in a 1998 massacre in Barrancabermeja. The massacre had been carried out by paramilitaries who abducted and killed thirty-two people, apparently with the officers' help.

Separately, the attorney general's office suspended in May Gen. Jaime Humberto Usctegui, commander of the Second Division, during an investigation for assisting a paramilitary massacre in the village of Onlineiripn, Meta, in 1997. This officer was also facing prosecution for the 1997 Puerto Elvira massacre and the 1998 San Carlos de Guaroa massacre. In October, General Usctegui resigned his post. Usctegui's arrest followed the March arrest of Lt. Col. Lino Snchez Prado, who allegedly helped paramilitaries reach the village. At the time of the massacre, Snchez led Mobile Brigade Two.

Other security force personnel whom government investigators have tied to serious violations remained on active duty, including two sergeants who killed Senator Manuel Cepeda in 1994. The men, who worked for military intelligence, acted on orders from Ninth Brigade Gen. Rodolfo Herrera Luna, who died of a heart attack in 1996.

A military penal code reform, long supported by national and international human rights groups as a way to address impunity, fell short of demands to strengthen accountability, failing to clarify how cases involving military officers charged with human rights violations would be prosecuted. For example, article 3 of the code named only three crimes-genocide, torture, and forced disappearance-as human rights violations that must be heard by civilian courts. Left out was the most common violation attributed to Colombia's security forces, extrajudicial execution. In the code, the cited crimes were defined according to "conventions and treaties ratified by Colombia," a further complication. While Colombia had ratified the U.N. Convention against Torture, it had not even signed the OAS convention against forced disappearances, making the use of these charges against security force officers open to legal manipulation. Although genocide was named as a crime, it has never occurred in Colombia. Another bill that would criminalize forced disappearances failed to receive adequate government support and was abandoned.

Despite the new code, already existing legislation, and court decisions mandating that human rights crimes be heard in civilian courts, the military continued to dispute and often win jurisdiction. Cases involving high-ranking officers, among them General Usctegui, continued to be sent to military tribunals, where impunity was the likely result.

For its part, the FARC continued to flagrantly violate the laws of war. In February, FARC militants seized, then executed three Americans who had visited the U'wa indigenous group in northeastern Colombia. Apparently in order to mislead investigators, guerrillas took Terence Freitas, Ingrid Washinawatok, and Lahe'ena'e Gay into Venezuela, where they executed the three. After admitting its role, the FARC claimed that it would subject those responsible to trial, a development Human Rights Watch protested since the guerrillas could not guarantee a fair trial.

Subsequently, the FARC announced that the guerrilla who they claimed commanded the unit that carried out the executions might be punished. However, transcripts of FARC radio conversations allegedly recorded by the Colombian army and released to the press suggested that the murders had not been carried out by low-ranking guerrillas, but had been ordered by Germn Briceo Surez, a top FARC commander who used the alias "Grannobles" and remained in his post. In September, army troops claimed to have killed in combat two of the guerrillas believed responsible for the Americans' death.

The FARC appeared disinterested in peace, and suspended talks repeatedly into the latter part of the year. Meanwhile, in the area ceded to them by the government, the FARC carried out extrajudicial executions of at least eleven civilians they suspected of various crimes. Repeatedly in 1999, the FARC used gas cylinders as bombs, weapons that were impossible to aim properly and often caused civilian casualties.

The National Liberation Army-Camilist Union (Unin Camilista-Ejrcito de Liberacin Nacional, UC-ELN) also continued to commit serious laws of war violations. On October 18, 1998, just after midnight, militants bombed the pipeline of Oleoducto Central, S.A., near Machuca, Antioquia. According to official investigations, the resulting spilled oil and the gases took six minutes to descend a slope, cross the Pocun River, and reach the population on the opposite bank. There, many residents depended on open flames for light and cooking,. The mixture ignited, engulfing sixty-four dwellings and the sleeping families inside them. Seventy-three people, among them thirty-six children, ultimately perished. Some of the dead could be identified only through dental records, since their bodies were completely burned. An additional sixty-four people were seriously wounded.

Weeks after the spill, the UC-ELN admitted its responsibility via a press interview with leader Nicols Bautista, who claimed without providing evidence that the UC-ELN had investigated the case and "punished" those responsible. However, several months later, UC-ELN leader Antonio Garca claimed it was sufficient to simply "acknowledge" the error and insist that units be more careful.

In 1999, the group continued to bomb pipelines near civilian dwellings. In May, the attorney general's office issued an arrest warrant for UC-ELN commander Luis Guillermo Roldn Posada as the alleged leader of the unit that carried out the Machuca attack.

In failed negotiations with the government in 1998, the UC-ELN made several pronouncements on the laws of war that served mainly to underscore how little the group respected them. On the subject of hostage-taking, for instance, the UC-ELN committed itself to cease kidnapping civilians-already outlawed under any circumstances-only if its economic needs could be satisfied "by other means," and claimed that it would exempt the elderly, pregnant women, and children.

Within the year, however, the group violated even this meager pledge, sometimes in spectacular fashion. On April 12, the group abducted forty-one passengers and crew members of an Avianca airline flight, pioneering the tactic of the mass kidnapping of civilians in Colombia. A month later, the UC-ELN seized over 140 churchgoers from a Cali church. Pursued by the authorities, the UC-ELN released some eighty captives, but kept at least two children and hostages they hoped would pay high ransoms. A bodyguard of one parishioner was shot and killed when he resisted abduction.

Months later, the UC-ELN apologized not for the Cali kidnapping itself, but for failing to wait until mass was concluded to carry it out. In April, May, and June alone, police estimated that the UC-ELN increased its pace of kidnapping by 217 percent, having abducted 463 people by the end of the period.

One result of human rights and international humanitarian law violations continued to be mass displacement. According to the Displaced Person Support Group (Grupo de Apoyo a Desplazados, GAD), an alliance of human rights, religious, and aid organizations, an estimated 1.5 million Colombians had been displaced by political violence since 1985. In a 1999 report, the Consultancy for Human Rights and the Displaced (Consultora para los Derechos Humanos y el Desplazamiento, CODHES), a group that studied forced displacement, found that displacement reached its highest level ever in 1998; an estimated 308,000 Colombians were forced to flee, an increase of 20 percent over the previous year. For every political killing in 1998, according to CODHES, an estimated seventy-eight people fled.

Far from improving, forced displacement intensified in some regions in 1999, making Colombia the country with the third largest internally displaced population in the world, after Sudan and Angola. While the government mobilized to help thousands of Colombians left homeless by a devastating January earthquake in Armenia, Quindo, forcibly displaced families continued to live largely in the shadows, subsisting on their own meager resources.

Venezuela repeatedly failed to comply with its international obligations to protect refugees under the 1951 Refugee Convention, calling the Colombians "displaced in transit" rather than refugees. Some refugees reported feeling intimidated into returning to Colombia despite their well-founded fears of continuing persecution from paramilitaries.

Colombian government attention to the displaced remained sporadic and paltry, and families fleeing political violence continued to face hunger, disease, and poor housing. Although the government frequently signed agreements to provide aid, promises were rarely honored. This amounted to a failure to comply with Law 387, passed in 1998 to provide aid to displaced persons.

In some cases, displaced families remained in poorly built camps for more than two years. In Quibd, for instance, capital of the department of Choc, displaced families lived in a misery unparalleled in Colombia, forced to use the street as their only latrine.

Colombia's so-called faceless courts were by law due to end by July 1999. During a last-minute session in the Senate, however, measures that fostered continuing violations of due process remained in legislation creating so-called specialized courts. Among them were the continuing anonymity of prosecutors and witnesses, and strict curbs on the defendant's right to argue against testimony offered by the prosecution. In 1998, disciplinary investigations by the attorney general's office showed that "faceless" court officials repeatedly "cloned" testimony, allowing a single, secret witness to appear as several people presenting corroborating evidence.

Landmines continued to be a problem in Colombia, used by both government forces and guerrillas. Most civilian casualties were farmers or cattle ranchers working in rural areas while most military casualties were the result of combat or injuries sustained while on combat patrol.

Colombia had yet to ratify the Mine Ban Treaty, although the ratification process was under way. Nevertheless, several senior Colombian military officials indicated that ratification might not be feasible until the conflict is resolved. The Ministry of Defense claimed that it had begun to change its doctrine and training manuals to take into account a landmine ban. It was also developing the country's domestic demining capacity and searching for alternative means to protect infrastructure.

The commander of the army, Gen. Fernando Tapias, committed the army to remove approximately 20,000 antipersonnel mines that the army had planted to protect the country's military and communications infrastructure. All major guerrilla groups continued to use and manufacture so-called minas quiebrapatas (foot breaker mines). Most of these mines were homemade, used cheap and easy-to-find materials, and came in various forms.

Colombia's prison population, which was the responsibility of the National Penitentiary and Prison Institute (Instituto Nacional Penitenciario, INPEC) continued to feel the ill effects of overcrowding, since there were 40 percent more prisoners than the state's prisons could handle.

Defending Human Rights

Defending human rights remained a dangerous profession in Colombia. "There is absolutely no security to do human rights work," reported one international observer, echoing the opinions of many Colombians.

In the first nine months of 1999, two human rights defenders were killed and dozens more were threatened. Two academics who worked in favor of human rights were also murdered. On January 31, Julio Gonzlez and Everardo de Jess Puerta, who worked for the Committee of Solidarity with Political Prisoners (Comit de Solidaridad con los Presos Polticos, CSPP), were shot and killed by presumed paramilitaries after they were forced off the public bus in which they were traveling in Antioquia. Subsequent threats forced the CSPP to suspend activities for several months.

Days earlier, four employees of the Popular Training Institute (Instituto Popular de Capacitacin, IPC) were kidnapped by "Las Terrazas," a Medelln-based gang of professional killers that investigators believed Castao hired to carry out political abductions or killings. Subsequently, Castao said he would continue to target so-called parasubversives working in human rights organizations. Although all four were later released, Castao continued to send "Las Terrazas" killers after human rights defenders, among them Senator Piedad Crdoba, president of the Senate Human Rights Commission, kidnapped in a bid to force the government to hold formal peace talks with the group. All were released unharmed. Senator Crdoba later fled Colombia because of continuing threats on her life.

In 1999, Colombia's attorney general formally charged Castao with ordering the 1998 murder of Jess Mara Valle, president of the "Hctor Abad Gmez" Human Rights Committee in Antioquia. The murder was allegedly carried out by "Las Terrazas" killers. The office also arrested several of the assassins accused of killing human rights lawyer Eduardo Umaa in his Bogot apartment in 1998. Nevertheless, the individuals who ordered the killing remained unidentified.

Several human rights groups closed their doors because of threats, among them a group working with the families and survivors of the Trujillo killings of the early 1990s. The Association of Family Members of Victims of Trujillo (Asociacin de Familiares de las Vctimas de Trujillo, AFAVIT) suffered repeated threats, and over fifty AFAVIT members won political asylum in Canada in 1999. At least thirty other defenders were also forced to abandon the country in 1998 and 1999.

Surveillance of some groups was open and aggressive. One group reported being filmed from the twelfth floor of a neighboring hotel, prompting them to request bulletproof glass for their twelfth-floor windows. Telephones were tapped, and callers could hear agents eating, turning newspaper pages, and listening to music. Several office managers reported having their calls blocked, cut off, or detoured to telephones in military barracks. One group discovered that a false nongovernmental organization set up by military intelligence kept surveillance over their activities, and fear was rife that the military and paramilitaries had infiltrated operatives within offices to report on the movements of key leaders.

The administration of President Pastrana allocated U.S. $4 million to protect human rights defenders in 1999, but monies were slow to materialize, short of what was promised, and often short-lived, including those allocated for much-needed measures like bulletproof glass, radios, taxis, and police protection at offices.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

The office of the U.N. high commissioner for human rights based in Bogot continued to function, collecting information, meeting regularly with government officials, human rights groups, and victims of abuses, and lobbying for greater human rights protections. Also during the year, High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson issued two strong statements on Colombia. Other high-ranking U.N. officials also visited Colombia in 1999. Francis Deng, representative of the secretary-general on internally displaced persons, returned to Colombia in May, to follow up on a 1994 visit prompted by an increase in that phenomenon. Although Deng noted that the government had made some progress toward acknowledging the displaced population, he pointed out that forced displacement had increased dramatically, and that the government had yet to take the measures necessary to halt further displacement and attend to the needs of thousands of displaced Colombians.

Also in May, Olara A. Otunnu, special representative of the secretary-general on children and armed conflict, toured Colombia and met not only with government officials and organizations working with children, but also with the FARC. Otunnu underscored the toll taken by war on the lives of children, some of whom had been forcibly recruited into the ranks of guerrillas and paramilitaries. Although Otunnu announced after his visit that the FARC had agreed to cease recruiting children under the age of fifteen, the group quickly disputed his claim, asserting that they would continue to "accept" children who chose to join guerrilla ranks.

In April, the U.N. Human Rights Commission dedicated a day to a debate about Colombia, the second time that it had focused special attention on the country and an indication of the seriousness of the human rights problems there.

European Union

The European Union continued to promote a peaceful solution to Colombia's conflict that included respect for human rights. Repeatedly, the E.U. publicly condemned violations of human rights and international humanitarian law by all sides. A March resolution by the European Parliament highlighted continuing threats against human rights defenders, and called on the Colombian authorities to protect and support them in their work.

In 1999, the commission approved funding for initiatives to promote peace communities in Colombia and help the forcibly displaced. The commission's humanitarian agency provided a 6.6 million euro (U.S. $7 million) humanitarian aid package for people internally displaced as a result of violence and earthquakes.

United States

The United States increased its attention to Colombia in 1999, in part spurred by fear that President Pastrana might be losing control. More high-level U.S. diplomats, congressional delegations, CIA officials, and military officers visited Colombia in 1999 than at any other time in recent history.

Key to the policy shift was the contention, forwarded by the U.S. Southern Command (SOUTHCOM), which oversaw U.S. military activities and assistance in South America, that guerrillas were "narco-traffickers" and legitimate targets of the drug war. The contention was supported by influential voices in the State Department, Congress, and the policy world. In the words of Gen. Charles Wilhelm, SOUTHCOM commander, "I think the connection between the insurgents and the narco-traffickers has been very clearly demonstrated."

Critics pointed out serious problems with the concept of "narco-guerrilla." It overemphasized their involvement in the drug trade, essentially based on taxing production in exchange for armed protection, not selling narcotics; and it erased the equally evident and occasionally more direct and intense involvement of other groups, prime among them the paramilitaries. The U.S. focus on military aid and not support for Colombia's civilian institutions threatened to turn some American officials into apologists for the army's human rights record. Although the issues of human rights and support for peace efforts remained important, they became increasingly secondary elements of U.S. policy.

The "narco-guerrilla" concept underpinned dramatically increased support and aid to the Colombian military. In July, White House drug adviser Gen. (Ret.) Barry McCaffrey wrote Secretary of State Madeleine Albright outlining an emergency aid program that would double aid to almost $600 million, much of it destined for the Colombian army. According to U.S. law, security assistance would continue to be administered under the human rights conditions laid out in the Leahy Amendment, part of the Foreign Operations Appropriations Act. By mid-1999, the United States had reviewed the human rights records and approved aid for the Colombian navy, the air force, and five army units, along with a newly created 930-soldier counternarcotics battalion , the first of a possible three such specialized units in the military. This brigade's primary objective, according to U.S. officials, was to regain guerrilla-controlled territory.

Two army units, the Twelfth and the Twenty-fourth Brigades, were approved for U.S. aid pending the transfer out of one officer each, implicated in human rights violations while serving in other army units. While U.S.

officials seemed to agree that the simple transfer out of officers who commit alleged violations within approved units would not satisfy the Leahy Amendment's requirement for "effective measures," they argued that funding would remain in place if officers charged with committing abuses while serving in other units were transferred out. Human Rights Watch protested the idea that this type of transfer satisfied U.S. law, which was meant to promote accountability. In general, the methods used by the United States to investigate Colombian security force units remained largely secret, an obstacle to evaluating the success of the law. U.S. officials told Human Rights Watch that they were unaware of any case in which the application of the Leahy amendment had led to "effective measures" being taken to investigate reports of abuses.

The United States also pointed to so-called narco-guerrillas as a threat to regional stability. At the annual meeting of the OAS in June, the United States proposed the creation of a multinational force able to intervene in the region if democracy "is in danger." Although the proposal, which many saw as directly related to U.S. fears over Colombia's stability, failed, neighboring countries sent troops to strengthen their borders with Colombia.

By the time McCaffrey traveled to Colombia in July, the U.S. had also begun formally sharing sensitive intelligence on guerrillas with the Colombian military, a further entanglement in the war. Although the intelligence-sharing was initially described as limited to information collected in "trafficking areas" since March 1999, it appeared clear that the United States provided the Colombian military with information used to repel the FARC during a July attack near the capital.

In fact, so much of Colombia could be considered a "trafficking area" that the stated limitations were largely meaningless. The July 23 crash of a U.S. Army RC-7B DeHavilland intelligence-gathering aircraft over the department of Putumayo, killing five

American and two Colombian officers, underscored the rapidly escalating U.S. involvement.

State Department spokesperson James Rubin claimed that the United States had received "explicit guarantees" that this intelligence "will be used only for the purposes for which it is intended and will not be shared with any outside groups." However, the mechanism for overseeing a military whose intelligence agents were infamous for abuses and who routinely passed intelligence to paramilitaries, who then used it to carry out atrocities, went unexplained. In 1999, there were no human rights conditions on intelligence-sharing, as there were on security assistance.

Longstanding deployments of U.S. special operations forces to Colombia also increased, from twenty-four in 1998 to a scheduled thirty in 1999. U.S. Army Green Berets, soldiers from the Naval Special Warfare Unit, and other elite troops trained in areas considered war zones, including the departments of Caquet and Vichada.

In its 1998 human rights report on Colombia, the State Department concluded that "members of the security forces collaborated with [paramilitaries]." The report went on to say that "Government forces continued to commit numerous, serious abuses, including extrajudicial killings. . .The authorities rarely brought officers of the security forces and the police charged with human rights offenses to justice."

During an April visit to Colombia, Harold Koh, assistant secretary of state for democracy, labor and human rights, made a strong speech calling on Colombia to improve its record by cutting the ties between the military and paramilitary groups and capturing paramilitary leader Carlos Castao, not stopping until Castao was "behind bars. We think it's time to take forceful action."

For the first time, some U.S. aid went to assist Colombians forcibly displaced by war. The U.S. also increased aid to human rights-related projects, including the Human Rights Unit of the attorney general's office for improved security and evidence-gathering capability. Aid also supported an information-gathering project by the office of the Colombian vice-president.

In a first-ever meeting, State Department representatives met with the FARC in Costa Rica in December 1998, and among other things discussed the group's practice of kidnapping civilians, among them U.S. missionaries whose fate remained unknown. Rep. William Delahunt (D-MA), a member of the House International Relations Committee, and staffers for other members of Congress also met with guerrillas during a Colombia visit in June.

Hoping to stave off crisis, in September President Pastrana presented a plan designed to save Colombia from increased strife, asking the United States and other countries for contributions to a proposed $3.5 billion plan to address drug trafficking, economic difficulties, and aid to the military.
CUBA

Human Rights Developments

Cuba clamped down on dissidents in 1999, evidenced by, most notably, the trial and conviction of four leaders of the Internal Dissidents' Working Group. The apparent opening that followed the 1998 papal visit was firmly shut and human rights advocates, journalists, and activists faced steady government repression. Harassment and prosecution of dissidents coupled with a continuing refusal to grant amnesty to hundreds of political prisoners demonstrated Cuba's increasingly repressive human rights conditions in 1999.

The exercise of fundamental human rights of expression, association, assembly, movement, and press remained restricted by Cuban law. Authorities imprisoned or ordered the surveillance of individuals who had committed no illegal act, relying upon laws penalizing "dangerousness" (el estado peligroso) and allowing for official warning (advertencia oficial) . The criminalization of enemy propaganda, the spreading of "unauthorized news", and the insulting of dead heroes effectively denied freedom of speech under the guise of protecting state security. In addition, Cuba confined persons for "illegal exit" when they attempted to exercise their right to leave the country. In August 1999, the government ordered that no Cuban who had emigrated through illegal channels after September 1994 could ever return to the island. Previously, those who left illegally were allowed to visit after spending five years abroad.

The government controlled Cuban courts, undermining the right to a fair trial by, in particular, restricting the right to a defense. The Council of State, a political entity presided over by President Castro, reviewed all death penalty cases, undercutting judicial independence. Cuban courts failed to observe the few due process rights available to defendants under the law. At least twelve prisoners sentenced to death were reportedly executed in 1999.

The Cuban government created new mechanisms to strengthen its repressive authority in 1999. In February, Cuba's National Assembly approved the Law for the Protection of the National Independence and the Cuban Economy ( Ley de Proteccin de la Independencia Nacional y la Economa de Cuba ), establishing harsh penalties of up to twenty years for any actions that could be interpreted as support for the U.S. embargo on Cuba.

In 1999, the government placed several dissidents on trial and arrested dozens of independent journalists and activists. On March 15, 1999, a Havana court sentenced four leaders of the Internal Dissidents' Working Group (Grupo de Trabajo de la Disidencia Interna, GTDI) to several years of imprisonment for "acts against the security of the state" based on their alleged incitement of sedition. In June 1997, the GTDI released "The Homeland Belongs to All" ( La Patria es de Todos ), a paper that analyzed Cuba's economy, proposed reforms to the Cuban Constitution, discussed human rights, and challenged Cuba's exclusive recognition of one political party. The trial followed nearly nineteen months of pretrial detention in maximum security prisons for the four, economists Martha Beatriz Roque Cabello and Vladimiro Roca Antnez, engineering professor Flix Antonio Bonne Carcasses, and attorney Ren Gmez Manzano. The trial was closed to the public, the press, and international observers. Only nine of the dissidents' family members were allowed to attend. The court forbade Gmez Manzano, the leader of a group of independent attorneys whom the government had previously disbarred, from defending himself. The court sentenced Roca Antnez to five years, Bonne Carcasss and Gmez Manzano to four years each, and Roque Cabello to three and a half years.

On December 10, 1998, Cuban police arrested Lzaro Constantn Durn, the leader of the Friends Club of the College of Independent Teachers (Club de Amigos del Colegio de Pedagogos Independientes), while he was participating in a celebration of the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in the Butari Park in Havana. Less than a week later, a Havana tribunal sentenced Constantn Durn to a four year prison term for dangerousness.

Whether detained for common or political crimes, inmates were subjected to severe prison conditions. Prisoners suffered malnourishment and languished in overcrowded cells without appropriate medical attention. Some endured physical and sexual abuse, typically by other inmates with the acquiescence of guards, or long periods in isolation cells. Prison authorities insisted that all detainees participate in politically oriented "re-education" sessions or face punitive measures. In many prisons, authorities failed to separate pretrial detainees from convicted prisoners and minors from adults. Political prisoners who denounced the poor conditions of imprisonment were punished with solitary confinement, restricted visits, or denial of medical treatment. Minors risked indefinite detention in juvenile facilities, without the benefit of due process guarantees or a fixed sentence.

In an encouraging step, a February 1999 criminal code reform provided that prisoners "cannot be subjected to corporal punishment, nor is it permitted to employ any means against them to humiliate them or to lessen their dignity." Yet the failure to establish penalties for committing such acts diminished the potential impact of this reform. The government continued, moreover, to retaliate against prisoners who denounced prison conditions and extended its ban on prison monitoring.

In March 1999, Cuba expanded the use of the death penalty to punish two additional crimes: international drug trafficking and the corruption of minors. Cuba kept on the books over a hundred other crimes punishable by death. The Cuban legal system's serious procedural failings and lack of judicial independence facilitated miscarriages of justice. Cuban law afforded convicts sentenced to death minimal opportunities to appeal their sentences. In March 1999, Cuba announced that a Havana court had sentenced Ral Ernesto Cruz Len to death for terrorism, based on his alleged involvement in bombing Cuban hotels. Cuban prosecutors sentenced a second Salvadoran, Otto Ren Rodrguez Llerena, to death in April 1999. In January 1999, a Havana court sentenced Sergio Antonio Duarte Scull and Carlos Rafael Pelaez Prieto to death for the murders of two Italian tourists in September 1998. In June 1999, a firing squad reportedly executed Pelaez Prieto. In March 1999, the provincial court in Granma announced the executions of Jos Luis Osorio Zamora and Francisco Javier Chvez Palacios. Cuba executed at least twelve prisoners in 1999.

The Castro government maintained a firm stance against independent journalism. Cuban authorities detained at least fifteen independent journalists in late February 1999, in an apparent attempt to prohibit them from covering the trial of the leaders of the Internal Dissidents' Working Group.

On May 6, 1999, a court in Holgun found two journalists and one of their companions guilty of "contempt for authority" ( desacato ). Manuel Antonio Gonzlez Castellanos of the Cuba Press agency was reportedly tried because he had criticized President Fidel Castro and other authorities in the course of a heated conversation with local police in late 1998. The police had apparently verbally harassed Gonzlez Castellanos earlier in the day. The court sentenced him to two years and seven months in prison.

On December 29, 1998, Cuban police arrested Jess Labrador Arias, a Cuba Press reporter in Manzanillo, holding him for several hours. On December 8, Cuban state security officials went to another Cuba Press journalist's residence, warning him not to cover any events on December 10, International Human Rights Day.

In a few cases, the government used housing regulations to harass independent reporters. In January 1999, housing authorities in Santiago notified Margarita Sara Yero, the director of the Turquino Correspondence of the Independent Press Agency of Cuba (Agencia de Prensa Independiente de Cuba), that she would be evicted from her home, where she had resided for thirty-five years. The officials claimed that she had abandoned her home, but several neighbors confirmed her residency. On February 1, 1999, police and housing officials called her neighbors to a public meeting, where they reportedly stated that Yero had not cast votes for Communist Party candidates and did not belong to the local Committee for the Defense of the Revolution (Comit para la Defensa de la Revolucin). The next day, according to press reports, Yero received a written eviction notice.

On January 18, 1999, Cuban police detained Jess Joel Daz Hernndez, the director of the Cooperative of Independent Journalists of Ciego de Avila (Cooperativa Avilea de Periodistas Independientes), in Morn, Ciego de Avila province. The next day, the Municipal Tribunal of Morn found him guilty of dangerousness and sentenced him to four years. The extremely brief period between Daz Hernndez's arrest and conviction made it impossible for him to prepare an adequate defense. The court reportedly based its verdict on Daz Hernndez's allegedly having met with delinquents and disturbed the public order.

On January 27, 1999, police in Ciego de Avila arrested Pedro Arguelles Morn of Cuba Press and detained him for two days. Earlier the same week, Havana police arrested Mara de los Angeles Gonzlez Amaro, the director of the Union of Independent Cuban Journalists and Writers (Union de Periodistas y Escritores de Cuba Independientes, UPECI), Nancy Sotolongo, a journalist with UPECI, Santiago Martnez Trujillo, an UPECI photographer, and Angel Pablo Polanco, of the Cooperative of Independent Journalists (Cooperativa de Periodistas Independientes), holding them for three to five days before release. The arrests apparently occurred because the journalists planned to cover an event marking the first anniversary of the pope's January 1998 trip to Cuba. Police reportedly issued Gonzlez Amaro with an official warning that she would face trial for criminal association and disobedience if she continued her activities.

While Cuba permitted greater opportunities for religious expression than it did in past years and allowed several religious-run humanitarian groups to operate, the government still maintained tight control on religious institutions, affiliated groups, and individual believers. On a positive note, in November 1998 Cuba approved visas for nineteen foreign priests to take up residence in Cuba.

The Cuban government restricted labor rights by banning independent labor groups and harassing individuals attempting to form them. The government recognized only one labor union, the Worker's Central of Cuba (Central de Trabajadores de Cuba, CDC). Havana police reportedly detained Jos Orlando Gonzlez Bridn, of the Confederation of Democratic Workers of Cuba (Confederacin de Trabajadores Democrticos de Cuba, CTDC) for brief periods in November and December 1998 and January 1999. On each occasion, Gonzlez Bridn was participating in protests of dissidents' trials. Cuban authorities arrested his colleague, Ofelia Nardo Cruz, an attorney with the same organization, on January 6, 1999, holding her for a few hours.

To attract international investors, Cuba tightly controlled labor rights in businesses backed by foreign investment. Under restrictive labor laws, the government played a prominent role in the selection, payment and firing of workers, effectively denying workers the right to bargain directly with employers over benefits, bases of promotions and wages. Cuba continued to use prison labor for agricultural camps, clothing assembly and other factories in its prisons. Cuba's insistence that political prisoners work without pay in severe conditions violated international labor and prison standards.

Defending Human Rights

The Cuban government silenced opposition through dogged repression of domestic human rights defenders in 1999. Authorities used surveillance, phone tapping, and intimidation to silence dissent. The trial of the four leaders of the GTDI demonstrated the government's willingness to use the criminal code against human rights activists and independent journalists.

In late January 1999, Havana police reportedly detained seven members of the Lawton Human Rights Foundation (FLDH), including the group's leader, Dr. Oscar Elas Biscet Gonzlez, for four to six days. The human rights activists had planned to participate in a celebration of the first anniversary of the pope's January 1998 visit to Cuba. The detentions prevented the FLDH members from taking part in the January 25 event, as they were not released until January 30, 1999. In August 1999, Cuban authorities again arrested and detained Biscet Gonzlez for two days after he gave a lecture on non-violent civil disobedience. A witness reported that the police physically assaulted Biscet Gonzlez and burned his arm with a cigar.

From June to July 1999, approximately twenty-five Cuban human rights defenders carried out a highly publicized forty day hunger strike to demand amnesty for political prisoners. In July 1999, jailed dissident Marta Beatriz Roque began a liquids-only and later a full-fledged hunger strike to protest the lack of government response to an appeal she filed against her imprisonment. Although state security officials reportedly visited Roque to inform her that prison staff would make no attempt to stop her from dying, on September 4, the government agreed to answer her appeal and Roque called off her strike. At this writing, no response had been issued to Roque's appeal.

In late February 1999, Cuban police and state security agents detained numerous members of opposition and human rights groups. The authorities apparently carried out the arrests to preclude the activists from being in the vicinity of the March 1 trial of the four leaders of the GTDI. The detentions ranged in length from several hours to several days, and detainees were held in both police stations and residences under the control of the Interior Ministry. Many of the detained activists were reportedly threatened with criminal prosecution. Police reportedly forced another fifty activists to remain in their homes while the trial was taking place. In October 1999, police cracked down on opposition, reportedly ordering forty human rights activists and dissidents to remain in their homes. Detentions were apparently carried out in order to prevent participation in human rights activities aimed at attracting the attention of Latin American heads of state attending the Ibero-American Summit in Havana in November 1999.

The Cuban government denied international human rights and humanitarian monitors access to the country. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) had not been allowed to conduct prison visits in Cuba since 1989. Cuba remained the only country in the region that did not allow the ICRC to carry out prison visits. Human Rights Watch had not been allowed to visit Cuba since 1995.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

Cuba's crackdown in early 1999, sentencing to prison prominent dissidents and enacting new repressive legislation, galvanized international support for renewed pressure on the government, in spite of a trend among many nations of warming relations with Havana. At the April 1999 meeting of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights, a resolution expressing concern for Cuban human rights practices, which did not include a provision for a rapporteur, passed by a narrow margin. In an unprecedented move in July, Cuba submitted a request to the United Nations Economic and Social Council, the governing body of the Commission on Human Rights, to amend the April resolution condemning Cuba. Unable to garner sufficient support, Cuba was forced to withdraw the resolution, which would have suspended any further consideration of Cuba by the Commission on Human Rights.

Ibero-American Nations

After the 1998 papal visit to Cuba, Latin American and Caribbean nations intensified official contact with Cuba; some restored diplomatic relations for the first time in decades. With some notable exceptions, however, these nations failed to use their renewed dialogue with Cuba to press for human rights protection. At the time of this writing, the heads of state of all Ibero-American nations were scheduled to hold their annual summit meeting in Havana in November 1999. At least three heads of state announced their intention to boycott the Havana summit, citing Cuba's lack of progress in democracy and human rights.

European Union

The March 1999 sentencing of four dissidents for the peaceful expression of opposition fueled renewed criticism from the European Union of Cuba's human rights practices. In June, the E.U. issued a statement deeply regretting Cuba's decision to increase the use of the death penalty in response to stepped up executions in 1999. Even as it condemned Cuba's human rights record, the E.U. strongly opposed the U.S. trade embargo against Cuba. High-level authorities from E.U. member States including the United Kingdom and Spain held official meetings with members of the Cuban government in 1999, demonstrating their differences with Washington's policy of isolation and confrontation with Havana. The E.U. member states continued to provide economic cooperation and humanitarian aid through nongovernmental organizations. In December 1998 and June 1999, the E.U. Council of Foreign Ministers noted that the parameters of Cuba's domestic and foreign policy had not improved and reaffirmed its Common Position that "full cooperation with Cuba will depend upon improvements in human rights and political freedom." The E.U.'s Common Position, originally adopted in 1996, called for "the reform of internal legislation concerning political and civil rights, including the Cuban criminal code, and, consequently, the abolition of all political offences, the release of all political prisoners and the ending of the harassment and punishment of dissidents."

Despite increasing repression, European trade and investment in Cuba continued throughout 1999. The Cuban government's restrictions on forming independent unions or bargaining collectively made European companies as well as all foreign investors in Cuba, complicit in the Cuban government's human rights violations.

Canada

Canada reassessed its constructive engagement policy with Cuba as a result of the March 1999 sentencing of four dissident leaders to three- to five-year prison terms. In June 1999, Canada suspended new programs that would not advance protection of human rights and canceled ministerial visits to Cuba. At the same time, Canadian officials also withdrew their commitment to press for Cuba's readmission to the Organization of American States (OAS), which had expelled Cuba in 1962. Canada was to host the OAS General Assembly in June 2000 and had previously intended to lobby for Cuba's reintegration into the system, provided that Cuba made progress on human rights and democracy. Although distancing itself somewhat, the Canadian government continued its dialogue with the Cuban government. Canadian officials, especially Foreign Affairs Minister Lloyd Axworthy, were also outspoken in their criticism of the U.S. embargo.

United States

Washington's approach to Havana remained defined by the all-encompassing trade embargo, despite its failure over more than three decades to bring about improvements in human rights practices in Cuba. The embargo continued to be an all-or-nothing policy rather than a calibrated tool designed to respond to changes in Cuban human rights practices. In January 1999, the Clinton Administration announced several small steps to soften the impact of the embargo on the Cuban population, while rejecting a call from prominent policy makers and former Republican officials, including former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, to empanel a bipartisan commission to review thoroughly U.S. policy toward Cuba. The U.S. was increasingly alienated from potential allies interested in promoting respect for human rights in Cuba but opposed to the embargo's indiscriminate nature. President Castro invoked the embargo to tighten restrictions on fundamental freedoms in 1999.

The embargo restricted the rights to free expression by limiting travel between Cuba and the U.S., violating article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which the U.S. was party to. U.S. authorities continued to repatriate Cuban asylum seekers aboard vessels intercepted at sea. On a positive note, in January 1999, the Clinton Administration removed the ban it had previously established on direct air travel to Cuba from Miami. The Clinton Administration allowed the Baltimore Orioles management to negotiate exhibition baseball games with the Cuban national baseball team. The first of these games took place in Havana in March 1999 and the second in Baltimore in May 1999.

Several U.S. lawmakers made official visits to Cuba in 1999 for reasons varying from expanding agricultural markets to discussing bilateral relations. The most notable visits were the joint visit of Senate Minority Leader Thomas Daschle of South Dakota and Senator Byron Dorgan, and the rare visit by Republican Senator Arlen Specter, both of which included nearly seven-hour meetings with Cuban President Fidel Castro. Senator Daschle and Senator Dorgan were refused permission to visit the four imprisoned leaders of the GTDI, and Castro denied that human rights abuses persisted in Cuba. Congressional efforts to ease the indiscriminate effects of the U.S. trade embargo continued and in August 1999, the Senate approved an amendment allowing virtually unrestricted food and drug sales to Cuba. In July 1999, Western Union set up thirty-one offices in Cuba allowing New York, New Jersey and Florida residents to directly wire up to U.S.$300 to Cuban residents, excluding Communist Party and high government officials, each trimester.
GUATEMALA

Human Rights Developments

As the four-year term of President Alvaro Arz came to a close, with a new government scheduled to take office in January 2000, impunity for human rights violations remained unbroken. Peace accords signed in December 1996 held out the promise of institutional reforms in the judiciary, police, and military, but these were stymied by the government's inability to confront the authoritarian legacy of Guatemala's thirty-five year internal conflict. Popular support for reforms was clearly on the wane, as constitutional changes that would have formalized some of the key military and judicial reforms were defeated in a national referendum in May. At the same time, the absence of effective law enforcement contributed to the tremendous insecurity of much of the population, as evidenced by an ever greater number of public lynchings.

Impunity for human rights violations carried out during the war featured prominently in political debates, especially with the February release of a report by the United Nations-sponsored Historical Clarification Commission (Comisin de Esclarecimiento Histrico, CEH), also referred to as the truth commission. The product of over eighteen months' labor by over 200 Guatemalan and international personnel, the CEH report documented over 42,000 victims of human rights violations, with state forces and paramilitary groups responsible for 93 percent of the documented cases, the Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity (Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca, URNG) insurgents responsible for 3 percent, and unknown parties responsible for the remaining 4 percent. The commission attributed 626 massacres to the army, and thirty-two to the guerrillas, mostly carried out in the early 1980s. The most damning charge, however, was the finding that the army had committed acts of genocide against the Mayan population in four areas of the country between 1981 and 1983.

The CEH report also recommended several measures to promote reconciliation and contribute to ending impunity. These included reforms to the judiciary and security apparatus, as well as a program of reparations for victims of the conflict, the implementation of a policy of exhumations in the hundreds of clandestine cemeteries, an administrative purge of the armed forces, and the creation of a commission (with civil society participation) to follow up on other CEH recommendations. One month after the release of the report, the government responded dismissively to these recommendations by reaffirming its rhetorical commitment to ending impunity, promoting human rights, and the reforms already outlined in the peace accords, while claiming it was not necessary to create another commission to provide follow-up. It also reiterated a statement made by President Arz on the second anniversary of the peace accords, in which he asked the Guatemalan people to grant their forgiveness for the state's "actions or omissions, for what we did or what we didn't do." While this reaction was deemed "preliminary," the absence of any further official commentary rendered this first position final, implying no further steps would be taken to respond to the CEH's recommendations. The response of the URNG rebels was hardly better: they lamented the "excesses, equivocations or irresponsibilities" their forces committed during the armed conflict, even though the CEH found that such acts were part of a deliberate political-military strategy or carried out under orders from the top leadership.

In May, several U.S.-based groups including Human Rights Watch released a copy of a military log book that documented the activities of a Guatemalan military unit responsible for kidnapping, torturing, and executing suspected leftists between 1983 and 1985. The log, which contained the names of 183 persons (some, but not all, known to have been executed or disappeared), was smuggled out of military files by a member of the military. The military was reportedly engaged in the destruction of all such incriminating documents early in 1999. Some human rights groups initiated legal proceedings based on the leads provided in that document, and Public Ministry prosecutors were assigned to investigate these cases.

The past was also salient in political debates, during which the demobilized guerrillas of the URNG, now constituted as a political party, participated openly for the first time in electoral politics. The principal contender for executive power, however, was not the left but a conservative party, the Guatemalan Republican Front (Frente Republicana Guatemalteca, FRG), whose secretary general, Gen. Efran Ros Montt, was the military ruler from March 1982 until August 1983. The presidential candidate for the FRG, Alfonso Portillo, nearly saw his chances scuttled when the press discovered that he had fled justice in Mexico in 1982, accused of a double homicide he claimed to have committed in self-defense. The judicial case against Portillo was closed in 1995.

Despite years of massive international assistance, the modernization of the judicial system remained a distant reality. U.N. Special Rapporteur on the Independence of Lawyers and Judges Param Cumaraswamy painted a grim picture of Guatemala at the conclusion of his August visit, saying that the justice system had yet to recover from the ills that plagued it during the armed conflict, including corruption, influence peddling, lack of resources, and threats and intimidation to lawyers and judges. Cumaraswamy said he had received information indicating that only 10 percent of all homicide cases went to trial, and of these very few ever resulted in convictions.

The terrible state of the administration of justice in Guatemala was on display in the investigation into the April 1998 murder of Bishop Juan Gerardi, killed just two days after the release of a church-sponsored report on wartime violations. While the first prosecutor focused attention exclusively on Father Mario Orantes, who shared a house with Gerardi and who was arrested shortly after the murder, at the beginning of 1999 a new judge and prosecutor began investigating whether the murder was politically motivated. However, every new piece of evidence gathered had its cost: every significant witness to the case had to flee the country; the ODHA endured numerous threats; Judge Henry Monroy, who moved the case forward, was forced to resign and leave the country after receiving telephone threats; and the subsequent prosecutor, Celvin Galindo, also suffered countless intimidating acts and left the country in early October after resigning from the case.

Another prominent case illustrating the formidable barriers to justice involved the prosecution of a military patrol for the 1995 killings of eleven persons in the returnee community of Xamn in Alta Verapaz, a massacre that MINUGUA deemed to be the most serious human rights violation since its arrival in 1994. After a drawn-out process rife with irregularities (including dilatory tactics by the presiding judge, lack of cooperation from military authorities, and threats to prosecutors), on August 13 a court in Cobn found the second lieutenant who led the patrol and ten soldiers guilty of manslaughter, while another fourteen were found guilty of "complicity" in manslaughter (a crime that did not exist in the Guatemalan penal code). The sentences, five and four years respectively, were commutable by paying five quetzales (approximately U.S. 67 cents) per each day of the sentence, or a total of U.S. $1,218 for the first group, and $975 for the second.

Other longstanding attempts to bring human rights violators to justice met with equally disappointing results this year. In April, four civil patrollers serving thirty-year sentences for the 1994 murder of former presidential candidate Jorge Carpio were released by the Third Appellate Court, which cited "grave errors" in the trial court proceedings. Also that month, former military commissioner Cndido Noriega was acquitted for a second time on multiple charges of murder, torture, and rape in a massacre case in Tululch in the department of El Quich. An appeals court overturned that decision in July, and he was being retried as of this writing. In the case of the 1990 murder of Myrna Mack, three high-ranking former military officers were finally indicted in February, although the case had hardly progressed as of October 1999. Also in October, three former civil patrollers were sentenced to death for their role in the 1982 massacre in Rio Negro, while evidence linking military personnel to the massacre was never investigated.

Guatemala's Constitutional Court issued a disturbing ruling in January, holding that freedom of expression guarantees apply only to members of the press. In September, the Center for Justice and International Law (CEJIL) joined the Guatemalan Archbishop's Human Rights Office (Oficina de Derechos Humanos del Arzobispado, ODHA) in filing a complaint before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, claiming that the decision violated the American Convention on Human Rights.

Most human rights concerns stemmed from the continued violence and insecurity that derived from criminal activity and poor social and economic conditions. A report prepared by the Inter-American Development Bank named Guatemala City as the third most violent city in Latin America, based on 1996 figures. The number of lynchings, often but not always carried out by spontaneous mobs against suspected petty thieves, also appeared to have increased. Since 1994, some 250 lynchings had taken place, while only two cases were under investigation as of October 1999.

The government's response to continued criminal activity was to try to meet the peace accord goal of a 20,000-person strong National Civilian Police force (Polcia Nacional Civil, PNC) by the year 2000. Due to inadequate recruitment, selection, and training practices (as noted by MINUGUA in its ninth human rights report issued in March), the government instituted quantitative rather than qualitative changes in the new police force. MINUGUA found that police abuses continued to occur, made all the more serious by the lack of effective internal disciplinary mechanisms, and that virtually all PNC officers had been recycled from the unprofessional National Police, Treasury Police or the army, with only a three-month training course.

Under the peace accords, the military was to give up its role in internal security and devote itself principally to external defense. Yet with the defeat of the constitutional reforms in May, the military continued to participate in internal security matters. Military intelligence continued to investigate kidnappings and organized crime, while foot soldiers also participated in joint patrols with civilian police under a 1996 executive decree.

Defending Human Rights

The Arz government did not always muster even rhetorical support for the work of human rights organizations. In an apparent reference to human rights and other organizations, President Arz asserted at the OAS General Assembly meeting in Guatemala in June that some NGOs were "cloaked instruments for foreign politics." Subsequently, Guatemala's foreign minister sought to reassure the General Assembly that the Arz government valued the work of most human rights organizations.

Threats to human rights organizations, witnesses and judicial authorities were nearly routine in all kinds of cases in the judicial system. As noted previously, virtually everyone involved in the Gerardi case faced such threats. In April, three armed men forcibly entered the home of the head of the Archbishop's Human Rights Office, Ronalth Ochaeta, threatening his domestic employee and four-year-old son. The men searched the house for forty minutes, and left behind a box containing a concrete block, widely interpreted as an allusion to the probable murder weapon used against Gerardi. Ochaeta and his family subsequently left the country.

Organizations and individuals pushing forward human rights cases in the courts were often the target of threats and harassment, as occurred in August with a family member and a witness in the Carpio case. Forensic workers and observers at various clandestine cemetery sites around the country were also routinely subject to intimidation and threats.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

Under the 1996 peace accords, the mandate of MINUGUA was due to expire at the end of the year 2000, one year into the next government. Several aspects of the accords would not be completed within the coming year, thus requiring continued international verification. MINUGUA's reports on various aspects of the peace process provided an extensive analysis of the human rights situation. MINUGUA released a human rights report covering April-December 1998 in March 1999, and over the course of the year issued occasional communiqus on specific human rights issues.

European Union

According to a report by the Washington Office on Latin America (WOLA), the European Union, the largest donor to the Guatemalan police, largely failed to condition its assistance on rectifying anomalies noted by MINUGUA, such as those found in recruitment and selection. This failure contrasted markedly with the stringent conditions the E.U. applied to judicial reform. The European Union was to fund the police with some 34 million ECUS (approximately U.S. $40 million) between 1998 and 2002.

In August, the Italian Senate cut off economic aid to Guatemala, citing the government's failure to comply with the CEH report recommendations.

United States

The United States provided over $1 million to fund the work of the Historical Clarification Commission between 1997 and 1999, as well as thousands of pages of declassified documents that aided the commission in understanding both Guatemalan abuses and the U.S. role in them. Following the release of the truth commission report, President Bill Clinton apologized during a March visit to Guatemala for previous U.S. support for abusive military forces: "For the United States, it is important that I state clearly that support for military forces and intelligence units which engaged in violence and widespread repression was wrong, and the United States must not repeat that mistake." This statement received more press coverage abroad than it did in Guatemala, where the U.S. Embassy was widely reported as reacting defensively to criticisms of the U.S. role. Through the U.S. Agency for International Development, the U.S. government continued to support the work of human rights organizations, including authorizing a new fund that sought to support, among other things, civil society follow-up to the recommendations of the CEH report.

The Federal Bureau of Investigations provided DNA testing facilities to assist the prosecution in the Gerardi case, the final results of which were still outstanding as of this writing. Through its International Criminal Investigations Training and Assistance Program (ICITAP), the U.S. could be faulted for not giving due weight to MINUGUA's criticisms of the police, for example, by continuing to train investigators that had been poorly vetted.

HAITI

Human Rights Developments

Mounting political violence in the context of anticipated elections and a notable increase in killings by police marked a year that began with President Ren Prval's abrupt dismissal of parliament and unilateral naming of a new prime minister and cabinet. Increasing political intolerance was apparent in several violent protests by supporters of former President Jean Bertrand Aristide, as well as armed attacks on political figures and a leading human rights activist. Meanwhile, a U.S. cut in special funding forced the six-year-old United Nations (U.N.)/OAS International Civilian Mission (MICIVIH) to close five offices and dismiss half its monitors, and the Clinton Administration announced the impending withdrawal of the 450-person U.S. Military Support Group in Haiti.

Killings attributed to the Haitian National Police (HNP), after dropping for two years (with fifty-nine reported in 1996, fifty-three in 1997, thirty-one in 1998, and just three from January to March 1999), jumped in the second quarter of the year, with fifty killings reported, according to the U.N./OAS mission, including the first cases of disappearances followed by execution since the end of military rule. However, in the following three months, just four cases were reported.

On May 11, a police operation in the Carrefour-Feuilles section of Port-au-Prince left eleven men dead, most of them shot in the head while in police custody. The first three victims were said to be suspected criminals handed over to police by citizens' groups; a justice of the peace called in to certify those deaths witnessed police shoot eight others, unarmed neighborhood residents. Port-au-Prince police commissioner Jean Coles Rameau, a former military officer implicated in earlier abuses who commanded the operation and may have joined the shooting, fled the country, but was arrested in the Dominican Republic and swiftly returned to Haiti. The government created a special commission of three judges to investigate the killings.

Police were also responsible for a pattern of apparent summary executions of presumed gang members involved in killings of police officers. The remains of fourteen bodies were found in Titanyan, an area north of Port-au-Prince that was an infamous body-dumping ground under military rule, and investigations indicated that many of the dead were probably gang members from the Fontamara neighborhood arrested and disappeared in Croix des Missions after the killing of an agent with the HNP's Company for Intervention and Maintaining Order (Compagnie d'Intervention et de Maintien de l'Ordre). HNP searching the area had shot and killed two young people and then arrested eight others who were never seen again. A so-called vigilance brigade made up of police and armed civilians killed a number of suspected thieves from Cit Soleil in May and June, with four mutilated bodies found in Titanyan, and two blindfolded ones near the Batimat building on the edge of Port-au-Prince, another site used during the military government.

Police beatings of suspects in custody increased, according to the U.N./OAS Mission, from 284 reports in 1997 to 432 in 1998, and 103 in the first three months of 1999. In most cases, authorities failed to sanction the officers involved or take effective action to prevent further abuses. The HNP Inspector General's Office, whose mandate covered investigations of human rights abuse, was increasingly occupied with combating drug trafficking and other criminal activities by police, but launched investigations into the most serious abuses and continued earlier investigations. The courts continued to lag behind the police in investigating and prosecuting police officers remanded to them, but a few cases moved forward in the provinces.

With the appointment in March of a new justice minister, human rights lawyer Camille Leblanc, there were signs that long-stalled justice reform was beginning to stir. The School for Judges (Ecole de la Magistrature), which graduated a first class in 1998, but then failed to follow up the next year, held competitive exams to recruit a new class that was set to start in November 1999. The long awaited court for minors was inaugurated on May 21, although it shut down in July and had not reopened by late October.

The largely dysfunctional justice system produced a prison population where 81 percent of approximately 2,700 detainees were awaiting trial. In mid-1999 at the National Penitentiary, the U.N./OAS Mission found 173 detainees held in pretrial detention since 1995 and 1996, some lacking dossiers. Judicial proceedings at all levels continued to be problematic, with vague and incomplete dossiers sent to examining magistrates, empty or missing police reports and significant irregularities during criminal court sessions.

Especially alarming was a refusal to carry out judicial release orders for certain long-term pretrial detainees, mainly former members of the Armed Forces of Haiti (Forces Arms d'Hati, FAd'H) or associated civilians accused of plotting against state security or related charges. These include Evans Franois, the brother of coup d'tat leader Michel Franois, ordered released in May 1997, and former Gen. Claude Raymond, jailed since July 1996, released in November 1998 but immediately rearrested on new charges. Prominent right-wing attorney Osner Fevry, detained in March 1997 for assault and ordered released the same month, was imprisoned until December 1998. Others with pending release orders as of mid-August were individuals accused in the 1987 Gonaves toxic waste dumping and the 1987 Jean Rabel massacre, and a former judge detained without charge or trial since October 1998. The Port-au-Prince state prosecutor of several years, Jean-Auguste Brutus, was directly responsible for most of these cases, but his stance, the U.N./OAS mission wrote in its Human Rights Review for April-June 1999, "increasingly appears to benefit from the support, tacit or otherwise, of his supervising authorities." Justice Minister Leblanc replaced Brutus in October.

After a two-year delay, the government in June 1999 approved regulations spelling out acceptable prison conditions and disciplinary guidelines for dealing with inmates. Under the renamed Penitentiary Administration Management (Direction de l'Administration Pnitentiaire, DAP), conditions improved generally, but mismanagement and suspected corruption still led to food shortages, malnutrition, and poor medical care at some facilities. The National Penitentiary opened a new three-story dormitory building in March, enabling the separation of men facing minor charges from those accused of more serious crimes. The penitentiary director and seventeen guards were dismissed in December 1998 for alleged involvement in prisoner beatings, but there were few such allegations in 1999. The DAP appointed the first inspector generals for the prison system in March 1999.

Justice Minister Leblanc made a priority of moving forward the long-delayed judicial proceedings in the 1994 Raboteau massacre, where Haitian military and civilians, many of them in custody, allegedly killed some fifteen people. In October, the investigating judge issued indictments charging Gen. Raoul Cedras and other high-ranking officers, all or most of whom were living outside Haiti, with intellectual authorship of the killings. The trial was being portrayed as the centerpiece of the battle against impunity. In the South Department, a few such cases moved forward, with a former FAd'H member sentenced to five years of imprisonment and a fine for a January 1993 incident of illegal arrest and torture.

With support from the recently created Committee to Bring Duvalier to Justice, four Haitians who had been imprisoned and tortured in the 1970s filed complaints in a Paris court on September 10, 1999, against former Haitian dictator Jean-Claude Duvalier for "crimes against humanity."

The Office of Prosecution and Follow-up (Bureau de Poursuite et Suivi) created by the Justice Ministry in 1998 to distribute reparations to groups that suffered violence or property damage under the military cited housing, schools, and legal and economic assistance to victims as the priority targets for its U.S. $3.75 million 1998 budget. In July 1999, the Ministry began disbursing funds to 914 victims of the 1993 fire in Cit Soleil, believed set by the paramilitary Front for the Advancement and Progress of Haiti (Front pour l'Avancement et Progrs d'Hati, FRAPH), with each receiving 27,000 gourdes ($1,687) to rebuild.

On January 11, 1999, President Ren Prval dismissed the entire Chamber of Deputies and all but nine Senate members, asserting that their terms had constitutionally expired, even though elections for their replacements, scheduled for December 1999, had not been held. Haiti had been without a fully functioning government since the June 1997 resignation of Prime Minister Rosny Smarth and the search for a successor had dragged on, with continuing disputes over the April 1997 elections. Opposition leaders called Prval's January 11 move, which also ended the terms of local elected officials, a "coup d'tat against parliament" and filed suit with the Court of Cassation, but the court decided it lacked jurisdiction. At this writing, no new parliament was expected to be seated until the legislative elections.

Several violent incidents followed the dismissal of parliament. On January 12, gunmen shot and wounded the president's sister and killed her driver. On March 1, Senator Jean-Yvon Toussaint, one of the nine remaining senators and a member of the opposition Organization of People in Struggle (Organisation du Peuple en Lutte, OPL), was assassinated in an ambush. Three former OPL deputies sought refuge in the residence of the Chilean ambassador and then left the country in April following threats and attacks on one of their homes.

In March, Prval appointed a new government headed by former Education Minister Jacques Edouard Alexis, and announced agreement on a new Provisional Electoral Council (Conseil Electorale Provisoire, CEP). The CEP scheduled elections for December, but then delayed them until March 2000. Political parties expressed fears for election security after the resignation in October 1999 of Secretary of State for Public Security Bob Manuel and the assassination of former Col. Jean Lamy, an Aristide associate rumored to be likely to succeed him. In separate incidents, two CEP members and two leading OPL figures sustained armed attacks in 1999.

Popular organizations linked to the Fanmi Lavalas party of former President Jean Bertrand Aristide were implicated in some violent protests. At a May 28 rally against violence called by the Chamber of Commerce with the support of many other private sector and popular organizations, protesters associated with the party threw urine-filled plastic bottles and chairs. Police failed to intervene to stop the violence but cancelled the rally shortly after it began and dispersed the crowd, mistreating four journalists in the process. Rumors that police were responsible for the April 20 killing of a Fanmi Lavalas activist sparked several days of violent protests calling for the resignation of the police chief and secretary of state for public security. The U.S. International Republican Institute (IRI), whose programs had encouraged political parties not associated with Fanmi Lavalas to unite, closed its Haiti office in June following threats and intimidation of its staff by gunmen who claimed to be supporters of the former president.

For 1998, the U.N./OAS Mission reported ninety people killed in sixty-one lynching incidents, a drop from 1997's 152 victims of eighty-eight incidents. Most victims were suspected criminals or accused of sorcery. Twenty-four incidents with thirty-two victims were reported from January to June 1999, and police efforts prevented others.

In August 1999, Haiti submitted its first report in nine years to the U.N. Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. It had yet to make a report to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women; its first was due in 1982. Campaigns by women's groups in the last few years helped increase awareness about violence against women, but there were no institutional mechanisms to assist victims or prevent violence. Kay Fanm (Women's House), which ran the only women's shelter in the country, received an average of twenty women per month. Children's rights advocates prepared a draft Code of the Child, aimed at increasing legal protection of children and bringing national law into harmony with the Convention on the Rights of the Child, but without a parliament this and many other bills could not be introduced.

Defending Human Rights

Gunmen driving a car opened fire on March 8 on well-known human rights activist Pierre Esprance of the National Coalition for Haitian Rights (NCHR), also treasurer of the Platform of Haitian Human Rights Organizations. Esprance was hit in the knee and the shoulder. In February and June, human rights groups found anonymous leaflets on their premises threatening them and their staff by name.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

The U.N. police training and monitoring mission known as MIPONUH (with 279 officers from ten countries) was unlikely to be renewed at the November 1999 expiration of its mandate, due to opposition within the Security Council, chiefly from China and Russia. The so-called Friends of Haiti (the United States, Canada, France, Argentina, Venezuela, and Chile) sought U.N. support for a new mission, perhaps under General Assembly authority, focused on police and justice reform. The Secretary General's independent expert on Haiti, Adama Dieng, visited the country twice and submitted a thorough report to the U.N. Commission on Human Rights. The special rapporteur on violence against women made her first official visit in June, and was expected to issue a report.

United States

The United States criticized Prval's shut-down of parliament and used promised funding for the holding of new elections to press for resolution of the contested 1997 vote. Washington continued to hold 160,000 documents seized from the Haitian military and the paramilitary group FRAPH during its 1994 intervention, maintaining that it wanted to hand them over to the Haitian government but only after blacking out the names of U.S. citizens, a condition the Prval government rejected. FRAPH leader Emmanuel "Toto" Constant, who claimed to be a paid CIA informant under military governments, continued to live and work in Queens, New York, after being given refuge from deportation or extradition, apparently on condition that he not speak about his U.S. connections. Former Haitian army colonel Carl Dorelien, who was living in Florida and who attracted attention after he won a Florida lottery jackpot, revealed to the Boston Globe in May 1999 that fifteen high-ranking Haitian officers, including most of the high command, were allowed to emigrate to the U.S. after Aristide's return. Congressional Republicans withheld $1.6 million dollars in U.S. funding to the OAS for the U.N./OAS human rights mission, causing major cutbacks. Under pressure from Republicans and the Pentagon, which argued that security risks to the troops had increased, the Clinton Administration announced the planned withdrawal of permanent U.S. military forces from Haiti some time in 2000. The troops kept a low profile recently, engaging in engineering projects and medical care, but their purpose was understood as deterring potential violence. The Haitian parliament in 1998 passed a law barring foreign troops on Haitian soil, and the response to the U.S. announcement was muted.
MEXICO

Human Rights Developments

Despite the announcement in December 1998 of a new federal initiative to promote and strengthen human rights, serious and widespread human rights violations, including torture and arbitrary detention, continued to take place in Mexico during 1999. As in years past, abuses often occurred in the context of the criminal justice system, either as police or soldiers made arrests, or as prosecutors processed cases. Rather than confront these problems head-on, politicians either ignored human rights topics altogether or chose to blame human rights groups for exacerbating public security problems. Indeed, Mexican and international human rights groups increasingly found themselves under attack by political, business, and even religious leaders who publicly accused them of protecting criminals to the detriment of law-abiding citizens. With public security concerns at the top of the national agenda and presidential elections slated for July 2000, another year passed in which Mexico's deeply rooted human rights problems received inadequate attention from authorities.

Although the Mexican government failed to take the actions needed to ameliorate the country's serious human rights problems, authorities did take several important steps toward greater recognition of international human rights law and mechanisms. In December 1998, Mexico officially accepted the jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights. Mexico also promised in July 1999 to ratify the 1951 Refugee Convention and its 1967 protocol. Authorities also reported to Human Rights Watch that, under the auspices of the December 1998 human rights program, progress had been made in identifying other human rights treaties to ratify and reservations to already-ratified treaties that Mexico could withdraw. During the year, Mexico permitted U.N. Special Rapporteur for Extrajudicial, Summary and Arbitrary Executions Asma Jahangir to visit the country, and at this writing was planning to host U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson in November. Also positive was the expansion of the autonomy of the federal government's National Human Rights Commission (Comisin Nacional de Derechos Humanos, CNDH), the president of which had been named by the president of Mexico and whose budget was provided by the executive branch of government. After the reforms, the commission's president and budget would depend on the legislature.

The gap between rhetorical support for human rights and the effective protection of rights and adherence to international standards remained great. The December 1998 Program to Strengthen and Protect Human Rights, for instance, lacked specific measures to address the country's human rights problems. While the ratification of human rights accords was vitally important, the fact that Mexico so clearly violated accords it had already ratified indicated that new and innovative steps would have to be taken if human rights abuses were to be countered. With respect to international human rights instruments, including the American Convention on Human Rights, the government demonstrated a startling lack of will to fulfill its obligations. The government ignored recommendations included in several hard-hitting reports from the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and failed to implement suggestions made by U.N. Special Rapporteur on Torture Nigel Rodley in 1998. Brig. Gen. Francisco Gallardo, jailed in 1993 for recommending the appointment of a military ombudsman, remained in jail, despite a 1996 commission report finding that he should be released.

The topic of public security and human rights remained in the forefront of the Mexican human rights situation during 1999. In February and March, the federal government approved constitutional revisions that stood to weaken human rights protections. Changes in Mexico's legal procedure for challenging authorities' actions, known as amparo , would expand the circumstances in which prosecutions could move forward despite the violation of due process guarantees. The changes would also make it easier for prosecutors to obtain arrest warrants by requiring them to document fewer facts about alleged crimes. Mexican human rights groups criticized the revisions for opening the door to abuse in a legal system already prone to fabrication of evidence and coercion of the accused. At this writing, the constitutional revisions had yet to be implemented, as a majority of Mexican states had not yet approved them.

The move to facilitate prosecutions took place concurrently with widespread public outrage at skyrocketing crime rates, a situation blamed in part on human rights guarantees. In January, Mexico's Cardinal Juan Sandoval, in Jalisco state, lambasted human rights groups for defending criminals. Referring to the respected Jalisco State Human Rights Commission, an autonomous government agency, the cardinal noted, "Human rights are not in question. Rather, in question is this human rights organization, whose work has not been beneficial to society." He went on to criticize what he called the agency's practice of "constantly defending delinquents." Reportedly referring to Human Rights Watch as "the mother of all nongovernmental organizations," the cardinal derided the organization as dedicated to destabilizing governments. Business leaders in Jalisco state also criticized human rights groups as defending criminals. In other parts of the country human rights groups also came under attack. In Mexico state, for instance, a new governor was elected in July in part on the strength of the get-tough-on-crime campaign theme of "human rights are for humans, not rats."

Human Rights Watch continued during 1999 to document cases of human rights violations committed in the context of criminal prosecutions. In January a two-year Human Rights Watch study found that despite numerous legal and institutional reforms that successive Mexican governments had touted as evidence of their commitment to protecting human rights, human rights violations-including arbitrary arrest, torture, and even "disappearance"-continued to take place as part of the judicial process in Mexico. Human rights violations stemmed not only from official toleration of abuse but also from the justice system's ineffective protection of individual guarantees and its lax approach to human rights violations. Prosecutors routinely used evidence obtained through human rights violations, and judges availed themselves of permissive laws and legal precedent to condemn victims while ignoring abuses.

The Human Rights Watch report concluded: "The Mexican government has failed to structure the justice system-understood to encompass police, prosecutors, and the courts-such that the goals of investigating crimes and punishing criminals are consonant with the aims of protecting human rights and promoting the rule of law." Abuses took place in both state and federal jurisdictions, and in all regions of the country, whether the victim was a suspected robber, accused drug trafficker, or alleged leftist guerrilla.

The case of Alfonso Martn del Campo illustrated the human rights shortfalls of Mexico's justice system. Sentenced to fifty years in prison for a gruesome double murder committed on May 30, 1992, Martn del Campo lost his final bid for freedom in March 1999, when a Mexico City Superior Court magistrate rejected his plea of innocence. With the exception of a self-incriminating statement made on the day of his arbitrary arrest in 1992, the case file was bereft of any evidence against him. It did contain, however, medical records that showed that he had been severely beaten. After allegedly making his first statement, he repeatedly retracted it on the grounds that he had been tortured-including with a plastic bag over his head. Despite these facts, judges at three successive judicial levels upheld his conviction, thanks to the principle of procedural immediacy, which they cited to ignore signs that he had been coerced into making his self-incriminating statement. As applied in Mexico, the principle held that the first statement made by a suspect could be considered more trustworthy than subsequent statements.

The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights termed the way this principle is interpreted in Mexico "wrong." In a report published in 1998, the commission noted, "The Mexican State is construing the guarantee of procedural immediacy in a way which, instead of serving as a procedural guarantee for those accused of a crime, is becoming its very antithesis, the source of abuse of the rights of accused persons." In other countries, the principle of procedural immediacy was interpreted in exactly the opposite way from that of Mexico: it was not a person's first statement that had greater value but rather a statement made in the presence of a judge.

Although Mexican judges often deserved blame for failing to factor human rights concerns into their sentences, there were still some cases in which Mexican courts issued positive rulings based on human rights principles. In June, for instance, a federal appeals court ruled that procedural violations in the murder prosecution of Juan Lorenzo Rodrguez Osuna invalidated the guilty verdict that had been issued against him two years earlier. The court ordered a retrial; at this writing, it was not clear whether prosecutors in Tamualipas state would discontinue the prosecution, a move urged by Human Rights Watch. In another case in which illegal arrest and torture constituted the fundamental investigative techniques-the prosecution of accused murderer Manuel Manrquez-a Mexico City Superior Court magistrate found Manrquez to be innocent in April, based in part on the findings of a report issued in February by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. While positive, these cases also highlighted a disturbing weakness in Mexico's justice system: years of injustice could be ignored by judges, and the ability to obtain justice depended not on ingrained respect for human rights within the justice system but on a victim's ability to marshal public support for his or her case.

Human rights issues in Chiapas state also continued to receive significant attention in Mexico. By the time of this writing, twenty people had been sentenced for the December 1997 massacre of forty-five people in the hamlet of Acteal. Federal authorities had assumed jurisdiction over the massacre, which otherwise would have fallen to state authorities to prosecute. For the most part, those sentenced were charged with material authorship of the killings and for possession of weapons reserved for the exclusive use of the army. Among those charged but not yet sentenced was a retired army general, Julio Csar Santiago Daz, a public security official at the time of the killings; police under his command ignored signs that the massacre was taking place. Prosecutors accused him of murder by omission.

Federal prosecutors also made advances in thirty-four state-level cases that they took over as part of the Acteal investigation. The cases, all of which took place during the year prior to the massacre but had gone nowhere in state courts, included murder, kidnapping, and other violent crimes in and around Acteal. At this writing, some 193 people had been charged in those cases; several state prosecutors had also been charged for their failure to prosecute cases in which sufficient evidence existed to move forward. Federal prosecutors also made progress in the case of Rubicel Ruiz, another Chiapas state case whose jurisdiction the federal attorney general's office assumed in 1998. Ruiz, who was gunned down in February 1998, worked with peasants seeking benefits from the state. Although federal authorities managed to identify the gunmen and the intellectual author of the crime, a member of a politically powerful family, at this writing the case had yet to be decided in court

Despite the advances made in the Acteal case, other serious human rights issues in Chiapas remained unresolved. Soon after taking over the Acteal investigation, federal Attorney General Jorge Madrazo announced that his office would be investigating several areas beyond the massacre itself, including the existence of armed civilian groups active in the state, of which more than ten had been reported; the reasons that the state justice system had failed in Chenalh municipality, in which Acteal sits; and why state authorities had permitted the arming of the group that carried out the massacre. Although those lines of investigation remained open, they had obtained few results. Mexican human rights groups continued to denounce the activity of illegal, armed civilian groups, which they often called paramilitary groups, and the state justice system remained extremely weak. In lieu of resolving these underlying problems, federal authorities continued to rely on the military to ensure calm in Chiapas, although human rights groups, including the Fray Bartolom de las Casas Center for Human Rights (Centro de Derechos Humanos Fray Bartolom de las Casas), continued to document cases in which the army's presence was the cause of, rather than remedy for, tension in the state.

In September, the government released a new Chiapas peace proposal after years of moribund negotiations. The plan's content included a promise that authorities would "carefully analyze complaints of harassment and other illegal acts denounced by diverse human rights organizations" and the establishment of a program within the federal Office of the Attorney General to receive and analyze such cases. In October, almost two years after the Acteal massacre, the office announced that it had established a special unit in Chiapas to investigate armed groups. Authorities had already taken hundreds of actions, including the taking of testimonies, it said.

At this writing, it was not clear whether the proposal would lead to steps to improve the human rights situation in Chiapas. After the peace plan was announced, state officials began to release from jail people detained in 1998 during a government crackdown on "autonomous municipalities," local governments set up by supporters of the Zapatista Army of National Liberation (Ejrcito Zapatista de Liberacin Nacional, EZLN) who refused to recognize the authority of the state government. According to Mexican human rights groups, none of the people who were released should have been detained in the first place; the arrests were marred by illegal procedures, including lack of evidence and failure to obtain arrest warrants.

Guerrero and Oaxaca states also presented disturbing human rights concerns. In January 1999, the Miguel Agustn Pro Jurez Human Rights Center (Centro de Derechos Humanos Miguel Agustn Pro Jurez, PRODH) published a report on these states that documented "the great number of violent acts that have been produced in the context of agrarian problems, local and regional politics, the planting and trafficking of drugs, militarization, and the presence of armed groups." PRODH described specific cases illustrative of these problems, including the illegal detention and torture by soldiers of Rodolfo Montiel Flores and Teodoro Cabrera Garca, and extrajudicial execution of Salom Snchez Ortz in Pizotla, Guerrero. The three victims were members of an environmental group opposed to logging practices in the region. It was for this work that PRODH suspected that they were attacked. The two surviving victims were forced to confess to crimes they did not commit and were prosecuted in a process fraught with irregularities, including the use of statements given on a military base. PRODH and other Mexican human rights groups also documented in Guerrero the rape of two women and the murder of a man and boy by soldiers in Barrio Nuevo, an area where government opponents had tried for years to establish a local government independent of the ruling party.

Other human rights abuses persisted in Mexico, including labor rights violations and limitations on press freedom. The government's system of labor tribunals continued to limit freedom of association, but even when court victories were obtained by workers, government enforcement did not always follow. One such case monitored closely by Human Rights Watch for several years-involving the Democratic Union of Workers of the Ministry of the Environment, Natural Resources, and Fishing (Sindicato Democrtico de Trabajadores de la Secretara del Medio Ambiente, Recursos Naturales y Pesca, SIDT-SEMARNAP)-remained unresolved. Despite court victories allowing the union to exist formally, government officials still refused to allow the union to function fully. On the positive side, Mexico's Supreme Court issued an important decision in May upholding the right of workers to form more than one union in any government agency.

For journalists covering sensitive topics, like drug trafficking, reporting was still a dangerous profession. Jess Barraza, editor of the weekly Pulso in San Luis Ro Colorado, Sonora state, for instance, was threatened with death after his paper reported on drug issues in May. A state police body guard withdrew his protection after being beaten by federal police officers in June, apparently in retaliation for his protection of the journalist.

Defending Human Rights

Human rights defenders continued to come under attack in Mexico during the year. After documenting the human rights abuses by the army in Pizotla, Guerrero, described above, PRODH staff members received a series of written death threats in August and September. In October they received a bomb threat. It was not clear, however, that the threats were provoked by the Pizotla case.

In Guerrero, Abel Berrera of the Tlachinollan Human Rights Center of the Mountain (Centro de Derechos Humanos de la Montaa "Tlachinollan") received death threats in May after working on human rights cases in which the army appeared to be implicated. In Ixtlayutala, Oaxaca state, Catholic priest Jos Rentera was threatened in April after interceding on election-related human rights issues. In Nuevo Len, Monterrey state, members of Citizens in Support of Human Rights (Ciudadanos en Apoyo a los Derechos Humanos) received threats for their work on prison conditions in the state.

The Mexican government also continued to exert pressure on human rights groups through onerous visa requirements for foreign human rights observers. Instituted in May 1998, the government required visa applicants to produce extensive documentation including a Spanish-language version of their organization's by-laws and letters attesting to their moral rectitude. The names of all locations to be visited had to be provided at least thirty days in advance of the trip, constituting a potential risk to the communities to be visited, whose members could be subjected to surveillance or harassment. At the same time, the specificity of the requirements meant that human rights investigators would be prohibited from searching for information in communities that they did not list on their visa applications, a serious impediment to investigators who needed to follow the leads received during research missions. In September, authorities within the federal Ministry of Government told Human Rights Watch that the visa requirements would be relaxed; at this writing no such change had been instituted. In September, Tom Hansen, an American at the helm of the Mexico Solidarity Network, won a court victory overturning his February 1998 summary expulsion. The following month, a court ruled in favor of twelve foreigners summarily expelled in April 1998.

At several times during the year, human rights defenders were prohibited from traveling to Mexico because Mexican consular officials, or their colleagues in the Ministry of Government in Mexico City, appeared unwilling or unable to process visa requests. In June, a lawyer from the Washington, D.C.-based Center for Justice and International Law (CEJIL) was obliged to cancel her participation in a human rights seminar she was to lead, and another was given a visa at the last minute that permitted her to do only a small portion of what she had planned-and requested-to do.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations and Organization of American States

In June 1999, Special Rapporteur for Extrajudicial, Summary and Arbitrary Executions Asma Jahangir visited several Mexican states, emphasizing, in particular, her concern about the situation in Chiapas. The Mexican government criticized her outspokenness, just as it did in 1998 when High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson expressed deep concern about human rights violations there. The U.N. Human Rights Committee strongly criticized Mexico in July, noting, among other things, that "alleged acts of torture, enforced disappearances and extrajudicial executions had not been investigated; that the person responsible had not been brought to justice; and that the victims or their families had not received compensation." The committee cited among positive developments in Mexico the increased autonomy of the National Human Rights Commission. The U.N. Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights issued a similar statement in August.

The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, part of the Organization of American States, continued to pay close attention to Chiapas. Human rights violations there received considerable attention in a September 1998 report on human rights violations in Mexico, and the commission released several case-specific reports. In addition to the report on the Manuel Manrquez case, mentioned above, the commission released important reports concerning the government's tolerance of presumed political murderers in Guerrero state and the case of Jorge Barn Guttlein, Rodolfo Izal Elorz, and Loren Reibe, three priests expelled from Mexico in 1995 under physical and legal conditions that violated their human rights.

European Union

In May, the European Parliament approved an economic partnership, political coordination, and cooperation agreement, which had been signed by Mexico and the European Union in December 1997. Members of the European Parliament emphasized that human rights issues were an important topic to which the parties to the accord should pay attention, and asked the European Commission to produce an annual report on human rights developments in Mexico. The commission ignored the request. At this writing, the full accord was not in force, because four European countries had not ratified it, so cooperation on human rights issues-within the context of the agreement-could not move forward.

United States

The United States has paid increased attention to human rights violations in Mexico in recent years. Following the release of the 1998 State Department report on human rights practices around the world, the United States and Mexico began a series of bilateral meetings on human rights, convened alternately in each country, which continued during 1999. Although the meetings took place outside the framework of the United States's priority bilateral issues-trade, illegal drugs, and immigration-they offered an important opportunity for Washington to voice concern about human rights violations in Mexico. And, just as importantly, the Mexicans had an opportunity to raise concerns about human rights violations in the United States.

Breaking with past practice, on several recent occasions, U.S. officials openly criticized human rights violations in Mexico. Upon the January 19, 1999 release of the Human Rights Watch report Systemic Injustice: Torture, "Disappearance," and Extrajudicial Execution in Mexico , State Department Spokesman James Rubin noted, "While we recognize that Mexico has made notable strides in political and electoral reforms in recent years, we remain concerned about persistent human rights problems in Mexico." Asserting that the U.S. government had addressed "many of the concerns which the report raises" with Mexico's director general for human rights, Rubin stated in reference to Chiapas that "we raised our concerns about politically motivated violence in its southern states."

The United States continued to provide military training to Mexico, valued at approximately U.S. $ 21 million for fiscal year 1999, through the State Department's Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement and the Defense Department. Although the U.S. government insisted that it applied human rights vetting criteria to Mexican officers who came to the United States for training, it provided no information on how vetting was carried out. Almost $100 million worth of commercial military purchases made in the United States were expected to be delivered to Mexico during the year.
PERU

Human Rights Developments

Amid mounting international criticism of his government's interference in the judiciary and covert activities to intimidate the opposition and the press, President Alberto Fujimori continued to prepare the ground for his second reelection in polls scheduled for the year 2000. Although Fujimori kept his opponents guessing about his intention to stand, his hitherto successful efforts to surmount constitutional obstacles to re-election, and his rising popularity in opinion polls, made his candidacy seem almost inevitable.

A welter of complaints against Peru before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights concerning gross violations of human rights committed by government agents during the guerrilla insurgency, as well as illegal intelligence activities aimed at silencing political and press adversaries, were a deep embarrassment to the Fujimori government. They included allegations that Fujimori advisor Vladimiro Montesinos, the de facto head of the National Intelligence Service (Servicio Nacional de Inteligencia, SIN), played a role in planning kidnappings and murders. The SIN was also implicated in more recent violations of civil and political rights. A key case involved the impeachment and dismissal of three members of the Constitutional Court in 1997 for issuing a ruling questioning Fujimori's constitutional right to stand for a third term. In December 1998, the Inter-American Commission called for the judges' reinstatement, but after the failure of attempts at a friendly settlement despite additional time given to Peru, the commission forwarded the case to the Inter-American Court of Human Rights.

Faced with mounting attention from the Inter-American Commission and Inter-American Court, Peru took the unprecedented step of withdrawing from the jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court. The move took place after the court ruled in June that four Chileans sentenced to life imprisonment for treason by a "faceless" military court had been tried unfairly, ordering that they be granted a new trial. The European Union, the United States, and members of the international human rights movement criticized the Peruvian government for closing a vital avenue of redress to which its citizens were entitled against violations of the American Convention on Human Rights. Fujimori claimed, without any grounds or justification, that implementation of the court's decision would mean the release of thousands of convicted terrorists.

The government continued to face sporadic armed activity by remnants of the Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso) guerrilla group, now largely confined to remote regions of the departments of San Martn, Hunuco, Ucayali, Junn, and Ayacucho. On June 6, state-of-emergency regulations were lifted in all of metropolitan Lima. They had been in force for thirteen years in parts of the city, except during elections. However, constitutional guarantees regarding the inviolability of the home and freedom of movement continued to be limited by states of emergency affecting large regions of the national territory, including areas recently unaffected by serious guerrilla attacks.

However, the Shining Path was not yet a spent force. On May 28, more than forty Shining Path guerrillas arrived in four trucks in the town of Uchiza in the Upper Huallaga region of San Martn. After attempting to break into the National Bank, which was closed, the attackers were surprised by the police and reportedly opened fire indiscriminately, killing Jess Espinoza Len, a teacher and trade unionist, schoolchildren Cerio Herrada Valverde and Guiliana Fasabi, and a police bank guard. After a gun battle with police, the attackers fled when police and army reinforcements arrived. One of the truck drivers forced by the guerrillas to drive them to Uchiza was reportedly shot and wounded while trying to escape his captors. During the same week, a survivor of a Shining Path attack in the community of Yanayac, in the department of Huancavelica, told reporters how about fifty guerrillas assembled local people into the main square and shot to death five members of the town's civil defense patrol after giving them a "popular trial." On July 14, police and army troops arrested Oscar Ramrez Durand, also known as Feliciano, the Shining Path's best-known leader, in the Andean village of Cochas, Junn department. President Fujimori advised that the arrest was imminent days before it occurred, and was pictured personally supervising the operation. More than forty journalists were flown in advance to the area to cover a press conference at which the prisoner was exhibited.

Hundreds of Peruvians unjustly convicted or facing trial on terrorist offenses remained in high-security prisons facing an extremely harsh prison regime. The so-called faceless courts that conducted their trials, which violated rights to defense and due process, were abolished in October 1997 after tireless campaigning by Peruvian human rights groups and repeated expressions of concern by the United Nations Human Rights Committee and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights.

By August, the special Ad-hoc Commission, formed by President Fujimori in 1996 to review cases and recommend candidates for presidential pardon, had obtained the release of 469 innocent prisoners. It also secured agreement in November 1998 for the criminal record of the beneficiaries to be wiped clean, and any ancillary legal proceedings dropped. Human rights organizations, however, had lists of hundreds of other innocent prisoners with applications in the pipeline. During the first eight months of 1999, Fujimori authorized only seven pardons out of more than fifty cases forwarded to him by the three-member commission, which reached all its decisions by consensus. Human rights groups that filed cases before the commission were convinced, however, that the commission was actually being stricter in its evaluation of cases. They claimed that the president was holding up cases in which people had been convicted for cooperating with guerrilla forces against their will or under coercion, a fate suffered by thousands of Peruvians in rural areas during the armed conflict. In an interview in July, the Peruvian ombudsman, Jorge Santistevan, who was a member of the commission, said that the commission would publish a report at the close of its term on December 31 listing the people it had recommended for pardon and who remained in prison.

According to estimates published by the ombudsman in September, more than 5,000 peasants whose lives were disrupted by guerrilla incursions during the armed conflict were still wanted for arrest and questioning on charges of assisting the insurgents. A study conducted by the Institute of Legal Defense (Instituto de Defensa Legal, IDL), a nongovernmental human rights group, revealed that high courts in three departments alone (Junn, Lambayeque, and Cusco) were processing terrorism charges against 3,002 people on suspicion of collaborating with the guerrillas in the 1980s and early 1990s. More than three-quarters were incriminated solely on the basis of statements by suspects held incommunicado in police custody, and many had faced the possibility of arrest for years. A number of court decisions in these cases, however, were encouraging. In July, a specialized court for crimes of terrorism dismissed charges and canceled arrest warrants against 108 peasants from Chungui, Ayacucho, following a hearing in which the court acknowledged that they had been coerced into collaborating with Shining Path at risk of death. In early August, the same judge, Marcos Ibazeta Marino, ordered charges and proceedings dropped against eighty-four peasants from Paccucha, Apurmac department, who had been accused in similar circumstances. Hundreds of similar cases remained unresolved.

Torture of suspects in police custody continued to be widespread. For instance, on December 18, 1998, Marine officers at the naval base in Aguayta, Ucayali department, beat tradesman Ral Teobaldo Andahua while he was under questioning for a terrorist offense, tortured him by inserting a stick into his anus, and left him unconscious. On the following day he was allegedly given electric shocks and forced to sign a self-incriminating statement. The Marines handed him over to the anti-terrorism police who set him free after he was able to establish his innocence. However, a local prosecutor investigating Andahua's complaint about his ordeal was reported to have classified the case as one of minor injury, despite a law introduced in March 1998 that typifies torture as a crime and prescribes a maximum sentence of twenty years of imprisonment. Many torture victims were ordinary criminal suspects held for questioning in police lockups, and there were also reports of beatings by prison guards. On January 18, a guard beat Pablo Pascula Espinoza Lome to death in the Yanamilla prison in Ayacucho after he was found drinking chicha , a local alcoholic brew. He was found to have a ruptured spleen and to have suffered internal hemorrhaging. The case was one of several being investigated by criminal courts under the new anti-torture law.

Human rights groups documented several cases of brutal ill-treatment of military conscripts. Eighteen-year-old Jaime Palacio Snchez, who enlisted in April at the Huaraz military base recruiting office, was transferred to Fort Coloma in Tumbes, on Peru's northern border with Ecuador. Ten days later he was taken to the emergency room in a Tumbes hospital suffering from what authorities said was tuberculosis, although his induction medical check had reported him to be fit. He died on the following day, apparently from torture. It transpired that six days after his enlistment Palacio and Elvis Lpez Tuya, a friend, had fled the base to escape the ill-treatment both had suffered. They were quickly intercepted and taken back to the base. According to Lpez's affidavit, they were held completely naked for two days without food, and later taken to the store where a group of soldiers savagely beat them. An autopsy gave the cause of Palacios' death as cerebral and pulmonary edema, and noted that his head and body were severely bruised. Nine soldiers and recruits died between January and April in military bases in circumstances that had not been satisfactorily clarified.

A covert campaign to intimidate opposition journalists, believed by human rights groups and the journalists themselves to have been conceived and implemented by the National Intelligence Service on the orders of Vladimir Montesinos, brought worldwide attention to the issue of press freedom in Peru. During the opening months of 1999 both the Inter-American Press Society (Sociedad Interamericana de Prensa, SIP) and the special rapporteur on freedom of expression of the Organization of American States, Santiago Cantn, visited Peru. Both organizations later issued reports condemning the harassment and intimidation of journalists. The special rapporteur had access to copies of secret intelligence documents proving espionage and harassment of a large group of influential journalists.

The case of Israeli-born magnate Baruch Ivcher, former owner of Frecuencia Latina-Channel 2 television, who in 1997 was stripped of his Peruvian citizenship and of his shares in the company in reprisal for broadcasting information on human rights violations and corruption implicating Montesinos and the SIN, had particular resonance in the United States. At the end of April, Ivcher revealed to the Peruvian press the contents of secret intelligence documents dating from 1996 and 1997 and describing plans to spy on and infiltrate four television stations, as well as to carry out surveillance on Alejandro Mir Quesada, director of the daily El Comercio, and Gustavo Mohme, director of the daily La Repblica , among other journalists. President Fujimori categorically denied the allegations. On June 18, a tax court found Julio Sotelo Casanova, former general manager of Channel 2, guilty of fraud and illegally altering company documents to transfer shares in the company to Ivcher's daughters. The charges, apparently without any merit, appeared to be motivated entirely by Sotelo's former role as Ivcher's associate in the company. Sotelo, who was said to be in poor health, was serving his sentence in San Jorge prison.

Well-known journalists critical of the Fujimori government were still the subject of hostile coverage in pro-government media outlets they believed to be covertly run by the SIN. A Miami-based Internet site directed by Hctor Ricardo Faisal Fracalossi, an Argentinean astrologer who was reported to have served formerly in the Argentinean army, featured libelous profiles believed by his targets to be sourced from intelligence reports. The organization responsible for the site, the Association for the Defense of the Truth (Asociacin Pro-Defensa de la Verdad, APRODEV), mimicked the acronym of the nongovernmental human rights organization Association for the Defense of Human Rights (Asociacin Pro-Defensa de los Derechos Humanos, APRODEH). Much of the hostile material published by Faisal was similar to that published in Lima in 1998 by sensationalist tabloids that were dedicated to the character assassination of leading opposition journalists. Press investigations during 1998 revealed several pieces of evidence linking the tabloids to the government. The fate of libel complaints lodged by seven journalists against Faisal also suggested government involvement. During the second week of May, Judges Elba Greta Minaya and Antonia Saquicuray, investigating the complaints, charged Faisal with defamation and ordered him to cease publishing the offending material. On the day after the ruling, the Lima Superior Court suddenly transferred the two judges to other positions, and the case was assumed by another judge, who promptly lifted the ban. On August 3, the judge dismissed the case against Faisal on the grounds that the material posted on the site was a reproduction of articles earlier published in the Lima tabloids. Press investigations showed that the judge who issued the ruling was an interim appointee without tenure, who had been sanctioned repeatedly in the past for improper conduct, and that Faisal was a fugitive from justice in his own country.

On May 31, a new broadsheet appeared in Lima calling itself La Repdica , which was strikingly similar to La Repblica in appearance. It contained death threats against Mohme and well-known La Repblica reporter Edmundo Cruz, using derisive language similar to notes delivered anonymously to government opponents and human rights defenders in earlier years.

Press freedoms were even more precarious in provincial towns, where journalists, particularly radio broadcasters, faced physical reprisals for their work. Seven journalists working for Radio Maran, a local station run by the Catholic Church's Vicariate of Solidarity in Jaen and which broadcast on human rights themes, received death threats in March. A colleague, Jos Luis Linares Altamirano, narrowly escaped with his life on March 18, when two hooded gunmen forced their way into his home and shot him in the stomach. Two months before, Linares had received threats by telephone warning him to stop his human rights reports. Other radio and television journalists who received threats include nine working for different media in Huaraz, who were publicly attacked by the mayor, Waldo Ros Salcedo, as "enemies of the people," and given an ultimatum to stop their critical comment.

Military officials in past years who had been accused of gross human rights violations continued to enjoy impunity. In May, IDL revealed in its monthly magazine Ideele that Maj. Ricardo Hurtado Hurtado, who was sentenced by a military court for the massacre of sixty-nine peasants, including twenty-three children, in Accomarca in 1985, was still on duty in the sixth military region in Bagua. After initial military denials, President Fujimori confirmed that IDL was correct and gave assurances that Hurtado would be removed from active duty. In May, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights agreed to investigate the La Cantuta case, a notorious crime of murder and "disappearance" in 1992 committed by members of the Colina Group, an army death squad. Information on the case to be considered by the commission included evidence from well-placed military sources that Montesinos and former army commander-in-chief Nicols Hermoza Ros, two members of the "triumvirate" that ruled Peru after Fujimori's 1992 coup, planned the crime. Members of the death squad convicted of the crime were released under a comprehensive government amnesty in 1995.

During 1999, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights forwarded to the Inter-American Court of Human Rights the Ivcher case and a case challenging the 1997 dismissal of the Constitutional Court judges, on which negotiations for a friendly settlement had broken down. Both were very sensitive cases for the government. On June 3, the court ruled that the Peruvian government had to order a retrial of four Chileans sentenced to life imprisonment for treason by a faceless military court in 1994, on grounds that they had been denied due process and the right to a defense. Fujimori announced that his government had no intention of carrying out the court's sentence. The Supreme Council of Military Justice announced that it would be unable to implement the Inter-American Court's order. In a further step taken against the court, on July 7 Congress voted to remove Peru from the court's jurisdiction. The decision deprived Peruvians whose rights have been violated of the possibility of redress by the court. The Inter-American Court had, in fact, increasingly become a last bastion of defense for victims of human rights violations in Peru, given persistent government interference in the Peruvian judiciary and amnesty laws that prevented accountability for past human rights violations. The argument advanced by Fujimori for Peru's withdrawal, that implementation of the court ruling would lead to the release of thousands of sentenced terrorists, had no basis in fact and seriously misled the Peruvian public. In September, the court rejected Peru's attempt to revoke its recognition of jurisdiction, finding, "There is no norm in the American Convention [on Human Rights] that empowers States Parties to withdraw their declaration of acceptance of the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court."

Defending Human Rights

The people's defender, Jorge Santistevan, played a pivotal role in the defense of human rights standards, giving the institution he headed undisputed authority and credibility. It remained the only public institution noticeably free of government intervention. Nongovernmental human rights organizations continued to campaign vigorously, their international credibility shielding them for the most part from attack by the government. However, they were not free from intimidation, which was occasionally violent.

Since 1998 Lola Flores had received anonymous threats for her work as a member of the Human Rights Committee of Moyobamba, department of San Martn. On March 13, as her husband, Estban Ros Serbn, was returning home by bicycle, he was met by two men dressed in black and wearing ski masks who demanded to know if his wife was involved with the Human Rights Committee. They struck him on the head with a stick, and when he tried to defend himself they shot at him twice. One bullet grazed his back and the other hit him in the shoulder. He managed to escape, and was eventually evacuated to hospital in Lima.

On June 3, municipal police discovered a box simulating a bomb under a tree opposite the Lima office of the Human Rights Commission (Comisin de Derechos Humanos, COMISEDH). The box contained three batteries connected by wires to a telephone. This organization also had an office in Ayacucho that had assumed the defense of victims of police torture. The hoax bomb had been planted on the day that trial proceedings against three policemen had been due to start.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

In March the U.N. Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination adopted its Concluding Observations on the reports submitted by Peru under the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. Among its recommendations, the committee called on Peru to take measures to ensure Peru's disadvantaged groups enjoyment of all the rights protected by the convention, equality before the courts, and in the exercise of political rights.

Organization of American States

OAS Secretary-General Csar Gaviria failed to take a firm position in defense of the authority of the Inter-American Court or on Peru's obligation to respect its obligations under the American Convention on Human Rights. In a statement issued on July 17, while reaffirming the importance of compliance with the rulings of the court, Gaviria had only praise for the no-concessions policy against terrorism pursued by the Fujimori government. He considered it to have been "undoubtedly an effective policy which contributed in an important fashion to strengthening the rule of law in Peru," despite the conclusions both of the court and the commission that the policy violated fundamental human rights.

In September, referring to what he called a "step backward," Secretary-General Gaviria criticized the Peruvian government for withdrawing from the jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights; he called Peru's failure to implement the court's sentences an even more urgent problem to overcome.

European Union

In a statement released on July 16, the European Union "deeply regretted" Peru's withdrawal from the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, describing it as a "step backwards" in the country's progress on human rights, and pointing out that it would inevitably affect the confidence of investors in Europe, Peru's largest trade partner.

In June, at the meeting between the heads of state of the Andean Community of Nations and the E.U. held in Brazil, Peru welcomed the progress made in the political dialogue between the two regions based on the common purpose of strengthening peace, democracy, and respect for human rights.

United States

Concern in the U.S. Congress about the persistent erosion of the rule of law and violations of press freedom in Peru mounted in 1999, adding a new lever of pressure to that exerted by the State Department and Amb. Dennis Jett in Lima. On July 1, the House of Representatives Foreign Relations Committee approved a motion to the effect that "the erosion of the independence of judiciary and electoral branches of the Government of Peru, the interference with freedom of the press, and the blatant intimidation of journalists in Peru constitute a threat to democracy in that country and are matters of concern for the United States." On the same day, the Senate Appropriations Committee passed a foreign aid bill for the fiscal year 2000 whose section on Peru read:

    The Committee has repeatedly expressed concern about U.S. support for the Peruvian National Intelligence Service (SIN). The Committee continues to received reports that investigations of allegations of corruption by SIN officials are routinely blocked, that the SIN has withheld information from U.S. officials, and that the SIN continues to harass and intimidate journalists and opponents of the ruling party. The Committee requests to be consulted prior ro any decision to provide assistance to the SIN.

Although U.S. assistance to the SIN had been suspected for years, administration officials had always refused to confirm or deny the reports. The revelation was a shocking admission that, in the interests of the "war on drugs," the Clinton Administration had been cooperating with, and secretly funding, an organization whose involvement in grave human rights abuses had been recognized in successive State Department reports. The U.S. embassy in Lima insisted that assistance was limited to the provision of computer equipment and training for a drugs intelligence unit, amounting to U.S. $34,000 in 1996, $150,000 in 1997, and $25,000 in 1998. Ambassador Jett denied that the unit had been engaged in operations or had any connection with human rights violations. He said that no more funds would be provided to the SIN in the current financial year, or in the future. The House of Representatives Appropriations Committee, debating the foreign aid bill in July, said that the SIN was not a reliable partner in the drug war as it was neither transparent nor accountable to civilian authorities, and was "involved in activities inconsistent with human rights, the rule of law and the development of democracy."

While a firm defender of Peruvian anti-narcotics efforts, U.S. Amb. Dennis Jett had consistently spoken up for human rights during his tour of duty, which ended in 1999.

World Bank

In April, the World Bank donated $500,000 to the Office of the People's Defender to support its activities in defense of human rights in Peru.

VENEZUELA

Human Rights Developments

The dramatic political upheavals in Venezuela following the election on December 6, 1998, of former army Lt. Col. Hugo Chvez Fras created uncertain prospects for human rights. Backed by a loose-knit coalition, the Patriotic Front (Polo Patritico, PP), Chvez was sworn in on February 2, just two days before the anniversary of a failed military coup he led in 1992 against the government of Carlos Andrs Prez. Chvez's comeback, with 57 percent of the vote, was attributed to widespread disillusionment and anger at politicians of the two traditional parties, Democratic Action (Accin Democrtica, AD) and the Christian Democratic Independent Committee for Political Electoral Organization (Comit de Organizacin Poltica Electoral Independiente, COPEI). Venezuela's political system had been described as a "partidocracy," due to the preeminence of these two party machines, which had poorly administered the country's resources. Chvez promised to give Venezuela a new constitution (its twenty-sixth), eliminate corruption, patronage, and nepotism, and carry out extensive economic and social reforms. However, his messianic aspirations were tempered by a pragmatic awareness of political realities.

In a plebiscite held on April 25, an overwhelming 85 percent of the electorate gave Chvez a mandate to hold elections for a constituent assembly to write a new constitution. Chvez supporters won 121 of the assembly's 131 seats in elections held on July 25. The traditional parties opposing Chvez held only five seats. The assembly, which was given six months to draft the constitution, had powers far beyond those of a traditional constitution-drafting body. On August 12, it declared the political system to be "in emergency" and gave itself powers to restructure and, if necessary, dissolve the other branches of government. This action raised fears both in Venezuela and abroad that Chvez might use his strong popular support and the discredit of Venezuela's institutions to establish an authoritarian government. On August 24, Chief Justice Cecilia Sosa resigned in protest at the designation by the assembly of a Emergency Judicial Commission (Comisin de Emergencia Judicial) empowered to fire judges and even Supreme Court justices. Her colleagues on the Supreme Court had ruled by a narrow majority that the assembly did have authority to restructure the judiciary. On the following day, the assembly issued a decree declaring a "legislative emergency," prohibiting Congress from making laws and preventing legislators from meeting to debate the political situation. Violent clashes occurred outside the Congress on August 27, when the traditional political parties, who had a majority in the legislature, attempted to session in defiance of the ban. On August 30, after congressional leaders threatened to cut off funds to the government, the assembly extended the ban to include Congress's budgetary functions, stripping it of its remaining powers.

Two weeks of grave constitutional crisis ended when President Chvez pulled back from the brink, having stepped dangerously close to total abrogation of the rule of law. He concluded a non-aggression pact with opposition leaders, brokered by the Catholic Church, which allowed Congress to reconvene and the judiciary to continue functioning. While the Emergency Judicial Commission continued to review and dismiss judges, its president insisted that the decisions were not taken unilaterally but on recommendation by the Judiciary Council, a preexisting constitutional body. Also, in mid-September the assembly was reported to have abandoned its idea of declaring a fourth emergency, which would have affected the executive branch and given it the power to dismiss the country's twenty-three elected governors and more than 300 elected mayors. Nevertheless, in the space of six months, Chvez had accrued more power than any ruler in Venezuela since the dictatorship of Marcos Prez Jimnez in the 1950s.

The constitutional text presented to the assembly by Chvez incorporated several proposals on civil and political rights submitted by the "Forum for Life," a coalition of nongovernmental human rights groups. For example, the draft included the prohibition of the death penalty, an article dedicated specifically to "disappearances," and provisions strengthening the rights of detainees. These included an article allowing police to hold suspects for a maximum of eight hours before bringing them before a judge and providing victims of ill-treatment or torture a right to rehabilitation. The draft constitution created a fourth branch of government, termed the Moral Branch, making the fight against corruption and abuse of power by state authorities the job of a group of institutions including the comptroller general of the republic, the attorney general's office, and a defender of the people, or ombudsman, an institution yet to be created. The drafting debates took place in twenty-one specialized committees, and a "commission for citizens' participation" was set up to receive ideas from the general public. The assembly was initially given six months to produce the final text, but in mid-September Chvez announced that he expected it to complete its work several months early, to enable a referendum to be held in November.

While the Chvez government and constituent assembly focused attention on the legal and institutional framework of government, Venezuela's serious human rights problems continued to demand immediate attention. An appalling record of inmate violence, inadequate food and medical attention, overcrowding, administrative chaos, and long delays in the administration of justice continued to make prison reform a human rights priority. According to prison official Gloria Pinho, in April, prisons were 73 percent above their maximum capacity, compared to 53 percent in July 1998. In Caracas alone 700 prisoners awaiting trial were being held in police lockups. During the period from January to April, seventy-eight prisoners died in fights, fifty-nine of them from gunshot wounds, according to information published by the nongovernmental human rights group Venezuelan Program of Education and Action in Human Rights (Programa Venezolano de Educacin-Accin en Derechos Humanos, PROVEA). Ten prisoners died in El Dorado prison, located in a remote jungle region near Venezuela's border with Guyana, in a violent prison riot in December 1998. On April 17, 135 prisoners were reported to have lacerated themselves with knives in a so-called blood strike to protest their transfer to El Dorado from other prisons. According to press reports, ninety-six protesters had to be treated for their wounds in the camp infirmary by a paramedic who quickly ran out of medicine and bandages and had to buy more out of his own pocket.

President Chvez and Luis Miquilina, who at the time was minister of the interior, made encouraging promises not to tolerate abuses by Venezuelan police forces. Nonetheless, extrajudicial executions and torture of criminal suspects, which reached a peak in the mid-1990s, continued to be reported. PROVEA documented eighteen violations of the right to life by police (including the unjustified use of lethal force) during the first three months of the Chvez administration-a number comparable to the last three months of 1998 under the government of President Rafael Caldera, but reflecting a drop of 45 percent from the average from 1993 to September 1998. On June 14, for instance, Metropolitan Police intercepted nineteen-year-old Jhon Alejandro Linares Pena as he was crossing a street in Caracas. According to witnesses interviewed by the Support Network for Justice and Peace (Red de Apoyo por la Justicia y la Paz), one of the police unholstered his weapon and shot twice at Linares, who appeared to be unarmed, after he tried to escape, without hitting him. Police located Linares in a house in which he had taken refuge. A resident of the house heard Linares's pleas for help, and a gunshot. Witnesses later saw two policemen holding Linares at gunpoint, while he was lying wounded on the ground in the street. He was dead on arrival at Catia hospital a half hour later, reportedly with several gunshot wounds.

There were significantly fewer reported arbitrary arrests, due to a government policy not to authorize preventive raids into crime-ridden neighborhoods, a source of frequent police abuses and social tension in earlier years.

Constitutional guarantees, including the inviolability of the home, the right to movement and personal liberty, were restored in February in sixteen municipalities on the Venezuelan-Colombia border, which had been militarized since 1994 to combat incursions of Colombian guerrillas, kidnappings, and other crimes. The lack of legal protection suffered for years by peasants in this region contributed to frequent arbitrary arrest and torture by military units controlling the border areas.

In July, a new Criminal Procedure Code, drafted under the Caldera administration, came into force. The new code substituted oral trials for laborious and lengthy written procedures that had contributed to interminable trial delays; it also abolished the secrecy of court proceedings and strengthened due process. The accountability of government officials was strengthened by the abolition of a legal procedure known as nudo hecho , a pretrial administrative investigation that had to be carried out before a public official could be charged with an offense. In past years these investigations dragged on for months, sometimes years, to the detriment of justice and equality before the law.

Defending Human Rights

The National Commission for Human Rights, established by President Caldera to provide a forum in which government officials could discuss a national agenda for human rights with representatives of nongovernmental human rights organizations, did not function during President Chvez's first year in office. The Forum for Life, a consortium of nongovernmental human rights groups, submitted detailed constitutional proposals to the constituent assembly, including long-overdue reforms such as limiting the jurisdiction of military courts and defining the conditions and permisible scope of states of emergency. Not all of these proposals were reflected in the official draft but many were adopted as written by the Forum for Life. Unlike earlier years, no reports were received of harassment, intimidation, or threats against human rights defenders.

The Role of the International Community

European Union

The European Commission approved a 5 million euro (U.S. $5.35 million) program designed to improve prison conditions in Venezuela. At this writing, the program, which included education for prison staff, had not yet begun.

United States

Despite its misgivings about Chvez's left-leaning and authoritarian temperament (he had been denied a visa to enter the U.S. in 1998 on grounds that he had attempted the overthrow of an elected constitutional government in 1992), Washington cultivated friendly relations with the new president. U.S. concerns centered on the effects of Chvez's policies on vital U.S. interests such as oil supplies, business security, the rule of law, the armed conflict in neighboring Colombia, and drug-trafficking. President Clinton received Chvez in January and again in September. Referring later to their January 27 meeting, Clinton combined encouragement with praise: "I was tremendously impressed by his evident commitment to the use of democratic and constitutional methods to achieve the institutional reforms that the people of Venezuela clearly want." Neither Chvez nor Clinton, however, commented on whether the topic of human rights had been specifically broached in their meetings.

Organization of American States

The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, part of the Organization of American States, sent Chvez a letter in April recognizing his "decided will" to support the inter-American system of human rights protection, and expressing "satisfaction at the high priority your Illustrious Government gives to the defense of fundamental liberties." In July the commission passed a case to the Inter-American Court of Human Rights that involved thirty-five of the 276 persons reportedly killed by Venezuelan security forces during a February 27, 1989 popular revolt, known as the Caracazo.
ASIA OVERVIEW

Human rights fared poorly in Asia during the year, and nowhere as badly as in East Timor. No outside country and no institution, regional or global, put the necessary pressure on Indonesia to stop the deadly violence of its proxy militias until a scorched earth campaign in September left the soon-to-be-independent country a smoking ruin and virtually its entirAe population uprooted. The principle of accountability for crimes against humanity was strengthened by United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan's establishment in September of an international commission of inquiry on East Timor. The principle was undermined, however, by Cambodian Premier Hun Sen's refusal for months to work with the U.N. to bring senior Khmer Rouge leaders to justice, although by late October, it appeared that his position might change.

Nationalist sentiment, inflamed by different factors in different countries, produced an anti-Western backlash across the region that had negative repercussions for human rights.

The fundamental civil rights of expression, assembly, and association suffered severe setbacks during the year in Pakistan, China, Burma, Malaysia, Singapore, and Cambodia, and judicial independence took a battering in Hong Kong and Malaysia. Religious persecution was a major issue in China, India, and Vietnam as well as elsewhere in the region.

Government action and inaction fueled communal and caste conflict in India, while communal violence, exacerbated by if not initiated by government action, flared as well in Indonesia. Internal armed conflicts in Sri Lanka, Afghanistan, Indonesia, and Burma produced human rights violations by all parties involved and led to serious problems of protection for refugees and internally displaced persons.

Governments in Pakistan and Afghanistan failed spectacularly to uphold women's rights, and violence against women was a pervasive problem in the region. The Indonesian government made no effort to further investigate the rapes of ethnic Chinese women in May 1998, and trafficking of women continued into or out of most of the countries of the region.

Corruption remained a major obstacle to respect for human rights, with cronyism of past or present leaders a national political concern in Malaysia, Indonesia, the Philippines, China, and Pakistan.

On the positive side, economic recovery and democratization made steady progress. The more open countries in the region, Thailand and South Korea, recovered most rapidly from the effects of the 1997-98 economic collapse, although key structural reforms were not implemented at year's end. In June, Indonesia successfully held its first free national election in forty-four years, but the triumph was marred by the continuing role of the army in political life, the persistence of "money politics" or influence-buying, and the failure of any politician to address the country's political and economic difficulties.

Regional governmental organizations played no role in human rights protection during the year. The Association of Southeast Asia Nations (ASEAN) seemed powerless and rudderless, in part because of the political and economic uncertainties in Indonesia, its largest member. The Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) summit in New Zealand in September ended up being a useful forum for discussion of East Timor but was otherwise seen by participants as lacking purpose or direction.

Human Rights Developments

The crisis in East Timor underscored the failure of "preventive diplomacy" and the unwillingness of the international community to take steps early on, such as exerting economic pressure or suspending military cooperation, that might have persuaded the Indonesian army to sever links with local militias, rendering international military intervention unnecessary (see Indonesia/East Timor chapter). The crisis highlighted the inability of key countries, such as the U.S. and members of the European Union, to focus on more than one crisis at a time, since East Timor was unfolding at a time when Kosovo had the near-exclusive attention of senior policy-makers in those countries. (Among Asian human rights activists, the attention to Kosovo left the impression that human rights disasters in Europe would always generate more attention than catastrophes farther afield.) The East Timor crisis also underscored Japan's unwillingness to link aid to human rights.

Once the scale of the post-referendum violence became apparent, the U.N. moved relatively quickly to force Indonesia to accept an international force, with full support from governments in the region, including China. But Asian support for and participation in the International Forces in East Timor (Interfet) was one thing; support for the notion of universal jurisdiction or international accountability for crimes against humanity was quite another. On September 27 in Geneva, in a special session of the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, Asian delegates as a bloc rejected or abstained from voting on a resolution calling on the U.N. Secretary-General to establish an international commission of inquiry for East Timor. They instead supported Indonesia's contention that it could do its own investigation without "foreign intervention," through the Indonesian National Commission on Human Rights. The argument was similar to that used by Hun Sen in rejecting an international tribunal for Khmer Rouge leaders, insisting that Cambodian courts could do the job.

The Asian governments' vote may have been linked in part to their unhappiness with how the special session was convened. But other factors may have been just as important. Of the governments concerned, Sri Lanka, Japan, Korea, Pakistan, and China are all countries that have unanswered questions of accountability for past abuses. Sri Lanka, India, and the Philippines, all of whom voted with Indonesia, also have national human rights commissions that are seen by their respective governments as sufficient to address ongoing abuses, without interference from abroad.

A final factor in the vote may also have been rising nationalism. Nationalist anger against outside intervention on rights issues was evident in Malaysia, in response to the November 1998 remarks in Kuala Lumpur by U.S. Vice President Al Gore in support of the political opposition; in China, in reaction to the May 7 bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade; in India and Pakistan, in response to a flare-up of the Kashmir conflict from May to July; in Indonesia, in response to the U.N. role in East Timor beginning in June; and throughout the region in response to NATO intervention in Kosovo.

The freedoms of expression, association, and assembly were under particular assault in Pakistan, China, Malaysia, and Burma during the year but suffered elsewhere as well. Burma's ruling State Peace and Development Council continued to arrest supporters of the opposition National League for Democracy. The government of Nawaz Sharif in Pakistan launched a frontal attack on nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) in May, depriving thousands of legal status, and then Sharif himself was overthrown in a military coup in October that led to the imposition of martial law. In China a series of sensitive anniversaries-of the Tibetan uprising on March 10, 1959, the Tiananmen Square crackdown on June 4, 1989, and the founding of the People's Republic on October 1, 1949-led authorities to tighten controls and increasedintolerance of independent political activity. Singaporean authorities continued to ban outdoor speeches and rallies, arresting opposition politician Chee Soon Juan in January for making a lunch-hour address to a crowd of businessmen, and imprisoning him for twelve days in February after he refused to pay the criminal fine levied against him for the January speech. The other veteran opposition leader in Singapore, Joshua Jeyaretnam, faced the prospect of bankruptcy as a result of punitive damages, awards, and costs assessed in defamation actions brought by Prime Minister Goh and others. The actions related to statements made by Jeyaretnam in an election eve political rally in 1997. In Malaysia, Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim's first trial ended in April with a six-year sentence on corruption charges; a second trial began in June. Both trials seemed designed to end Anwar's political career and the threat he posed to his former mentor, Prime Minister Mahathir, as well as to stifle calls for reform.

The integrity and independence of courts were at issue in many countries of the region during the year. In Malaysia, Far Eastern Economic Review journalist Murray Hiebert was jailed in September on charges of "scandalizing the court," for an article he wrote in 1997 noting the speed with which a lawsuit involving the son of a prominent judge moved through the court system. He was released on October 11. It was the first time any journalist in Malaysia had been detained since 1957. In Cambodia, pressure from the U.N. and major donor governments on Hun Sen to allow an international tribunal to try senior Khmer Rouge leaders was premised on the assumption that Cambodian courts were still too weak and politicized to do the job properly. In China, legal reform continued to make slow headway, but "verdict first, trial second" remained the operative rule for political cases. In the Special Administrative Region (SAR) of Hong Kong, the traditional independence of the court system was placed in jeopardy in May after SAR Chief Executive Tung Chee-hwa asked Beijing to intervene to overrule a decision by Hong Kong's Court of Final Appeal that he opposed. In Pakistan, the government set up new military courts in late 1998 to try suspected "terrorists" and when these were challenged, simply replaced them in May with anti-terrorist courts, which still eliminated most basic protections for defendants.

Caste, communal, and ethnic violence continued to plague the region. In India, private armies supported by upper-caste landlords attacked members of the Dalit or "untouchable" community with impunity; a series of particularly vicious attacks took place in Bihar in from January to April, part of an ongoing cycle of retaliatory violence between these armies and Maoist guerrillas. The coming to power of a Hindu nationalist government also encouraged many right wing Hindu groups to attack religious minorities, often with local police failing to intervene.

A series of communal riots throughout Indonesia in late November and December 1998 and January 1999 were widely believed to have been instigated by army-linked provocateurs. Whether the riots were provoked or not, government intervention inevitably made things worse. Conflict between Muslims and Christians, rooted in political and economic causes, raged unchecked in the central and southeastern Moluccan islands at the end of the year. Many of the deaths were caused by security forces opening fire to stop communal fighting, but local people alleged that different branches of the armed forces took one side or the other, rather than remaining neutral. No progress was made during the year in investigating the deadly May 1998 riots in Jakarta that were directed against ethnic Chinese. In Kashmir, the conflict took on a communal aspect as it spread beyond the Kashmir valley, with the Indian government deploying former army servicemen, largely Hindu, to assist the army in counterinsurgency operations in the Jammu region. These village defense forces were responsible for abuses against local Muslim villagers.

Internal armed conflict produced grave human rights violations across the region, with abuses against civilians often being carried out by paramilitary groups working in unofficial collaboration with government armed forces. Rebel groups were also responsible for abuses. In Kashmir, the incursion into Indian-held Kashmir by Pakistani-backed militants in May and the resultant fighting between India and Pakistan diverted attention from a pattern of systematic abuse in Kashmir by Indian security forces and former militants working with them called "renegades," but those abuses continued. Militias organized, trained, and equipped by the Indonesian army were the primary agents of violence against suspected supporters of independence in East Timor; attacks by pro-independence groups on non-Timorese civilians took place in late 1998 and early 1999, but from February onwards, the violence was almost all on the other side. In Sri Lanka, several paramilitary Tamil groups worked with the Sri Lankan army to try and crush the insurgency led by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) in the north and east of the country; the LTTE was also responsible for grave abuses, including recruitment of child soldiers. In Burma, the ongoing campaign by the Burmese army or Tatmadaw to pacify areas held by ethnic insurgent armies resulted in large-scale forced population removals and other abuses; there were also some reports of executions by the insurgents, including the Karen National Union, during the year. In Afghanistan, both the Taliban forces and the United Front were responsible for indiscriminate bombings of civilian areas. The Taliban also forcibly relocated thousands of civilians and detained an unknown number during a mid-year offensive.

The various conflicts in the region produced huge outflows of refugees and internally displaced persons, with critical protection problems emerging as a result. In East Timor, one issue was how to safely repatriate East Timorese who had been forcibly expelled into Indonesian West Timor and who remained under the control of the militias who had forced them out (see chapter on Refugees).

In Thailand and Malaysia, the governments' failure to accord refugee status to Burmese and Indonesians respectively led to an ever present danger that people with a genuine fear of persecution could be repatriated against their will and in violation of international law. The Malaysian government continued to deny UNHCR permission to visit immigration detention camps where some refugees were believed detained. In Bangladesh, the government was eager to see the repatriation of some 21,000 remaining ethnic Rohingya refugees originally from Arakan, in western Burma, but not all wished to return. For those who did, the Burmese government continued to place obstacles in the way of repatriation. Tens of thousands of Indonesians were displaced by political or communal conflicts in Aceh, West Kalimantan, and the Moluccas; the Indonesian government restricted access by international humanitarian agencies to the camps, fearing that their presence would be exploited for political reasons by parties to the conflict. The Sri Lankan government blocked delivery of humanitarian relief supplies to internally displaced persons in northern Sri Lanka in June and July, leading to international protests. In October 1998, UNHCR established a presence in Thailand along the Thai-Burmese border where camps housed some one hundred thousand refugees. The procedures by which new arrivals from Burma would be screened for admission to the camps remained unclear; local groups were concerned that until those procedures were clarified, there was a possibility that genuine refugees could be sent back. UNHCR sought to cease international protection for Cambodian refugees remaining in Thailand and send them back to Cambodia, based on what it viewed as an improved political situation. After protestsby human rights groups, UNHCR said the status of Cambodians would be further reviewed. In the beginning of the year, the Thai government said it would consider signing the U.N. Refugee Convention, but as of this writing, it had taken no action.

Corruption remained a huge issue. In Indonesia, a major bank siphoned off U.S.$70 million to officials of the Golkar ruling party, including people closely linked to President Habibie. In February, a taped conversation between President Habibie and Attorney General Andi Ghalib revealed that a government investigation into former president Soeharto's wealth was a sham; Ghalib himself became the target of a bribery inquiry and was forced to step down on June 14 pending investigation. The investigation into the Soeharto wealth was called off in October. In April former Pakistani prime minister Benazir Bhutto was convicted in absentia of taking bribes; her husband remained in a Pakistani jail on corruption charges. In Malaysia Anwar Ibrahim was tried on corruption charges, but it was he who in 1998 had raised concerns about corruption and cronyism in Mahathir's inner circle. Newspaper articles accusing high-ranking officials of corruption led to systematic harassment of journalists and publishers in Pakistan. In August, newspapers in the Philippines also complained of government pressure after reporting on corruption and cronyism in the administration of President Joseph Estrada. In Cambodia, the Cambodian Mine Action Center (CMAC), a national institution, lost funding after news broke that CMAC officers had misappropriated hundreds of thousands of dollars. In Vietnam corruption continued largely unabated, despite the high-profile trial in August of seventy-seven people in what became known as the Minh Phung Epco case. Corruption of police and immigration officials facilitated trafficking of women and illegal migration across the region.

Defending Human Rights

Where they were allowed to exist and in some cases, even where they were not, Asian NGOs vigorously defended human rights. Human rights NGOs in Thailand and Malaysia worked with their Indonesian counterparts to protest abuses in Aceh. The Asia Monitor Resource Center, a Hong Kong-based NGO, documented abuses of worker rights in Vietnam and China. Advocacy on behalf of migrant workers continued to be a priority for NGOs in the region. A project to better enforce the fundamental freedoms of expression, assembly, and association in Asia involved human rights organizations from Hong Kong, Sri Lanka, Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand, and Cambodia. Human rights in Burma and East Timor continued to be of major concern to NGOs across Southeast Asia; they often worked collaboratively to document abuses and raise concerns with ASEAN governments. When Malaysian human rights activists were arrested in September, organizations across Asia rallied to their support. Extensive access to the Internet by Asian NGOs facilitated not only regional campaigns of this kind but also international advocacy efforts on Asian issues. When Falun Gong was banned, its members in China bombarded western human rights groups and governments with e-mail messages pleading for help.

Human rights monitoring continued to be a risky job, however. Neelan Tiruchelvam, a Sri Lankan recognized internationally as a leader of the human rights movement, was assassinated in Colombo in July by a suicide bomber believed to be linked to the LTTE. Two staff members of the Cambodian human rights organization Cambodian League for the Promotion and Defense of Human Rights (LICADHO) were arrested in December 1998 and accused of inciting a demonstration against toxic waste dumping in the port city of Sihanoukville. The two LICAHDO staff were detained for one month, released pending trial, then put on trial in July. They were eventually acquitted of all charges. The office of the leading East Timorese human rights organization, Yayasan Hak, was attacked by militias on September 5. The staff were evacuated, and then the building was torched, destroying valuable evidence that might have been used in prosecutions of Indonesian officers.

In several countries including Indonesia, Sri Lanka, the Philippines, and India, national human rights commissions functioned reasonably independently and were helpful in getting certain human rights issues onto the national agenda. The Indian commission succeeded in getting compensation paid to victims of police torture. But in Indonesia, the government used the national commission as a way to deflect international scrutiny of its role in East Timor. Malaysia and Thailand both passed legislation during the year mandating the establishment of national human rights commissions, and Korea was also planning to create one.

No human rights organizations were permitted to function in North Korea, Vietnam, Burma, or Singapore. In China, legal aid organizations and a hotline for women operated freely, but any organized advocacy effort on behalf of dissidents, religious activists, Tibetan nationalists, or workers was crushed.

The Role of the International Community

The international community was moved by conflicting impulses during the year. On East Timor, the impulse to stop the destruction was restrained by a concern voiced by several U.N. Security Council members that too much pressure on Indonesia could undercut Indonesia's fragile democratization process. (Indonesian pro-democracy activists argued the opposite, that only accountability for senior officers could help reduce the role of the military.) The terror in East Timor did, however, prompt an unusual mobilization of military and material resources, with Japan covering almost half the costs of an international force led by Australia, and Malaysia, Thailand, Singapore, the Philippines, Korea, Bangladesh, China, and New Zealand among the countries of the region contributing personnel.

Despite a crackdown that steadily increased in China during the year, the G-7 countries gave up trying to pressure the government to make improvements and put all their effort into human rights dialogues and seminars on the rule of law which, while harmless, produced few, if any, tangible results.

In South Asia, Western countries put concern over human rights aside as they worried about how to halt the escalation of conflict between India and Pakistan over Kashmir, not recognizing the role that human rights abuse by Indian security forces and separatist militants had played in fueling the conflict to begin with.

The region's economic recovery was a top priority for all donors, but there was a noticeable increase in attention toward governance and support of civil society.

International Financial Institutions

The World Bank engaged in more consultation with local groups than ever before in countries that had active NGO networks. Where freedom of association was tightly restricted, as in China, "consultation" tended to be a much more pro forma process. The Bank launched a "comprehensive development framework" initiative to enhance the input of civil society in development activities, but its only pilot project in the region was in Vietnam, where the emphasis was on poverty reduction. The World Bank shied away from giving explicit support to NGOsin China trying to expose corruption. But it energetically protested the crackdown on NGOs and journalists in Pakistan, convening a special meeting of ambassadors in Pakistan with NGO participation, putting off a planned consultative group donor meeting, and appealing for the release of Najam Sethi, a jailed journalist who campaigned against corruption.

In Indonesia, the World Bank consulted with a wide range of NGOs and political opposition leaders as it decided how to handle disbursement of loans in the pre- and post-June election period. In September, it held up loans to the Habibie government because of a major corruption scandal. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank also linked the delay in disbursements to the violence in East Timor and Indonesia's failure to meet its commitments under the May 5, 1999 agreement (see Indonesia/East Timor chapter).

The World Bank's inspection panel was charged with doing an independent assessment of a highly controversial $40 million resettlement project in a traditionally Tibetan ethnic area of China, and for the first time, its assessment was a precondition for disbursement of project funds. Its report was due to be delivered to the World Bank's board in late November or early December.

Under Congressional mandate, the U.S. Treasury Department established an outside advisory committee to examine the impact of IMF programs, including social safety net funding, greater transparency in IMF operations, and the impact of the IMF on core labor rights standards. The committee's initial meetings in early September focused on procedural matters; it included representatives from the human rights and environmental communities as well as business and labor groups.

United Nations

The United Nations made useful contributions to human rights in East Timor, Cambodia, Indonesia, Vietnam, and Afghanistan.

Despite controversy over whether the U.N. could have done more to protect the people of East Timor from the terror unleashed by militias in September, there is no question that the U.N. Mission in East Timor (UNAMET) acted with professionalism and integrity as it organized a referendum in record time under abominable conditions and ensured the safe evacuation of the more than one thousand displaced people who had taken shelter in its compound. The protection failure lay more with member states who failed to exert the pressure on Indonesia that they could have earlier in the year. In September the Security Council authorized the sending of an Australian-led international force to East Timor to halt Indonesian army-backed violence, restore order, and provide humanitarian aid to hundreds of thousands of displaced people. A special session of the U.N. Commission on Human Rights also met in September and passed a resolution calling on the secretary-general to set up an international commission of inquiry into violations of international humanitarian law in East Timor.The Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights opened a small office in Jakarta.

The Special Rapporteur on Violence Against Women visited Jakarta and East Timor in November 1998; she was followed in February by the U.N. Working Group on Arbitrary Detention. In neither case were the visitors allowed to visit Aceh or Irian Jaya.

Following up on a November 1998 mission, the U.N. sent a second group of experts to Cambodia in August 1999 to assess options for bringing the Khmer Rouge leadership to justice through a tribunal that met international standards. The U.N. was initially rebuffed by Premier Hun Sen, however.The Phnom Penh field office of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights had its mandate extended for another year, but in September Hun Sen called for the closure of the office of the personal representative of the secretary-general in Cambodia at the end of its mandate in January 2000.

A hard-hitting report on Vietnam released in March by Abdelfattah Amor, the special rapporteur on religious intolerance prompted an angry response from the Vietnamese government.

A resolution by the U.N. Commission on Human Rights and statements by the U.N. Secretary-General in April and August, respectively, condemned widespread violations of human rights and humanitarian law in Afghanistan. Burma, also the subject of a UNCHR resolution critical of its rights practices, continued to block access by U.N. Special Rapporteur Rajsoomer Lallah.

U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson's visit to China and Tibet in September 1998 led to no new initiatives, and even an assessment mission in 1999 designed to press for ratification of the two U.N. covenants China had signed was not productive.

The U.N. High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) expanded its role in some areas, including along the Thai-Burma border. It continued to be involved in some of the region's protracted refugee situations, such as in Nepal, but was sometimes insufficiently proactive in identifying possible solutions that respected refugee rights and wishes. UNHCR continued to work with urban refugees in India, Thailand, and Malaysia. Detention of refugees on charges of illegal entry remained a problem in many countries as governments made no distinction between refugees and undocumented migrants. UNHCR often had no access to these detainees; Malaysia was a case in point.

United States

United States policy in the region was once again pulled in different directions by political and economic imperatives. Political interests themselves led to contradictory initiatives, with security concerns sometimes at odds with the desire to strengthen civil society and bolster democratization efforts. With the exception of the India-Pakistan conflict and the East Timor crisis, Asia lost out to the Balkans in the administration's list of priorities.

The White House was outspoken in opposing the crackdown on NGOs and journalists in Pakistan, and this coincided with its policy of increased pressure on the Sharif government, driven largely by nonproliferation and anti-terrorism concerns; it condemned, however, the coup against Sharif in October. The White House, State Department, and Pentagon also used public and private diplomacy throughout the East Timor crisis. Unfortunately, all three drew the line at conditioning economic and military assistance on an end to militia violence until the scorched earth campaign began, by which time mere threats were no longer useful.

There was no change in the administration's tough policy on Burma, and a July report by the U.S. embassy in Rangoon documented for the first time that U.S. sanctions were having a significant impact on foreign investment and the overall economy even if they were not producing the desired political objectives.

The Administration took the lead in carving out benchmarks for a U.N.-supported "mixed tribunal" for Khmer Rouge leaders and pressed for the release of two staff members of the human rights organization LICADHO as a key test of the Cambodian government's attitude towards civil society. In Vietnam, both the embassy and the State Department gave top priority to finalizing a trade agreement, although religious freedom issues were high on the agenda.

China represented the administration's most significant policy failure. The administration badly handled opportunities to exert serious pressure on Beijing, including during the U.N. Commission on Human Rights in Geneva, Premier Zhu's visit to the U.S. in April, and President Clinton's contacts with Jiang Zemin throughout the year. China's deft manipulation of the crisis in U.S.-China relations following the bombing of the Belgrade embassy in May put the administration at a disadvantage and left its dialogue strategy in shambles. Talks on China's World Trade Organization (WTO) entry were making little progress towards the end of October.

European Union

While the European Union (E.U.) expressed concern about human rights violations in Afghanistan, Burma, India, Malaysia, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka, it took a less active stance with respect to China. Former Hong Kong governor Chris Patten, the European Commission's foreign affairs commissioner, however, stressed the importance of taking human rights concerns into consideration in E.U. relations with China, including in the establishment of trade and economic ties. Similarly, the European Parliament linked expansion of the E.U.-India relationship to India's nuclear disarmament, while urging India to ratify the convention against torture, place a moratorium on executions and step up efforts to abolish the death penalty, foster religious tolerance, and protect religious freedom. The E.U. continued to criticize the Burmese government while attempting, albeit unsuccessfully, to involve the government in a dialogue about human rights. On October 11, the E.U. extended sanctions against Burma for another six months, citing human rights abuses.

In October, the European Council expressed concern about the humanitarian situation in East and West Timor and banned for four months the supply to Indonesia of equipment that might be used for internal repression or terrorism. The E.U. also pressed for peaceful settlements to the conflicts in Kashmir and Afghanistan and advocated the establishment of an international tribunal for Cambodia.

Japan

The Japanese government was noticeably more active at the U.N. Commission on Human Rights than in previous years, taking the initiative, for example, to sponsor a Cambodia resolution, and working to develop a consensus on Burma. On China, Japan caved in to pressure from the Chinese foreign minister not to cosponsor the U.S. resolution, though it opposed a no-action procedural motion by China. In general, with the exception of China's WTO entry, which Japan strongly supported, Japan's relations with China remained tense, and Beijing put ion hold the bilateral human rights dialogue with Japan that had begun in 1997.

Japanese diplomacy was highly visible in Southeast Asia. Japan sent observers to Indonesia for the June elections and donated computer equipment to tally the results. Japanese leaders lobbied President Habibie and other officials to end militia violence in East Timor, but stopped short of using Tokyo's huge bilateral Official Development Assistance (ODA) as leverage. Through 1997 Indonesia had received a cumulative total of more than $13 billion in ODA loans and other assistance.

In Vietnam, Japan continued to focus on economic reform, and did not link any of its ODA to human rights improvements, although Japanese officials did raise some human rights cases. Once again, Japan was Vietnam's largest donor.

Japan also maintained its high level of interest in Cambodia, hosting in February the World Bank's first donor conference since the 1997 coup, and trying to defuse the Khmer Rouge tribunal issue by supporting both U.N. and domestic remedies without providing concrete assistance for either.

Behind the scenes, the Japanese government used its ties to the Burmese government to press for International Committee of the Red Cross access to prisons, implementation of the International Labor Organization's recommendations on forced labor, and the visit by U.N. envoy Alvaro De Soto in mid-October. It took no action to restore suspended ODA to Burma.

Japan continued its assistance to economies suffering from the Asian currency crisis, providing emergency aid in yen loans and grants to Indonesia, Thailand, the Philippines, and South Korea under the so-called "Miyazawa" initiative, named after the former prime minister who formulated Japan's response to the crisis. Together with loans provided as part of the IMF's package of financial aid, Japan gave a total of $43 billion, the largest contribution of any single donor. Otherwise, whether in Kashmir, India, and Pakistan, or Malaysia, where Japan had particularly close ties, human rights concerns were low on the Japanese government's agenda. The October coup in Pakistan, however, did spark a strong diplomatic response: Prime Minister Obuchi publicly urged the military to "promptly" return to democratic and constitutional rule.

The Work of Human Rights Watch

Enhancing collaboration with Asian NGOs, finding new ways to get international attention to long-standing issues and neglected areas, and responding to the East Timor crisis occupied much of the division's time during the year. The international financial institutions were more a focus of advocacy efforts than ever before.

In India, we continued our partnership with local organizations working on the rights of Dalits ("untouchables"), assisting in their campaign to end caste violence. The launch in April of a Human Rights Watch report on abuses against Dalits gave a major boost to the campaign, and by year's end, Dalit activists in South Africa, the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Netherlands had joined the effort. At this writing, the report was being translated into eight regional languages in India. In Cambodia, we produced two reports in close collaboration with local human rights defenders. One of them, on official impunity in Cambodia, was released simultaneously in Khmer and English and served as the starting point for a campaign to bring officials responsible for unlawful deaths to justice.

Much of the Asia division's work focused on bringing attention to serious human rights violations in the region that were out of the public eye. Abuses in the area known as "eastern Tibet"-ethnic Tibetan regions of the Chinese provinces of Gansu, Sichuan, Yunnan, and Qinghai-were highlighted in a report in September, and human rights violations associated with communal violence in Ambon and Aceh, Indonesia were addressed in March and May.

The Asia division reached out to regional media in advocacy work, with op-eds appearing in the Asahi Evening News , on Japan's policy toward Indonesia and East Timor, and in the English-language Phnom Penh Post, as well as the leading Khmer language daily on accountability for the Khmer Rouge. Our reports on caste violence in India and on impunity in Cambodia, as well as our advocacy work on East Timor were extensively reported in the media in India, Cambodia, and Indonesia respectively.

The work of the Washington, London, and Brussels offices as well as that of the U.N. representative were critical to the division's efforts during the year. In Washington, our work focused on Congress, the executive branch, the World Bank, and foreign embassies. Asia division staff testified or submitted written statements to Congressional hearings: once each on Cambodia and Hong Kong, twice on China, and three times on Indonesia and East Timor. In addition to briefing Congressional staff and arranging for them to meet NGOs from the region, Human Rights Watch facilitated Congressional letters to foreign leaders on key human rights issues in Cambodia, Hong Kong, East Timor, Pakistan, India, and China. We also briefed new U.S. ambassadors to Indonesia and Cambodia, the charge d'affaires to Burma (the highest ranking U.S. official posted there), and the newly appointed U.S. ambassador for religious freedom.

Asia division staff had ongoing contact during the year with the World Bank on human rights concerns across the region, particularly in response to concerns in China, Burma, Cambodia, Indonesia, East Timor, Pakistan, and elsewhere in the region.

Japan was a major focus of advocacy, with a mission to Tokyo and extensive interaction with Japanese embassy officials in Washington throughout the year, as well as contacts with Japanese NGOs, academics, and business people.

The Washington office hosted four Burma roundtables during the year on a range of issues including humanitarian assistance in Burma and the impact of selective purchasing legislation in certain U.S. states.

AFGHANISTAN

Fighting continued in contested areas of Afghanistan, intensifying in midyear as both the Taliban and the United Front launched new offensives in the north. The fighting drove thousands of displaced civilians into Kabul. There was no improvement in the status of women in the parts of the country controlled by the Taliban. After months of negotiations over security for United Nations staff, some expatriate U.N. staff began to return to the country in March. Attacks on Afghan political figures opposed to the Taliban continued in Pakistan.

Human Rights Developments

Fighting continued for control of the central part of the country which had fallen to the Taliban in 1998. On April 21, United Front faction Hizb-i Wahdat took control of Bamiyan city, only to relinquish it after heavy fighting in early May. Following the Hizb-i Wahdat victory, relief workers reported that Hizb-i Wahdat forces had beaten and detained residents suspected of supporting the Taliban, and burned their houses. When Taliban forces retook the city, they reportedly took reprisals by shooting suspected Hizb-i Wahdat supporters, primarily ethnic Shi'a Hazaras, burning hundreds of homes and deporting men to unknown locations.

In late July, at peace talks held in Tashkent, the Taliban and the United Front agreed to the "Tashkent declaration," which called on all parties to resolve the conflict through "peaceful political negotiation." Almost immediately afterwards, both the Taliban and the United Front resumed fighting, with the Taliban focusing its efforts on United Front Commander Ahmad Shah Massoud's territory north of Kabul. As they pushed north, the Taliban forced civilians from their homes and then set fire to houses and crops, and destroyed irrigation canals and wells, ostensibly to rout opposition sympathizers but effectively preventing the residents' return. In the Shomali region, men believed to be loyal to Massoud were arrested or shot, and women and children were taken by truck to Pakistan or made to walk to Kabul. Some one thousand ethnic Tajik men were reportedly separated from their families during the exodus and held by the Taliban. Over four days in August the U. N. estimated that over twenty thousand people fled to Kabul, bringing the total to close to forty thousand in a two-week period.

The influx of displaced people into Kabul further strained relief efforts in the city. Some 850 families took refuge in the abandoned Soviet diplomatic compound. A further one hundred thousand displaced were thought to have taken refuge in the Massoud-held Panjshir valley, fifteen thousand of them without shelter. In September, officials with the U.N. World Food Programme stated that 145,000 people were at risk of malnutrition in the coming winter.

For much of the year, both the Taliban and the United Front launched mortar and rocket attacks on cities, killing hundreds of civilians. In September Taliban fighter planes bombed Taloqan, the capital of northern Takhar province. Earlier in the year, Massoud's forces fired rockets into Kabul, killing scores of civilians.

Taliban officials continued to beat women on the streets of Kabul for dress code violations and for venturing outside the home without the company of a close male relative. In Kabul, girls were not permitted to attend school, although primary schools for girls were permitted in other parts of the country. Women's employment remained severely restricted and was generally limited to health care. To ensure that religious practices were strictly enforced, Taliban police continued to arrest men for having beards that were too short, for not attending prayers, and for having shops open during scheduled prayer times.

As in previous years, the Taliban enforced its laws according to its interpretation of Islamic Sharia, with weekly public executions, floggings, and amputations in Kabul stadium and other cities under its control. Several men accused of sodomy were punished by having walls pushed on them by a tank. In one case, a man who survived the ordeal after being left under the rubble for two hours was reportedly allowed to go free.

In September, the Taliban issued new decrees aimed at non-Muslims that forbade them from building places of worship but allowed them to worship at existing holy sites, banned non-Muslims from criticizing Muslims, ordered non-Muslims to identify their houses by placing a yellow cloth on their rooftops, forbade non-Muslims from living in the same residence as Muslims, and required that non-Muslim women wear a yellow dress with a special mark so that Muslims could keep their distance.

Defending Human Rights

No human rights organizations operated inside Afghanistan, but several nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) based in Pakistan documented abuses in Taliban-controlled areas. Other humanitarian groups also reported on human rights abuses. A number of womenassociated with these groups received threats from Taliban soldiers in Pakistan; in some cases, the women were compelled to cease their work and seek asylum outside Pakistan.

The Role of the International Community

Peace talks sponsored by the Group of Six-plus-Two, comprised of Afghanistan's neighbors (Pakistan, China, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Iran, and Uzbekistan) plus the United States and Russia, held in February and March, produced cease-fire agreements but had little effect. The March talks resulted in an agreement by all parties to a shared government, but a meeting to work out the details scheduled for the following month never took place, after the announcement by the Taliban that it would not share power with opposition elements. Talks in July resulted in both sides agreeing to allow humanitarian aid into areas under their control. Most neighboring countries as well as some of the Gulf states continued to provide financial and military support to one or more of the Afghan factions.

Twenty NGOs returned to Kabul in January, after a six-month absence stemming from the Taliban's edict that all aid organizations and employees be housed in a single dilapidated building. The returning groups included MedAir, CARE, and M6decins sans Fronti4res, who agreed to the move on the condition that the facility be rehabilitated.

The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), which had remained in Kabul throughout the controversy, continued to provide food and assistance to the civilian population. In June, ten ICRC workers were attacked, beaten, and robbed in Taliban-controlled Bamiyan province, despite having permission to travel and safety assurances from Taliban authorities. ICRC staff was reduced for approximately one week until further safety guarantees were obtained from the Taliban.

United Nations

The United Nations Afghanistan seat remained in the control of the government of Jamaat-I Islami leader Burhanuddin Rabbani, who was ousted from Kabul by the Taliban militia in 1996.

U.N. staff began a gradual return to the country in March and April. A team was also sent to the northern city of Mazar-i Sharif to reopen a U.N. office in the city, the first since September 1997, when U.N. offices were raided there during heavy fighting.

The special rapporteur on Afghanistan, Dr. Kamal Hossain, visited the country in March. In April, the United Nations Commission on Human Rights passed a resolution condemning human rights violations by all parties in Afghanistan, citing in particular the mass killings that accompanied the Taliban's taking of Mazar-i Sharif in August 1998 and the continuing violations of women's rights. It also denounced both sides in the conflict for continuing the civil war and urged other nations to refrain from supplying military support to any of the factions. The commission also specifically condemned the Taliban for violations of women's and girls' human rights. The mandate of the special rapporteur on Afghanistan was extended for another year.

Shortly after the start of the Taliban's July offensive, the U.N. Security Council called for an immediate stop to hostilities. Once again, countries were urged not to aid any of the factions militarily. U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan implored the Afghan factions to stop their "senseless self-destruction." He criticized all the parties for committing "criminal acts" and then relying on "the U.N. and the international community...to help save their own people from disasters provoked by those who claim to be their country's leaders." He also denounced the use of child soldiers in the conflict.

In August, the U.N. Subcommission on Human Rights adopted a resolution condemning the Taliban for violations of the most fundamental rights of women and girls, stating that Afghan women were "cheated of their rights to health, employment, freedom of movement and security."

In September, U.N. Special Rapporteur for Violence against Women Radhika Coomaraswamy visited Afghanistan. She condemned the Taliban militia for its "widespread systematic violation of the human rights of women." She stated that public beatings of women continued and she urged the Taliban authorities to respect international conventions on human rights and dismantle the Ministry for Promotion of Virtue and Prevention of Vice, the religious police responsible for the beatings.

In January, UNICEF reported that 90 percent of the girls in Afghanistan and 75 percent of the boys were not attending school in Taliban-controlled areas, a drop from previous statistics. In a July UNICEF report on children at risk, Afghanistan ranked behind only Angola and Sierra Leone. The study analyzed environmental conditions, mortality rates, nutrition, primary education, security, and health.

Afghanistan remained one of the most densely mined countries in the world, with approximately six million mines, most of them remnants of the war with the Soviet Union from 1979-1992. In 1999 it was estimated that there were ten to twelve victims of landmines per day in the country, 30 percent of them children and 50 percent of them fatalities due to inadequate or nonexistent medical facilities. In July and August, the U.N. reported that the United Front was laying mines north of Kabul to repulse the Taliban offensive.

The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) reported in February that the 2.6 million refugees from Afghanistan living in Pakistan and Iran remained the largest group of refugees in the world. Over two million remained internally displaced due to fighting and forced evictions and relocations. Although some fifteen thousand refugees returned from Iran, and fifty-one thousand from Pakistan during the first half of the year, renewed fighting deterred many from going back.

United States

Due to their harboring of suspected terrorist Osama bin Laden, the Taliban's relations with the U.S. remained strained. Tensions increased in June when the U.S. put bin Laden on the FBI's Ten Most Wanted list and offered a $5 million reward for his capture. To exert further pressure, the U.S. imposed economic sanctions in July, including a freeze on all property and trade controlled by the Taliban in the U.S. This was extended in August to include the freezing of approximately $500,000 in assets of Ariana Airlines, the only airline operating in Afghanistan, on the presumption that it could be supplying the Taliban with export goods.

In a statement to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in April, Assistant Secretary of State for South Asian Affairs Karl Inderfurth stated that U.S. representatives had been meeting with Russian representatives as well as with Afghan King Zahir Shah to discuss means of reaching peaceful settlement in Afghanistan, but that prospects for peace were dim. Listing the areas of concern to the U.S., he cited the threat of terrorism, ongoing narcotics cultivation and export, human rights abuses, treatment of women and girls, and regional instability. Inderfurthreiterated the U.S. goal of a "broad-based, multi-ethnic, representative government" but expressed doubt that the Taliban would accept such a formula and predicted further hostilities.

In August, the State Department announced that it was doubling its resettlement quota of South Asian refugees for the year 2000 from four thousand to eight thousand, specifically to allow more Afghan women into the country. In the announcement the department representative said, "We have seen a sizable increase in the numbers of Afghan women at risk. As President Clinton has made clear, we are deeply opposed to the Taliban regime's repressive policies toward women and we are committed to ensuring that Afghan women in vulnerable circumstances obtain the protection they deserve." In September the U.S. issued a report on religious freedom worldwide in which it accused the Taliban of persecuting and killing minority Shi'as.

Relevant Human Rights Watch Report:

Afghanistan: Massacre at Mazar-i Sharif, 11/98
BURMA

The ruling State Peace and Development Council (SPDC) offered no signs during the year that fundamental change was on the horizon. The SPDC's standoff with the opposition National League for Democracy (NLD) continued. No progress was made on ending forced labor. Counterinsurgency operations by the Burmese military in several ethnic minority areas, accompanied by extrajudicial executions, forced relocation, and other abuses, led to the displacement of thousands inside Burma and the flight of yet more refugees across the border into Thailand. In one of the few positive developments during the year, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) reopened its office in Rangoon in May and was able to visit Burmese prisons on a regular basis.

Bilateral and multilateral policies towards Burma remained largely unchanged during the year, with sanctions in place from much of the industrialized world. Various governments tried combinations of diplomatic carrots and economic sticks to improve human rights and encourage negotiations between the SPDC and the opposition, but none had succeeded by late October.

Human Rights Developments

Arrests and intimidation of supporters of the NLD continued, part of a campaign that began in August 1998 after the NLD announced its intention to convene a parliament in line with the 1990 election result. This was foiled by mass arrests, and the NLD subsequently established a ten-member Committee Representing People's Parliament (CRPP), a kind of parallel parliamentary authority whose creation was seen as a direct challenge to the government. Some sixty parliamentarians remained under detention while thousands of NLD registered voters were forced to resign their party membership.

Divisions appeared within the NLD itself in early May, as a group of twenty-five MPs interested in promoting dialogue with the SPDC criticized NLD leader Aung San Suu Kyi over the establishment of the CRPP. The NLD central leadership later accused the group of attempting to sow disunity within the party. In June Suu Kyi said that she would accept lower level contact with the government, but the Burmese Foreign Minister Win Aung responded that before this could happen the NLD should dissolve the CRPP. The NLD refused.

Detention of other political opponents continued. On January 13, a special court gave lengthy sentences averaging seven to ten years to 270 students who had demonstrated in support of the CRPP in November and December 1998. Of this group, a student named Thet Win Aung reportedly received a sentence of fifty-two years, and Myon Min Zaw, thirty-eight. Also in January, Mon National Democratic Front chairman Nai Htun Thein was detained without trial, following the sentencing of three other MNDF party members in December. Each received a sentence of seven years.

The Burmese government released three high-profile prisoners during the year in response to international pressure. Eighty-one-year-old Ohn Myint was released in January following the visit of United States Congressman Tony Hall. Dr. Ma Thida, a medical doctor and close colleague of Aung San Suu Kyi, was released from prison on February 11 on "humanitarian grounds" during a period of diplomatic differences between the European Union and the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN). Ma Thida had received a twenty-year sentence in October 1993 for distributing anti-government materials. The E.U. called the release an "interesting gesture." A few days later, Burmese writer, Nyi Pu Lay, who was serving a ten-year sentence, was also released. Any hopes that these releases constituted increased tolerance by the SPDC were dashed by the arrest in late February of fifty-one-year-old U Yaw Hsi, elected to parliament in 1990 as an NLD representative. He was arrested for possession of a cloth soaked in opium oil, a common medicinal item in Burma.

On May 6 the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) reopened its office in Rangoon and was allowed to have confidential visits with prisoners in Insein prison, the facility near Rangoon where most well-known political prisoners are housed. An agreement reached between ICRC and the Burmese government allowed the ICRC to visit all of Burma's prisons. By September 1999 it reported having registered some eighteen thousand prisoners and visited nine places of detention.

Exiled dissidents spearheaded a campaign beginning early in the year for a mass uprising on September 9, 1999 (9-9-99). The uprising was intended to replicate the mass pro-democracy protests on August 8, 1988 (8-8-88) that have come to symbolize the high point in Burma's short "Democracy Summer" and were met with violence by the security forces. Dissident groups claimed the government arrested some five hundred persons in connection with the campaign, but diplomats put the number at about one hundred. The SPDC admitted arresting forty. Two British activists were also arrested when they entered the country in late August to protest against the government. The first, James Mawdsley, who had been arrested and deported twice previously, was given a seventeen-year sentence in a closed trial. The Burmese court in Rangoon sentenced Rachel Goldwyn to seven years of hard labor on charges of sedition. September 9 itself passed quietly with little protest.

Academic freedom remained tightly restricted, despite one small breakthrough. On January 5, 1999, the government announced that it was reopening four medical institutes. Classes there resumed in May. Thousands of other students spent yet another year with no access to college education. Since 1996, all universities have been closed in Burma, except for some post-graduate and other specialist courses.

Burma's ethnic minority areas were the sites of continuing violence and gross violations of human rights and humanitarian law. The military's forced relocation of villagers as a counterinsurgency measure continued in different parts of the Shan, Kayah (Karenni) and Karen state and Tenasserim Division, especially in areas where armed opposition groups were known to be active. After relocation, soldiers frequently burned homes, uprooted crops, and looted belongings that villagers left behind. At the relocation sites, villagers had to contribute up to fifteen days a month of forced labor on infrastructure projects, portering, night watch, and the physical maintenance of army camps. One new development of particular concern was the arrival of Burmese army "short pants" units to Karen State. Since December 1998, these out of uniform soldiers operating in units averaging six persons have "disappeared," beaten, and threatened villagers primarily in Nyaunglebin township in an effort to weed out from the rural communities any supporters of the Karen National Union (KNU).

Violations by the ethnic insurgent armies were also reported in 1999. In March for example, the KNU captured and executed eleven Burmese immigration officers along the road between Three Pagodas Pass and Thanbyuzayat. On July 31, elements of the Karenni National Progressive Party reportedly killed Daw Phraemoe and Hla Din, two local Karenni community leaders who had acted as go-betweens in cease-fire talks between the government and ethnic Karenni guerrillas.

In November 1998 the repatriation of Rohingya refugees from Bangladesh to Burma resumed. Nevertheless, the Burmese government obstructed the refugees' right to return by requiring the re-verification by Burmese authorities of those refugees previously cleared to return. Because of these obstructions, the maximum quota for returning refugees of fifty persons per week set by the Burmese government itself has never been filled. In Rakhine (Arakan) State, the Burmese government continued to deny the Rohingya full citizenship.

Defending Human Rights

The Burmese government's suffocating grip on all aspects of society has prohibited the development of any indigenous human rights institutions. Restrictions persisted on access to the country by foreign human rights monitors. In what has become a yearly ritual, the government denied U.N. Special Rapporteur on Burma Rajsoomer Lallah access to the country, but he nevertheless presented a scathing report on conditions in Burma to the U.N. Human Rights Commission. The government continued to exercise strict control over the flow of information into and out of the country by monitoring telecommunications.

The Role of the International Community

The international community continued to differ over how to ease repression in Burma. Sanctions imposed by most of the world's leading donor governments remained in place.

Australia and Japan continued to refrain from giving aid but tried to maintain a political dialogue with the SPDC: Australia sent a mission to explore creation of an independent human rights commission in Burma, and Tokyo invited an SPDC military official to visit Japan. The E.U. sent a mission to Rangoon to try to break the SPDC-NLD deadlock. Its efforts to keep Burma at a diplomatic distance while trying to maintain cordial relations with ASEAN, of which Burma is a member, led to strains not only between the E.U. and ASEAN but also within the E.U. itself.

United Nations

On February 25 and April 23 respectively, the General Assembly and the Human Rights Commission adopted resolutions criticizing the government for a wide range of violations and calling on the SPDC to take the necessary steps to restore democracy, bring an end to forced labor, and cease the abuse of civilians in zones of conflict. The Human Rights Commission decided to extend by one year the mandate of the special rapporteur. The government postponed at the last minute the slated September 11 visit of U.N. Deputy Secretary-General Alvaro de Soto. De Soto and a World Bank official visited Rangoon from October 14 to 19 to discuss an incremental plan to restore aid in return for progress on human rights and dialogue with the NLD.

The concern of the International Labour Organization (ILO) about the Burmese government's use of forced labor in violation of the Forced Labour Convention resulted in Burma's effective expulsion from the organization. In July 1998 the ILO had published the results of a commission of inquiry into the use of forced labor in Burma, which incorporated a set of recommendations to be implemented by the SPDC if it wished to remain an ILO member in good standing. Nearly a year later, with no perceived progress, the ILO, in an unprecedented move at its annual conference, prohibited any further Burmese participation in its activities and banned receipt of ILO technical assistance. The ban was to be lifted only upon the cessation of the use of

forced labor and implementation of the recommendations.

Asia and the Pacific

Japan continued to engage the SPDC this year while keeping most of its Official Development Assistance (ODA) suspended. In a move seen as an effort to cultivate dialogue with the government, Tokyo hosted the January 20-28 visit of Brigadier General Kyaw Win, deputy director of the Office of Strategic Studies, an influential institution within the Burmese intelligence apparatus. Brig. Gen. Kyaw Win was the first high-ranking Burmese government official to receive an invitation from the Japanese government since 1988. During a meeting with parliamentarians, Kyaw Win was informed that no more aid would be forthcoming without substantial political and human rights reforms. Japan proposed but did not co-sponsor the Burma resolution at the U.N. Commission on Human Rights and privately urged the SPDC to agree to ICRC prison visits, prior to the actual opening of the ICRC office.

In a controversial move, Australia sent Human Rights Commissioner Chris Sidoti to discuss the potential for the Burmese government's establishing its own independent national human rights commission. This initiative was modeled after Australian support for similar bodies in Indonesia and Vietnam. SPDC authorities were reported to have expressed interest in the idea of a commission and in other types of human rights exchange with Australia while Aung San Suu Kyi voiced strong reservations, questioning whether the commission could be truly independent.

Fellow ASEAN members continued to have problems with Burma despite the formal policy of engagement. Burmese membership in ASEAN hindered the organization's meeting with the E.U. (See below). Thailand continued to host some one hundred thousand refugees in camps along the border while human rights conditions displaced others into the Thai labor market. The October 1

seizure of the Burmese embassy in Bangkok by five Burmese calling themselves the Vigorous Burmese Student Warriors threatened to lead to increased restrictions by the Thai government on student refugees. The trafficking of women to Thailand and abroad persisted, with the Burmese authorities failing to formulate a policy to address the issue. Two of Burma's top leaders, Senior General Than Shwe and Lieutenant General Khin Nyunt, visited Thai Prime Minister Chuan Leekpai in March. Human rights issues were not mentioned.

European Union

The European Union (E.U.) this year continued to criticize the Burmese government while searching for opportunities to initiate a dialogue between the generals and the NLD. The possible participation of Burmese officials in talks between senior officials of the E.U. and ASEAN scuttled a slated meeting of the two regional bodies in late January. In the last week of January, Germany advocated Burmese participation in ASEAN-E.U. foreign ministers' talks in Berlin in March, providing Burma was willing to include human rights issues in the agenda. This meeting was also canceled when several other E.U. member states insisted that Burma not be allowed to participate. ASEAN and E.U. representatives did meet in Thailand on May 24-27, after the Burmese government agreed to limit its participation to silent observation. In an effort to end the political stalemate in Burma, the European Union sent a four-person exploratory mission to Rangoon in July to discuss human rights and democratization. The mission, which the E.U. kept secret until the last minute, met with both the government and Aung San Suu Kyi but returned with no immediate results. On October 11, the E.U. extended sanctions for another six months.

United States and Canada

On May 19, President Bill Clinton extended sanctions against Burma for another year. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright delivered a strong condemnation of the Burmese regime at the ASEAN ministerial meeting in Singapore in July. Congressman Tony Hall made a visit to Rangoon from January 11 to 14 to assess humanitarian needs in the country. He returned to the US advocating the increase of assistance to Burma, particularly in the sectors of water, sanitation, food, security and public health.

During an official visit to Thailand in late July, Canadian Foreign Minister Lloyd Axworthy announced a shift in Canada's policy, when he expressed a willingness to engage the SPDC on the prospect of cooperation in narcotics suppression. Since 1988, Canadian policy had been to prohibit military and non-humanitarian exports to Burma and to limit official contact. However with Burma the world's largest producer of illicit opium and heroin, much of the international community was concerned about how to engage effectively on this issue.
CAMBODIA

With the defection or arrest of the remaining Khmer Rouge forces and the launching of a new coalition government following tumultuous 1998 national elections, political tensions eased in Cambodia and for the first time in thirty years the country was not at war.

Impunity for human rights abusers, however, continued largely unabated. By October, none of the surviving Khmer Rouge leadership had been brought to justice, and throughout the year many civilian and military authorities continued to commit crimes with impunity. Human rights monitoring continued to be a risky profession, with the unsolved killing of an activist member of the Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association (ADHOC) and the arrest and trial of two workers from the Cambodian League for the Promotion and Defense of Human Rights (known by its acronym LICADHO), on spurious charges of having incited a demonstration against toxic waste. The two were later acquitted. Torture by police of detainees, undue use of lethal force by police in apprehending suspects, complicity of military and police in trafficking of women and children for sexual exploitation, and excessive pretrial detention periods were endemic problems, as was confiscation of land by military personnel and local officials. The judiciary was far from independent, and numerous court decisions were influenced by corruption or political dictates.

Human Rights Developments

A key issue during the year was whether or not senior Khmer Rouge officials would be brought to justice. By midyear, all surviving members of the top Khmer Rouge leadership-Khieu Samphan, Nuon Chea, Ieng Sary, Ieng Thirith, Chhit Choeun (Ta Mok), Ke Pauk, and Kaing Kek Iev (Duch)- had either defected to or been taken into custody by the government. As of October, however, none had been brought to trial. When former Khmer Rouge Standing Committee members Khieu Samphan and Nuon Chea defected in December 1998, the two men were given VIP treatment by Hun Sen before being allowed to retire in the town of Pailin. In February, Ke Pauk, former chief of the Khmer Rouge's Northern Zone and allegedly responsible for the massacre of thousands of people in eastern Cambodia, was made a one-star general in the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces (RCAF). Ieng Sary, former Khmer Rouge foreign minister who defected in 1996, continued to operate freely in Pailin, with former Khmer Rouge commanders issuing periodic threats that if Sary were brought before a tribunal it could lead to a resumption of civil war.

On March 6, government forces arrested former Khmer Rouge Standing Committee member Ta Mok, followed by the arrest in May of Duch, the former head of Tuol Sleng prison, a notorious torture center. The military court detained both men in the military prosecutor's prison in Phnom Penh and charged them first with violating the 1994 Law Outlawing the Democratic Kampuchea Group. They were then charged with genocide under a 1979 law. (Pol Pot and Ieng Sary were tried in absentia in 1979 in a "revolutionary tribunal" established by that same law.) Human rights organizations questioned the legality of both men being charged by the military court, since neither has served in the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces. They also questioned whether the 1979 law met international standards of justice.

In an effort to buy more time as the six-month pretrial detention period for Ta Mok neared in August, the National Assembly and Senate passed a law extending the pretrial detention period from six months to a maximum of three years for people charged with genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanity. The law penalizes those who have not yet been proven guilty in court, and some Cambodians feared it could be used against members of the political opposition.

In 1997 the two then co-premiers of Cambodia had requested U.N. assistance to help bring the Khmer Rouge to justice and the U.N. Secretary-General appointed a legal team known as the group of experts. The team's report was released in early March 1999 to the secretary-general and the Cambodian government. It concluded that domestic trials organized under Cambodian law were not feasible and proposed that an ad hoc international tribunal be held outside of Cambodia for crimes against humanity and genocide committed from 1975 to 1979. The experts found that Cambodia's court system lacked the essential elements of fairness: a trained cadre of judges, lawyers, and investigators; adequate infrastructure; and a culture of judicial impartiality. U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan concurred.

Premier Hun Sen rejected the U.N.'s recommendations, announcing in March that Cambodia was considering a Truth and Reconciliation Commission and then declaring that Cambodian courts were competent to conduct their own trials. In April, Hun Sen stated that foreign judges and prosecutors could participate in trials conducted in Cambodia and welcomed U.N. assistance to draft legislation to that effect. On June 30, a second U.N. team of experts recommended to the Security Council that trials take place in Cambodia, with indictments prepared by international prosecutors and approved by a predominantly non-Cambodian panel of judges appointed by the Secretary-General. Hun Sen rejected this formulation. Having a minority of Cambodian judges, he argued, constituted a violation of national sovereignty. In August, the Cambodian government presented its own draft tribunal law to the U.N., which firmly placed any tribunal within the Cambodian national court system. Foreign judges and prosecutors would be allowed to participate, but only in a minority. When Hun Sen met with U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan in September he proposed that either the Cambodian government organize its own tribunal with limited international participation; that the U.N. not participate in a tribunal at all but only provide legal advice; or that the U.N. bow out of the process completely. However, in October Hun Sen appeared to welcome an initiative by the U.S. to forge a compromise, although nothing had been resolved by the end of the month.

In addition to stalling on the question of past abuses, the government also failed to prosecute civilian and military authorities responsible for more recent crimes and human rights abuses. Research conducted by ADHOC and LICADHO found that police, military, gendarmerie, militia members, or local officials allegedly killed at least 263 people during a twenty-two month period from January 1997 through October 1998. While many of these murders appeared to have been deliberate executions, few of the perpetrators had been brought to justice by the end of 1999. In addition, an estimated 130 crimes with political connotations, including assassinations and disappearances, were documented by the Cambodia Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (COHCHR) between August 1997 and October 1998. Most of these crimes have never been investigated or brought to trial.

In June, the Ministry of Interior authorized the establishment of local civilian militia groups-unarmed other than clubs, knives, or hoes -ostensibly to reduce crime and take the place of armed militia that have answered to commune (sub-district) officials in the past. Human rights advocates expressed concerns that the civilian security patrols would contribute to an increase in vigilante executions of alleged robbers and also be used to intimidate potential opposition candidates in upcoming commune elections.

The problem of impunity was compounded by the lack of neutrality and independence in the judicial and law enforcement systems, as well as a low level of professionalism in those bodies. Key institutions such as the Supreme Council of Magistracy and the Constitutional Council remained largely inactive and lacked credibility, effectively leaving the country with no institutions to discipline judges or rule on the constitutionality of legislation.

A law that effectively institutionalized impunity, article 51 of the Common Statutes on Civil Servants, was amended in August by the National Assembly and Senate. Previously article 51 provided protection to government employees who commit crimes by requiring the permission of the perpetrator's ministry prior to arrest. In its amended form, article 51 requires the prosecutor to inform the head of the concerned institution within seventy-two hours before charging a suspect who is a civil servant. However, ambiguities in the article (such as whether prosecutors should continue to warn a perpetrator's ministry before charging or arresting a perpetrator) continued to provide a degree of protection to civil servants who commit crimes.

Excessive use of lethal force and misuse of weapons by law enforcement officials continued to be a problem during the year, with the instant reaction to an apparent crime often being to kill the alleged perpetrator, rather than waiting for a case to work its way through the politicized, weak, and often corrupt court system.

Decades of war have left Cambodia awash with weapons and landmines. A campaign to impound unlicensed weapons, authorized by subdecree number 62 in April, met with limited success. Thousands of weapons were seized and many destroyed in public ceremonies, although Deputy Prime Minister Sar Kheng admitted in August that many of the confiscated weapons were subsequently sold on the black market. In May, the National Assembly approved the 1997 Ottawa treaty banning the use, production, and storage of antipersonnel landmines. However, the country's national demining agency, the Cambodian Mine Action Center (CMAC) suffered a huge setback and loss of donor confidence after press accounts emerged of corruption and mismanagement by CMAC officials, who were found to have engaged in "contract de-mining," where land is de-mined to benefit commercial interests rather than ordinary Cambodians.

Citizens who chose to demonstrate during the year were largely allowed to do so, despite the chilling effect of the arrest of the LICADHO workers in December 1998. Farmers gathered at the National Assembly to protest evictions, teachers rallied to demand higher wages, and students marched to Thai and Vietnamese embassies to protest alleged border incursions. In general, the demonstrations passed without incident, although permission was denied for several demonstrations, such as an anti-Khmer Rouge rally planned in February just before a meeting of Cambodia's donors in Tokyo, and a May 1 workers' demonstration. In August, three members of the opposition Sam Rainsy Party (SRP) were temporarily detained by police, who confiscated leaflets they were distributing announcing a march in support of an international tribunal.

The government sought to restrict freedom of expression, although there were far fewer attacks on journalists than in previous years. From March through September, the Ministry of Information suspended the issuance of new press licenses, stating that too many licenses had already been issued and the ministry needed to develop new requirements for potential newspaper owners. In February, the ministry sent warning letters to Smardei Khmer (Khmer Spirit) and Neak Sre (Farmer) newspapers for publishing articles critical of King Sihanouk. In March,the ministry issued warnings to Samleng Yuvachun Khmer (Voice of Khmer Youth) and Smardei Khmer newspapers, alleging that they had violated the Constitution and press code for attacking the king and Hun Sen. In September, Samleng Yuvachun Khmer was again issued a warning by the ministry for an article that criticized Prince Ranariddh, and Sathearanak newspaper was suspended for thirty days for allegedly insulting the king. Also in September, Moneaksekar Khmer (Khmer Conscience) was summoned to court for defamation for charging that Hun Sen had attempted to assassinate Sam Rainsy and suggesting that Military Intelligence Chief Mol Roeup was bribing SRP members in order to infiltrate and destroy the opposition party.

The Cambodian People's Party (CPP) of Hun Sen continued to dominate radio and television airwaves. However, in March the opposition Sambok Khmum (Beehive) radio station was allowed to resume broadcasting, after being closed by the government in September 1998. In August, Prince Ranariddh's FUNCINPEC party was allowed to buy back its radio station from a pro-CPP company that had been running the station since it was confiscated by the CPP during the 1997 coup.

Without an election campaign to raise political tensions, 1999 saw a decrease in political violence. Nevertheless, one member of the opposition SRP, Chhum Doeun, was killed by a group of men in military uniforms on March 25 at his home in Kandal province. The motive is thought to have been political; Doeun had been active in the 1998 campaign and post-election demonstrations, when he criticized alleged election irregularities, and he was a prospective candidate in upcoming commune elections.

The SRP came under further pressure in September, when military police arrested member Mong Davuth in Siem Reap and Battambang member Kong Bun Hean in Phnom Penh in connection with a rocket attack in September 1998 on a motorcade carrying Hun Sen. Both men were sent to the military prosecutor's prison in Phnom Penh. During the same time, several SRP officials in Battambang had their houses surrounded and searched by civilians supported by military police. In addition, several SRP members complained of being harassed by police during the year.

On October 6, SRP member of parliament Lon Phon, who represents Battambang, was abducted from his house in Phnom Penh by four armed men dressed in military uniforms. After payment of a ransom he was released on October 9. Government denials of any link to the abduction were greeted with skepticism in Phnom Penh, given the pattern of state harassment of the opposition. In September, five senior army generals aligned with the FUNCINPEC party were summoned to answer questions by army intelligence chief Mol Roeup about their alleged involvement in the Siem Reap rocket attack. In addition, the home of Nhek Bun Chhay, a former senior FUNCINPEC general who had become a member of Cambodia's Senate, was raided by a group of armed men in military uniforms on September 13.

On July 31, a member of a Vietnamese organization opposed to the Communist regime in Hanoi was arrested by Cambodian authorities in Pailin. Police arrested Vu Duc Binh and transported him to Phnom Penh. Since then his whereabouts have been unknown, and the Cambodian Ministry of Interior denied any knowledge of the incident.

Prison conditions remained poor in 1999, with many long-term prisoners suffering from malnutrition and approximately one-quarter of the prisons lacking access to medical care. In June, two escaped prisoners were allegedly killed execution-style with shots to the head by prison guards at the Sihanoukville prison upon recapture. A local human rights group reported that approximately 25 percent of Cambodia's prison inmates claim to have been mistreated while in police custody after arrest. The same NGO reported 286 cases of torture in police custody and thirty cases in prison between January and August 1999. At the Youth Rehabilitation Center in Phnom Penh, thirteen out of forty-eight detainees claimed they were mistreated or tortured by police.

Throughout 1999 human rights and legal aid organizations reported a substantial increase in the number of land-related complaints received. A study conducted by Oxfam showed that law enforcement and military authorities were involved in most land conflicts. For example, in May in Ratanakiri province, district authorities accompanied by armed police and gendarmerie coerced representatives of several ethnic minority villages into allowing a Taiwanese company to log in areas considered sacred and on which the ethnic minorities depended for hunting and collection of forest products. Throughout 1999, a coalition of local and international NGOs worked on amending the 1992 land law in order to address issues of transparency and control over concessionaires, state confiscation of land, and the rights of indigenous peoples to obtain communal land title.

In March, in one example of a typical land conflict, gendarmerie in Prey Veng opened fire on villagers protesting land confiscation, shooting and injuring two and beating numerous others with bamboo poles and rifle butts. One villager was hit on the head with a machete by another civilian in the presence of gendarmerie, who then tied him to a truck for three days. Fifty-three other villagers were tied up and taken on a twelve-hour forced walk, boat, and truck journey, without food and water, to the provincial town. As of October, none of the perpetrators had been brought to justice.

Defending Human Rights

Domestic and international human rights organizations were allowed to operate in Cambodia, but their work was not without risk. The December 1998 killing of an ADHOC activist in Kandal province who had been helping families resist eviction remained unsolved as of October 1999. In January, provincial representatives of domestic human rights organizations in seven provinces were intimidated by government authorities, and one NGO worker was threatened with arrest during a campaign to gather signatures from Cambodians requesting the U.N. to establish an international tribunal for the Khmer Rouge.

Human rights defenders suffered a further setback with the arrest, one-month detention, and trial of two LICADHO employees after they monitored demonstrations against toxic dumping in Sihanoukville that turned violent . The two workers were acquitted in July after a three-day trial that U.N. and international observers said should never have occurred in the first place because of lack of evidence and procedural errors.

Also in July, workers from ADHOC and LICADHO came under threat of arrest in Koh Kong province after assisting in a human rights case; this was resolved only after strong intervention from the Cambodia Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (COHCHR) and the Cambodian Human Rights Action Committee, a coalition of local human rights groups.

In August the COHCHR extended its memorandum of understanding with the government, enabling it to operate until March 2002. In September, however, Hun Sen called for the closure of the Office of the Secretary-General's Personal Representative in Cambodia at the end of its mandate in January 2000. The office had been active in monitoring political violence during the 1998 election campaign. As of October, the National Assembly had not acted on a much criticized new law that would place restrictions on NGOs.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

In December 1998, Cambodia regained its seat at the U.N. General Assembly, vacant since the 1997 coup. The U.N. special representative of the secretary-general on the situation of human rights in Cambodia, Thomas Hammarberg, made numerous trips to Cambodia during the year, focusing on impunity, land rights, indigenous minorities, and bringing the Khmer Rouge to justice. In July, the U.N. Human Rights Committee evaluated Cambodia's compliance with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The Concluding Observations of the Human Rights Committee included concerns about weaknesses in the judicial system, impunity, killings by security forces, deaths in custody, torture, trafficking for labor and sexual exploitation, and the fact that Khmer Rouge leaders had not been brought to trial.

Donor Countries

In February, the Consultative Group (CG) of Cambodia's international donors, convened by the World Bank, met in Tokyo for the first time since the 1997 coup. Donors pledged U.S. $470 million, conditioned on the government's implementation of political, economic, and social reforms. In June, at the first quarterly donor meeting to evaluate Cambodia's progress, donors did not evaluate in any depth the country's progress in addressing human rights violations, although donors expressed satisfaction with the country's steps to reform fiscal and public administration, military demobilization, and forestry practices.

Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)

On April 30, Cambodia became a member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). Japan, which was Cambodia's top donor and host of the donor meeting, focused primarily on restoring stability in Cambodia and did not link any of its aid to human rights improvements. On the other hand, when the Japanese foreign minister met with Hun Sen in February, he voiced concern about abuses committed in connection with the 1997 coup and also urged that criminals responsible for genocide be brought to justice. In June, Japan expressed its support for a domestic tribunal to try the Khmer Rouge, as long as it met international standards and due process, but did not offer to provide assistance. Japan pledged $100 million at the donor meeting, including $3.9 million for landmine removal.

China

In March, China expressed strong opposition to an internationally-sponsored tribunal to try the Khmer Rouge, stating that this was the imposition of the international community's agenda on Cambodia. In June, Chinese Foreign Minister Tang Jiaxuan lobbied Cambodian parliamentarians to reject foreign involvement in any tribunal, charging that such a process would interfere with Cambodia's sovereignty.

European Union

The European Parliament passed a resolution in April condemning attempts by the Cambodian government to prevent the creation of an international tribunal by the U.N. and calling on all European Union (E.U.) member states and the European Council to fully cooperate with the creation of such a tribunal. The European Commission provided 1 million euro (U.S. $1,078,400) in March to support refugee repatriation, followed by a pledge in July by the E.U. of U.S. $5.7 million to fund NGOs working on health care, refugees, and demining. In July, the E.U.'s Council of Ministers adopted key agreements offering preferential market access for textile imports from Cambodia.

United States

The United States continued to take a strong stance on human rights issues, with Secretary of State Madeleine Albright pushing for an international tribunal when she visited Thailand in March. Several U.S. Congressmen visited Cambodia during the year and raised the issue of bringing the Khmer Rouge to justice. In June, the Congressional Human Rights Caucus, a bipartisan group of more than 180 members of Congress, wrote to Hun Sen to call for the dismissal of charges against the two LICADHO workers. A senior State Department official visited Cambodia in July and urged dismissal of the LICADHO case as well as an end to official impunity. In July, the U.S. announced an aid package of $3.4 million to Cambodian human rights NGOs. The foreign aid bill for fiscal year 2000 conditioned any resumption of assistance to the Cambodian government on steps to end impunity and cooperation with an international tribunal for the Khmer Rouge.
CHINA AND TIBET

Controls on basic freedoms were tightened during the year, in part because of Chinese authorities' desire to ensure stability on several sensitive dates. These included the fortieth anniversary of the March 10, 1959, Tibetan uprising, the tenth anniversary of the crackdown in Tiananmen Square on June 4, 1989, and the fiftieth anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China (PRC) on October 1, 1949.

Trials of dissidents-and there were many-were neither fair nor open. Gao Yu, a prominent journalist accused of leaking state secrets, was released from prison early, but like many other released prisoners, continued to face a variety of restrictions.

A prolonged economic slump coupled with illegal and excessive fees and taxes fueled unrest and heightened the government's concerns with stability. On the political front, President Jiang Zemin's determination to bolster the Chinese Communist Party, to placate hardliners, and to secure his own place in history contributed to heightened intolerance of any organization openly critical of the Party's platform or attempting to function outside Party control. Individuals and groups suspected of ties to "hostile" foreign organizations and those disseminating sensitive political information overseas were particularly targeted.

State control of religious affairs in Tibet intensified. Dozens of judicial executions were reported from Xinjiang, where some ethnic Uighur groups were advocating a separate state; other alleged "splittists" were sentenced to long prison terms. Judicial independence and the rule of law in the Special Administrative Region (SAR) of Hong Kong were seriously undermined when the SAR government asked Beijing to interpret a ruling by the SAR's highest court.

The two key human rights treaties signed by China in 1997 and 1998 remained unratified. For the most part, the West and Japan continued to use bilateral dialogues rather than pressure as their method of choice in addressing human rights issues. The U.S. human rights dialogue was suspended in the aftermath of the NATO bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade in May.

On the positive side, legal reform efforts continued, although the legal system remained highly politicized. Supreme Court President Xiao Yang announced in March that in the interests of transparency, trials would be open and verdicts quickly made public, except for cases involving state secrets. In April, he announced plans to curb government interference with the legal process. Chinese judicial and legal experts continued to meet with their counterparts in many countries in an effort to further the reform process.

Human Rights Developments

On November 23, 1998, former Premier Li Peng announced that China would not tolerate any political system that would "negate the leadership of the Communist Party." A month later, three organizers of the opposition China Democracy Party (CDP) received heavy sentences. Veteran dissident Xu Wenli in Beijing, Qin Yongmin in Hubei province, and Wang Youcai in Zhejiang were sentenced to thirteen, twelve, and eleven years in prison respectively on charges of subversion. Other CDP members were also tried. During the first week of August alone, Zha Jianguo and Gao Hongming received nine- and eight-year terms in Beijing, and She Wanbao and Liu Xianbin received twelve and thirteen years respectively from courts in Sichuan. The following week, two Shanghai CDP members, Cai Guihua and Han Lifa, instead of being released on schedule, had their terms extended. Some thirty CDP members were still in custody as of mid-October, and the crackdown on the CDP had extended to some twenty provinces, autonomous regions, and municipalities.

Legal authorities also squashed the China Development Union (CDU), a nongovernmental organization committed to environmental and political reform. In February, its leader, Peng Ming, was detained for fifteen days on a charge of soliciting prostitution. Instead of being released, he was then administratively sentenced to an additional term of eighteen months.

Labor and peasant activists also received long sentences. Unrest in Hunan province resulted in sentences of up to six years for nine peasants who protested the imposition of exorbitant taxes; the arrest of Liao Shihua for organizing workers to demand an end to pervasive corruption in the province; and two-year terms for six farmers who alleged that local elections had been rigged.

Throughout the year, China repeatedly demonstrated its determination to prevent contacts between mainland and overseas dissidents and to obstruct information flows. On January 20, the Shanghai No.1 Intermediate Court announced a two-year sentence for computer entrepreneur Lin Hai for passing some 30,000 e-mail addresses to VIP Reference , an overseas dissident publication. Fang Jue, a former economic planning official in Fujian province, whose essay on democratic reform was published abroad in 1998, was sentenced to a four-year prison term in June 1999 on what appeared to be spurious fraud charges. In March, a district court sentenced Gao Shaokun, a retired police officer, to a two-year term after he informed the foreign press about a peasant protest. On May 11 a Beijing court sentenced Liu Xianli to a four-year term for his attempts to publish a work about well-known Chinese dissidents. Song Yongyi, a Dickinson College (Pennsylvania) researcher, was detained in August when he returned to China on a Chinese passport to continue his research on the Cultural Revolution.

Chinese authorities were clearly concerned about increasing use of the Internet. New regulations in January required bars and cafes with Internet access to register and inform the police about their business operations and customers. In May the Ministry of State Security installed monitoring devices on Internet service providers capable of tracking individual e-mail accounts. Special computer task forces began round-the-clock checks on bulletin boards. In January one of those bulletin boards, "Everything Under the Sun," was ordered closed for posting messages critical of the government. In February Chinese authorities shut down the "New Wave Network," a popular bulletin board that featured political discussion. In September police detained Qi Yanchen, a former China Development Union member and a member of the China Democracy Party, whose electronic magazine Consultations pushed the CDU agenda. In early September, after overseas dissidents hacked into the website of the official newspaper, People's Daily , a police circular called for a crackdown on all anti-Party and government articles on the Internet.

The government also tightened controls on publishing and the print media. On January 1, new regulations required shippers of printed material to obtain government permits. President Jiang Zemin personally ordered senior officials to prevent the media from undermining the fiftieth anniversary celebration. His complaints about the number of publications in circulation resulted in a decision to stop issuing any publication permits at least through June. In September the government decreed that local newspapers and magazines had to be placed under Party management by October 30 or face closure, and it was estimated that some 20,000 publications would be closed.

In September, Chinese authorities banned newsstand sales of special editions of Time , Asiaweek , and Newsweek covering fifty years of Communist Party rule. Censorship even affected computer games and survey research, with authorities confiscating some 10,000 games that featured Taiwan repelling a mainland invasion.

Restraints on religion and belief increased significantly during the year. On April 25, ten thousand members of Falun Gong (also known as Falun Dafa), surrounded Zhongnanhai, the Beijing compound housing China's top leaders. The peaceful, silent demonstration was to protest a newspaper article disparaging Falun Gong, a quasi-religious meditation society whose beliefs were loosely based on Buddhist and Daoist tradition. The size of the demonstration clearly shocked the government, and while authorities took no immediate action, they began a systematic crackdown three months later. On July 22, the Ministry of Civil Affairs labeled Falun Gong an illegal organization and accused it of spreading "superstition" and "endangering social stability." It banned public and private practice and distribution of the organization's literature. Police detained thousands of practitioners for reeducation and began to confiscate and destroy over one million books. A week later, the government issued an arrest warrant for Li Hongzhi, the group's leader, who had been living in the U.S. The government put the number of practitioners at two million; other estimates run as high as seventy million. Alarmed at the number of party members involved, the party leadership mounted a full-scale internal "rectification," using the opportunity to emphasize the value of Marxism and reinvigorate President Jiang's "three stresses" campaign to strengthen theoretical study, political awareness, and good conduct among Party members. As of mid-October, the first set of trials of Falun Gong leaders was under way in southern China.

Police detained members of at least three other sects, the Men Tu Hui or Disciples, Dongfang Shandian or Eastern Lightning, and a group known as God's Religion. The government continued its long-standing campaign to force Catholic congregations to register with the Bureau of Religious Affairs. The campaign, centered in parts of Zhejiang and Hebei provinces with large Catholic populations, was marked by detentions, disappearances, ill-treatment, fines, and harassment. A series of arrests in Wenzhou, Zhejiang, that continued into September, forced some clergy into hiding. In one still unexplained incident, Father Yan Weiping, from Hebei, was found dead on a Beijing street on May 13. He had been detained that same day while saying Mass. In a crackdown in southern Henan province, several prominent house church leaders were briefly detained. The raid followed an earlier one in central Henan on January 24 when pastor Chu Chang'en and forty-five others were detained. In May, three students in China's most prestigious Protestant seminary were expelled after protesting the government's control of religious affairs.

Free assembly fared poorly during the year. Police in several cities prevented those wishing to publicly commemorate the tenth anniversary of the June 4 crackdown from laying wreaths or visiting cemeteries. Jiang Qisheng, a student leader in 1989, was formally arrested for calling on people to remember the crackdown with a candlelight vigil.

In a move to ensure order before the October 1 celebration, the Beijing city government banned all public gatherings after July 1. Police detained or expelled those without papers, legal residence permits, or permanent incomes. They targeted migrants, beggars, hawkers, food vendors, the homeless, the unemployed, the mentally ill, prostitutes, and other "undesirables." On September 6, the Public Security Bureau notified hostels, hotels, boarding houses, and private citizens that they would be penalized for housing illegal migrants. Dissidents were under heavy surveillance, their movements restricted, and their phone lines cut. Any non-resident wishing to enter Beijing needed a detailed letter of introduction.

The death penalty continued to be in use, and mass executions were common. On September 27, the Guangdong Supreme People's Court declared it would hold fifty-seven public rallies to announce 818 sentences. Two hundred and thirty-eight prisoners were scheduled to be executed before October 1. Executions also took place in Changsha, Hunan province and Chongqing, a city formerly part of Sichuan province.

Tibet

At the beginning of the year, authorities announced a three-year campaign to free rural Tibetans from the "negative influence of religion," and to work against the Dalai Lama's "splittist" struggle. They continued to deny access to Gendun Choekyi Nyima, the ten-year-old boy recognized by the Dalai Lama as the reincarnation of the Panchen Lama, the second most important figure in Tibetan Buddhism. No one has seen the child or members of his family since 1995 when the Chinese government recognized another boy, Gyaltsen Norbu, as the reincarnation. On June 17, that boy arrived in Tibet for the first time.

In response to a World Bank proposal to resettle some 58,000 Han Chinese and Hui Muslims in a predominately Tibetan and Mongolian area in Qinghai province, an Australian, Gabriel Lafitte, an American, Daja Meston, and their Tibetan translator, Tsering Dorje, traveled to the area to assess for themselves the feelings of residents in the resettlement region. State security forces detained all three on August 15 but released them within two weeks. Lafitte and Meston, who was severely injured in an escape attempt, were permitted to leave after confessing to wrongdoing.

During the year, security forces detained Tibetans who openly advocated independence. On March 10, the fortieth anniversary of an abortive uprising against China, two Tibetan monks, Phuntsok Legmon and Namdol, demonstrated in Barkor Square in Lhasa. On July 9, they reportedly received three- and four-year sentences respectively, a report that Tibetan officials have denied. In a preemptive move, some eighty people were detained before March 10. Monks from major monasteries could not enter the city, and the Jokhang, the most religious site in Tibet, was closed for "cleaning."

Prison conditions in Tibet remained substandard. In February the official Chinese news agency acknowledged that "quasi-military" training for staff and prisoners had been carried out in Drapchi prison "to improve police officers' managerial abilities and enhance prisoners' discipline and awareness of the law." The use of torture continued, sometimes resulting in death. Legshe Tsoglam, a Nalanda monk who resisted reeducation, died in April, several days after his release from Gutsa Detention Center. A Ganden monk, Ngawang Jinpa, died two months after serving his full four-year term, and Norbu, also from Nalanda, died almost three years after severe prison beatings damaged his kidneys. All three were in their early twenties. Several monks, arrested in 1998 for putting photos of the Dalai Lama on the main altar in Kirti monastery in Sichuan Province, were sentenced in July and August 1999. Ngawang Sangdrol, a twenty-three-year-old nun, severely beaten after a protest in Drapchi prison in May 1998, had her original three-year sentence extended for the third time for a total of twenty-one years.

Xinjiang

Local authorities, claiming that "splittist" elements in the region were using terrorist tactics, ordered intensified efforts to maintain stability in the run-up to the October 1 anniversary celebrations. Executions of so-called "splittists" were commonplace, as were long prison sentences and public sentencing rallies. In January, a court official in Ili prefecture, the scene of massive demonstrations and rioting in 1997, confirmed that twenty-nine people, all but two of them ethnic Uighurs, had been given the death penalty. In July a court in Nonshishi sentenced another eighteen men to terms ranging from ten to fifteen years for, among other things, allegedly destroying the Party's religious policy. In an apparent attempt to decrease the flow of information overseas, public security officers in Urumqi, the capital, seized Rebiya Kadeer, a prominent Uighur businesswoman, on August 11 as she was on her way to meet a visiting American. She was later charged with trying to transmit information across borders. Rebiya Kadeer's husband, a U.S. resident, publicly advocates independence and appears regularly on Radio Free Asia and the Voice of America. Rebiya, her son, Ablikim Abdyirim, and her secretary, Kahriman Abdukirim, remained in prison as of October.

Hong Kong

This year China took several steps to curtail Hong Kong's autonomy and the rule of law. The independence of the courts in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (SAR) was placed in jeopardy after Chief Executive Tung Chee-hwa invited Beijing to intervene in a decision of the highest court in Hong Kong, the Court of Final Appeal. Tung campaigned against the court's decision on right of abode in Hong Kong that would have allowed many more mainland Chinese to reside in the SAR. (How many more was a matter of intense debate.) Fearinga flood of Chinese immigrants, on May 18 Tung invited the Standing Committee of China's People's National Congress, as the ultimate authority under Hong Kong's constitution, the Basic Law, to overturn the ruling. Leading judges and lawyers questioned the political decision of the Chief Executive to invite Beijing to intervene. The Standing Committee effectively reversed the Court of Final Appeal's decision.

Municipal councils, the middle tier of elected office in Hong Kong, were abolished by Tung this year, in a transparent effort to weaken the influence of pro-democracy political parties in Hong Kong.

Chinese officials barred entry to pro-democracy Hong Kong lawmakers. On September 12, Margaret Ng was prevented from attending a seminar on China's constitution. China also interfered with requests for travel to Hong Kong, refusing to consider a papal visit because the Vatican and Taiwan maintain diplomatic relations. A senior official from Taiwan was prevented from attending an academic conference at the University of Hong Kong.

Defending Human Rights

Public defense of political and civil rights was virtually impossible, and social organizations concerned with aspects of worker rights or basic freedoms found themselves unable to register with the government or, in some cases, they were banned altogether.

The Role of the International Community

Human rights concerns dropped even lower on the agenda of China's major trading partners in 1999 as Beijing used the Belgrade embassy bombing to create a crisis in its overseas relations. The Chinese government suspended a bilateral human rights dialogue with the U.S., put off a planned visit by the German chancellor until later in the year, and delayed talks on China's entry into the World Trade Organization (WTO). International protests against the banning of Falun Gong and the crackdown on activists prior to the June 4 and October 1 anniversaries were mild or nonexistent. At the U.N. Commission on Human Rights in April, China sustained its successful campaign to prevent a debate on its human rights record, persuading the European Union (E.U.) and other governments to refrain from backing a last-minute resolution by the U.S., dooming it to failure. Meanwhile, the E.U., Australia, and Canada continued human rights dialogues and rule of law seminars; the exchanges were sometimes useful, but they appeared to have little direct impact on the human rights situation. Jiang Zemin visited Australia in September and European capitals in October. Except for a brief visit to the U.S. by the Chinese labor minister in March and a Canadian-led seminar in July, concerns about violations of worker rights' were largely absent from the agenda.

United Nations

A split between the U.S. and the E.U., traditional cosponsors of resolutions on China at the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, enabled China to once again escape U.N. scrutiny during the Commission's annual meeting in April. Under intense domestic pressure, the Clinton Administration tabled a last minute resolution which was blocked by a Chinese no-action motion. That motion was adopted by a vote of twenty-two to seventeen, with fourteen abstentions. The E.U. and individual member states refused to cosponsor the measure; Poland agreed to serve as a cosponsor.

China made no progress in ratifying the International Covenant on Economic Social and Cultural Rights or the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Both were under review by the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress.

U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson sent a technical mission to China in March to follow up her visit to China in September 1998. The results of the mission were inconclusive. The High Commissioner was publicly silent about the crackdown on the Falun Gong movement in July, despite appeals to intervene, although she did raise concerns privately with Chinese authorities.

The U.N. Committee reviewing China's compliance with the Convention to Eliminate Discrimination Against Women issued a report in February and recommended that China invite the Special Rapporteur on Violence Against Women to visit China. It listed among its concerns domestic violence and custodial abuse, sexual harassment in the workplace, and various aspects of the implementation of China's population policy.

European Union

Germany, in the presidency of the E.U. in the first half of 1999, made no effort to overcome E.U. opposition to sponsorship of the resolution on China at the U.N. Commission on Human Rights meeting in Geneva. At the E.U. General Affairs Council meeting on March 22, the foreign ministers decided that maintaining unity within the E.U. was a higher priority than criticizing China. It also prevented individual E.U. states from cosponsoring any measure put forward by the U.S. (The E.U. did oppose China's no-action motion.)

On February 7-8, Germany hosted an E.U.-China dialogue in Berlin on human rights focused on China's relationship to various U.N. human rights mechanisms, the recent crackdown on political activists, and Tibet. NGOs were invited to attend part of the meeting, but most declined to participate. There was no public report on the results of the dialogue.

In March, an E.U. troika delegation (Germany, Austria, and Finland) visited Beijing to press for human rights progress but returned empty handed.

An E.U.-China summit planned for May was called off after the NATO bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade. Instead German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder went to Beijing in an effort to apologize to China's leaders on behalf of NATO for the alliance's deadly mistake. Another E.U.-China summit was re-scheduled for November in Beijing. Schroeder also planned to lead a delegation of company executives and members of parliament to China in early November.

Meanwhile, the E.U. continued with its policy of dialogue with China. Finland, the new E.U. president, chaired a seminar on ethnic minorities, discrimination against women, and other human rights concerns in early September. The next formal E.U.-China human rights dialogue meeting was scheduled to take place in Beijing in mid-October.

The E.U. issued a mild demarche in Beijing on the banning of Falun Gong, but made no public protests.

The E.U. strongly supported China's entry into the World Trade Organization, and this was expected to be the major focus of a visit by Jiang Zemin to London, Brussels, and other European capitals in October. Beijing reportedly voiced objections to the appointment of Chris Patten, former British governor of Hong Kong, as the European Commission's new foreign affairs commissioner. In hearings before theEuropean Parliament, Patten declared that trade and economic links with China should be not allowed to overshadow human rights concerns. He also said that development of E.U. relations with Beijing would depend, in part, on its human rights record.

United States

The Clinton Administration had no clear strategy to follow up the president's visit to China in June 1998, except to continue dialogue and to use the occasion of high-level contacts to protest abuses. Following the Belgrade bombing, the administration was preoccupied with getting bilateral relations back on track, largely putting human rights concerns on the back burner.

A dialogue with China took place in Washington, D.C. in mid-January, in which State Department officials pressed for an end to administrative detention, made a request (which was denied) for access to the Panchen Lama, and objected to arrests of political activists. Further meetings were suspended by China after the Belgrade bombing.

In mid-February, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright visited Beijing; a prominent journalist, Gao Yu, was released just prior to her visit. Albright urged human rights improvements, but received no specific promises in preparation for Premier Zhu Rongji's first official visit to the U.S. later in the spring.

There was little or no White House support for the effort to sponsor a resolution on China at the U.N. Commission on Human Rights.

Zhu Rongji's visit in April was dominated by the debate on China's bid to join the WTO. Human rights concerns and Tibet were raised in his talks with President Clinton but without apparent results. Clinton also urged Zhu to pursue China's dialogue with the Vatican. Despite major concessions by Zhu on the WTO, the White House turned down a bilateral agreement. The visit was considered a failure by both governments, and WTO talks with the U.S. were cut off after the Belgrade bombing.

In June the president extended Normal Trade Relations (NTR) status, formerly called Most Favored Nation, to China for one year, triggering a Congressional debate that focused mainly on security concerns. On July 27, the House of Representatives voted 260-170 to defeat a bill that would have overturned Clinton's decision. Clinton also promised to lobby Congress for permanent NTR status (doing away with the annual renewal process) should China become a member of the WTO.

Also in June, Undersecretary of State Thomas Pickering traveled to China to explain the NATO bombing of the Belgrade embassy. The U.S. subsequently agreed to pay $4.5 million in compensation for the three people killed and twenty-seven wounded, opening the way for the restoration of high-level contacts.

The State Department protested arrests in the run up to the June 4 anniversary, and publicly appealed to the Chinese government to make a full accounting of those killed in 1989 as well as to release all those still serving sentences for their peaceful participation in the demonstrations.

In September, Clinton and Jiang met in Auckland, New Zealand in the margins of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) summit and agreed to resume WTO talks. Discussion of rights concerns was perfunctory; the U.S. protested the crackdown on Falun Gong and other abuses. No human rights steps were announced, and China would not agree to resume the bilateral human rights dialogue.

Also undecided by October were plans for a visit to China by U.S. Labor Secretary Alexis Herman- the first such visit by a U.S. labor official- in exchange for a visit to Washington in late March by her Chinese counterpart.

Pacific Rim Countries

Canada rejected appeals by NGOs and others to cosponsor the China resolution in Geneva and instead focused on its dialogue policy with China. A forum on human rights, jointly sponsored by Canada and Norway, took place in Qingdao in late July. Among the participants were government representatives and officials from national human rights commissions in thirteen countries from the Asia-Pacific region and academics, but no NGOs. The session was modeled after a similar meeting held in Vancouver in 1998 and debated issues such as the rights of ethnic minorities and labor concerns. Canadian officials used the meeting to protest the violation of Falun Gong members' rights to free association and assembly. No public report was issued on the results of the meeting.

Australia's major focus was on a visit to Canberra by Jiang Zemin en route to the APEC summit in New Zealand in September, during which human rights concerns were raised. Just prior to the visit, the third annual Australia-China human rights forum took place in Beijing and Qinghai province in late August. A wide range of topics, including Tibet and the Falun Gong crackdown, were on the agenda, and Australia later announced a joint program of cooperation for the next year, including exchanges and visits of judges, and legal and prison experts. But the session was eclipsed by the detention of an Australian citizen visiting a planned World Bank resettlement project in Qinghai.

Japan's prime minister, Keizo Obuchi, visited China in July to follow up an official visit to Tokyo by Jiang Zemin the previous November. During the 1998 summit, Japan had announced the next round of Official Development Assistance (ODA) loans for China for 1999-2000 totaling 390 billion yen (US $3.67 billion) for twenty-eight projects. A joint declaration noted that the two countries would pursue human rights concerns through mutual exchanges and dialogue "based on equality and mutual respect." In April Japan declined to cosponsor the Geneva resolution. Japan did, however, vote against China's no action motion in Geneva. Because of this vote, during Obuchi's visit Beijing refused to schedule the next session of its bilateral human rights dialogue with Japan, tentatively set for October.

World Bank

China continued to be the World Bank's leading recipient in loans. For fiscal year 1999, the Bank approved over $1.7 billion in loans to China, plus $45 million in technical assistance. In June, the Bank's board decided to fund a $160 million poverty reduction project in Western China that included $40 million for the voluntary resettlement of farmers to a traditionally Tibetan ethnic area. The project was approved over the objections of the U.S. and Germany, pending a visit to the project site by the Bank's inspection panel in early October and based on Beijing's agreement to allow open, unhindered access to the site for journalists, diplomats, and others. The detention in mid-August of an American and Australian visiting the site, together with their Chinese translator, triggered high level diplomatic activity to press for their release, and they were freed within two weeks. The Bank had made appeals in Beijing, along with the U.S. and Australian governments.
INDIA

Conflict with Pakistan over Kashmir and communal violence dominated human rights developments in India during the year. The Hindu nationalist Indian People's Party (Bharatiya Janata Party or BJP), which led India's coalition government during the year, appeared to condone the activities of right-wing Hindu groups responsible for attacks on religious minorities and people at the bottom of or outside India's caste system, including members of tribal groups. The attacks increased significantly in the months preceding national parliamentary elections in September and October. In Bihar, a series of caste clashes and massacres between January and April once again revealed the unwillingness of state authorities to protect the rights of those born into lower castes.

Human Rights Developments

In April the BJP government lost a motion of confidence in Parliament by one vote. Because opposition parties were unable to form a government, India was forced to hold national parliamentary elections for the third time in as many years. In October the BJP-led National Democratic Alliance returned to power, a development that boded ill for communal relations.

Human rights violations by Indian security forces and by Islamic militants, many of them Pakistani-trained, continued to fuel tensions within Kashmir and between India and Pakistan. In February, Indian Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee's bus trip across the Indo-Pakistan border to meet with Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif seemed to signal the beginnings of a reconciliation and hopes for a resolution of the Kashmir conflict. However, those hopes were short-lived. In April India tested ballistic missiles and Pakistan followed suit. In May, after Islamic militants crossed from Pakistan into Indian Kashmir near the town of Kargil, India responded with military operations against the militants and their Pakistani backers. Armed clashes between India and Pakistan continued for the next eight weeks, until Pakistan agreed to withdraw the militants, and both countries agreed on a process of "disengagement."

In the course of those clashes, over 1,200 people, many of them civilians, were killed by artillery fire. Civilians were also forced to flee the towns along the 720-kilometer border that divides Indian and Pakistani-controlled Kashmir. Communal violence between Hindu and Muslim groups escalated during the military confrontation, particularly in Jammu, the Hindu-majority area of the state of Jammu and Kashmir. For example, on June 30, Islamic militants gunned down twelve Hindu migrant laborers in southern Kashmir, reportedly in retaliation for the June 28 massacre of fifteen Muslim villagers, including women and children, by unidentified gunmen in Poonch district. Human rights activists reported that the gunmen were members of a militia backed by the army. Pakistan's agreement on July 4 to withdraw its fighters did not bring an end to the violence. On July 20 about twenty Hindus were killed by militants in Doda and Poonch districts. The victims included eight women and children.

Indian security forces in Jammu and Kashmir continued to violate human rights with impunity. The Jammu and Kashmir Disturbed Areas Act and the Armed Forces Special Powers Act, which authorize warrantless searches and arrests, remained in effect in the state. Military-led cordon-and-search operations in Muslim neighborhoods continued to result in violations of fundamental civil rights, including the detention, torture, and summary executions of suspected militants.

Caste violence assumed alarming dimensions early in the year, particularly in the state of Bihar, where clashes between the Ranvir Sena, an upper-caste landlord militia, and Naxalites, Maoist guerrillas agitating for higher wages and more equitable land distribution for lower-caste laborers, claimed many lives. Human rights activists charged the state administration with criminal negligence for failing to intervene effectively and prosecute those responsible for the killings. On January 25, about one hundred armed extremists from the Ranvir Sena killed at least twenty-two Dalit ("untouchable") men, women, and children in Bihar's Jehanabad district. On February 10, Sena members struck again in the same district killing eleven Dalits as they slept.

The massacres led the government in New Delhi to impose "president's rule" in Bihar, a legal regime whereby the central government takes over authority from the state. Despite that measure, which led to the increased presence of paramilitary forces in the state, twelve alleged supporters of the Ranvir Sena were reportedly gunned down on February 14 by Communist Party of India-Marxist Leninist (Liberation) activists in retaliation for the January killings. In early March the central government reinstated the state government led by Chief Minister Rabri Devi. On March 18, Naxalites killed another thirty-five upper-caste villagers in Senari village, Jehanabad district. On April 21, about a hundred armed activists from the Ranvir Sena killed twelve lower-caste villagers in neighboring villages in Gaya district. The victims included a sixty-five-year-old man, three women, and a nine-month old child. Police made little effort to prevent the killings, despite the fact that the Ranvir Sena often publicly announced its intentions days before each attack. They also failed to provide protection for villagers in the aftermath of such attacks.

Caste clashes also continued to plague the southern state of Tamil Nadu, and Dalit women were primary targets. On March 29, in the Ogalur-Villupuram region of Tamil Nadu, four upper-caste men sexually assaulted a female Dalit farm laborer. The attackers were then beaten by those responding to the laborer's cry for help. On April 3, in retaliation for the beatings, three upper-caste men set fire to a Dalit colony, injuring twenty people. On June 19 a gang of upper-caste Hindus looted and destroyed the houses in a Dalit settlement in Kodankipatti village, Madurai district, after Dalits there had demanded a share in the common property of the village. The Dalits were then chased out of their homes.

More incidents of violence against India's Christian community were recorded during the past two years than in all the years since independence. Attacks occurred primarily in the tribal regions of Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, and Orissa, as well as the state of Maharashtra. Activists belonging to militant Hindu extremist groups, including the Bajrang Dal and the Vishwa Hindu Parishad (World Hindu Council, VHP) were often blamed for the violence. While the central government officially condemned the attacks, spokespersons for the BJP characterized the surge in violence as a reaction to a conversion campaign by Christian missionaries in the country.

Anti-Christian violence in the state of Gujarat reached its peak during Christmas week 1998 when a local extremist Hindu group obtained permission to hold a rally on December 25 in Ahwa town in the state's southeastern Dangs district. Over four thousand people participated in the rally, shouting anti-Christian slogans while the police stood by and watched. After the rally, Hindu groups began to attack Christianplaces of worship, schools run by missionaries, and shops owned by Christians and Muslims. Between December 25, 1998, and January 3, 1999, churches and prayer halls were damaged, attacked, or burned down in at least twenty-five different villages in the state. Scores of individuals were physically assaulted, and in some cases tied up, beaten and robbed of their belongings while angry mobs invaded and damaged their homes. Thousands of Christian tribals in the region were also forced to undergo conversions to Hinduism.

On January 23 in Keonjhar district, Orissa, a mob of Hindu extremists burned to death Australian missionary Graham Stewart Staines and his two sons as they slept in their car. Staines had worked for over thirty years in a leper colony in the state and was accused of conducting mass conversions to Christianity. In August a government-appointed judicial commission accused Bajrang Dal activist and BJP member Dara Singh of leading the charge in the killings. The commission's report also found that Staines had not been involved in any conversions, but it fell short of accusing the Bajrang Dal, insisting that Singh acted alone. Opposition parties labeled the report a "whitewash," while allies of the BJP by and large welcomed the findings.

The Shiv Sena, a Hindu party which heads the state government of Maharashtra in coalition with the BJP, also engaged in disruptive practices and hate campaigns against Muslims and Christians throughout the year. In December 1998, the award-winning film Fire , by director Deepa Mehta, was recalled from theaters after Shiv Sena activists vandalized at least fifteen cinemas where it was playing. Sena members objected to the film's depiction of a lesbian relationship between two Hindu sisters-in-law, adding that had the women been Muslim there would be no objection.

In January 1999, when Pakistan's cricket team was set to travel to India for a series of test matches, members of the Shiv Sena dug up the pitch at a New Delhi stadium that was to host the first match and ransacked the headquarters of the Board of Control for Cricket in Bombay. In June, the Shiv Sena launched a series of attacks against Christian mission-run kindergarten schools alleging that they were not admitting the children of Sena activists. On June 26 suspected Sena members vandalized the Sacred Heart school in Worli, Bombay.

On August 26 Staines' killer Dara Singh struck again, when he led an angry mob to attack the garment shop of Sheikh Rehman, a Muslim trader in Orissa's Mayurbhanj district. In the presence of four hundred eyewitnesses and in broad daylight, Rehman's arms were chopped and his body was set on fire. Singh continued to evade arrest despite his numerous television appearances in the months following the Staines murder. One week later, on September 2, the Rev. Arul Doss was killed by a gang of fifteen unidentified assailants. Voting in Orissa for the staggered general elections was scheduled for September 25. On September 20, a Catholic nun in Bihar was abducted by two men, stripped, and forced to drink their urine. The nun was reportedly interrogated about her proselytizing activities.

Violence remained a salient feature of India's national parliamentary elections. During five stages of polling in September and October 1999, repolling was ordered for hundreds of poll stations as a result of violence and the destruction of ballot papers and ballot boxes. Well over one hundred election-related deaths were reported throughout the country, predominantly in Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Kashmir, Bihar, and the northeast region of Assam and Tripura. Most deaths resulted from clashes between supporters of rival parties and from attacks by separatist militants trying to enforce election boycotts. In the Chidambaram constituency of Tamil Nadu, Dalits were not allowed to vote in as many as twenty-three villages as a result of attacks by political parties contesting elections in which the Dalit Panthers of India were also candidates. In clashes that ensued, nearly ten Dalit hamlets were torched. While over two hundred Dalits were arrested, police refused to register cases against caste Hindus.

Police in Andhra Pradesh continued to summarily execute suspected Naxalites in so-called "encounter killings." Violence in the northeastern states, particularly Assam, continued throughout the year, claiming many civilian casualties. Members of the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA), a militant group seeking Assam's independence from India, repeatedly clashed with the police and with surrendered ULFA members, now working with the government and referred to as "SULFA."

The Armed Forces Special Powers Act remained in effect in the northeast, but it was not the only abusive law on the books. Due to the spurious backdating of violations, detentions under the notorious Terrorist and Disruptive Practices (Prevention) Act (TADA) continued for offenses allegedly committed before the law lapsed in 1995. In Karnataka, for example, fifty-two people remained in pre-trial detention in Mysore Central Prison for periods ranging from four to six years.

Women, particularly those belonging to the lower castes, continued to be victims of violence and sexual abuse. In a positive step to promote gender equality, the Supreme Court of India gave women the same rights as men to act as natural guardians of a minor. Gita Hariharan's application for financial bonds in the name of her minor child had been rejected by the Reserve Bank of India on the basis of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act of 1956, which regards the father, and only after him the mother, as the natural guardian of a minor. The Supreme Court ruled that the provision "after" had to be struck down from the act as it violated gender equality

Defending Human Rights

India's vibrant human rights movement continued to grow despite some setbacks. While most organizations were allowed to function freely, social action groups working with marginalized communities faced continuous harassment and intimidation. On December 10, 1998, the National Campaign on Dalit Human Rights was officially launched in New Delhi. Among the campaign's demands were the abolition of untouchability practices, the effective implementation of the 1989 Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, and increased intervention by U.N. bodies and the international community against caste-based violence and discrimination.

On February 11, members of Parivartan, an NGO working with Dalits and landless agricultural laborers in Gujarat, were attacked in Padra village. Sixteen Dalit women, who had come to attend a tailoring course organized by Parivartan's women's co-operative, were among those physically assaulted by local strongmen. Police officials agreed to register a complaint only after the Home Ministry's intervention. In 1998, the Hindu group VHP had issued a press statement claiming that Parivartan was trying to convert Gujarat's entire tribal belt to Christianity-a charge that the NGO has denied. On June 11, four fishworkers were killed and thirteen were injured when police opened fire on an anti-shrimp culture protest organized by the NGO Chilika Matsyajibi Mahasangh in Orissa. Despite a Supreme Court ruling prohibiting shrimp farms within a thousand meters of the Chilika lake in Orissa, a number of shrimp farms had obtained support of local politicians and bureaucrats.

On July 23, police action against lower-caste laborers in Tirunelveli district, Tamil Nadu, resulted in the loss of seventeen lives. The victims, including two women and one child, were among those protesting working conditions at a local tea plantation and demanding the release of 652 workers arrested following a demonstration on June 8. Members of the police and reserve forces chased the victims into theThamiraparani river where they drowned. In July, political parties in favor of the building of the Sardar Sarovar dam across the Narmada river in western India burned copies of the book, The Greater Common Good by novelist-activist Arundhati Roy. Roy, whose book discussed the social and environmental costs of the Narmada project, including large-scale population displacement, was part of a larger people's movement against India's big dam projects. Facing threats from the youth wings of the BJP and the Congress party, bookstores in Ahmedabad city, Gujarat, also began to pull the book from their shelves.

On September 27, the Ministry of Home Affairs sent a notice to several prominent NGOs asking them to justify their status as nonpolitical organizations under the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act. The notice was effectively a threat to cut off foreign funding. The NGOs, many of whom worked on women's rights, communal violence, and Dalit and tribal issues, had publicly criticized the policies of the BJP-led government and the anti-secular activities of the sangh parivar , a collective of rightwing Hindu organizations of which the BJP is a member.

The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC), a government-appointed body, tried to defend human rights in several areas, although it did not directly address the troubled regions of Kashmir and the northeast. In February the NHRC directed state governments to ensure regular medical examinations of all prison inmates and to submit monthly reports. Concerned over the rising number of custodial deaths and excesses committed by the police, the NHRC launched human rights cells in all state police headquarters. The commission also ordered the payment of compensation to the families of persons who had either died as a result of police violence or had been physically assaulted by the police, and recommended action against guilty police officials.

The Role of the International Community

Tensions between India and Pakistan dominated India's international relations during the year. Many countries welcomed the Indo-Pakistan summit in February, but while crediting India with showing "restraint" in its handling of the Kargil crisis, the international community failed to use the opportunity to press India to curb human rights abuses in the state.

United Nations

While Pakistan demanded U.N. mediation in the Kashmir dispute, the Indian prime minister rejected an offer by the U.N. secretary-general to send an envoy. In a report issued in January, the U.N. special rapporteur on torture commented on India's abysmal record on torture and detentions, especially in Jammu and Kashmir, and noted with regret the government's continued refusal to extend him an invitation to conduct investigations in the country. Also in January, the special rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism indicated that, with the permission of the Indian government, he might undertake a field mission to investigate the situation of "untouchables" in the country.

World Bank

In April the World Bank board approved a controversial plan limiting the powers of the inspection panel, an internal watchdog body set up to receive and investigate complaints by those adversely affected by bank-funded projects worldwide. Following a visit in July 1997, the inspection panel was blocked from conducting a more thorough investigation in Singrauli, India's "power capital," where a World Bank-funded thermal power project resulted in the displacement of thousands of villagers and severe environmental damage. India was prominent among World Bank member countries pushing for limiting inspection panel investigations.

European Union

The European Union (E.U.) joined the international community in expressing concern over the escalation of fighting in Kashmir, and issued several statements publicly urging India and Pakistan to hold talks to find a peaceful solution to the crisis. The E.U. remained India's largest trading partner, with an estimated 26 percent share of India's export and 25 percent of the country's imports. In a February resolution the European Parliament expressed deep shock over the persecution of Christians in India by extremist groups and called on the Indian government to put in place effective measures for protection of religious minorities and to bring to justice those responsible for the killing of Australian missionary Graham Staines. The European Parlaiment also called on the E.U. and the European Commission to ensure that human rights clauses in treaty agreements with India be rigorously implemented. A legally binding partnership and development agreement between India and the E.U. concluded in 1994 contains such a human rights conditionality clause.

In March, the European Parlaiment expressed support for the European Commission's efforts to enhance relations with India but said improved relations should depend in part on India's nuclear disarmament. The European Parlaiment also urged India to foster tolerance and protect freedom of religion; to ratify the torture convention; and to impose a moratorium on executions and step up efforts to abolish the death penalty.

Japan

In response to India's nuclear tests in May 1998, Japan halted all new grant aid (with the exception of emergency and humanitarian aid and grant assistance for grassroots projects) and all new yen loans in accordance with Japan's Overseas Development Assistance (ODA) Charter. The suspension remained in effect in 1999.

United States

The Clinton Administration dropped its objections to a U.S. $150 million World Bank loan request by India for a power project. In June the U.S. Senate approved a measure lifting sanctions on the sale of farm commodities and other products to India and Pakistan. The sanctions,which had been triggered by India's May 1998 nuclear tests, were to remain in place for missile and nuclear technology and for military sales. The Clinton administration joined the international community in expressing concern over India and Pakistan's ballistic missile tests in April, and over the conflict in Kargil. In September the U.S. Department of State released its first annual report under the 1998 International Religious Freedom Act, detailing attacks on religious minorities throughout India. Responding to reports that U.S. Ambassador Robert Seiple wished to visit the country to discuss religious rights, the Indian government defended its ability to guarantee constitutionally mandated religious freedoms and rejected any "intrusive exercise" into its internal affairs.
INDONESIA AND EAST TIMOR

Indonesia lurched haltingly toward a more democratic political system but remained in thrall to a powerful military that oversaw the destruction of East Timor in September.

Government leaders gave little attention to resolving nationalist, ethnic, and communal conflicts, particularly in Aceh, in northern Sumatra; Ambon, in the Moluccan islands; West Kalimantan, on the island of Borneo; and Irian Jaya, on the western half of the island of New Guinea. Corruption remained endemic. So much of the ancien regime remained entrenched that the year's political developments underscored how hard it was going to be for Indonesia to emerge from the legacy of disgraced President Soeharto.

Three key votes took place during the year. On June 7, Indonesia held its first free parliamentary election in forty-four years, with voters decisively defeating the ruling party, Golkar. On August 30, in a "popular consultation" organized by the United Nations, close to 80 percent of East Timorese voters decided to reject an autonomy package offered by Indonesia and move toward independence. On October 20, the newly elected parliament in Jakarta and 200 other appointed delegates chose Abdurrachman Wahid as the country's fourth president in a ballot that for the first time ever did not have a predetermined outcome. The opposition leader Megawati Soekarnoputri was elected vice-president the next day.

The June elections were preceded by a boisterous but peaceful campaign that defied expectations of widespread violence. The August ballot in East Timor was preceded by systematic terrorization of independence supporters by Indonesian army-backed militia and local police and military. The international community was unwilling to exert the pressure needed to stop it, initially in the belief that the military in a democratizing Indonesia must be better than it was under authoritarian leadership. Even when the role of the Jakarta military command in the East Timor violence became obvious, those countries with leverage over Indonesia were reluctant to use it for fear of setting back Indonesia's economic recovery and political stabilization.

Officials in Jakarta exploited that concern throughout the year. Even in late September, after a scorched earth campaign had left East Timor a smoking ruin, some of Indonesia's major donors were reluctant to press too hard for an international investigation into possible crimes against humanity for fear that the military would mount a coup against a weak and discredited civilian leadership. Angry Indonesian democracy activists said the opposite was true: if military officers were not held accountable for what they had done in East Timor, Indonesia would never rid itself of military rule and genuinely democratize.

Human Rights Developments

Violence in and around Jakarta in November 1998 foreshadowed many of the political conflicts that were to erupt across the country in 1999. From November 10 to November 13, a special session of the People's Consultative Assembly (Majelis Permusyawaratan Rakyat or MPR) was held to draft the legal framework for reform of the political system. On November 13, the last day of the session, sixteen people, mostly students, died in the Semanggi area of the capital as soldiers fired bullets at rock-throwing crowds calling for President Habibie's resignation and protesting the military's ongoing involvement in politics. The violence was exacerbated by thousands of civilian guards armed with sharpened bamboo staves who had been deployed and paid by the army as a security measure to protect the MPR session, some of them chosen for their opposition to the student pro-democracy movement. The army's increased reliance on civilian auxiliaries during the year only served to intensify existing conflicts.

In the months that followed the MPR session, Indonesia took a number of tentative steps toward reform. The parliament passed a new and exceedingly complex election law that lay the groundwork for multiparty competition in the national elections in June.

In March, Justice Minister Muladi stated that since taking office in May 1998, the Habibie administration had freed 202 of 242 political prisoners; by year's end, twelve more had been released. Those freed in 1999 included forty-three Acehnese; twenty-seven East Timorese, including resistance leader Xanana Gusmao, who was released on September 8; fifteen Muslim activists from Lampung, Sumatra; ten men arrested in connection with the coup attempt in 1965-66; and Dita Indah Sari, a labor activist from the militant People's Democratic Party (Partai Rakyat Demokratik or PRD), who was amnestied and released on July 7. Budiman Sujatmiko and six other PRD members refused a presidential amnesty in March; Budiman said he would stay in prison until general amnesty was extended to all political prisoners.

On April 1, in a move seen as presaging civilian control over the security forces, the police were formally separated from the military and placed under the Ministry of Defense rather than the Commander of the Armed Forces. The separation was more in principle than in practice, however, since the Minister of Defense and the Commander of the Armed Forces were the same person, General Wiranto. Wiranto appeared to be making an effort to send police rather than soldiers to situations of civil unrest during the year, but in some cases, as in East Timor, local observers reported that many of the "police" were merely soldiers with new uniforms that they recognized from earlier tours of duty.

By March, an Election Commission had approved forty-eight parties to compete in the June elections, a whopping increase over the three officially-approved parties allowed by the Soeharto government. Despite fears of ethnic and communal violence, the campaign was exuberant and peaceful, if focused more on personalities than issues. Over 90 percent of the eligible voters turned out in June in a process that an army of international observers said was largely free and fair. The counting was painfully slow, and it was not until September 1 that the final tally was announced, with the Indonesian Democratic Struggle Party (PDI-Perjuangan) of Megawati Soekarnoputri garnering the most votes.

On September 23, students in Jakarta put the government on notice that they would take to the streets if it took decisions that went counter to reform. That day, the parliament passed an army-backed bill on national security that would have given the army sweeping powers to declare states of emergency at the regional or national level. Pro-democracy groups and student organizations mobilized thousands to protest, and in the ensuing clash with security forces, four people were killed, including one policeman. On September 24, the government announced that it was suspending implementation of the law.

The national security bill went to the heart of a key issue in Indonesia's democratization-whether civilians would have control over the military. In April, the parliament made good on the Habibie government's promise to abolish the hated 1963 anti-subversion law, which had been used repeatedly by Soeharto to detain political opponents. In the same session, however, legislators revised the Indonesian Criminal Code to incorporate many of the defunct bill's articles on crimes against the state. And in July, the Ministry of Defense and Security under General Wiranto submitted a draft of a new internal security law which allowed the president to declare martial law in parts of the country beset by separatist rebellions, communal violence, or "ideological challenges."

General Wiranto claimed the bill was a needed reform of the 1959 law it replaced, because it placed a number of checks on the declaration of a state of emergency. But to many concerned with civil-military relations, the law still gave too much power to the military. The protests against it were the most violent in Jakarta since the rioting that preceded Soeharto's fall in May 1998. They also served as a reminder to the MPR delegates who began meeting on October 4 that rubber-stamping was no longer acceptable to those who wanted change.

The MPR session had as its major item of business the selection of a new president. The thirty-eight seats reserved for the military in the 700-member MPR took on far more importance with forty-eight parties as opposed to three, and it was likely that Abdurrachman Wahid's election was made possible in part by military support.

While Jakarta seemed totally preoccupied by the maneuverings of its own elite, the rest of the country seemed to be descending into political unrest of varying degrees of violence. On November 22, 1998, the first in a series of communal riots erupted in Ketapang, a Jakarta neighborhood, following a rumor that security guards for a local casino-almost all of them Ambonese Christians-had burned down a local mosque. Muslim youths trucked into the area then lynched seven Ambonese and destroyed thirteen churches, as Jakarta police stood by. Thirteen people in all were killed.

A week later, on November 30, Christian youths in Kupang, West Timor, protesting the church-burnings in Ketapang, attacked mosques, shops and homes belonging to ethnic Bugis, a Muslim immigrant group from South Sulawesi. In both Ketapang and Kupang, there was some evidence of provocation but by whom and for what reason was not clear.

On December 5, a church was burned in Ujung Pandang, Sulawesi, apparently in retaliation for the Kupang riot. And on January 19, the last day of the Muslim fasting month, a fight between a Christian driver and a Muslim youth in the city of Ambon, capital of the Maluku province, set off a civil war that spread to islands far to the south and was continuing in October, with no end in sight and tens of thousands displaced. While the international press tended to portray the Christian side as the primary victims and the Indonesian press emphasized attacks on Muslims, both sides were equally perpetrators and victims. By the second month of the conflict, allegations that Indonesian security forces had stood by and done nothing to prevent the initial clashes had shifted to accusations by local leaders that they were playing a partisan role, with the army accused of siding with the Muslims and police with the Christians. By September, a rights group in Jakarta placed the death toll since January at 1,349.

As in Ketapang and Kupang, allegations of provocation in Ambon were widespread, with several politicians charging that elements within the army linked to the Soeharto family were trying to stir up civil unrest to either disrupt the elections planned for June or pave the way for the return of the military to power. Evidence, however, was all circumstantial.

Communal violence also flared up again in West Kalimantan where indigenous Dayaks had attacked Madurese immigrants in 1997. This time the conflict started in January between Madurese and ethnic Malays but Dayaks and even ethnic Chinese joined forces with the Malays to attack Madurese, a much resented immigrant group. Some 200 were killed, mostly Madurese, and 30,000 Madurese were displaced.

Meanwhile, a non-violent pro-independence movement in Irian Jaya gathered strength in the post-Soeharto political climate. On February 26, in what was billed as a "national dialogue" on Irian Jaya's future political status, one hundred prominent public figures from Irian Jaya presented President Habibie with a statement expressing the aspirations of the people of Irian Jaya for independence. The government rejected any discussion of independence, and in April, after participants in the meeting tried to disseminate the results of the meeting to a larger public at home, the Irian Jaya chief of police banned any further discussion. In August, news leaked out that five prominent Irianese had been banned from leaving Indonesia as of June 28. The ban, initiated by the military and imposed by immigration officials, was justified on unspecified national security grounds. Those affected were Tom Beanal, a tribal leader and plaintiff in a lawsuit against the U.S. company Freeport McMoRan; Dr. Benny Giay, a Protestant minister and professor; Willy Mandowen, a professor of linguistics at Cenderawasih University in Jayapura and founder of the Forum for Reconciliation of the People of Irian Jaya (FORERI); Octovianus Mote, Jayapura bureau chief of Jakarta's best-known newspaper, Kompas ; and Herman Awom, assistant general secretary of the Evangelical Christian Church in Irian Jaya. All were associated with support for changing Irian Jaya's political status through peaceful means.

Separatist flag-raisings in July and September in the districts of Sorong and Jayapura claimed three lives and resulted in at least nineteen new political prisoners. Also in September, residents of Manokwari, suspecting that arriving ships carried provocateurs from Ambon and East Timor, began checking identity cards of disembarking passengers. In clashes on September 24, one man died and police shot another in the chest as they blocked crowds from entering the port area. The next day, crowds threw rocks at police, who responded with gunfire, wounding two other men. The Manokwari police chief was replaced three weeks later.

And then there was Aceh, by far the most serious of the regional insurgencies. Calls for a referendum on Aceh's political status that began in January were fueled by bitter disappointment over the lack of accountability for atrocities committed by the Indonesian military during its operations there from May 1990 to September 1998. Students initiated the demand for a referendum in an Aceh-wide congress on January 28, 1999, but it was taken up by others including members of the local parliament and, on September 14, by influential religious leaders who comprise the Ulama Council of Aceh.

A long-simmering rebellion led by a guerrilla group called the Free Aceh Movement (Gerakan Aceh Merdeka or GAM) flared up again in late 1998, sparking the same kind of heavy-handed counterinsurgency operations that had led to so many abuses eight years earlier. On December 29, a pro-independence mob pulled seven soldiers off a bus in the town of Lhok Nibong and killed them; the next day, two army officers were kidnaped, apparently by GAM, near the city of Lhokseumawe. On January 3, in the course of military operations in Lhokseumawe, the army opened fire on villagers from the hamlet of Pusong, killing at least five. On January 5 and 9, it conducted search operations in the village of Kandang, just outside Lhokseumawe, where it believed GAM supporters and one GAM leader in particular were hiding. Dozens of young men captured during these operations were detained in a building belonging to the government youth association, KNPI, in Lhokseumawe. In the evening of January 9, a group of soldiers entered the building and started beating the detainees, four of whom later died of their injuries. In the speediest prosecution ever known in Indonesia, the Indonesian officer responsible for the assault, whose men had been killed in the bus incident in December, was tried and sentenced by a military court to six years in prison.

Further shootings by the army resulting in civilian deaths took place on February 2-3 in Idi Cut, East Aceh, in which at least seven were killed and seventy-four wounded; a visit by President Habibie to Aceh on March 26 sparked angry demonstrations and only served to exacerbate tensions. On May 3 in Kreung Geukueh, North Aceh, at least thirty-nine people were killed when the military opened fire on a crowd marching toward an army base; and on July 23, more than fifty were believed killed when the army opened fire on a religious school in West Aceh. Army officers believed the school's charismatic head, Teungku Bantaqiah, was collecting arms for GAM. Four guns were reportedly found at the site.

By year's end, much of the districts of North Aceh and Aceh Pidie were under direct control of GAM, government services were at a standstill, and Indonesian officials in Jakarta had made no move to prosecute anyone for abuses committed in the 1990-98 period.

In the aftermath of the May 1998 riots in Jakarta that had been directed against ethnic Chinese, several new groups emerged in 1999 to promote better race relations and lobby for the repeal of discriminatory laws. But only superficial gains were made: a ban on government use of the word pribumi , or "indigenous," a term usually invoked to differentiate ethnic Chinese from other Indonesians, and the repeal of a ban on Chinese schools. Many Indonesians of Chinese descent still carried special identifying numbers on their national identity cards, although the practice was said to have ended.

A new press law passed on September 13 guaranteed press freedom and no longer required publishers to obtain a publishing license from the government. The role of the Information Ministry was expected to be substantially reduced as the new law took effect.

Throughout the year, Indonesia continued to be hobbled by economic woes and endemic corruption. Signs of recovery at mid-year were swept aside by revelations that a major bank, Bank Bali, had paid some $70 million as a commission for loan recoveries to a company closely linked to the ruling Golkar party. An investigation into former President Soeharto's ill-gotten wealth got nowhere, in part because Attorney General Andi Ghalib, who was supposed to be leading the investigation, was himself suspected of corruption and in part because, as an intercepted conversation in February between President Habibie and Andi Ghalib revealed, the government was not serious about pursuing it anyway. It was finally suspended in October.

East Timor

By mid-September, the U.N. Secretary-General was suggesting that the Indonesian army's actions in East Timor might constitute crimes against humanity. Beginning in January, its use of local militia to intimidate, harass, and sometimes kill East Timorese suspected of supporting independence seemed clearly designed to thwart moves toward a referendum or if that failed, to ensure that the vote went in favor of continuing integration with Indonesia.

But that strategy ran directly counter to that of President Habibie, who announced on January 27 that his government had decided to give East Timorese the "second option" of independence if they rejected the first option, a proposal for far-reaching autonomy under Indonesian sovereignty. That proposal had first been broached in August 1998.

Officials from Indonesia, Portugal, and the U.N. proceeded to negotiate the substance of the autonomy package as well as the means by which East Timorese would be asked to accept or reject it. But as the details were being hammered out in Lisbon, Jakarta and New York, the Indonesian military was organizing, arming, and training pro-independence militia in each of East Timor's thirteen districts. Some of these militia had existed since the late 1970s; others were newly created. But the army, apparently under the leadership of the army special forces, known as Kopassus, linked them into a centrally-coordinated network with a political front organization as a way of defending "autonomy"-which came to mean not enhanced self-government but the status quo. A systematic pattern of violence began in February and culminated in April with two massacres in the capital, Dili, and a town to the west of Dili called Liquica. The death toll in the two attacks was more than sixty, but Indonesian authorities did not arrest any of the militia members responsible. Eyewitnesses reported direct army and police involvement.

On May 5, Indonesia and Portugal signed an agreement to put the autonomy proposal to the East Timorese people in a direct and secret ballot that would be administered by a U.N. mission in East Timor that became known as UNAMET. Security for the ballot and the preparations leading up to it would remain the responsibility of the Indonesian government. U.N. officials and East Timorese leaders knew at the time that this provision was a serious flaw, but they believed that no agreement would be possible without it, and that another chance for what amounted to a referendum on independence might never occur.

UNAMET staff began arriving in Dili in late June and quickly became the target of militia attacks, as violence against suspected independence supporters continued, often with Indonesian military backing or direct participation. U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan twice delayed the date of the vote because of security concerns. On August 30, close to 99 percent of eligible voters went to the polls, and on September 4, Annan announced that 78.5 percent had voted to reject the autonomy package and separate from Indonesia. Militia members, again backed by Indonesian soldiers, then initiated the scorched earth campaign that led to the destruction of most towns and villages and much of East Timor's physical infrastructure. Over 200,000 East Timorese were pushed into West Timor, long part of the Indonesian province of East Nusa Tenggara. Many of the refugees were forcibly expelled at gunpoint by militia members who then regrouped to terrorize them in West Timor. Most of the remaining population fled to the hills; out of East Timor's pre-referendum population of eight hundred thousand,humanitarian agencies were estimating that at least five hundred thousand had been displaced by mid-September. An unknown number of people were killed.

International pressure, which had been noticeably absent as militia violence was escalating in April, May, and June, eventually forced President Habibie to acknowledge that he could no longer control the situation, although many suspected that orders for the scorched earth campaign had in fact come from Jakarta. On September 12 President Habibie requested the assistance of a multinational force led by Australia. On September 15, the Security Council passed a resolution authorizing the International Force in East Timor, or Interfet, to be sent, and the first troops began arriving on September 20 to a totally devastated and burned out city.

On September 22 Sander Thoenes, a Dutch journalist for the Financial Times who had returned to Dili, was killed by men in Indonesian military uniforms. Clashes between Interfet forces and militia members were continuing to take place through October, and security remained a major concern for the hundreds of thousands of East Timorese hiding in the forest and in church sanctuaries.

On September 27 a special session of the U.N. Commission on Human Rights passed a resolution, over the objections of Indonesia and other Asian countries, calling on the Secretary-General to establish an international commission of inquiry to look into violations of international humanitarian law in East Timor. The Secretary-General entrusted the task to U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson, and five commissioners were duly appointed on October 15. But at the same time, the Indonesian National Human Rights Commission set up its own inquiry to avoid, in its chairman's words, "foreign intervention." It was mandated to investigate genocide, extrajudicial executions, rape, torture, and arson, with anyone indicted to be tried before a new human rights tribunal. Both the Indonesian commission and the international commission pledged to have preliminary reports ready by December 31.

In the meantime, refugees in West Timor remained under the control of the militia, and the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights worked to ensure their speedy repatriation. An airlift of refugees began on October 8.

On October 19, the Indonesian MPR voted to ratify the results of the August 30 referendum and begin the process of turning East Timor over to a United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).

Defending Human Rights

Human rights advocates operated openly and vigorously in both Indonesia and East Timor, although in East Timor and Aceh, they were under constant threat. In East Timor on September 5, militia attacked and destroyed the office of the premier human rights organization there, Yayasan HAK, and the entire staff was forced into hiding. Human rights activists in Irian Jaya were also subject to government harassment.

Little progress was made, however, in holding senior officials responsible for human rights violations. On November 3, 1998, a government-appointed fact-finding team composed of NGOs, community leaders, and members of the military, released a summary of its findings on the three-day riot in Jakarta in May 1998. The report confirmed fifty-six cases of sexual violence, mostly against ethnic Chinese women. It also suggested some degree of state responsibility for the widespread looting and arson. But the full version of the report was never made public and by October 1999, none of its recommendations had been implemented.

One positive outcome of the riots was the formation of the National Commission on Violence Against Women, which was active during the year in East Timor and Aceh.

On September 8, a wide-ranging new law on human rights was passed, giving new powers to the National Commission on Human Rights, including subpoena powers, and allowing the establishment of human rights tribunals. The law also recognized the equal rights and responsibilities of spouses and guaranteed the right of children to be protected from dangerous and exploitative work. Unfortunately, article 118 of the new law also stated that no human rights abuse reported more than five years after its occurrence could be investigated or prosecuted.

On April 6, the Indonesian parliament ratified the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination of 1965. On April 23, it ratified three International Labor Organization (ILO) conventions: No. 105 on the abolishment of forced labor, No. 111 on employment discrimination, and No. 138 on minimum working age.

 The Role of the International Community

United Nations

The U.N.'s role in East Timor through the arrival of the Interfet forces is described above. On October 25, the Security Council passed a resolution establishing the United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor under Chapter VII of the U.N. Charter. It was to be headed by a Special Representative with sweeping administrative powers, and to be supported by U.N. peacekeepers with "robust" rules of engagement.

In addition, the office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights appointed a representative to be based in Jakarta, in line with a 1998 "chairman's statement" of the U.N. Commission on Human Rights.

Aceh and Irian Jaya remained off limits to U.N. human rights visitors. In November 1998 the Special Rapporteur on Violence Against Women visited Jakarta and East Timor but was not allowed to visit Irian Jaya or Aceh. In February 1999, the U.N. Working Group on Arbitrary Detention visited Jakarta and East Timor but again was denied access to Irian Jaya and Aceh.

European Union

In a declaration issued February 19, the European Union (E.U.) welcomed Indonesia's new position on holding a popular consultation in East Timor, encouraged a reduction of Indonesian military presence there, and expressed concern about increasing violence and arming of civilian militia in the territory. Central and Eastern European countries associated with the E.U., Cyprus, and European Free Trade Association (EFTA) countries aligned themselves with the statement.

On September 7, the European Parliament condemned the violence in East Timor and said it would support a resolution to send in peacekeeping forces. On September 16, it passed a resolution calling for immediate recognition of the independent state of Timor Loro Sae, the provision of peacekeepers, humanitarian aid and financial support, and the formation of an international court to try crimes perpetrated there.

On September 18, the E.U. threw its weight behind international suspension of economic aid and arms sales to Indonesia. Its ban on export of arms, munitions, military equipment and bilateral military cooperation with Indonesia had initial applicability of four months. Speaking for the E.U. Council of Foreign Affairs Ministers, Finnish Foreign Affairs Minister Tarja Halonen said that the post-referendum violence had taken everyone by surprise.

On September 21, the Finnish E.U. presidency, issued a statement welcoming the deployment of Interfet in East Timor, and pressing for complete, early withdrawal of Indonesian troops, rapid disarmament of paramilitary elements, safe access for humanitarian organizations to East and West Timor, and the establishment of the international Commission of Inquiry to investigate alleged violations of international law.

The British government was embarrassed when it was revealed in mid-September that three British Hawk trainer jets were at the Bangkok airport awaiting delivery to Indonesia. Britain said it was powerless to stop the delivery, because the planes were already the legal property of Indonesia under a British Aerospace contract.

United States

The Clinton Administration linked Indonesia's democratic transition to the government's handling of East Timor, and put considerable resources into supporting economic recovery and the June parliamentary elections. Stanley Roth, the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia and the Pacific, played a key role both in bilateral contacts and through efforts to mobilize support for the elections among other donors and Asian governments.

Through the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), the United States gave U.S. $31 million to assist with election preparation, mainly for training, public education, and various election-monitoring operations under the auspices of Indonesian NGOs and American organizations. No funding was given to the Indonesian government. Just prior to the vote, the U.S. provided, with input from Indonesian NGOs, a pilot crowd control training program for the Jakarta police, in anticipation of possible post-election violence. The Administration attempted, but failed, to get other governments to contribute to the training.

At the Consultative Group meeting in July, the U.S. praised the "disciplined and relatively peaceful" run up to the elections, and the open press coverage during the campaign. It called for a greater role for civil society in the transition and the release of remaining political prisoners, and urged the government to end attacks by civilian militia in East Timor, though this was not a condition for U.S. aid.

The Administration requested $70 million from Congress in FY 2000 for economic development assistance to Indonesia. In addition, it pledged an initial $10 million for the multinational force in East Timor, and provided $20 million in humanitarian assistance for East Timor and refugee aid in West Timor.

As of late October, the U.S. had deployed helicopters and support personnel for the U.N. operation in East Timor, with approximately 1,800 U.S. personnel on ships offshore, 150 troops handling communications equipment in Dili, and 300 more in Darwin, Australia supplying logistical and intelligence support.

Congressional hearings focused on the elections and on East Timor during the year. In testimony, senior State Department officials urged Jakarta to ensure that each step in the political transition was "free, fair and transparent," called for an end to abuses in Aceh, and called on the Habibie administration to foster dialogue and negotiation in Irian Jaya. Secretary of State Albright raised many of these concerns when she met with her Indonesian counterpart in Singapore at the ASEAN conference in July, and at the U.N. in New York in September.

President Clinton was outspoken on the East Timor crisis, and at the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum in New Zealand in mid-September lobbied for pressure on Habibie to invite a multilateral force into East Timor. There was close White House coordination with the Australian government throughout the crisis. Clinton publicly condemned the violence and said it was clear that the Indonesian military was aiding and abetting the militia. On September 9, he announced a suspension of U.S. military sales, commercial transfers, and training programs.

Direct military aid and training in 1999 totaled $476,000, mainly for Expanded International Military Education and Training (IMET); Congress had already sharply limited most training programs in 1992, after the 1991 Santa Cruz massacre in Dili, though some joint training with Kopassus troops continued until all such programs ceased in May 1998 in response to Congressional pressure. Estimated commercial military sales approved in FY 1999 totaling $16 million and licenses for export still pending approval were also suspended in September.

The role of the U.S. military was highly controversial-especially with regard to East Timor. The Pentagon argued that its high level contacts with General Wiranto and other senior officers provided a useful channel to send political messages on East Timor, the need for a stable electoral process, and democratic reform. U.S. Defense Secretary William Cohen met with Habibie and Wiranto in late September in Jakarta and also reportedly sent private letters urging the military to rein in the East Timor militia, as did General Henry Shelton, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

But Congress was skeptical of the benefit of U.S. training programs and other forms of cooperation, and there was no clear evidence that more than forty years of such training had made a significant impact on the military's behavior.

In the Congress, bipartisan legislation required the U.S. to oppose non-humanitarian multilateral aid to Indonesia and to cut off all U.S. military ties and supplies until specific conditions were met, including the safe return of refugees and Indonesian civilian and military cooperation with the investigation and prosecution of abuses in East Timor. As of late October, similar provisions in a separate bill and in the foreign operations appropriations bill for FY 2000 were pending in both the House and Senate.

A House-Senate Congressional delegation visited East Timor in late July, and the House passed a strongly-worded resolution on September 28 urging the MPR to ratify the August 30 vote and expressing support for U.S. participation in the multilateral force, although not with combat troops.

Two State Department delegations traveled to West Timor, Dili and Jakarta to press for access to East Timorese refugees by U.N. agencies and an end to militia violence in the camps. Julia Taft, Assistant Secretary of State for Refugees, went to the camps with diplomats from Sweden, Japan, the United Kingdom, Thailand and Australia in late September; Harold Koh, Assistant Secretary of State for Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor also visited in early October. He called for a rapid and voluntary repatriation of refugees under U.N. auspices.

The U.S. strongly supported passage of the resolution by the special session of the U.N. Commission on Human Rights in September calling for an international commission of inquiry in East Timor.

Australia

The Australian government, perhaps inadvertently, played an important part in Habibie's decision to allow East Timorese to opt for independence. Australia also took the lead in responding to the post-referendum violence, causing relations between the two countries to plummet.

In a private letter sent to Habibie in December, Prime Minister John Howard outlined a proposal for an eventual vote on self-determination in East Timor following an extended period of autonomy. Australia had been the only Western country to recognize Indonesian sovereignty over the territory, a stance it adopted in 1978. The Howard letter, seen by Indonesia as a major policy shift (although it apparently was not intended as such by some in the Howard government), was a crucial factor in Habibie's January 27 announcement that Indonesia would consider independence for the territory.

From that point on, the East Timor question seemed to drive Australia's policy toward Indonesia, although the Australian government was also eager to see free and fair elections in Indonesia in June and provided significant financial and logistical support for them.

After the May 5 agreement between Indonesia and Portugal resulted in the establishment of the United Nations Assistance Mission in East Timor (UNAMET), Australians came to constitute UNAMET's largest component. Amid continuing violence leading up to the vote, Australia lobbied for increased numbers of international civilian police and military advisors.

Darwin became an international staging ground for relief efforts and military deployments after August 30. Australia organized and commanded the International Force for East Timor (Interfet) that entered East Timor on September 20; the deployment of four thousand five hundred soldiers (out of a total of seven thousand) was Australia's greatest troop mobilization since the Vietnam War.

Indonesian anger over the referendum results and the entry of Australian troops into East Timor sent Indonesia-Australian relations to their lowest point ever, and the Australian embassy in Jakarta and consulates elsewhere became the target of Indonesian nationalist protests.

Following an exchange of fire in East Timor that killed an Indonesian policeman, Indonesia suspended a 1995 security treaty that had committed the two countries to "mutual consultation" on "matters affecting their common security," and joint navy patrols in the oil-rich Timor Sea. Australia's carefully-cultivated relationship with the Indonesian armed forces, that had led to extensive training programs and joint exercises, also appeared to be destroyed.

World Bank

In one of the year's more dramatic developments, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank, together with the Asian Development Bank and Japanese government, held up $1.4 billion in loan disbursements from a $43 billion rescue package to Indonesia as of September 30, and raised the possibility of putting billions more on hold. Although a corruption scandal involving a major bank, Bank Bali, was a key reason, the IMF and the Bank also linked the aid suspension to the violence in East Timor and Indonesia's commitments under the May 5, 1999, agreement between Indonesia and Portugal. This unprecedented use of multilateral and bilateral aid leverage was a major factor in convincing Jakarta to agree to an international force in East Timor.
MALAYSIA

Human rights in Malaysia continued to deteriorate in 1999. Government authorities responded to the growing assertiveness of some citizens groups and to a new opposition coalition with a series of repressive measures. Former Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim's conviction for corruption and his ongoing sodomy trial dwarfed all other news. The Anwar trials, the arrest of several Anwar supporters and associates, and repeated government crackdowns on pro-Anwar rallies demonstrated the fragility of political rights in Malaysia. Arbitrary limitations on basic rights were also evident in restrictions on campus life, arrests of activists, and use of criminal contempt laws against lawyers and journalists who questioned the independence of the judiciary. Although the Malaysian economy began to rebound, providing hope for economically vulnerable populations, the government continued to implement restrictive laws on refugees and migrant workers. Detainees at immigration centers protested harsh conditions and extended periods of confinement. The passage of legislation to establish a Malaysian Human Rights Commission held out the promise of more government attention to human rights, but the legislation was severely flawed and drew strong criticism from local NGOs for its failure to establish a truly independent commission and to implement international standards.

Human Rights Developments

The trial of Anwar Ibrahim on corruption charges continued into 1999. In April, Anwar was convicted on four counts of corruption and sentenced to six years in prison.

In June the joint trial of Anwar and Sukma Dermawan, Anwar's adopted brother, began on charges that they had sodomized Azizan Abu Bakar, Anwar's wife's former driver. Sukma was also charged with aiding and abetting Anwar. Although the judge lifted a gag order that he had previously issued preventing anyone involved in the trial from making public statements about the case, he warned journalists about violating contempt laws after the trial began. On September 10, Anwar was hospitalized following allegations that he had been poisoned with arsenic while in prison and the trial was temporarily suspended. Anwar was released from the hospital on October 4, and the sodomy trial resumed the following day. According to the hospital, tests on Anwar's urine, hair, and nails did not reveal impermissable levels of arsenic.

The use of the Internal Security Act (ISA) to arrest Anwar and some of the witnesses, the beating of Anwar in custody, and the repeated interference by the prosecution with the defense all combined to put the fairness of the proceedings in doubt. In January the Inspector-General of Police Abdul Rahim Noor resigned following the Malaysian attorney general's acknowledgment that the police had beaten Anwar. The government then set up an independent commission to further investigate the matter. In April, Abdul Rahim Noor was charged with "attempting to cause grievous hurt." He pled not guilty to the charge.

The primary witnesses against Anwar have recanted their confessions, alleging that they were coerced physically and psychologically by the police. In February, Mior Abdul Razak, who had been arrested in September 1998 and held for 107 days for alleged sexual offenses with Anwar, lodged a statutory declaration stating that the police had pressured him to confess and that he was never sodomized by Anwar. In April, perjury charges were brought against Mior Abdul Razak for his statement and were pending at the time of this writing. During Anwar's corruption trial in March, Azizan testified that "threats of the police...had been very brutal and forced me to make confessions implicating Anwar Ibrahim, without any basis." Perjury charges were then brought against Azizan for giving false evidence; these charges were dismissed in July.

Sukma and Dr. Munawar Anees, a Pakistani scholar and colleague of Anwar's, both pled guilty in September 1998 to being sodomized by Anwar; in 1999, both unsuccessfully appealed their convictions on the grounds that their confessions had been coerced. Sukma filed an affidavit to this effect and was consequently charged in April with perjury and two additional sexual offenses. Despite Sukma's testimony at the sodomy trial of physical and psychological abuse by the police, the court found his confession voluntary and allowed it to be introduced as evidence.

Subsequent to Anwar's arrest in September 1998, the Malaysian government repeatedly broke up peaceful opposition demonstrations and public meetings. Rallies in support of the "reformasi" (reform) movement and demonstrations protesting Anwar's detention and conviction were followed by mass arrests. Demonstrators were brought to trial under charges of violating the Police Act (illegal assembly), the Penal Code (rioting), or both. After lengthy legal proceedings, many protestors saw the charges against them dismissed; others were sentenced to imprisonment and a fine. Of more than 300 people arrested in October 1998, twenty-seven were found guilty after trials in February and March; the others were all acquitted. Other trials were still ongoing at the time of this writing.

On September 19 the largest protest since Anwar's arrest erupted over allegations that Anwar had been poisoned in prison. Approximately ten thousand people gathered at the National Mosque to demand that an independent investigatory commission be appointed. Police arrested activists and opposition figures, including Sivarasa Rasiah, one of the most prominent human rights lawyers in Malaysia and a founder of the NGO Suara Rakyat Malaysia (Voice of the Malaysian People) (SUARAM), and Tian Chua, vice-president of the National Justice Party (Parti Keadilan Nasional). This was the fourth time that Tian Chua had been arrested since September 1998 in connection with public demonstrations; Chua said that he was beaten by police while in custody in September 1998, April 1999, and September 1999. Others arrested following the September 19 demonstration included activist Hishamuddin Rai; Azmin Ali, Anwar's former private secretary; and Mohamad Ezam Nor, Anwar's former political secretary. Although some protestors reportedly had thrown stones and flower pots when the police moved in to drive back the crowd, there were no reports linking those arrested to the violence. Sivarasa, Chua, and at least twenty-seven others were subsequently charged with unlawful assembly or disobeying an order to disperse and were released on bail. If convicted, they face a fine and up to a year in prison.

Students faced additional constraints from the Malaysian Universities and University College Act (UUCA) which forbids students from participating in any political organization or trade union, on campus or off. The law also restricts the participation of university staff in political activity. Following Anwar's arrest, a growing number of students were detained in reformasi demonstrations, and Education Minister Datuk Seri Najib Tun Razak threatened sanctions under the act, including fines, suspension, and expulsion. Educational institutions began issuing "show cause" letters, and students and teachers who were arrested faced disciplinary action. In April following demonstrations protesting Anwar's conviction, thirty-six students, teachers, and lecturers were arrested and subsequently faced disciplinary action. The Education Minister announced in May that two students, one from St. John's Institute and one from the Institut Teknologi Mara, had been expelled for participating in the rallies.

In June the Universiti Malaya, under the orders of "high officials," canceled a political debate organized by the Islamic Students Society. The debate was to be entitled, "Is Student Politicking Relevant?" and would have included speakers from opposition parties. The United Malays National Organization (UMNO) Youth Students and Training Council Chief Zein Isma praised the cancellation, saying that the debate was forbidden under the UUCA and was designed to instigate hatred against UMNO, the ruling party.

Illegal assembly laws were also used in other contexts to punish well-known activists exercising their right to freedom of assembly. In July Irene Fernandez, head of the Kuala Lumpur-based advocacy organization Tenaganita (Women's Force); Mohamad Nasir, president of the Malaysian Socialist Party (Parti Sosialis Malaysia) and four others were charged with unlawful assembly for their participation in a peaceful gathering on June 28 at Kampung Sungai Nipah. The activists and community members were protesting the demolition of the urban settlement as well as the authorities' failure to provide alternative housing to eighty families whose homes were scheduled for demolition. Many of the families had lived there for decades, and the protesters were awaiting a stay order on the demolition from the Court of Appeal. Police reportedly sprayed mace and tear gas at some one hundred men, women, and children who had formed a human barricade around the settlement, and then used water cannon and physical force to disperse the crowd. More than fifty people were reportedly arrested, with the majority released soon after. Although over four hundred people participated in the demonstration, five of the six persons charged were activists, suggesting that the law was being selectively applied.

The Malaysian government continued to use arbitrary regulatory decrees, broadly worded legislation, and lengthy, expensive court proceedings to punish its critics and control free speech. In preparation for the upcoming general elections, the Information Ministry announced in July that Malaysian opposition parties would not be allowed to appear on state-run television stations. At the same time, the Entrepreneur Development Minister, who controls taxi licenses, told Parliament that taxi drivers who criticize the government, play tape-recordings of anti-government speeches, or display pictures of opposition leaders in their vehicles could have their licenses revoked. In September Deputy Chief Minister Datuk Seri Mohamad Shariff Omar stated that mosque officials who allowed opposition parties to hold anti-government "ceramah" (political forums) in their mosques would be removed. Certain mosque officials who criticized the government in their sermons reportedly were removed.

The trial of Irene Fernandez entered its fourth year, with Fernandez facing the possibility of three years of imprisonment on charges of malicious publishing. In July 1995, Fernandez had published a short memorandum on abuses in immigration detention centers based on over 300 interviews with former detainees. The government maintains that the report was inaccurate.

On August 26, former secretary general of the Democratic Action Party (DAP) Lim Guan Eng was released after serving one year of his eighteen-month sentence for sedition and malicious publishing of false news. In 1995 he had accused the attorney general of mishandling a case of alleged statutory rape of a schoolgirl by the chief minister of Malacca. Because of his conviction, Guan Eng was disqualified from being a member of parliament or holding elective office, was prohibited from holding any position in a political party for five years, and was barred from pursuing his profession as an accountant.

In April the International Court of Justice held that the Malaysian courts must provide Dato' Param Cumaraswamy, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Independence of Judges and Lawyers, with immunity in defamation suits brought by two corporations. The suits were based on a 1995 article in the London-based International Commercial Litigation in which Cumaraswamy was quoted as saying he would be looking into allegations of corporate interference in the Malaysian judiciary. According to the world court, Cumaraswamy made the allegations in his capacity as special rapporteur and, therefore, was clearly entitled to immunity under the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations. The court found that the Malaysian government had violated its obligations under the convention when it failed to inform the Malaysian courts of the U.N. Secretary-General's finding that Cumaraswamy was immune, and directed the government to communicate the court's opinion to the Malaysian courts. Although Prime Minister Mahathir stated in March that he had accepted the court's decision, in October the Malaysian High Court denied Cumaraswamy's motion to dismiss and assessed him costs, stating that the world court's decision was not a final and binding authority. According to the Malaysian court, Cumaraswamy is not absolutely immune, and whether he is entitled to any immunity should be decided at trial.

The cases brought against Cumaraswamy were among a spate of libel and criminal contempt actions brought against lawyers who questioned the independence and integrity of the Malaysian judiciary. Other targets have included Zainur Zakaria, an attorney for Anwar who had filed an affidavit accusing the prosecution of attempting to tamper with evidence, and Tommy Thomas, an attorney who had publicly criticized the judiciary and who was the target of several libel suits for comments attributed to him in the same 1995 article that led to the suits against Cumaraswamy. In separate proceedings in November and December 1998, respectively, Zakaria and Thomas were convicted of contempt of court under a loosely worded law that gives a presiding judge broad discretion to sanction attorneys and other parties for statements they make in connection with pending cases. At the time of this writing, although their cases were on appeal, both were still facing jail time.

The imprisonment of Canadian journalist Murray Hiebert for contempt in September attracted international attention. In 1997 Hiebert had published an article detailing a civil suit brought by the wife of an Appeal Court judge and noted its unusually rapid progress through the judicial system. After a two-year appeal of his contempt conviction during which his passport was impounded and he was unable to leave the country, his sentence was reduced from three months to six weeks. He decided to serve the sentence and was released after four weeks for good behavior. Local opposition leaders and NGOs, including SUARAM, criticized the verdict as a further attack on freedom of expression in Malaysia.

Extended detention of undocumented immigrants continued to spark protests by detainees. On July 27, detainees at the Lenggeng detention center demonstrated against a three-day water cut and numerous health issues, and almost two hundred detainees escaped. On September 19, more than four hundred Indonesian detainees at the Langkap detention center protested their lengthy detention.

According to Menteri Besar Tan Sri Mohamad Isa Abdul Samad, 1,998 undocumented immigrants were detained and deported from January to August 20. On September 3 Foreign Minister Datuk Seri Syed Hamid Albar stated, "We do not recognize the status of refugees. . . . [W]e only allow foreigners to stay on a temporary basis after which they have to go back." Although Malaysia is not a party to the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, it is bound both by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights which provides refugees the right to seek and enjoy asylum from persecution and by customary international law which prohibits governments from returning refugees to countries where their life or freedom would be threatened.

In July Parliament passed a bill to establish a Malaysian Human Rights Commission. Under the bill, the commission would advise the government on human rights issues and have limited power to investigate allegations of infringements on human rights with some immunity from defamation actions. Local NGOs objected to the commission's jurisdiction being restricted to rights embodied in the Malaysian constitution, which has been deemed compatible with Malaysian laws including the ISA, the Official Secrets Act, and other broadly worded laws which violate internationally established human rights. In addition, NGOs maintained that under the bill the commission would lack adequate resources and sufficient independence from the government.

Defending Human Rights

Malaysia's human rights groups continued monitoring and advocacy on a variety of issues. SUARAM responded quickly to arrests of reformasi protestors, including those following the September 19 demonstration. Tenaganita continued to monitor immigrants in detention. The Malaysian Bar Council expressed concern about judicial independence, with its president raising the issue before the Commonwealth Law Conference in September. Local NGOs closely monitored legislation to establish a National Human Rights Commission, and thirty-four organizations and two political parties submitted a memorandum to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs raising the concerns about the bill noted above. In July Hakam, Era Consumer, and SUARAM held a forum on the commission and produced a statement critiquing the legislation and proposing amendments. The bill was later passed as drafted.

As documented by the Anwar proceedings, the four-year old case against Irene Fernandez, and the arrests of Sivarasa Rasiah and Tian Chua, Malaysian activists continued to pay a high price for their commitment to human rights.

The Role of the International Community

North America

The U.S. State Department on April 14 expressed great concern about Anwar's conviction and noted serious questions about the basic fairness of the judicial proceedings. The U.S. urged that Anwar be released on bail pending appeal. Both U.S. President Bill Clinton and Canadian Foreign Minister Lloyd Axworthy condemned Murray Hiebert's imprisonment.

Asia

Japanese Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi met with Prime Minister Mahathir during his seven-day visit to Japan which began on May 29. Obuchi urged due process in Anwar's trial, but did not protest the April verdict or sentence. The Japanese Foreign Ministry was concerned, however, about Anwar's mistreatment in custody and about long-term stability in Malaysia if unrest continued. Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs Alexander Downer also expressed concern about Anwar's conviction and the hope that issues concerning the trial's conduct and possible judicial bias in favor of the prosecution would be addressed on appeal.

European Union

In an urgent resolution in June, the European Parliament called on the Malaysian government to stop politically motivated crackdowns on supporters of the reform movement, opposition parties, and NGO activists; to stop the excessive use of force by police and to bring to justice those responsible for abuse; to revise the laws criminalizing homosexual acts between consenting adults; and to abolish or amend the ISA.

World Bank

In September World Bank president James Wolfensohn, who had issued a public statement protesting Anwar's arrest in September 1998, reiterated his concern about Anwar's detention. In May 1999, the Malaysian government officially informed the Bank that it would confine its borrowing to the $704 million that had already been approved and that it was not interested in participating in any other loan programs or technical studies with the Bank.
PAKISTAN

As 1999 drew to a close, the government of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif confronted mounting sectarian violence, a unified opposition demanding new elections, and escalating tension with the military. That tension, culminating in Sharif's dismissal of army chief General Pervez Musharraf, ultimately led to the country's fourth military coup on October 12.

By suppressing opposition-led demonstrations and strikes, curtailing civil liberties through repressive ordinances, and persecuting independent NGOs and journalists, Sharif's administration left civil society battered. Meanwhile, Sharif alienated important elements in the army with his abrupt withdrawal of support in July for Muslim militants who had occupied strategic peaks overlooking Kargil, in the Indian-held portion of Kashmir. The subsequent retreat of the militants, who had seized their positions with the backing of the Pakistani military, reduced the danger of Pakistan's diplomatic isolation but engendered widespread domestic condemnation and proved to be the final catalyst in prompting a military takeover.

Human Rights Developments

The most dramatic development during the year was the bloodless coup on October 12. Prime Minister Sharif dismissed General Parvez Musharraf as army chief, then tried to prevent the general's plane, en route from Sri Lanka, from landing in Karachi. Within hours, the military launched its counterattack, and by the end of the day, Sharif was under arrest and the entire cabinet was under guard.

Within days of the military takeover, the general suspended the constitution, abolished the national assembly and all provincial legislatures, announced the formation of a six-member national security council to give "guidance" to the Cabinet of Ministers, and banned the Supreme Court from challenging his authority. The general also promised to uphold freedom of the press and religious tolerance, to exercise nuclear restraint, withdraw some military forces from the Indian border, and to revive the country's battered economy while attacking high-level corruption. He said his was an interim government but gave no timetable for new elections. Reaction to the coup within the country was generally favorable.

The October coup capped a year of increasing discontent with the Sharif administration stemming from its crackdown on opposition political activity and increasing encroachments on civil liberties, with the courts providing only occasional relief. Leaders of Pakistan's normally fractious opposition announced on September 14 the formation of the Grand Democratic Alliance (GDA), grouping together nineteen political parties with the avowed aim of dislodging Sharif's government. The government responded with overt attempts to suppress opposition political activity. A GDA call for a protest rally in Karachi led to the arrest from September 24 to 26 of more than 1,000 opposition activists throughout the city, including much of the leadership of the Pakistan's People's Party, as well as senior leaders of the Muttahida Qaumi Movement (MQM), the Awami National Party, and the Pakistan Tehrik-e-Insaaf party. Most were released on bail on September 28, although magistrates rejected the bail applications of some senior figures, including Senators Nasreen Jalil and Aftab Sheikh of the MQM.

On February 17, in a landmark ruling, the Supreme Court declared that the military courts set up by the federal government in late 1998 to try civilians for political, sectarian and ethnic violence were unconstitutional, and ordered that cases pending in military courts be transferred to anti-terrorism courts or other courts established within the law. The federal government responded by amending the 1997 Anti-Terrorism Act so as to give anti-terrorism courts jurisdiction over the same categories of offenses as the military courts. In the amended act, the definition of terrorism was extended to include "acts of civil commotion," a term that included the "commencement or continuation of illegal strikes" as well as "distributing, publishing or pasting of a handbill or making graffiti or wall-chalking intended to create unrest or fear."

Seven anti-terrorism courts were established in Karachi in early May. One case was tried in apparent violation of Pakistan's constitutional guarantee against double jeopardy. Mohammad Saleem had been acquitted by a military appellate court on January 6 of involvement in the murder of three police officers, after the court failed to establish a motive or find substantial evidence linking him to the crime. However, police again arrested Saleem on May 13 and brought him before an anti-terrorism court to face a second trial on the same charges. On June 11, Saleem was convicted and sentenced to death. The court rejected Saleem's contention that he was below the age of sixteen-which under Sindh provincial law would have precluded capital punishment-after a court-ordered medical examination found him to be between the ages of twenty and twenty-one.

The government repeatedly failed to uphold the civil liberties of women or to punish "honor killings." In one particularly egregious case, Samia Sarwar was shot and killed in the Lahore office of the AGHS Legal Aid Cell on April 6 by a gunman who had apparently been hired by her family. A resident of Peshawar in the North-West Frontier Province (NWFP) and the daughter of Ghulam Sarwar Khan Mohmand, president of a local chamber of commerce and industry, Sarwar had traveled to Lahore the previous month to obtain a divorce, over her parents' ojections. Although the First Information Report (FIR) included them in the list of the accused, neither Sarwar's father, mother, or uncle was arrested. And despite strong and credible evidence linking them to the murder, the investigation report submitted by the police concluded that there was no evidence of involvement by Sarwar's family.

On August 3, the Pakistani Senate voted to block debate over a draft resolution condemning incidents of violence against women. Only four members of the Senate voted in favor of discussing the draft, itself a substantial dilution of an earlier text that specifically condemned Sarwar's murder.

The government's intimidation of the news media emerged as an issue of international concern, as authorities targeted a leading independent newspaper group and several journalists who had collaborated with a BBC team producing a documentary about government corruption in Pakistan.

Najam Sethi, editor of the Friday Times , was arrested at his home in Lahore on May 8 and held without charge for nearly a month by Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), a military intelligence agency. Government officials stated that Sethi was being held in connection with a speech he had delivered in New Delhi in April. The Friday Times claimed the real reason for his arrest was a series of editorials he had written about loan defaults by senior government officials and an interview that he gave the BBC team. The Lahore High Court dismissed a habeas corpus petition filed by Sethi's wife, Jugnoo Mohsin, ruling that it did not have the jurisdiction to "interfere in the affairs of the armed forces."

The government finally charged Sethi on June 1 with sedition, promoting communal enmity, condemning the creation of Pakistan and advocating the abolition of its sovereignty, and violating the Prevention of Anti-National Activities Act. The charges were withdrawn a day later, after the government failed to produce evidence before the Supreme Court justifying Sethi's detention and following condemnation of Sethi's detention by the international community. Although Sethi was released on June 2, authorities subsequently seized his passport and his wife's bank accounts. On June 24, Zafar Ali Shah, the parliamentary secretary for parliamentary affairs, filed a petition with the chief election commissioner seeking an inquiry into Sethi's religious status. Shah suggested that if Sethi were found to be a non-Muslim, he should lose his right to vote.

Two other journalists who had cooperated with the BBC team were also subjected to official harassment and intimidation. In April, M.A.K Lodhi, a journalist with the News International was briefly arrested and questioned about the nature and extent of his collaboration with the BBC team. On May 4, Hussain Haqqani, an opposition leader and columnist for The Friday Times and the Urdu-language daily Jang , was arrested by Pakistan's Federal Investigation Agency under a two-year old corruption charge on which he had already been exonerated. However, his detention was also suspected to have been related to interviews he gave to the BBC. He was finally released on July 25, after allegedly being brutally tortured and interrogated.

During late 1998 and early 1999, the government persistently tried to prevent the Jang group of newspapers from publishing. The Karachi-based group includes Jang , Pakistan's largest circulation Urdu newspaper, and the News International , the country's second-largest English-language newspaper. The Federal Investigation Agency raided Jang 's Rawalpindi bureau in mid-December 1998, the day after Jang published a story on a financial scandal involving the Ittefaq group of companies owned by Prime Minister Sharif's family. Prior to the December raid, the government had frozen the Jang group's bank accounts, placed deadlines upon it to pay large taxes, ceased government advertising, and withheld supplies of government-regulated newsprint. The government's harassment of Jang continued into early February.

Reports of torture and ill-treatment in prisons continued to surface, including a case of sexual abuse of a juvenile that highlighted the lack of impartial grievance mechanisms for prisoners. On April 11, a riot broke out in the juvenile ward of Sahiwal Central Prison in Punjab, after prison staff members beat a thirteen-year-old inmate for complaining of sexual abuse by the head warder. Several of the juvenile prisoners broke the wall of their prison cell and set fire to gallows and prison furniture. The riot was eventually suppressed by the Frontier Constabulary, resulting in injuries to nearly twenty children. A few days earlier, the Punjab prisons department had authorized a local legal-aid lawyer who had been informed of the sexual abuse, to visit the prison. However, the prison superintendent subsequently prevented the lawyer from meeting any of the juveniles. In the immediate aftermath of the uprising, the provincial prison department suspended the prison's assistant superintendent and two of the warders. Criminal cases were also registered against ten of the boys for rioting and damaging prison property.

Sectarian violence escalated in scale and geographic scope, as Shi'a Muslim leaders and communities came under attack not only in Punjab, where the attacks had previously been concentrated, but also in Karachi. In the immediate aftermath of an attack on October 1 at a mosque in Karachi that left nine worshipers dead, police detained Maulana Azam Tariq, head of the extremist Sunni Muslim party Sipah-i-Sahaba Pakistan. They also arrested about two dozen local leaders and activists of various religious parties in Hyderabad.

Defending Human Rights

The Punjab provincial government shut down nearly 2,000 NGOs, imposed restrictions on the registration of new groups, and began drafting a law that would facilitate its ability to regulate the province's remaining NGOs. A similar crackdown on NGO activities, albeit on a smaller scale, was underway in Sindh. Although local NGO activists noted that many of the banned organizations existed in name only, they said the move also targeted groups that had done critical reporting on human rights issues.

Punjab social welfare minister Pir Binyamin Rizvi stated at a press conference on December 26, 1998 that all NGOs working in Punjab would need clearance from provincial and federal intelligence agencies before they could be registered with the Social Welfare Department. All NGOs, he said, would have to submit a written pledge to the department that they were not involved in anti-state, anti-government, or anti-religion activities.

On May 10, the department revoked the registration of 1,941 NGOs, shutting down nearly one third of the 5,967 NGOs registered in the province. Stated reasons for the closures included, in some cases, failure to notify the government of an address change. Rizvi told Agence France-Presse that about 3,000 remaining NGOs in Punjab were "under scrutiny," and that the government suspected that some of them hadengaged in anti-state activities as "agents of foreign countries." He said that NGOs would not be permitted to receive direct foreign aid, and that donors would be required to channel grants through the government.

All of the disbanded organizations were registered under the Voluntary Social Welfare Agencies (Registration and Control) Ordinance. However, several major NGOs, including the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP), are registered under the Societies Act and are technically outside the jurisdiction of the Social Welfare Department. The Punjab government subsequently announced on May 18 that all NGOs in the province would henceforth be registered under the Social Welfare Ordinance. It also began drafting a law that would enable it to dissolve NGOs registered under the Societies Act and to seize their assets. As of October, however, government representatives and an NGO committee were engaged in a dialogue about the need for such a bill and its possible content.

Women's NGOs emerged as a special target of harassment, and Social Welfare Minister Rizvi was quoted by Dawn accusing the Applied Socio-Economic Research (ASR) Institute of Women's Studies of "brainwashing young women and making them pursue a course that clashed with government policies."

Although the crackdown on NGOs was centered in Punjab, similar campaigns were intitiated in other provinces. On May 17, for example, the Sindh social welfare department announced that it had canceled the registration of 273 NGOs, out of a total of about 5,282 NGOs registered in the province, because of their alleged involvement in anti-state activities and corruption. The same month, the government of Sindh, on the directive of the federal government, initiated an inquiry into the alleged embezzlement by Shirkat Gah, a prominent women's rights NGO, of Rs. 80 million (U.S. $1,543,657) of World Bank funds and its alleged involvement in anti-state activities. The World Bank has denied funding the organization.

Despite these repressive measures by the government, NGO activism continued. Groups such as HRCP, and others working on women's, environmental, and rural development issues, openly condemned the detention of Najam Sethi, the failure of Pakistan's Senate to condemn "honor killings" of women following Samia Sarwar's murder, and the efforts by provincial governments to deregister and otherwise restrict NGOs.

Role of the International Community

There was near universal condemnation of the October 12 coup, and major powers used the threat of continuing sanctions to bolster their demand for a quick return to civilian rule. The British Commonwealth suspended Pakistan's membership on October 18 because of the coup.

United Nations

In April, Radhika Coomaraswamy, the U.N. Special Rapporteur on Violence Against Women, expressed concern over the growing number of "honor crimes" in Pakistan, particularly the murder of Samia Sarwar. Coomaraswamy urged the government of Pakistan to seriously address the issue of honor killings and support crisis centers and shelters for women victims, adding that "the government of Pakistan should take all necessary steps to protect the lives of Asma Jehangir and her colleagues." In October, U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan condemned the ouster of the civilian government and urged General Musharraf to take early steps to "restore civilian rule and the constitutional process."

United States

The Clinton Administration expressed concern over the ballistic missile tests by India and Pakistan in April and the escalation of violence in Kashmir during the months of May and June. It also criticized the Pakistani government for the arrest of Najam Sethi, calling for his release and stating that the crackdown against Pakistani journalists was "unacceptable." The State Department called for the immediate release of Sethi and other journalists who had been detained by the government.

In September, during a meeting between Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and Pakistani Foreign Minister Sartaj Aziz, the U.S. expressed concern over the arrests of opposition leaders and activists in Karachi. In the aftermath of the coup, the State Department announced that it would cut off remaining economic assistance to the country, as required by U.S. law. Previous sanctions due to nuclear testing in 1998 had already reduced U.S. aid to less than $5 million per year. Following General Musharraf's address to the nation, the U.S. seemed somewhat more optimistic about its relations with Pakistan. In prepared testimony before Congress, Assistant Secretary of State for South Asian Affairs Karl Inderfurth praised the general's address to the nation in which he announced the withdrawal of troops from the Indian border and promised to return Pakistan to a "true" democracy, although the U.S. later expressed disappointment at the lack of a timetable for that return. On October 21, the administration said it intended to maintain sanctions imposed following Pakistan's nuclear tests-though it was lifting some sanctions on India-saying "there won't be business as usual with Pakistan until there is a prompt restoration of civilian and democratic rule."

European Union

The European Union (E.U.) expressed concern over the escalation of fighting in Kashmir, and issued a statement in which it called on both India and Pakistan to show maximum restraint and respect the Line of Control (LoC). It demanded the withdrawal of armed infiltrators from Kashmir, and urged India and Pakistan to resume diplomatic talks to resolve the dispute. The E.U. also postponed signing a trade and cooperation agreement with Pakistan four times: first, because of Pakistan's nuclear tests; second, because of the arrest of Najam Sethi; third, in the wake of the Kargil conflict; and finally, due to the October coup. The E.U. strongly condemned the coup and expressed deep concern about its implications for the South Asian region.

Japan

Japan suspended all new grant aid and new yen loans after Pakistan conducted its first underground nuclear tests in May 1998, following India's nuclear tests earlier that month. Exceptions were made for "aid of an emergency and humanitarian character and grant assistance for grassroots projects." Japan has urged Pakistan to sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, and has sought greater transparency in Pakistan's nuclear programs. Japanese Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi also expressed grave public concern over the military takeover and did not respond to appeals from General Musharraf to Japan's ambassador in Islamabad to provide aid.

International Financial Institutions

Aid and trade sanctions imposed on Pakistan following the May 1998 nuclear tests sent the country into an economic tailspin, but the October coup virtually ensured the sanctions would stay in place. The International Monetary Fund had already delayed payment of a $ 1.5 billion credit because of questions about Pakistan's economic policies, and following the coup suspended talks with the government. While ongoing World Bank projects continued and $2.28 billion of a major loan program had already been disbursed, the bank said no new disbursements would be made and payment of another $1.3 billion loan approved would likely be held up until democracy was restored. The Asian Development Bank, which did not extend new loans to Pakistan following the 1998 nuclear tests, stated that it would continue to monitor the situation to assess the impact of the coup on its operations in the country.
SRI LANKA

The sixteen-year conflict between the Sri Lankan government and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) continued to produce human rights violations on both sides. On July 29, the international human rights movement lost one of its most respected and beloved leaders when a suspected LTTE suicide bomber assassinated Neelan Tiruchelvam, founder of both the International Centre for Ethnic Studies and the Law and Society Trust, a human rights research and advocacy organization. Tiruchelvam, a Tamil member of parliament, had angered the LTTE by proposing an alternative to a separate Tamil state, namely a plan for devolution of power to regional councils set up in part along ethnic lines.

Human Rights Developments

The war was increasingly complicated by paramilitary actors, often working alongside the army as auxiliary forces, but sometimes at odds with them and with each other. Armed clashes between rival groups claimed civilian lives. Impunity remained a critical problem, with few prosecutions for human rights violations, and torture prevalent both in the context of armed conflict and in day-to-day policing. Discrimination against Tamil civilians by members of the security forces attempting to root out the LTTE continued throughout the country and especially in the capital city of Colombo and in army-controlled areas of the north and east.

The war in the north continued to claim civilian lives and generated thousands of new internally displaced people and a smaller number of external refugees as people fled military shelling, clashes between the army and the LTTE, food shortages, and LTTE recruitment of children and adults for military service. On September 15 more than twenty civilians were reported killed and some forty injured in an air force bombing of the Puthukkudiyiruppu market in the northern district of Mullaithivu; houses and buildings nearby were also destroyed. Three days later a suspected LTTE attack on Sinhalese villagers in the east killed more than fifty.

The army redoubled its efforts during the year to control the strategically important A9 highway, linking the Jaffna Peninsula in the far north to Vavuniya town. In early December1998 the army launched a new offensive and advanced northeast-ward into the area around Oddusuddan, displacing some 12,000 people, some forcibly. In March 1999, the army began the first phase of Operation Rana Gosa (Battle Cry), and fighting shifted to the southwestern Vanni region of northern Sri Lanka, where the army made substantial territorial gains; at times appearing to move in virtually uncontested. In April, the army overran Madhu camp, an open relief facility established by the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). The camp housed some 10,000 internally displaced persons (IDPs), some of whom had been there for almost a decade. Half of the camp's residents-those from areas under army control-were sent home; those from regions still under LTTE control were moved to welfare centers in other areas. International relief agencies criticized the eviction, saying that it led to overcrowding of existing welfare camps in the north.

Military operations were marked by repeated closures of access across the forward defense lines, resulting in the disruption of delivery of food, medicine and humanitarian relief to the civilian population of the Vanni. One closure that began on June 26 lasted for more than six weeks, until the LTTE and the army reached a mutually acceptable arrangement to open the supply line. The functioning of humanitarian organizations was badly hampered and conditions for civilians, especially IDPs, deteriorated sharply throughout July.

According to U.N. estimates, about a dozen people suffered injuries from landmines each month on the Jaffna peninsula. Both the government and the LTTE promised they would not remine areas cleared by U.N. mine clearance teams. The government, however, refused to sign the Ottawa Treaty banning land mines, citing security concerns imposed by the LTTE.

Conflict-related deaths and injuries of civilians were also reported in eastern Sri Lanka.

The security forces' use of home guards and armed ex-militant Tamil groups as auxiliary units to aid in military operations continued to draw criticism from human rights defenders. These groups have engaged in illegal detention, murder, abduction, extortion, assault, torture, forced conscription, and forced eviction. In 1999, fighting between two of these groups, the People's Liberation Organization for Tamil Eelam (PLOTE) and Tamil Eelam Liberation Organization (TELO) also claimed civilian lives.

Large-scale arbitrary arrests of Tamils based almost solely on their ethnicity continued in many parts of the country. In the north and east, residents complained of discrimination at checkpoints, routine beatings, torture, public humiliation of persons detained during searches, and of detainees being used for forced labor by the army and Special Task Force.

The LTTE was also blamed for deaths of civilians and other noncombatants and intimidation of political opponents. Several members of Neelan Tiruchelvam's party, the Tamil United Liberation Front (TULF), reported receiving threatening letters or telephone calls from the LTTE or LTTE front organizations. The LTTE also targeted members of armed Tamil groups; on September 2, 1999, Manikkadasan, PLOTE's vice president and military wing leader, was killed along with two others in a claymore mine bombing of a PLOTE camp in Vavuniya.

On September 18, apparently in retaliation for the deaths of civilians killed in air force strikes on Puthukudiyiruppu three days earlier, suspected LTTE members hacked to death some forty-eight Sinhalese villagers and shot six others in attacks on three villages in eastern Sri Lanka. The killings sparked large anti-LTTE demonstrations in Colombo.

Increased recruitment of children was also reported from LTTE-controlled areas of the country. School buildings were the site of recruitment drives aimed at teenagers, and in April the LTTE began a practice of enlisting all residents in some areas of the north for military training as a "civilian defense force." Older residents were reportedly directed to act as guards for their villages, while younger members were sent to the front lines to aid LTTE combat units. Residents attempting to flee these areas said they were leaving, among other things, because of LTTE recruitment.

Official efforts continued to account for the tens of thousands of persons who "disappeared" at the hands of the security forces since the conflict began. In January, the Presidential Commission on Disappearances submitted an interim report, based on investigations since June 1998. The commission received some 10,135 complaints, mostly from the Central Province, and 460 complaints from Jaffna district. At the beginning of 1999, there were more than 7,500 complaints awaiting inquiry, and the term of the Commission was extended.

The report provided details on about one hundred court cases filed against perpetrators of "disappearances." According to officials of the Relief and Rehabilitation Authority, more than 18,000 people applied for death certificates for "disappeared" relatives; death certificates are a necessary prerequisite to obtaining government compensation.

Almost a year after a former soldier named Somaratne Rajapakse alleged that the army had buried "disappeared" Tamil civilians in mass graves near Jaffna town, exhumation began in June on the first site. Rajapakse, sentenced to death in June 1998 along with six other soldiers for the 1996 rape and murder of a Jaffna teenager named Krishanthy, told a Colombo court after his conviction that he knew the whereabouts of graves of hundreds of Tamil youths killed by the army after it took Jaffna in 1996. The first grave identified by Rajapakse contained two male skeletons. An investigating team that included Sri Lankan and foreign forensic experts and human rights observers said the remains showed signs of physical assault and murder. The victims, one with his hands tied with rope and the other blind-folded, were identified as two men in their twenties who"disappeared" in 1996.

In August, Rajapakse and other ex-soldiers convicted with him identified twenty-four additional grave sites around Chemmani village near Jaffna town which they told a Jaffna district court contained eighty to one hundred bodies of persons killed and buried by the army near Jaffna town in 1996 and 1997. Exhumations resumed on September 6, and within days more bodies had been uncovered.

Rajapakse complained in August that he and his family had received death threats, and that police investigators who questioned him about his allegations of mass graves failed to record the names of army officials who he said were involved.

Prosecutions of abuses by security forces remained rare, but several notable cases did reach the courts. On July 20 a Mannar court ordered the detention of two soldiers from Pallimunai army detachment accused of raping and murdering Ida Hamilitta, a twenty-one-year-old former LTTE member who had surrendered to the army two months before. A witness told the court he had tried to report the killing to the Pallimunai police, but that they had refused to record his statement and warned him to keep quiet. The Mannar medical officer, however, gave graphic testimony about the results of the woman's post-mortem, and a determined magistrate ensured the prosecution of those responsible.

No progress was made in reopening the notorious "Bolgoda Lake" case which implicated Special Task Force (STF) commandos in the 1995 murders of twenty-three Tamil youths whose bodies were found floating in bodies of water near Colombo.

But in another notorious case in which twenty-five people, including twenty-four students between the ages of fifteen and seventeen, "disappeared" from Sevana army camp, Embilipitiya, Ratnapura district between late 1989 and early 1990, there was some justice done. Six members of the Sri Lankan security forces and a high school principal were sentenced to ten years' imprisonment after having been found guilty of abduction with intent to murder and wrongful confinement. The court was unable to prove murder. The judgment was the first to address the enormous number of "disappearances" linked to the state's counterinsurgency campaigns against suspected supporters of the Janatha Vimukti Peramuna (JVP), a Sinhalese nationalist insurgency, in the late 1980s.

Independent press coverage of the war remained difficult, and political reporting on topics other than the war often sparked threats and physical attacks. In mid-July, when police in Colombo fired rubber bullets, tear gas and water cannons to disperse a crowd of supporters of the United Nationalist Party, the main opposition party, unidentified men in plainclothes assaulted protestors, wounding at least thirty people, including ten journalists. The Free Media Movement denounced the assaults as "the worst attack on the media in recent history," and said that journalists had identified several attackers to be from the presidential security division (PSD). The demonstrators were protesting the failure of the People's Alliance government to keep election promises including the abolition of the powerful executive presidency. On July 21 journalists held a second demonstration in Colombo to protest the assaults.

In late August, some two hundred people, including academics and students, journalists and local businessmen attended a demonstration organized by the North Sri Lanka Journalists' Association in Jaffna town protesting the August 21 grenade attack on the office of a local Tamil newspaper, Uthayan . The North Sri Lanka Journalists' Association, which sent a memorandum to President Kumarantunge, said the attack was an effort to discourage the press from exposing incidents of extortion and corruption. They appealed to the Sri Lankan government to carry out an impartial inquiry.

On September 7, Rohana Kumara, the editor of Satana (Battle) , a pro-UNP newspaper, was killed by unidentified gunmen in a Colombo suburb. He was shot on his way home in a taxi after receiving a call that his house was being attacked. Members of parliament for the UNP blamed the ruling party for the killing and demanded an immediate investigation.

Defending Human Rights

Human rights defenders continued to play a critical role in demanding accountability for human rights abuses and working for an end to political violence in Sri Lanka. But these activities did not come without substantial risks. The greatest blow to human rights advocacy was the killing of Neelan Tiruchelvam. Seven others were wounded in the attack, including five policemen. The three young Tamil men arrested in connection with Tiruchelvam's murder were reportedly severely tortured in police custody in Colombo.

In December 1998, a candlelight vigil organized by The Missing Persons Guardian Association (MPGA) in Jaffna, an organization of relatives of the"disappeared," was held opposite the Human Rights Commission office in Jaffna to protest "disappearances" in the area, and the slow pace of progress in investigating the allegations of mass graves near Chemmani.

Also in December, the Citizens Committee of the Vanni asked the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in Mallavi to intervene with the army to prevent attacks on displaced civilians. It noted in particular a December 21, 1998 attack which killed five civilians who were traveling to their paddy fields in the area.

In January the Centre for Monitoring Election Violence, INFORM, and other human rights organizations protested reports of widespread violence, vote-rigging and voter intimidation during the Northwest Provincial Council Elections.

In March the Civil Rights Movement of Sri Lanka and other NGOs raised public concerns regarding an announcement that the government would no longer automatically commute death sentences when they came before the president, a move many feared would lead to a de facto reinstatement of the death penalty.

The Role of the International Community

International attention to Sri Lanka focused on continuing support for humanitarian efforts to mitigate the worst effects of the war and accountability for past abuses. The killing of Neelan Tiruchelvam sparked widespread international condemnation, including from United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan who denounced the murder as an "act of terrorism."

During an official visit to Jaffna in December 1998, Ilkka Uusitalo, head of the European Commission's Delegation to Sri Lanka, raised concerns with the members of the commission about arbitrary arrest of civilians by army and police on the peninsula and human rights violations by paramilitary Tamil groups operating alongside the army during a meeting with the Human Rights Commission in Jaffna. The Ambassador also inquired about the treatment of detainees by the security forces and the progress of investigations into allegations of mass graves at Chemmani.

A ten-member team of experts from the Zimbabwean mine defusing company Mine Tech operating under contract to the United Nations arrived in the Jaffna peninsula in early July to launch a two-and-a-half-year landmine clearing project assisted by the United Nations Development Program (UNDP). The project, partially funded by the Netherlands and Australia, was aimed at aiding the resettlement of thousands of displaced civilians. The U.N. also undertook a public mine awareness program.

In September, the United States government announced that it had donated U.S. $1.3 million to the UNHCR to assist the agency's efforts on behalf of Sri Lanka's internally displaced population.
VIETNAM

The Vietnamese government continued to show little tolerance for political criticism of the government, despite the release of more than a dozen prominent political prisoners in amnesties in 1998 and early 1999. Political and religious dissidents faced repression and heavy surveillance, with several key dissidents remaining under house or pagoda arrest, and outspoken government critic Nguyen Thanh Giang was arrested in May for two months. Freedom of expression became even more strictly controlled with passage of a new press law. Legislation authorizing administrative detention remained in force and prison conditions continued to be substandard.

Human Rights Developments

In general, the government tried to isolate rather than imprison political and religious dissidents during the year, in order to avoid international condemnation. Key dissidents were placed under surveillance and regularly summoned for questioning by police or local officials. Their publishing rights were denied, friends and neighbors discouraged from meeting them, and communication with the outside world interrupted. Others were forced into retirement or lost their positions in the government.

Many of the political prisoners released in 1998, including Dr. Nguyen Dan Que, Thich Quang Do, Thich Tue Sy, and Thich Khong Tanh, were denied residence permits and were thus unable to travel freely. Dr. Que was unable to resume work as a medical doctor because the authorities withheld his license to practice. Thich Nhat Ban, released in October 1998, said that he had been released from a "small prison only to enter a larger one."

In January, the Vietnamese Communist Party expelled the country's highest-ranking dissident, retired Gen. Tran Do, who has criticized the Communist Party for corruption, lack of democracy, and disorganization. Afterwards, his phone was monitored and the connection often cut, his house was under surveillance by undercover security police, who followed him when he traveled, and the Ministry of Culture and Information rejected his request in July to publish a newspaper. In March, police arrested geologist Nguyen Thanh Giang, an outspoken intellectual who has openly advocated human rights, multiparty democracy, and peaceful reforms. He was charged under Article 205a of the Criminal Code for "abusing democratic rights." After widespread international protest Giang was released in May, but he was required regularly to report to police and prohibited from traveling outside of Hanoi without permission.

In August, three members of a U.S.-based anti-Communist organization, the Vietnamese People's Action Movement, were arrested in Can Tho province. In September, in a trial conducted quietly in An Giang province, twenty-four people, most of them members of another U.S.-based group, the People's Action Party (PAP), were sentenced to terms of up to twenty years for subversive activities. All of the PAP members had been detained without trial for more than two years.

Arbitrary detention under the 1997 Administrative Detention Decree 31/CP continued to be another way to isolate and silence critics. As of October, critics who remained under house arrest included biologist and writer Ha Si Phu, poet Bui Minh Quoc, writer Tieu Dao Bao Cu, and war veteran Nguyen Ho. All had been under house arrest for more than two years.

Equally worrisome was a new decree, 89/ND-CP, which authorized the establishment of provisional custody and pretrial detention centers around the country. Signed by Prime Minister Phan Van Khai in November 1998, this decree allows police units from the district level upward and military units from the division level upward to operate their own temporary detention camps and to arrest and detain people under provisional custody or pretrial detention. No information was available about what kinds of crimes could motivate arrests under decree 89/ND-CP, nor how detention periods would be determined.

The Vietnamese Communist Party made several attempts to stifle dissent within the party, in addition to expelling Tran Do. In February, the party central committee issued a resolution supporting ideological freedom while at the same time stating that it would punish members who expressed opinions or distributed documents against the party. In May, Politburo Permanent Secretary Pham The Duyet outlined more than a dozen activities outlawed for party members, including criticizing the party platform, and organizing or inciting people to lodge complaints or join demonstrations.

A report by Abdelfattah Amor, the U.N. Special Rapporteur on Religious Intolerance, released in March, underscored the need for Vietnam to implement reforms to safeguard religious freedoms. However, the government continued to require that all religious activities be registered by the state and to apply restrictions on travel by religious leaders and on the contents of their sermons and speeches.

In April the government issued a new decree on religion, No. 26/1999/ND-CP. While guaranteeing freedom of religion, the decree states that all religious organizations used to oppose the government, as well as undefined "superstitious activities," will be punished according to the law. The decree also bans religious organizations that conduct activities contrary to "structures authorized by the prime minister."

Religious leaders from the banned Unified Church of Vietnam (UBCV) faced ongoing persecution during 1999. In September, one year after their release from prison in 1998, three UBCV monks-Thich Quang Do, Thich Khong Tanh, and Thich Tue Sy-were again threatened with arrest. In March 1999, Thich Quang Do was summoned for questioning and ordered to return to Ho Chi Minh City after he traveled to central Vietnam to visit the Supreme Patriarch of the UBC, Thich Huyen Quang (who himself has been under pagoda arrest for sixteen years). On August 6, officials in Ho Chi Minh City called in Thich Quang Do for several hours of questioning and tried to force him to sign a confession that he had acted illegally after he wrote a letter to European Union ambassadors in Hanoi calling for human rights and religious freedoms. On August 13, a police squad came to his pagoda after midnight and demanded to see him, threatening to break down the door before they eventually left. In September, Quang Do was again summoned for questioning by police, as were Thich Khong Tanh and Thich Tue Sy. The monks were told that their rearrests were imminent, as warrants had already been prepared to arrest them for "subversive activities" pending further investigation.

Members of the Hoa Hao sect of Buddhism were subject to police surveillance and at least one member was thought to be in detention. The sect was granted official status in May, although government appointees dominated an eleven-member Hoa Hao Buddhism Representative Committee established at that time. In July, in one of the first large public gatherings of the group since 1975, thousands of Hoa Hao members commemorated the founding of the church in An Giang province.

The government also made efforts to suppress Protestants, particularly as increasing numbers of ethnic minorities joined evangelical churches in the northern and central highlands. Reports were received of persecution and harassment of Hmong Protestants in Lai Chau, Lao Cai and Ha Giang provinces, Mnong in Binh Phuoc province, Bahnar in Gia Lai province, and Hre in Quang Ngai. In January the official law journal Phap Luat heavily criticized the conversion to Protestantism of Hmong in northern Ha Giang province. The provincial party chief was quoted as saying that a district task force had been established to "deal with illegal religious evangelism" by persuading people to sign commitments not to follow "bad people" or cults but to rebuild ancestor shrines. Two months earlier in Ha Giang, the provincial propaganda committee had issued a forty-two page pamphlet entitled "Propagandizing and Mobilizing Citizens not to Follow Religion Illegally." More than a dozen Hmong Christians were reportedly in detention in Lai Chau and Lai Cau provinces as of mid-1999.

On May 7, police raided an evangelical gathering of the Vietnam Assemblies of God Church in a Hanoi hotel, holding twenty people for several days. Police detained two of the group's leaders, Lo Van Hen (a member of the Black Thai minority group, who had been released from three years in prison in January 1999), and Rev. Tran Dinh (Paul) Ai, who had served two years in prison in the early 1990s for his religious activities and who met with U.N. Special Rapporteur Amor during his 1998 visit. Lo Van Hen was escorted back to his home in Dien Bien Phu, while Rev. Ai was detained under police guard for a month in the Hanoi hotel where the meeting had taken place before being released.

For Catholics, relations between Vietnam and the Vatican slightly warmed with the visit in March of a Vatican delegation and Vietnam's acceptance of the appointment of four new bishops by the Vatican. In addition, in September a group of bishops from the U.S. Catholic Conference made a historic visit to Vietnam, their first since 1975. As in 1998, tens of thousands of Catholics were able to attend an annual festival commemorating the sanctuary of the Notre Dame of La Vang in Quang Tri province. However, at least three members of the Catholic Congregation of the Mother Co-Redemptrix, arrested in 1987, were believed to remain in prison.

During 1999 there were scattered reports of civil unrest in the countryside. In January villagers and riot police clashed over a land dispute in Ba Ria, Vung Tau province near Ho Chi Minh City, despite an unsuccessful mediation attempt by the local Catholic church. In May, more than one hundred farmers from provinces around Hanoi gathered in front of the National Assembly to protest against corruption by officials. That same month the official Thai Binh newspaper reported that unrest continued in Thai Binh province, the site of peasant clashes with the government over corruption and land grabs in 1997.

The party and the government made several attempts during the year to attack corruption, starting with an official anticorruption drive in February and the party's launching of a two-year "self-criticism" campaign in May. The state Vietnamese News Agency reported in May that during the first four months of 1999, more than 1,000 officials in Thai Binh province had been suspended from their jobs for corruption. Also in May, the state press announced that a new criminal code had been drafted that would focus more on corruption issues and economic crimes, rather than on national security violations. It would also decrease the number of crimes punishable by death from forty-four to thirty. The National Assembly failed to pass the new code before adjourning in June but was expected to take it up again in its November session. The country's largest corruption trial, the Minh Phung-Epco case, ended in August, with six people sentenced to death and six sentenced to life in prison. The continued use of the death penalty in Vietnam remained a concern.

Conditions within Vietnam's prison system continued to be very poor and did not meet the U.N.'s Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. Solitary confinement, pressure to sign confessions, forced labor, and inadequate food and medical care were commonplace.

In May, the National Assembly passed a new press law requiring journalists to pay compensation or publish retractions to persons hurt by their reports, even if the information is correct. A June edition of Tap Chi Cong San , the theoretical journal of the party central committee, instructed journalists to publish the conclusions of competent state agencies. If the press did not agree with such conclusions, the journal stated,it must publish them all the same but could file a complaint with the National Assembly. An earlier 1997 directive requires Vietnamese journalists to obtain approval from the Ministry of Culture and Information before passing any information on to foreign journalists.

Defending Human Rights

On September 6, Dr. Nguyen Dan Que, Vietnam's leading human rights activist, called for the establishment of an independent human rights organization in Vietnam from his home in Ho Chi Minh City. International human rights organizations were not permitted to visit Vietnam during the year, nor were domestic human rights organizations allowed to operate. In March, following the release of a report by the U.N. Special Rapporteur on Religious Intolerance, the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry stated that individuals or organizations coming to conduct activities concerning human rights or religion would not be allowed in Vietnam. Communist Party Secretary Le Kha Phieu revealed much of the leadership's view on human rights at a party plenum in August, when he stated: "Any ideas to promote `absolute democracy,' to put human rights above sovereignty, or support multiparty or political pluralism...are lies and cheating."

The Role of the International Community

Donor Countries

At the meeting of the Consultative Group of donors to Vietnam held in December 1998 in Paris, donors pledged U.S. $2.2 billion in aid to Vietnam. One of the largest donors to Vietnam was the European Union (E.U.), which pledged $1.7 billion. In June, prior to a midterm review of donor aid in Haiphong, Germany's ambassador to Vietnam, on behalf of the E.U. presidency, pushed for economic and social reforms and expressed concerns about political prisoners and restrictions on press and religious groups. During a September visit by Vietnamese Prime Minister Phan Van Khai to Finland after it took over the E.U. presidency, the Finnish prime minister raised issues of human rights, judicial reform, and treatment of dissidents. Phan Van Khai visited Tokyo in March and received aid commitments of 600 billion yen (U.S. $5.6 billion) in loans plus 600 billion yen (U.S. $5.6 billion) for infrastructure projects. The Japanese Foreign Ministry expressed concerns about the detention of Nguyen Thanh Giang but Tokyo did not condition any of its aid on human rights improvements or legal reforms. In August the Australian Senate passed a resolution on human rights in Vietnam, in which it mentioned the arrest of Nguyen Thanh Giang.

United States

The United States government took fairly strong positions on Vietnam's human rights record during the year, criticizing the arrest of Nguyen Thanh Giang in March, and handing over a list of political prisoners it wanted released in July during the seventh session of the U.S. -Vietnam bilateral human rights dialogue in Hanoi. These incidents, as well as the September release of a report by the Department of State on religious practices in Vietnam, provoked strong reactions from Hanoi, which criticized the United States for interfering in its internal affairs. Nonetheless, in July the U.S. and Vietnam signed an agreement in principle on a Bilateral Trade Agreement, potentially paving the way for eventual granting of Normal Trade Relations status for Vietnam. However, as of October the Vietnamese government had not yet signed the final agreement. Earlier in the year, the U.S. House of Representatives affirmed President Clinton's 1998 decision to grant the Jackson Vanik waiver of freedom of emigration requirements of the 1974 Trade Act. Trade, human rights, and accounting for U.S. personnel missing in action from the Vietnam War were the main agenda items during a visit to Vietnam in September by Secretary of State Madeleine Albright.
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA OVERVIEW

Human Rights Developments

Massive human rights abuses in Kosovo and the NATO bombing that ensued, renewal of Russia's military campaign against Chechnya, and the rapidly deteriorating human rights situation in Central Asia were the dominant themes in the region during 1999. In a long-awaited move, the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) indicted Slobodan Milosevic, along with three senior Serbian officials and a Yugoslav Army officer, for crimes against humanity in Kosovo. Six others indicted for war crimes were arrested, five in Bosnia by the NATO-led Stabilization Force and one by Austrian police in Austria.

After months of internal armed conflict in Kosovo that had already left over 2,000 civilians dead and hundreds of thousands displaced, in September 1998 and early 1999, the Yugoslav and Serbian forces committed several particularly brutal crimes against ethnic Albanian civilians that ultimately forced the international community to act. The media images of mutilated and executed ethnic Albanian civilians that flashed around the world sent a shock wave of recognition and generated intense pressure on the governments of Western Europe and the United States to respond in a more effective and timely manner than had been the case in Bosnia.

On March 24, 1999, after the collapse of peace negotiations in February in Rambouillet, France, NATO began its bombing campaign against Serbia. Political leaders, if not NATO commanders, seemed initially to believe that it would only take a few days of air strikes to bring Milosevic back to the negotiating table. Instead, Milosevic defied NATO, intensified his military campaign in the province, and began the systematic "ethnic cleansing" of the province. Over the course of the next seventy-eight days, Serbian and Yugoslav forces committed widespread atrocities, including summary executions and massacres

of civilians, beatings, rape, destruction of civilian property, and massive displacement. Over 800,000 people were expelled from the province and as many as 10,000 people were believed to have been arbitrarily executed, although the precise number was still unknown.

Milosevic apparently expected that the members of NATO would not be able to maintain a united front over an extended period of time and that pressure would build to stop the bombing. But this time, Milosevic miscalculated. Although there were severe tensions among NATO member states regarding the bombing of Yugoslavia, as well as growing discomfort at the strained relations with Russia and China caused by NATO's campaign, the NATO leadership remained remarkably steadfast over the course of the three-month bombing campaign. Ultimately, NATO bombing, combined with diplomatic efforts, brought an end to the "ethnic cleansing" in Kosovo and a withdrawal of Yugoslav and Serbian troops there. The NATO-led Kosovo Force (KFOR) entered Kosovo on June 12, almost one million refugees began returning to their homes, and the United Nations assumed governance of the province until a future Kosova government could be elected.

While the NATO strategy ultimately succeeded in bringing an end to atrocities against ethnic Albanians in Kosovo, touting the NATO response as the paradigm for dealing with future human rights crises was controversial among many in the human rights community and was likely to be a source of debate for years to come.

Those looking to the handling of the Kosovo crisis as a blueprint for a future human rights-oriented foreign policy would do well to start with a study of what the U.S. and its allies failed to do over the preceding ten years that might have prevented the need for military intervention. Not only did the international community utterly fail to devise any strategy to end the repression in Kosovo over the years leading up to the outbreak of armed conflict in Kosovo, but, in deference to Milosevic, it agreed not to place issues related to Kosovo on the agenda during the Dayton peace negotiations.

Instead, the international community opted to treat Milosevic as a peacemaker and its legitimate interlocutor in the region and failed to arrest Milosevic's cohorts in Bosnia-Bosnian Serb leaders Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic-creating an unmistakable environment of impunity. (See The Role of the International Community - United States, below). Once the armed conflict erupted in Kosovo, the United States and West European governments repeatedly threatened economic and other sanctions against Yugoslavia, and NATO threatened military action for months. But these threats were rarely credible and were quickly withdrawn or forgotten at the slightest promise of restraint by the Yugoslav leaders.

While the West procrastinated, Milosevic prepared for the massive "ethnic cleansing" campaign launched by the Yugoslav army and Serbian police on March 19. It was only then that NATO finally reacted in earnest. Given the international community's failure to take early steps to prevent the crisis in Kosovo, some international human rights activists felt great discomfort that the NATO bombing was then carried out in the name of human rights. For some in the human rights community, the debate centered around whether military force could ever be an appropriate means to address human rights abuses and, if so, under what circumstances. There was a consensus that states have an obligation to prevent or stop genocide, but there was serious disagreement about whether military intervention-which may produce its own human rights victims-was an appropriate response and even more disagreement about whether human rights groups should ever advocate such a response.

This debate only intensified as NATO bombs killed a growing number of civilians in Serbia proper. An estimated 600 Serb civilians were killed during the war, and total reconstruction costs could well reach U.S. $34 billion. In addition, the conflict produced other negative side effects that were antithetical to human right progress: the seventy-eight-day bombing campaign revived cold war tensions and increased anti-Western sentiment in Russia and elsewhere, tested the commitment of the recently admitted NATO member states, threatened to undermine the fragile peace in Bosnia, as well as in neighboring Albania and Macedonia (although it ultimately did not do so), jeopardized nascent democratic opposition in Serbia itself, and created divisions among human rights activists around the world about the universal applicability of human rights standards.

Human Rights Watch's policy is to call for the use of military force if it considered it the only reasonable measure that could prevent or stop genocide or genocide-like mass killings. But the organization also insists that all military action, regardless of its stated humanitarian purpose, has to be carried out in compliance with international humanitarian standards, and that those who violate such standards must be held accountable.

NATO's strategic decision to rely almost exclusively upon massive aerial bombardment to force Serbia to withdraw from Kosovo was also troubling. By deciding to fly only at high altitudes, at least in part to protect NATO pilots, while offering no immediate protection to the ethnic Albanian population in Kosovo, NATO appeared, at least in the short term, to be turning the priorities of humanitarian law-the protection of civilians-on its head.

Moreover, there appeared to be no consensus among international actors as to what humanitarian intervention actually meant and no clear parameters as to which circumstances warranted or required a military response. The Kosovo conflict presented a double challenge to the international human rights community: to preserve humanitarian intervention as a possible response to prevent or end the worst human rights crises, while ensuring that such interventions, no matter how appropriate or necessary, were carried out in a responsible and accountable manner. If humanitarian intervention was to be a response grounded in human rights protection, it should be applied in a consistent manner worldwide and not only in those places of geopolitical interest to the U.S. and its allies. What is more, clear parameters were necessary in order to prevent human rights violations from becoming a pretext, or being perceived as a pretext, for interventions motivated firstly by geopolitical or other interests.

As Kosovo so dramatically underscored, when human rights abuses are allowed to fester for years, peace, stability, and regional security are inevitably threatened. The international community's appeasement of abusive leaders and willingness to turn a blind eye to deteriorating human rights concerns in the Balkans guaranteed that over time such abuses would increase and become more severe. It also ensured that the international community would ultimately be required to invest much greater financial, military, and other resources in the region to end the fighting and facilitate reconstruction. Furthermore, at this point, the importance of accountability for human rights abuses as an essential component of any security plan should be beyond dispute. Yet the failure to arrest Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, or to indict Milosevic years ago for abuses committed by forces under his command in Croatia and Bosnia, only perpetuated the environment of impunity that led ultimately to the atrocities in Kosovo.

The Balkans could have taught many important human rights lessons, if only the international community were prepared to learn. However, as 1999 came to an end, the international community appeared poised to repeat its mistakes in other areas of the region such as Central Asia and the northern Caucasus, where human rights violations had reached crisis proportions, but an international response grounded in strong human rights protections remained lacking.

Throughout Central Asia and the Caucasus, governments joined forces during the year in what they portrayed as a fight against Islamic fundamentalism. Following the February bombings of government buildings in Tashkent, the Uzbek government accelerated its crackdown on independent political and religious groups. Thousands of men were believed to have been detained, although no independent monitors were granted access to detention centers. During the year, the government tortured detainees to coerce confessions; denied detainees access to legal counsel and a fair trial; prosecuted criminal defendants in what were clearly show trials; threatened, beat, and arrested human rights defenders; and discriminated against "independent" Muslims, or those who practice Islam beyond the parameters of government-controlled mosques. In August, the Kyrgyz army, backed by Uzbek warplanes, began an attack on armed militants-reportedly members of the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan-in southern Kyrgyzstan. The conflict, which as of this writing had produced a number of civilian casualties and over 5,000 displaced persons, threatened to destabilize the entire region as both Uzbek and Kyrgyz military conducted air strikes in neighboring Tajikistan.

While the governments of the region had legitimate security concerns, their response was thoroughly disproportionate to any threat that had been presented, and the conduct of the authorities-the widespread planting of evidence, torture of suspects, the absence of fair trials, and the denial of defendants' basic due process rights-did not seem intended to identify true criminal suspects. The fact that the governments of the region targeted peaceful political, religious, and ethnic groups and persecuted independent human rights monitors raised suspicion that the "threat of terrorism" was primarily a pretext for silencing potential government opposition.

Yet despite the backtracking on human rights protections throughout the region, the U.S. government and the European Union squandered economic and diplomatic leverage, granting lucrative trade benefits to the countries of the region. The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe-the regional body most active in Central Asia-paid lip service to human rights, but increasingly pursued a policy largely devoid of a human rights strategy, seeking instead to focus its efforts on economic development, the environment, and security-uncontroversial issues that were of interest to the governments of Central Asia.

In a similar vein, when Russia renewed its war in Chechnya, the past failures of Western policy toward that country again came into focus. During the 1994-1996 war in Chechnya, western governments and intergovernmental institutions, eager to support President Boris Yeltsin in his 1996 reelection campaign, granted Russia key financial and diplomatic benefits without requiring a corresponding commitment from Russia to hold its military and political leaders accountable for the abuses committed during the war; justice and accountability simply were not on the agenda. When Russia began air strikes over Chechnya in September, the international community, having been complicit in creating a climate of impunity for Russian military abuses following the previous Chechen war, could faint be heard.

Not surprisingly, civilians quickly became this new war's worst casualties. Within weeks, hundreds were reported dead, the victims of indiscriminate bombings. About 180,000 people fled their homes to Ingushetia and Dagestan, fearing a repeat of the devastation that took between 80,000 and 100,000 civilian lives in 1994-1996. Flouting international and domestic law protecting freedom of movement for Russian citizens, Russian authorities banned internally displaced persons in Ingushetia, one of Russia's most impoverished regions, from traveling to other cities in Russia for which they did not have internal residence permits.

Prior to the start of the war in Chechnya, a series of explosions that the Russian government blamed on Chechens had claimed at least 300 lives in Russia. In response, the Moscow city government rounded up over 20,000 people with the darker skin typical of natives of the Caucasus region. Although the government justified these as extraordinary security measures, the harassment, detention, extortion, and mistreatment of "blacks" had long been standard practice in Moscow. Ethnic minorities were also detained and mistreated in Kyrgyzstan where, in response to the crisis brewing in southern Kyrgyzstan, police in Bishkek and Jala-Abad rounded up hundreds of ethnic Uzbeks, Tajiks, and Afghans.

In addition to the difficulties faced by the 180,000 Chechens who were displaced by the fighting in Chechnya, other conflicts produced significant displacement and threats to international refugee protection standards. By mid-March, when NATO air strikes began against Serbia, more than 450,000 had already been displaced by the fighting in Kosovo. The world was stunned by the speed and brutality with which Yugoslav forces carried out their "ethnic cleansing" campaign in April and May, during which over 800,000 people were systematically forced into neighboring Albania, Macedonia, and the Yugoslav Republic of Montenegro.

The international community was not prepared for the large numbers of refugees who flooded across the borders, and its initial response was slow and inadequate. Resources in neighboring countries were also severely strained by the crisis. Despite poverty and only minimal infrastructure in the north of Albania, the Albanian government and people valiantly responded to the Kosovar Albanians who sought refuge in the country. In Macedonia, however, ethnic Albanians were not so welcome. The government repeatedly closed its border to fleeing Kosovar Albanians, leaving them stranded in the no-man's land between borders or pushing them back into areas of Kosovo where they were at great risk. Once they arrived in Macedonia, refugees faced hostility, discrimination, and police abuse. Thousands of refugees were involuntarily deported from Macedonia to third countries, in many cases separated from their families, deprived of information about their destination or rights, and denied the benefit of registration or monitoring by UNHCR or other refugee assistance organizations. Although western governments were initially reluctant to offer protection to Kosovo refugees, hoping instead that they would be cared for in the region, they ultimately agreed to accept quotas of refugees in order to reduce the potentially destabilizing strain on Macedonia.

The crisis in Kyrgyzstan also produced an estimated 5,000-7,500 displaced persons who, as of this writing, remained in government-established camps. In Kazakhstan and Tajikistan, governments also failed to provide the protection for refugees required by international law.

Throughout the former Yugoslavia, many war refugees and displaced persons continued to live in limbo, unable to return to their pre-war homes or facing difficult obstacles to rebuilding their lives if they did return. For the second year in a row, the Office of the High Representative in Bosnia and Hercegovina (OHR) designated 1999 as the "year of return," but the number of minority returns was far less than foreseen by OHR. Ethnically motivated violence continued against those who tried to go back to their pre-war homes, as did economic and housing discrimination. The process was further complicated when more than 50,000 refugees fled from Yugoslavia to Bosnia during the NATO bombing campaign. Most international staff were also pulled out of Republika Srpska (RS) during this period because of an increase in anti-western sentiment, further undermining the security situation for returnees. Under intense pressure from the international community, the RS finally adopted housing legislation that removed some of the most egregious impediments to the return of refugees and displaced persons.

Similarly, in Croatia, ethnic Serbs who were displaced by the war continued to face severe obstacles to return. Despite government promises to facilitate the process, Serbs found it difficult to obtain the identity documents necessary for them to return to their homes and reclaim their property. Although courts continued to evict displaced Serbs who had been occupying Croat homes, there was no parallel effort to remove Croat occupants from the homes of ethnic Serbs and no effort to provide homeless Serbs with alternative accommodations. Discrimination without hope of redress in housing and employment, as well as an increase in violence against ethnic Serbs in some parts of the country, were further impediments to return.

There was much unfinished business related to strengthening human rights protection in post-conflict areas. In Tajikistan, the peace process moved forward during 1999, but there was no corresponding reduction in the level of political or criminal violence, or a host of abuses related to abusive or corrupt law enforcement and judicial officers. Similarly, in the period leading up to presidential elections in late 1999 and parliamentary elections scheduled for early 2000, the Tajik government took numerous steps to impede the activities of political parties and the media. In an effort to obstruct the registration of opposition presidential candidates, the Supreme Court granted registration to one of the candidates just two weeks before the planned elections.

Optimism faded in Northern Ireland as implementation of the Good Friday agreement was stalled by disagreement over the disarmament of paramilitary groups. An independent commission established to address issues of police reform-a key element of building confidence in any peace-time police body-failed to recommend a screening process for police or other steps that would guarantee accountability for past abuses.

Justice for past abuses is clearly an essential requirement for a secure and lasting peace in any post-conflict area, but the region presented a mixed record in holding perpetrators accountable. The indictment of Slobodan Milosevic on May 26-the first sitting head of state to be indicted for crimes against humanity-along with three senior Serbian officials and a Yugoslav Army official, was a welcome and long awaited development. Similarly, the arrest by SFOR of six persons indicted for war crimes, five in Bosnia and one in Austria, and the extradition of another indictee by the Croatia government were positive steps forward. Nevertheless, as of this writing, thirty-two publicly indicted persons remained at large, most notably Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic.

The capture and trial of Abdullah Ocalan, leader of the Kurdish Workers Party (PKK), and the PKK's announcement that it intended to institute a unilateral ceasefire in southeastern Turkey raised hope that the fifteen-year conflict might finally be brought to an end. However, while the Turkish authorities pursued the prosecution of Ocalan, it took no steps to initiate an equally thorough and impartial investigation into abuses by its own troops during the war in the southeast.

Despite the Turkish army's recent military victories over the PKK and the capture of Ocalan, there was no indication that the Turkish government would seize this opportunity to lessen the conflict by guaranteeing Kurds' basic cultural or political rights, the denial of which had fueled the conflict. In practice and in law, there were still severe limitations on the use of the Kurdish language, while political parties with a large Kurdish membership were subjected to police raids and closed down, Kurdish voters and candidates were harassed prior to the April elections, and numerous Kurdish politicians were sitting in prison for their peaceful expression and political activity.

Turkey also continued to persecute Islamists, refusing in April to allow a newly elected deputy of the Islamic Virtue Party to take her parliamentary oath while wearing her head scarf, taking legal steps to ban the party, broadening regulations that prohibit students, civil servants, and others from wearing head scarves on government premises, and punishing those who protested against these regulations.

Torture and police abuse were routine in the region, especially during security crises. Torture was endemic to much of the region's criminal justice systems and was used in the investigation of crimes ranging from petty theft to murder. Torture methods included sustained and repeated beatings, painful suspension of body parts, asphyxiation, sexual abuse, and electric shock. Several factors facilitated torture: impunity for torturers, poor protection for defendants' rights in national legal systems, the lack of an independent judiciary, and corrupt law enforcement agencies. Deaths in custody due to torture were reported in Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Georgia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan during 1999.

While torture was most frequent during the first hours of detention in police custody, there were also numerous reports of physical and psychological ill-treatment in the region's prisons. Repeated beatings and other forms of ill-treatment by prison guards were reported inKazakhstan and Tajikistan, and an inhumane isolation regime continued to be used in Turkey. In Turkey, ten inmates were killed and many others injured when Turkish gendarmerie apparently used excessive force to put down unrest in the Ankara Closed Prison on September 26. In Azerbaijan, a prison revolt in Gobestan ended in the deaths of eleven prisoners who were reportedly shot by officials of the Ministry of Interior.

States' practices related to the death penalty varied widely in the region. As of September, twenty-nine people were known to have been executed during the year in Belarus. Kyrgyzstan and Turkmenistan announced a moratorium on the death penalty in 1999, and capital punishment was abolished in Bulgaria and the Federation of Bosnia and Hercegovina. Although Turkey had not executed a prisoner since 1984, in June, PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan was convicted of treason and sentenced to death.

Although there were numerous elections in the region during 1999, a number of governments used the lead-up to elections to impose highly restrictive measures on anyone perceived as a potential political opponent. In Kazakhstan, suddenly called presidential elections in January were a gross perversion of a democratic political process, with the government obstructing the formation, registration, and activities of groups intending to support opposition candidates or to participate as monitors. In Georgia, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan, restrictions on the press, assembly, and association increased dramatically in the pre-electoral period. In Belarus, "alternative" elections to protest President Lukashenka's extension of his term in office were dealt with brutally. Turkmenistan's parliamentary elections scheduled for December are expected to be an empty exercise because the Turkmen government had comprehensively deprived its citizens of all basic political freedoms, incarcerated its political opponents, banned nascent nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and permitted no media activity that did not support the government. In the lead-up to presidential elections in 1999 and parliamentary elections scheduled for early 2000, the government of Tajikistan tried to obstruct the legitimate activities of political parties and attempted further to restrict the independent media.

Throughout the region, journalists were threatened, beaten, detained, and even killed during the year. Those reporting on corruption and other government misconduct were particularly at risk. In Russia, the Glasnost Foundation reported that it had documented fifty-four attacks, threats, or robberies of journalists between January and August, including the murder of eight journalists. In Serbia, an editor who had been critical of the Milosevic government was assassinated in April.

Writers and journalists throughout the region faced criminal prosecution for the peaceful expression of their views. For example, Nadire Mater, who wrote Mehmet's Book-Soldiers who have Fought in the Southeast Tell Their Stories was charged with "insulting the armed forces. " Her trial in the Istanbul State Security Court started on September 29. Others were subjected to a variety of financial measures such as fines and tax audits aimed at forcing their closure. There was no independent local media whatsoever in Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan.

Journalists also continued to be prosecuted under criminal libel statutes in many countries in the region, including in Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Romania, Russia, Turkey, and Uzbekistan. The international community suspended the criminal libel statute in Bosnia. Governments in Russia, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan took steps during the year to restrict access to the internet.

Roma continued to face systematic discrimination and mistreatment throughout the region. In Albania, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Greece, Hungary, Macedonia, Romania, and Slovakia, reports of police brutality, including excessive force leading to injury and death, and racist verbal abuse against Roma were disturbingly common. Roma also were the targets of neo-Nazi and skinhead violence that was frequently fatal. Whether the perpetrators were police or private citizens, Roma faced enormous obstacles in obtaining redress for crimes against them. In Kosovo, dozens of Roma suspected of siding with the Serbs were robbed, beaten, abducted, detained, and as many as thirty-five were killed or "disappeared" after Serbian and Yugoslav forces withdrew from the province.

Religious groups, especially "non-traditional" groups that operated outside the confines of government control, continued to face discrimination and harassment in a number of countries in the region, including Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Georgia, Greece, Russia, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan. Such groups were often denied legal registration, making them vulnerable to police harassment, extortion, and other abuses. Members of religious groups were detained, their prayer services disrupted by police, their homes searched without warrant, their religious publications and pamphlets confiscated, and some were threatened with dismissal from their jobs. In August, a Baptist minister in Turkmenistan was sentenced to four years of imprisonment allegedly for financial misconduct; his sentence was believed to have been motivated by his religious activities. Anti-Semitic violence and attacks on synagogues increased in Russia during the year. In Uzbekistan, the release of five imprisoned Christians was clearly timed to occur prior to the publication of the U.S. government's first annual report on religious freedom. Conscientious objectors, often members of persecuted religious groups such as the Jehovah's Witnesses, sometimes faced severe beatings and lengthy prison terms when they refused military service, particularly in Armenia, and even in countries such as Azerbaijan and Bulgaria where the law provided for alternative service.

Discrimination and police abuse against gay men and lesbians was reported in Romania, where an unknown number of people remained in prison for private, consensual sex with someone of the same sex.

Throughout the region, women faced rampant discrimination and violence. During the conflict in Kosovo, women suffered rape and other sexual abuse, and some also reported being forcibly taken from refugee camps in Albania and trafficked into prostitution. Trafficking of women into prostitution was widespread and often possible because of government complicity, if not direct involvement. The criminal justice system often provided little support or protection, but instead created obstacles, for any woman trying to report rape or domestic violence; sometimes these bodies were blatantly hostile toward the victim.

To date, thirty-nine of the fifty-three countries of Europe and Central Asia have signed the 1997 Mine Ban Treaty and twenty-nine have ratified. FRY and Russia continued to produce landmines. There were also allegations that Turkey still produced landmines, but these were denied by the government. None in the region are believed to export landmines. Anti-personnel mines were used by both the Yugoslav military and the KLA during the Kosovo conflict, and in southeastern Turkey by the government and the PKK. Georgian partisans used landmines in Abkhazia, and there were unconfirmed reports that rebels in Tajikistan used landmines during 1999.

Defending Human Rights

The development of civil society depends on transparency and adherence to the rule of law. Local human rights defenders play a crucial role in this process by exposing the abusive conduct of governments and promoting accountability. They often provide a critical lifeline between victims of government abuse and the rest of society, where offering assistance and support for those who are most vulnerable. Because of the important role they played, because they often threaten to expose abusive governments, and because they challenge the notion that states' sovereignty was absolute, a growing number of human rights defenders were themselves victims of abuse during 1999. Three prominent human rights activists were killed in Europe during the year. Others were beaten or imprisoned. Most were victims of direct government harassment, but some were targeted by paramilitary groups.

Human rights activists were a target of violence and intimidation during the conflict in Kosovo. Human rights lawyer Bajram Kelmendi, along with his two sons, was killed by Serbian police on May 6. Other activists in Kosovo were detained or imprisoned during the year, and many were ultimately forced to flee the province. Human rights activists in Serbia and Montenegro were also under extreme pressure and subject to police harassment during 1999; groups such as the Humanitarian Law Center and the Helsinki Committee for Human Rights in Serbia took great risks in reporting on the atrocities being committed in Kosovo.

Duma deputy Galina Starovoitova, a prominent human rights activist and outspoken critic of government corruption in Russia, was brutally murdered in late 1998. As of this writing, her murderer had not been identified and the motive for her death remained unknown. Other human rights activists in the country also faced administrative harassment, such as cumbersome re-registration requirements, that were clearly intended to impede their work.

Rosemary Nelson, a highly respected human rights lawyer in Northern Ireland, died from a car bomb on March 15. The Red Hand Defenders, a loyalist paramilitary group, claimed responsibility. Ms. Nelson had long been harassed and threatened with death or physical harm by officers of the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC).

The government of Uzbekistan launched a wholesale attack against human rights defenders in 1999, seeking to intimidate activists and prevent international scrutiny of its disastrous human rights record. Activists were brutally beaten, detained, sentenced to long prison terms on spurious charges, and impeded in their activities. Mikhail Ardzinov, chairman of the Independent Human Rights Organization of Uzbekistan (IHROU) suffered broken ribs, bruised kidneys, and a concussion from a brutal beating on June 25 by officers of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Ismoil Adylov and Mahbuba Kasymova, both members of IHROU, were sentenced to prison terms of six and five years respectively following sham trials on politically motivated charges. Akhmadhon Turakhonov, also a member of IHROU, died in prison in June after being deprived of adequate medical care.

Human rights activists in Turkey were also the target of widespread government harassment, ill-treatment, and criminal prosecution during the year. The regional offices of several organizations were closed indefinitely. Akin Birdal, president of the Human Rights Association (HRA), began serving his one-year prison term on June 3 for having referred to "the Kurdish people" in a speech he gave in 1996. His sentence was suspended on health grounds in September, shortly before Turkish Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit met with President Clinton in Washington, D.C. On September 28, however, as Ecevit met with President Clinton, HRA members were among one hundred people detained and mistreated at a public meeting in Istanbul, followed the next day by a raid on HRA's Istanbul office and the violent arrest of one of its board members, Saban Dayanan.

Turkmenistan remained so repressive that no local human rights organization was able to operate in the country, and even international monitors were obstructed in their efforts to document abuse. During a fact-finding mission to Turkmenistan in February, a Human Rights Watch representative was taken from his hotel room in the middle of the night and deported from the country, allegedly for distributing a human rights publication. The government took steps to intimidate persons it believed would be contacted by Human Rights Watch during the mission and threatened them not to speak to the delegation. Those who did meet with the organization were summoned for interrogation by the security forces.

Human rights defenders in Armenia, Belarus, Georgia, and Kyrgyzstan also faced harassment and a variety of government-created impediments to their legitimate activities during the year.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

In June 1999, the United Nations (U.N.) took on its unprecedented peace implementation mission in Kosovo where, pending a final political settlement of the status of the province, the U.N. is tasked with all aspects of civilian administration; developing provisional local government institutions; conducting elections; overseeing reconstruction of infrastructure and the economy; maintaining civil law and order by deploying an international police force as well as establishing a replacement local force; protecting and promoting human rights; and ensuring the safe return of refugees. Delayed deployment of U.N. police throughout the summer months left a security vacuum that facilitated a continued cycle of violence, with Kosovo Albanians committing revenge attacks that forced over 200,000 Serbs and Roma to flee Kosovo.

The UNHCR's response to the mass influx of Kosovar Albanian refugees into Macedonia was initially slow and poorly coordinated since the organization was unprepared for such a large and sudden exodus. The emergency response improved greatly within a few weeks, but was difficult to coordinate due to the participation of NATO and the rapid proliferation of nongovernmental organizations. As of October, UNHCR was conducting an independent review of its emergency response in both Macedonia and Albania.

Although it devoted insufficient attention to war crimes being committed in Kosovo throughout most of 1998, the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) finally committed to a full-scale investigation in early 1999, leading to the May indictment of Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic. The indictment, though welcome, might have had a greater deterrent effect had it come earlier. Moreover, because its timing coincided with the NATO bombing campaign, it created the inaccurate impression that the tribunal was politically motivated, especially because the Milosevic indictment was based only on abuses committed in Kosovo, neglecting Milosevic's alleged responsibility for humanitarian law violations committed in Bosnia and Croatia between 1991 and 1995. Also welcome in 1999 was the tribunal's long awaited public outreach campaign aimed at fulfilling its mandate of promoting peace and stability by educating the citizens of the countries that make up the former Yugoslavia about its work.

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)

Expectations of the role of the OSCE in promoting human rights were raised in early 1999, with Norway promising to put human rights at the top of the agenda during its yearlong chairmanship of the organization. In January, the OSCE made the principled decision to signal its disapproval of Kazakhstan's flawed electoral process by sending only a scaled-back assessment mission to observe presidential elections. The OSCE's Kosovo Verification Mission conducted an immediate and thorough investigation of the January 15 massacre of innocent civilians in Racak, publicly reported its findings, and stood firm in the face of intense criticism from the Yugoslav government in response. In addition, the OSCE mission to Croatia notably improved its work by issuing more critical external reporting and streamlining its internal reporting procedures.

These high points were unfortunately overshadowed by the OSCE's poor handling of the worsening human rights situation in Central Asia. Following on the December 1998 Ministerial Council Decision on Central Asia, the chairman-in-office appointed Wilhelm Hoynck as his special representative to develop a plan for strengthened and coordinated OSCE engagement in Central Asia, but Ambassador Hoynck's July report was a disappointment. The report was issued at a time when Uzbek human rights activists were facing increased harassment and abuse, when the Turkmen government was refusing to agree to any OSCE human dimension activities in the country, and when Turkmenistan, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan were all preparing for what appeared would be seriously flawed elections in late 1999 and early 2000. Yet the Hoynck report made only scant reference to these conditions and completely omitted discussion of a strategy for the OSCE to address them. OSCE officials defended the report, claiming that it was not intended to be a public accounting of human rights problems in the region, but rather to outline a comprehensive strategy to demonstrate OSCE commitment to the region. To undertake such a communication, without addressing the serious human rights situation in the region, risks signaling that these countries can benefit from OSCE membership and enhanced engagement and integration, without being held accountable for their failure to implement their OSCE human dimension commitments.

Council of Europe

In the first year since its restructuring, the European Court of Human Rights struggled under the pressure of a growing caseload, with more new cases filed in the first half of 1999 than in all of 1998. The year also saw an indication of a worrisome increase in state defiance of the court's binding judgments.

The strain on the court and its authority was troubling as its jurisdiction extended to new signatory states with seriously defective human rights records and neither the political will nor the rule of law culture necessary to implement the court's decisions. This included Georgia, which gained admittance in April, but repealed important legal reforms only one month after gaining membership. This threat to Council of Europe standards was compounded by pressure for premature admission of applicant states, especially Bosnia and Hercegovina, Armenia, and Azerbaijan. In May, the Parliamentary Assembly, in consultation with the Office of the High Representative, identified eight conditions for admission to the Council of Europe that Bosnia could and should meet by September. In September, one of the Parliamentary Assembly's rapporteurs, Swiss parliamentarian Peter Bloetzer, reported that the eight conditions had not been met but recommended nonetheless that the Council of Europe prioritize only four of those conditions. Arguing that Council of Europe admission would help solidify the Serb, Muslim, and Croat confederation, Bloetzer pressed for admission of Bosnia as early as January 2000, notwithstanding the fact that the Bosnian authorities had persistently demonstrated limited political will to live by Council of Europe norms. Meanwhile, applications for admission remained pending for Armenia and Azerbaijan, with Council of Europe officials suggesting they might be admitted in 2000 because the two countries could not be made to wait forever, not because they had demonstrated any particular commitment to implementing Council of Europe principles.

In a potentially valuable contribution to the promotion of human rights throughout the Council of Europe region, in May the Committee of Ministers established the Council of Europe commissioner for human rights, mandated to promote education and awareness of human rights, facilitate the activities of national ombudsmen or similar institutions, identify possible shortcomings in law and practice of member states, and provide assistance to remedy those shortcomings. In September, Professor Alvaro Gil-Robles of Spain was elected to fill the post. At this writing, it was too early to tell whether the commissioner would reach the full potential of his mandate.

In May, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe adopted Recommendation 1408 calling on member states, inter alia, to ratify as soon as possible the statute of the ICC adopted in Rome on July 17, 1998 and to adopt domestic legislation enabling them to cooperate with the court.

North Atlantic Treaty Organization

Failed diplomatic efforts to bring an end to the "ethnic cleansing" of Kosovo forced a U.S.-led NATO response that ultimately brought peace to the region. NATO's conduct, however, violated international humanitarian law in several instances. (See section on the U.S. government, below) After the conflict ended, the NATO-led KFOR force had responsibility for military aspects of the peace implementation. In the early weeks of the peacekeeping mission, KFOR failed to adjust effectively to its quasi-policing role in order to protect ethnic Serb and Roma minorities from reprisal attacks and prevent their mass exodus from the province.

The Kosovo intervention occurred against the backdrop of NATO's continued effort to reinvent itself as a post-Cold War institution. March witnessed the first round of its expansion, with Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic joining the alliance. In April, the heads of state of NATO members convened in Washington to celebrate the organization's fiftieth anniversary, adopt a Membership Action Plan for countries wishing to join, approve an enhanced relationship with countries of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union participating in the Partnership for Peace, and launch a new "Defence Capabilities Initiative," aimed at improving alliance preparedness for Kosovo-type situations in the future. The Summit declaration committed member states and the alliance "to defend our people, our territory and our liberty, founded on democracy, human rights and the rule of law."

European Union

The human rights component of the European Union's (E.U.) relations with the countries of Eastern Europe, the Balkans, and the newly independent states repeatedly gave way in 1999 to competing political and economic interests. First, in exchange for their support of the NATO attacks on Serbia, the E.U. developed for the countries of southeastern Europe a new "Stabilization and Association Process," as part of the E.U.-led international Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe. Particularly for Croatia, Bosnia and Hercegovina, Albania, and Macedonia, the new process held out the promise of substantially enhanced trade and assistance benefits, while seeming to downplay the political criteria contained in the E.U.'s prior "regional approach" to relations with those countries. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was excluded from the Stability Pact and the E.U.'s Stabilization and Association Process pending its fulfillment of the international community's conditions on Kosovo, as well as progress on democratization and treatment of minorities. In addition, the European Union imposed strict sanctions on Yugoslavia, including an oil embargo, a visa ban on Milosevic, his family and associates, an asset freeze on overseas funds of the Yugoslav and Serb governments as well as Milosevic, his family and allies, and an investment ban. Efforts were made to exclude Kosovo and Montenegro from the impact of these sanctions and to ensure that they benefit from the Stability Pact.

In a similar vein, at this writing it seemed likely that by the end of the year the E.U. would extend its expansion process to include up to twelve Eastern European applicant states in active negotiation for accession, and also extend official candidate status to Turkey. Particularly in the cases of Slovakia and Turkey, this possibility represented a significant shift away from a previous policy barring such negotiations for, at least in part, human rights reasons. At this writing, it was too early to tell whether the E.U. would effectively use the advancing accession process with these countries to engage them on human rights issues.

Finally, the E.U. and its member states ratified Partnership and Cooperation Agreements with Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyzstan, opening the way for substantially enhanced trade and assistance benefits for these countries. E.U. officials vowed to address human rights in the context of the new relationships created under the agreements, which specify respect for human rights as a binding condition. While human rights concerns were reportedly discussed in the first Cooperation Council ministerial meetings convened to implement the agreements, these concerns did not appear to have any significant impact on the nature and level of E.U. assistance to these countries.

The European Union took the leading role in promoting ratification of the treaty for the International Criminal Court (ICC).

United States

The U.S.-led forceful NATO response to the "ethnic cleansing" of Kosovo by Yugoslav and Serb security forces came only after years of appeasement of the destructive and abusive Milosevic regime. Repeated missteps in U.S. policy in the Balkans led to the standoff in March. In 1995, the U.S. chose Milosevic to act as its trusted negotiating partner and guarantor of the Bosnian peace, ignoring allegations of his role as the mastermind behind Bosnia's "ethnic cleansing." Further, U.S. negotiators accommodated Milosevic by leaving problems in Kosovo off the table during the Bosnia peace negotiations. Moreover, as the violence in Kosovo escalated throughout 1998, the U.S. government continued to negotiate with Milosevic, repeatedly threatening sanctions and other penalties only to withdraw the threats at the slightest Serb concession. This approach-together with the international community's failure to arrest indicted Bosnian Serb leaders, Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic-could only be interpreted by Milosevic to mean that he would face no repercussions for his escalating campaign of repression in Kosovo. While the West dithered, Milosevic prepared for the thorough "ethnic cleansing" of Kosovo carried out from March to June 1999; and conditions for the Kosovo Albanians deteriorated to the point that the U.S. and its allies felt compelled to respond with military force, which itself brought considerable destruction and, in some instances, civilian casualties in violation of the laws of war.

Promotion of the trans-Caspian and Baku-Ceyhan pipelines (avoiding transit through either Russia or Iran) dominated U.S. policy toward the Caucasus and Central Asia, at the expense of any meaningful action on human rights. The nature of U.S. policy toward the region was illustrated in August when a court in Turkmenistan sentenced opposition figure Pirguli Tangrikuliev to eight years of imprisonment on trumped-up charges during the same week that U.S. Energy Secretary Bill Richardson visited the country. In Washington, the U.S. government issued a public condemnation of the sentencing, but in Ashgabat, Richardson's high-profile visit and his release of the final tranche of U.S. financing for a feasibility study of the trans-Caspian pipeline spoke louder than words.

U.S. government officials continued to call for much needed reform in Turkey, but at critical times they appeared to lack conviction in this policy. Too often US officials seemed still ready to accept short-term half-measures and assurances of future reform, notwithstanding a long history of empty promises from the Turkish government. During his July visit to Turkey, Assistant Secretary of State for Democracy, Human Rights and Labor Harold Koh spoke out forthrightly on the most serious problems, prompting considerable controversy and introspection regarding human rights conditions in the country. Unfortunately, President Clinton failed to drive home the message when he met with Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit in September, and the administration appeared to back away from conditionality on arms transfers to Turkey, including conditions on the pending sale of 145 attack helicopters to which then-Prime Minister Mesut Yilmaz and President Clinton agreed in December 1997. In addition, having supported Turkey in its apprehension and trial of the leader of the Kurdish Workers' Party, Abdullah Ocalan, the administration then failed to press aggressively for fair trial safeguards. As of this writing, it was as yet unclear whether the U.S. government would make effective use of the November Istanbul summit of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe as a forum for promoting meaningful change in Turkey.

The Work of Human Rights Watch

During the Kosovo conflict in 1999, the Europe and Central Asia (ECA) division mounted our largest ever emergency response to a crisis. We also worked persistently to raise the profile of abuses in Central Asia and the Caucasus, intensified our advocacy efforts in the Council of Europe and the OSCE, and focused substantial resources to expose the chronic problems of police brutality and torture in several countries in the region. In Bosnia, Northern Ireland, and Tajikistan, as well as in Kosovo during the latter half of the year, we also focused on the myriad problems -protecting vulnerable populations in times of transition, rebuilding civil society institutions, forming accountable criminal justice and order-keeping bodies, and creating the conditions for free and fair elections-that confront many post-conflict societies.

The crisis in Kosovo was a top priority for Human Rights Watch during the year. We devoted significant resources during late 1998 and early 1999 to our ongoing efforts to document and expose war crimes in the province committed by Yugoslav and Serbian forces, as well as by the Kosovo Liberation Army. In early 1999, we released two reports demonstrating that the forcible displacement of hundreds of thousands of ethnic Albanians was not an unintentional consequence of war, but a deliberate and deadly strategy pursued by Serbian police and Yugoslav army troops. A Week of Terror in Drenica , released in February, documented grave violations of international humanitarian law, including summary executions, massacres, and the destruction of civilian property by Serbian and Yugoslav forces in Kosovo's Drenica region during September 1998. Report on the Massacre in Racak , released in January, presented evidence of killings and other atrocities in that Kosovar village that had taken place earlier that month. During the unsuccessful Rambouillet negotiations in February our staff used both reports, in English and in French translation, to urge that human rights be at the center of the proposed peace agreement.

When the negotiations at Rambouillet foundered and the NATO bombing campaign began in Yugoslavia at the end of March, the ECA division deployed researchers to both the Albanian and Macedonian borders with Kosovo, where hundreds of thousands of refugees were fleeing. For the duration of the crisis, ECA staff carried out hundreds of interviews with victims of and eyewitnesses to summary executions, massacres, beatings, forced expulsions, and other atrocities, summarizing their findings in regular "Kosovo Human Rights Flashes." We worked closely with representatives of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, presenting our documentation in five of the six incidents that ultimately formed the basis for the indictment of Milosevic. Special attention was also paid to the Macedonian government's treatment of Kosovar Albanian refugees, and a number of statements and a letter to the government were issued in this regard.

We also closely monitored NATO's actions during the campaign and sent letters to NATO Secretary General Javier Solana and to the members of the U.N. Security Council, urging the alliance to comply with international humanitarian law. In June, we issued NATO's Use of Cluster Munitions, condemning the use of cluster bombs by NATO forces in Kosovo, and we sent a three-person delegation to Serbia in September to conduct an on-site investigation into possible NATO humanitarian law violations. It was our second mission to Serbia in 1999; in January, a researcher investigated the Serbian government's restrictions of academic freedom.

After the NATO bombing ended and the Kosovar refugees began to return home, we shifted our efforts to exposing revenge violence by ethnic Albanians against the remaining Kosovar Serbs and Roma. Our researchers on the ground also continued to gather evidence to corroborate accounts of war crimes and crimes against humanity that refugees had reported when they were first interviewed in Albania and Macedonia. In July, we released "Ethnic Cleansing" in Glogovac Municipality, documenting war crimes that were perpetrated by Serbian and Yugoslav forces during the period between March 19, when the Kosovo Verification Mission withdrew from Kosovo in the lead-up to the NATO bombing campaign, and June 15, when Serbian and Yugoslav forces withdrew from the region.

We published Abuses Against Serbs and Roma in Kosovo in August, exposing the growing level of revenge killings, beatings, and other abuses against ethnic Serbs, Roma, and others perceived as having supported the Serbian regime in the province, and we made a series of recommendations to international bodies. We also urged the international actors in Kosovo, including the U.N. and the OSCE, to pay attention to our human rights concerns in post-conflict Kosovo.

In Bosnia, we concentrated our efforts on assessing that country's compliance with the conditions set for membership by the Council of Europe. In a briefing paper for Council of Europe officials we outlined serious deficiencies in the application of international human rights standards and the rule of law throughout the country that fell far short of the Council's standards for member states. We conducted advocacy in Strasbourg during the January, June, and September Parliamentary Assembly sessions to deliver the same message to Council of Europe rapporteurs, Parliamentary Assembly committee members, and other Council staff.

In Croatia, we focused on the treatment of ethnic Serbs, as well as the work of international bodies that have particular leverage in the country. In March, we released Second Class Citizens: The Serbs of Croatia at a press conference in Zagreb and presented the findings of the report to the Croatian government representatives, as well as to representatives of the international community. We also conducted an October mission to examine political rights in the context of forthcoming parliamentary elections. We continued an ongoing dialogue with the OSCE regarding the work of its mission and with the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly Monitoring Committee regarding Croatia's lack of progress toward meeting its commitments as a member of that institution.

In our work on Russia, we established three priorities: exposing the widespread use of torture and working with the Moscow Helsinki Group to train groups throughout Russia's regions to document cases of torture; ongoing advocacy work to expose and address the horrific conditions and ill-treatment of children in Russia's orphanages; and documenting abuses related to the renewed conflict in Chechnya. In addition to completing a two-year project documenting torture in Russia's criminal justice system, our staff briefed the Council of Europe's Committee for the Prevention of Torture on our findings and raised torture concerns during interventions at the OSCE Review Conference meetings in Vienna in September and Istanbul in October.

In early 1999 we liaised with U.S. government officials to highlight the need for support to programs that provided abandoned or disabled children with viable alternatives to institutionalization in orphanages. In May, we published the Russian-language version of the Abandoned to the State orphanages report. Our Moscow staff raised our concerns about orphanages, torture, and police harassment and brutality against ethnic minorities during a meeting with U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson during her trip to Russia in June.

We quickly made Chechnya a new priority when Russian forces began aerial bombardments of the region in September. In a variety of fora-a statement to UNHCR's Executive Committee, a letter to Prime Minister Putin, a letter to the E.U. Presidency, and in several press releases-we criticized Russian conduct of the military campaign and the government's abhorrent response to the new refugee crisis. We also sought to provide some historical context to the conflict, reminding the public and government officials that during the 1994-1996 war in Chechnya, the international community essentially showered benefits on the Yeltsin government but failed to make good use of its leverage with the government to seek more responsible conduct in the conflict.

Similarly, when Moscow police began rounding up and expelling thousands of non-Muscovites presumed to be from the Caucasus, we immediately began interviewing those who had been arrested. We issued three press flashes on the arrests, and addressed many public fora on the issue, again pointing out the historical context and past Human Rights Watch reports that had documented, since 1993, Moscow's racist policing.

Throughout the year, we continued to concentrate our efforts on exposing the government of Belarus's harassment and intimidation of all forms of opposition. At a July 15 press conference in Minsk, we released a report on violations of academic freedom in Belarus, which documented a systematic campaign by the government to chill academic enquiry through overly restrictive institutional controls, de facto censorship of politically sensitive historical research, obstruction of the private educational initiatives, and harassment, dismissals, and expulsions of politically active faculty and students. Our staff also presented the findings of the report to Ministry of Education representatives, university rectors, and others. In March, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe adopted a resolution "On the Situation in Belarus," which incorporated a number of our recommendations, in particular on freedom of the media, access to the media by opposition politicians, and concern that restrictions on freedom of the media in and of itself preclude the holding of free and fair elections. Similarly, the Council's advisory group on a new Law on Higher Education incorporated a number of our recommendations on the deeply flawed law, including inserting safeguards on freedom of speech, association, and assembly. In September, we wrote an open letter to President Lukashenka urging him to investigate the disappearance of leading opposition figures Victor Gonchar, Tamara Vinnikova, Yury Zakharenka, and independent publisher Anatoly Krasovsky and to guarantee the safety of all persons in Belarus, regardless of their political affiliations.

With field offices based in Uzbekistan and Tajikistan, and numerous advocacy and fact-finding missions to the region, the countries of Central Asia were a growing focus of our work in 1999. This was in response to the dire human rights situation, the growing geopolitical importance of the region, and the expansion of the OSCE's presence in Central Asia.

As the government of Uzbekistan continued its brutal assault on the basic rights of its citizens, Human Rights Watch intensified both its research and advocacy work in the country during 1999. We sent two fact-finding missions to investigate cases of torture in late 1998 and 1999, monitored dozens of trials, and gathered testimony from scores of witnesses about the unyielding government campaign against independent Muslims and people affiliated with the political opposition. Our representatives were also on hand to document the government's vigorous and brutal campaign against local human rights defenders who were jailed, beaten, and otherwise harassed. In response to the rapid deterioration in rights protection, Human Rights Watch issued a series of press releases and letters to the government decrying the brutal treatment of rights defenders and providing horrifying accounts of torture and deaths in detention at the hands of security forces and police. We regularly briefed international organizations and governments active in Uzbekistan, including the Congressional Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe in an October hearing on Uzbekistan. In October, we released Class Dismissed:Discriminatory Expulsions of Muslim Students documenting the discriminatory expulsion of independent Muslim students from universities and schools for wearing religious attire or beards.

During 1999, Human Rights Watch's Dushanbe office monitored the implementation of the peace accord in Tajikistan and the pre-election and elections period. We urged governments and donor bodies with an interest in Tajikistan to condition economic and non-humanitarian aid on improvements in human rights conditions and to support the development of local human rights initiatives. We issued a report on media restrictions, raised violations of freedom of association and expression, and discussed the judiciary, refugee, and security-related concerns with diplomatic missions in Dushanbe, Tashkent, and Almaty, and with the government and international organizations in Dushanbe, particularly OSCE and United Nations Mission on Tajikistan (UNMOT). We monitored violations committed by security forces; intervened regularly before the General Procuracy and Ministries of Internal Affairs and Security on behalf of individuals who had experienced human rights violations; and briefed multilateral organizations, nongovernmental organizations, and journalists on the current situation in the country. We also actively supported local human rights and journalists' organizations.

Our work on Turkmenistan remained focused on several key goals during 1999: to make the government's appalling human rights record part of the mainstream agenda in all fora for investment and security issues, to use leverage to secure improvements, to ensure that the government did not benefit from investment and credit funds that have human rights conditionality without making human rights concessions, and to engage the government directly on human rights.

A February 1999 mission by our research staff was to have been our first mission to the country since 1993. Throughout 1998, we attempted to reestablish contact with Turkmen government officials, who were plainly irritated by our efforts to make human rights part of the overall debate on Turkmenistan. In February, this standoff ended when meetings between Human Rights Watch representatives and senior members of the Turkmen government took place in Ashgabat, the capital of Turkmenistan. The meeting took place during our first research mission to in the country in six years. The mission had a broad agenda, including gathering information on torture; on the stifling of what little opportunity remained for local NGOs to exercise free association and expression; and on political prisoners. The mission, however, was interrupted when Turkmen security forces summarily deported one of the mission participants. Following the February trip to Ashgabat, a Human Rights Watch representative addressed a meeting of the heads of all OSCE field missions in Oslo, Norway, where she discussed developments in Central Asia with the relevant heads of OSCE missions and urged a strong condemnation of the Turkmen government's treatment of our staff. A short trip to Vienna followed, where she raised similar issues with OSCE delegations.

In December 1998, we launched our first-ever fact-finding mission to Kazakhstan to investigate violations of basic civic freedoms in the run-up to the presidential elections. We interviewed dozens of journalists, editors, publicists, political activists, and citizens pressured by the government to participate in the presidential nomination process. A report on our findings was released in October, on the eve of Kazakhstan's parliamentary elections. In July, as part of our effort to convey to policy makers the true state of human rights in Kazakhstan, our staff addressed the Congressional Human Rights Caucus.

Our concerns in Central Asia featured prominently in our international advocacy during the year, targeted toward the U.S. government and the OSCE, two of the most prominent political actors in the region. As the chairman-in-office and the head of the OSCE's Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights prepared for their respective trips to the region, we sent briefing papers about issues and specific urgent cases. We used the report to the OSCE Permanent Council by Ambassador Wilhelm Hoynck-a document that was to have set out the OSCE's policy in the region-as an opportunity to analyze OSCE strategy. Our critique of the report was released prior to Hoynck's presentation to the Permanent Council, and we liaised with key OSCE delegations to ensure that the human dimension would remain in the OSCE's strategy for the region.

Twice in 1999, we exhorted the OSCE to desist from sending full observer missions to Kazakhstan's elections. In December 1998, fresh from our mission to Kazakhstan investigating election conditions, we sent a letter on our preliminary findings to OSCE Chairman-in-Office Vollebaek urging the OSCE not to send an observer mission of any kind to the elections, which were clearly fraudulent. In August, we wrote to Ambassador Gerard Stoudmann, the head ODIHR, urging the OSCE not to send a full observer mission to Kazakhstan's parliamentary elections. In this and other fora-notably the OSCE review conference-we sent a clear message that any observation of upcoming elections in Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan would merely serve to legitimize what were sure to be hollow exercises.

In all meetings with U.S. government officials regarding Turkmenistan, we pressed the need to condition Export-Import bank credits and other assistance on significant improvements in that country's human rights record.

In the Caucasus, our research was conducted from our field office in Tbilisi, and focused primarily on abuses by police and security forces and on the lack of adequate legal protections for detainees. Our primary advocacy target was the Council of Europe, to which both Armenia and Azerbaijan keenly sought admission, though we also regularly briefed representatives of the OSCE, E.U., and U.S. government, in advance of significant bilateral and multilateral meetings on the region. A European Parliament resolution adopted in February, drafted after consultation with our staff, emphasized the need for further improvements in the human rights practices of Armenia and Azerbaijan.

Human Rights Watch engaged in a dialogue with the government of Armenia regarding its human rights record and issued a number of lengthy letters, documenting our concerns on issues such as the abuse of conscripts; torture and beatings of detainees, including children; poor conditions in places of detention; and restrictions on freedom of religion and the media. The letters were timed to correspond with activities in the Council of Europe related to Armenia's membership application. The letters, some published in their entirety in Yerevan newspapers, were widely read and sparked more open discussion of Armenia's poor human rights record. In January, we briefed key U.S. congressional staff on our concerns given the significant amount of economic assistance provided to Armenia by the U.S. despite the lack of any significant improvement in its respect for the rule of law.

Similarly, we focused attention on Azerbaijan's poor human rights record as part of its application for membership in the Council of Europe. Prior to the sessions of the Council of Europe's Parliamentary Assembly, letters were sent to rapporteurs on Armenia and Azerbaijan and other relevant policymakers outlining our concerns. Our staff attended the Parliamentary Assembly sessions in January, June, and September and carried out a series of advocacy meetings with rapporteurs, committee members, and delegations involved in the decision-making on Armenia's and Azerbaijan's applications. In August, we issued Impunity for Torture, which documents how the Azerbaijani Ministry of Internal Affairs often keeps detainees in a state of isolation from the outside world, including from lawyers and relatives, allowing torture to take place in virtual secrecy. Advance copies of the report were distributed in June at the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly session in Strasbourg. The report was also distributed to the United Nations Committee Against Torture.

In January, we briefed congressional staff on the links between corruption, human rights violations, and oil investment in Azerbaijan, and we also distributed briefing papers to the World Bank, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), the U.S. government, European governments, and oil companies. The U.S. House of Representatives version of the legislation promoting increased U.S. engagement and investment in the Caucasus and Central Asia, adopted in August and known as the Silk Road Strategy Act, contained significant language emphasizing the need for respect for the rule of law and religious tolerance in the Caucasus and Central Asia.

In Georgia, we monitored numerous trials including that of those accused in the February 1998 assassination attempt on Georgian President Eduard Shevardnadze; many defendants claimed that they had not had access to lawyers since their detentions. As Georgia's already poor human rights practices deteriorated in advance of the October parliamentary elections, we monitored numerous other trials relating to physical abuse and to restrictions on non-traditional religious organizations.

In April, we sent a letter to President Shevardnadze of Georgia detailing police abuse, specifically the pattern of deaths involving detainees who had suspiciously fallen from windows while in the custody of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. We called on Shevardnadze to ensure thorough and impartial investigation into such deaths. A similar letter was also sent to U.S. Ambassador Yalowitz urging that human rights abuses -specifically widespread police abuse and impunity for that abuse -be featured prominently in the promotion of U.S. interests in Georgia. We urged Ambassador Yalowitz publicly to condemn police abuse in Georgia, to call for an independent investigation into the death of Ivane Kolbaya (who fell to his death from a fifth-floor window of Tbilisi Central Police Department), and to support the development of the criminal justice system's capacity to combat police abuse. Additional letters on the same theme were sent to the OSCE, the U.S. Congress, the Council of Europe, embassies, and international financial institutions. These concerns elicited no public condemnation from the U.S., but in September, USAID sent a team to identify and plan future work on Georgia's criminal justice system and other aspects of the legal system.

Throughout the year we sought opportunities to make contact with and brief representatives of multinational corporations, especially oil companies investing in the Caspian sea region. Our goal was to promote awareness of the serious human rights problems affecting their investments and to encourage them to take proactive steps-in their relations with governments, intergovernmental organizations, international financial institutions, and nongovernmental organizations-to address these conditions.

A significant focus of our work on Turkey during 1999 related to the capture and trial of Abdullah Ocalan, the leader of the Kurdish Workers Party (PKK). When Ocalan was first arrested in Italy in November 1998, we called on the Italian government not to extradite Ocalan to Turkey because of that country's well-documented record of torturing security suspects, but to ensure that Ocalan be held accountable for the abuses committed by PKK guerrillas under his command. When Ocalan fled Italy and was later captured and transported to Turkey, Human Rights Watch pressed the Turkish government to safeguard Ocalan's safety and take all steps to ensure that he received a fair trial. We also used the increased international attention to Turkey to highlight the need for an equally thorough investigation of abuses committed by the Turkish army in the southeast. Prior to the start of Ocalan's trial, we issued two background papers on the Turkish State Security Courts and Repression of the Kurds in Turkey. In May, our staff attended the trial.

We also continued to press for greater protection of the basic rights of expression and association, rights that are chronically violated in Turkey. On April 15, we released Violation of Free Expression in Turkey and did a round of follow-up letters to Congress and to the OSCE Special Representative on Media regarding the findings in our report. In June, we condemned the imprisonment of leading Turkish activist Akin Birdal, president of the Human Rights Association of Turkey, as a violation of his free speech. Throughout the year we pressed the U.S. government to use its special relationship with Turkey to promote change, especially in the context of a possible $3.5 billion sale of U.S.-manufactured attack helicopters to Turkey. We also took advantage of Turkey's role as host of the November OSCE summit to press for significant change.

Immediately following the murder of human rights lawyer Rosemary Nelson in March, Human Rights Watch joined with other human rights organizations to draw attention to Ms. Nelson's death and the broader issues of protection of defense lawyers and intimidation by police in Northern Ireland. During the U.N. Human Rights Commission meeting in Geneva in mid-April, Human Rights Watch co-hosted a talk with Param Cumaraswamy, the U.N. special rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers, who had been a strong critic of the U.K.'s lack of protection for Ms. Nelson and other defense lawyers in Northern Ireland. Human Rights Watch wrote a letter to Mo Mowlam, Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, as part of a dialogue that included a number of face-to-face meetings with her on the subject. We published a limited-run short report on Ms. Nelson's life, urging the U.K. government to establish an independent murder investigation, free of participation by the Northern Ireland police, whose officers had systematically harassed Nelson in recent years. The protection of defense lawyers was but one issue of concern we raised with the Independent Commission on Policing, established by the Good Friday agreement and mandated to make sweeping recommendations for the reform of the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC), Northern Ireland's police force. We made a number of written submissions to the commission, including a detailed briefing paper on vetting the RUC to screen out officers with records of past human rights abuses from a peacetime police force. Human Rights Watch attended meetings with the commission in January and September to express our concerns about police abuse. In July, we sent a researcher to monitor the security force operation during the annual, often violent, marching season in Northern Ireland. We sent numerous letters to U.K. Secretary for Northern Ireland Mo Mowlam and British Prime Minister Tony Blair throughout the year urging them to implement the human rights provisions of the Good Friday agreement and highlighting particularly the continuing lack of accountability for police officers involved in the torture of detainees and collusion with loyalist paramilitaries in the murder of defense lawyer Patrick Finucane in 1989.

ALBANIA
Human Rights Developments

The rapid influx of ethnic Albanian refugees from the neighboring province of Kosovo was Albania's dominant event in 1999. By early June, more than 450,000 Kosovar Albanians were in the country, having been forcibly displaced by Serbian and Yugoslav forces during the NATO air campaign against Yugoslavia.

Despite limited resources, the Albanian government made sincere efforts to accommodate the refugees, many of whom had suffered serious human rights violations inside Kosovo. Protection problems faced by the refugees were mostly related to the unsafe location and poor security of the camps in the north of the country; the general state of lawlessness in Albania; and the country's severe economic deprivation.

One positive consequence of the Kosovo crisis was the ameliorating effect it had on Albania's highly polarized political scene. The two main parties, the Democratic Party (DP) and the Socialist Party (SP), were less antagonistic in 1999, and politically motivated abuses were less common than in previous years. Despite this, Albanian citizens continued to experience many of the human rights violations that accompany states in transition from communism, such as politicized courts, abusive police, and abuses against women. As in previous years, victims of abuse rarely obtained redress through the legal system.

A high level of official corruption, pervasive at all levels of government, remained a critical problem. Corruption continued to have a negative impact on citizens' trust in the government and the rule of law. In September, Prime Minister Pandeli Majko issued an administrative order obliging all senior administration officials to declare their personal assets and state how they had been acquired.

The judicial system was a particular problem. With meager state salaries, judges and prosecutors were susceptible to bribes from wealthy and powerful criminal elements.

Women's rights also remained a serious concern, including the ongoing practice of trafficking. While there is no evidence of direct government involvement, the government has clearly been unable to stop trafficking, including of Kosovar Albanian women who were taken, some forcibly, from refugee camps by criminals and trafficked into prostitution in Italy. The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) reported some cases of rape and sexual assault of Kosovar Albanian women in Albanian refugee camps. Domestic abuse also remained a serious but largely unmentioned issue in Albanian society. There were no state-run institutions to provide assistance for victims of domestic violence, who had to use Albania's small and underfunded nongovernmental organizations for shelter or counseling.

Despite the less belligerent political atmosphere, a remaining point of contention between Democrats and Socialists was the state's investigation into the September 1998 killing of Azem Hajdari, a former student activist and militant member of parliament for the opposition Democratic Party. Top DP officials, including former President Sali Berisha, refused to testify to investigators during 1999 because, they said, the investigation was politically motivated.

The government was also continuing to investigate the violent demonstrations that erupted two days later during Hajdari's funeral procession, when armed DP supporters ransacked government offices and, for a brief period, held the Prime Minister's office, the parliament building, and the Albanian state television and radio building, prompting the resignation of then-Prime Minister Fatos Nano. Parliament subsequently lifted Berisha's immunity due to his alleged role in what the government called a coup d'etat, but no charges were leveled against him in 1999. The trial of twelve people who were arrested for their alleged involvement in the violence was ongoing during the year. In October the defendants, including the chairman of the Legality Movement Party, staged a brief hunger strike to protest what they considered procedural violations by the court.

Local human rights groups and the political opposition complained about procedural violations in the legal case against six former government officials. The six men, including the former Minister of Defense and Minister of the Interior, were charged in August 1998 with crimes against humanity for their role in suppressing the popular uprising following the collapse of the pyramid schemes in March 1997. They were released from house arrest in February 1999 but had still not been tried as of this writing.

Despite these problems, Albania's slow process of legal reform continued throughout 1999. On November 22, 1998, a national referendum approved Albania's first complete post-communist constitution which is in conformity with international human rights standards. Until that time the country had operated under a motley collection of new laws and constitutional provisions.

On September 30, 1998, parliament passed a new law on public and private radio and television, the first complete law regulating the electronic media since the fall of the communist government in 1992. The law largely meets international standards, although some media experts complained that the Albanian state radio and television still had ownership of the transmitter network, which, they feared, would allow the government to interfere in the transmission of programs. Throughout 1999, a host of private radio and television stations were broadcasting, some of them in opposition to the government.

In February 1999, the parliament ratified a new law to create Albania's first national human rights ombudsman. As of September, however, no one had been appointed to the post. According to the law, the parliamentary commissions on human rights and legal matters must propose candidates, who are then approved by three-fifths of the parliament.

By September 1999, the Albanian government had still not abolished capital punishment, despite continued pressure from the Council of Europe, which Albania joined in 1995. No one has been executed in Albania since 1993, although six people were on death row in 1999. Those on death row were reportedly kept in inhuman conditions that fell far short of international standards. International monitors observed the inmates wearing helmets and said they were in shackles twenty-four hours a day.

Public order was a serious problem throughout the year, as it has been since 1997, with violent incidents occurring frequently, usually between the police and criminal gangs. Much of the mountainous north and parts of the south were not under the government's control, and crime was endemic. The smuggling of drugs and illegal immigrants, mostly to Italy, was pervasive.

Political violence was less of a problem in 1999 than it had been in previous years. However, on February 21, unknown individuals attacked the former judge and well-known defense attorney Kleanthi Koci, although the reason for the attack is not known. He died a few days later on route to Rome for medical treatment.

Albania's Roma population continued to be a target of racism and discrimination by the general population, sometimes resulting in physical violence. In May, the parliament agreed to ratify the European Framework Convention for the Protection of Minorities, which the government had already signed.

Defending Human Rights

Albania's burgeoning nongovernmental sector continued to expand during 1999. Dozens of groups worked on issues related to human rights, ranging from labor rights to domestic violence against women. None of them reported restrictions on their work by the government.

Many Albanian human rights groups worked intensively to assist the ethnic Albanian refugees from Kosovo, including by taking testimony about war crimes, either for publication or to provide to the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. Others provided counseling for victims of abuse.

The Role of the International Community

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)

The OSCE maintained a large mission in Albania with field offices in various cities, engaged in monitoring human rights and media, provided technical assistance on draft legislation, and conducted other institution-building activities. Field offices near the border with Yugoslavia monitored refugee flows, as well as fighting between the Kosovo Liberation Army and Yugoslav forces.

Council of Europe

Albania came under fire from the Council of Europe (CoE) for maintaining the death penalty, despite a 1995 commitment to abolish it. The Parliamentary Assembly cautioned that any retreat from Albania's commitment to abolish the death penalty "would have serious consequences for Albania's membership in the Council of Europe." The Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) visited Albania in December 1998, following up on its visit from the previous year. At this writing, Albania had not published either of the reports issued by the CPT.

European Union

Albania's handling of the refugee crisis and its cooperation with NATO garnered praise and economic assistance from the European Union (E.U.). In addition to its annual commitment of 100 million Euros, the E.U. pledged 62 million Euros in April to meet refugee related expenses, although only 40 million Euros (U.S. $42 million) were ultimately needed. In June, the E.U. took the lead in establishing the Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe, which provides a framework for economic development, democratization, and conflict prevention and resolution in the region. Participants in the pact, including Albania, reaffirmed their commitment to observe human rights in accordance with OSCE standards and the U.N. Charter. In 1999, the E.U. also informed the Albanian government that further E.U. support for legal reform in the country was preconditioned on the abolishment of the death penalty.

United States

The United States government had close relations with the Albanian government throughout the year with Kosovo as the centerpiece of discussion. During his June visit to the country, President Clinton promised Albania that its generosity to the refugees and cooperation with NATO provided "an opportunity to deepen [its] partnership with NATO and [its] integration with Europe and the future prosperity that will bring." The U.S. government allocated an estimated $33 million in foreign aid to Albania in 1999, with the largest portions going to economic development and democracy building. In September, the State Department invited a group of moderate politicians from the political oppositionto visit Washington just before the Democratic Party was scheduled to have its party congress. Former President Sali Berisha was not among the invitees.

North Atlantic Treaty Organization

The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and Albania maintained close relations throughout 1999 due to the Kosovo crisis. Already a member of the Partnership for Peace, Albania opened its airspace for NATO and allowed 8,000 NATO soldiers to be deployed in the country, both for humanitarian and military reasons. In April, the U.S. military deployed twenty-four Apache attack helicopters in Albania for potential use in Kosovo, but they were never put into military action, and one crashed while conducting exercises.

International Financial Institutions

The World Bank and International Monetary Fund provided supplemental loans for the government to deal better with the influx of refugees, and the World Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development committed substantial funds to Albania and neighboring countries as part of the Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe. In the first six months alone, the World Bank pledged U.S. $125 million in new credits to Albania.
ARMENIA

Human Rights Developments

Armenia's human rights record remained poor despite official claims that the country was "in transition to democracy" and promises for improvements as its application underwent review for full membership in the Council of Europe.

On October 27, armed individuals entered the Armenian parliament during a live nation-wide radio broadcast and assassinated Armenian prime minister Vasgen Sarkisyan, along with parliament speaker Karen Demirchian and several other senior officials. Parliamentary elections on May 30 had brought to power the Measnutsiun (Unity) block led by Sarkisyan. The Unity Block included the Communist Party headed by Demirchian, several smaller parties, and the Yerkrapah, a militia organization of Nagorno Karabakh war veterans led by Sarkisyan. The Yerkrapah organization was linked to organized violent attacks on members of twelve non-apostolic religious groups in April 1995.

The assassinations followed political violence during July local elections. Armed supporters of a candidate in a local by-election in Yerevan reportedly beat up and opened fire with automatic weapons on the proxies of another candidate on July 11. At least eight people were hospitalized. Both candidates contending for the Ajapnaik District council seat were pro-government: one was a member of the Yerkrapah, the other a member of the nationalist Republican Party.

OSCE election observers noted that a new electoral code with some reform provisions was adopted prior to the May parliamentary elections and concluded that the parliamentary elections were a step forward toward meeting OSCE obligations. However, a report issued by the National Democratic Institute, which was based on findings by 4,000 local monitors, stated that political parties and so-called "independent" candidates throughout the country manipulated some reform provisions embodied in the new code. The report added that party-affiliated and independent candidates, frequently local strongmen with political and business ties, demonstrated powerful influences over political processes and distorted both the authority of the national government and the electoral code.

In January legislation mandated by the 1995 constitution to implement its new provisions went into force. The new legislation governing criminal investigations and trials was a missed opportunity to bring about reform of a criminal justice system characterized by widespread violations of due process. The new criminal procedure code was particularly disappointing: it does not allow detainees to file a complaint in court prior to trial to redress abuses by the procuracy, police, or other security forces during criminal investigations. Under the new code, the police may detain individuals for up to twelve hours before notifying family members, witnesses have no right to legal counsel during questioning while in police custody, even though failure to testify is a criminal offense, and detainees must seek permission from the police or procuracy to obtain a forensic medical examination to substantiate a report of torture. Meanwhile, the constitution does not allow citizens the right to petition the constitutional court should one of their constitutionally guaranteed rights be violated.

Cases of violations against those in detention included that of Ashot Bleyan, former Minister of Education, awaiting trial on corruption charges. According to his lawyer, Ministry of Internal Affairs staff beat Bleyan while in Nubarashen remand prison on August 18. On September 7, Bleyan stated in a press interview that a procuracy official handling his case, Armen Tamazian, was present during the beating.

The government remained deeply hostile to adherents of non-apostolic religious faiths and failed to bring about a climate of religious tolerance. It imprisoned at least nine conscientious objectors on religious grounds, while numerous other individuals were forced to live in hiding to escape harassment campaigns against them. The authorities continued to deny the Jehovah's Witness organization the right to register, while at least two of the other religious organizations attacked in April 1995 were too fearful even to attempt to register, and many of their members remain in hiding. Ignoring European Convention standards, which officials promised to uphold after Council of Europe accession, the government failed to repeal discriminatory provisions in the law on religious organizations. The law prohibits financing for religions based outside of Armenia and sets a 200-member minimum for registration of a religious organization.

Freedom of the press suffered a blow in August. Nikolai Pashinian, editor of Oragir (Diary) newspaper was sentenced to one year in prison on August 31 for publishing an article alleging corruption involving a trading company linked with senior Ministry of Internal Affairs officials. In early June, Pashinian had lost a civil suit brought by then-Minister of Internal Affairs Serg Sarkisyan and had been ordered to pay U.S.$25,000 in damages to the trading company. Editors at other newspapers publicly demonstrated against the August verdict and said that the case would have a chilling effect on freedom of the press. An official at Tigran Mets, the main newspaper printing plant in Armenia, said in a September interview that the plant had refused to print a successor newspaper published by Pashinian on the grounds that the editor's possible imprisonment would prevent him from repaying the printing debts of Oragir , which was closed after the lawsuit.

Defending Human Rights

Nongovernmental organizations working on human rights issues for the most part avoided frank discussion of Armenia's poor human rights performance. Numerous victims of human rights abuses expressed great fear of retaliation and a marked lack of confidence in the authorities' willingness to act on complaints of abuses, including torture and abuse in the army. Government officials insulted or harassed several Armenian human rights defenders. In February, a Ministry of Defense official warned a member of an organization dealing with conscripts to desist from cooperating with international human rights organizations. In March, Mikael Danielyan, chair of the Armenia Helsinki Association, was accused of making "ungrounded accusations" after he complained about the Ministry of Internal Affairs' refusal to grant access to pre-trial detention facilities for monitoring. Danielyan had submitted written requests and made repeated attempts to gain access for over a year.

The Role of the International Community

Council of Europe

The Council of Europe continued to review Armenia's application for full membership. In January, Human Rights Watch recommended to the Council of Europe's Parliamentary Assembly that it take no further action on Armenia's membership application until the government took concrete steps to demonstrate its commitment to the rule of law. Developments throughout the year indicated that Armenia's accession would be highly premature and would serve to legitimize the government's unwillingness to uphold the rule of law.

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)

Talks under the auspices of the OSCE Minsk Group to negotiate a settlement to the twelve-year-old conflict with Azerbaijan on the political status of Nagorno Karabakh failed to bring results as of this writing. President Robert Kochariyan and Azerbaijani President Heydar Aliyev held bilateral talks in Geneva in June and August at the urging of the international community. The OSCE announced that it intended to open an office in Yerevan in the later half of the year to assist in promotion of OSCE principles.

United States

The U.S. State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1998 accurately noted that Armenia's constitution provides the executive with extensive powers that are not balanced by an independent judiciary and that the judiciary is subject to political pressure, while the security forces routinely beat detainees during arrest and interrogation. The U.S. State Department Annual Report on International Religious Freedom for 1999 simply outlined many of the legal restrictions on the free practice of religious belief in Armenia, while failing to note that these restrictions are in violation of international law. Members of the U.S. House of Representatives, including members of the Armenian Congressional Caucus, failed to call Armenia publicly to account for its abysmal record in a number of areas, including on religious minorities, while spearheading support for assistance programs that ensure Armenia's status as one of the highest per capita recipients of U.S. assistance in the world.
AZERBAIJAN

Human Rights Developments

Azerbaijani President Heydar Aliyev's hospitalization in early January and surgery in May created a climate of considerable political uncertainty throughout 1999, fueling rampant speculation regarding possible successors and causing the postponement of important legal reforms.

In early September, Aliyev stated that he was considering a third term as president. Although the constitution allows presidents to serve only two terms, Aliyev, who assumed the presidency in 1993 and began a second term in October 1998, reportedly believed that since the constitution was adopted in 1995, he is eligible for a third term. In the wake of the president's illness, some members of the opposition speculated that President Aliyev's son, Ilham, was being groomed to succeed his father as president.

Legislation affecting municipal elections slated for December 12 sparked protests from opposition parties. Nongovernmental organizations specializing in electoral reform called on the Azerbaijani government in August to balance the Central Election Commission and lower-level commissions with additional representatives of major opposition parties in an effort to ensure their impartial conduct during the elections.

On January 8, a revolt in the Gobestan prison was reported to have ended in a massacre. Authorities maintained that two political prisoners led twenty-five to thirty others to take prison guards hostage and demand transportation for an escape. Eleven prisoners were reported shot. Senior officials characterized the revolt as a coup attempt.

The Ministry of Justice claimed that an amnesty decreed in December 1998 had resulted in the release of over 4,000 prisoners by April. Opposition political parties reported that few political prisoners benefited from it.

Azerbaijan made little progress in ending torture in police custody and impunity for it. The government also failed to bring criminal procedure and other legislation governing detainee rights and due process into compliance with international standards, or to investigate and prosecute all credible allegations of torture. There were highly credible reports of police having detained, physically abused, and extorted money from detainees' family members. In July a protest at the Sadarak customs point in Nakhichevan led to one death, several wounded, and the subsequent detention of several opposition members. Authorities claimed that the opposition orchestrated the incident, but news media reported that it resulted from protests by local residents over bribery and corruption at the customs point.

The police continued the practice of harassing and threatening the family members of those wanted for questioning. In September, Nashuba Mirzazade, the wife of Rauf Rusulov, who is wanted by the police, reported that the police continued to subject her to an ongoing harassment campaign in an effort to coerce information from her regarding her husband's whereabouts.

A year after it lifted pre-publication censorship, the government continued to suppress freedom of the press through other means. The editors of twenty newspapers had held a ten-day hunger strike in November 1998 to protest the numerous spurious libel suits that officials had filed since the lifting. Such libel suits-some of which resulted in fines clearly intended to bankrupt the papers-continued to be filed in Azerbaijani courts, which enjoy little if any independence from the executive. In June, the procuracy opened a criminal libel case against Irada Husseynova after she wrote an article in a Baku newspaper alleging that the president's brother, Jalal Aliyev, was involved in illegal gasoline distribution. In July, the procuracy's office opened criminal libel cases against editors and reporters at Yeni Musuvat (New Musuvat), Hurriyet (Freedom), and Azadlik (Freedom), all prominent opposition newspapers.

Meanwhile, physical abuse, harassment, and detentions of journalists continued. These included the reported beating of Rovshan Ismayilov of Ganun (Rights) magazine on April 13 by Nizami district police officers and the beating of Muhalifet (The Independent) newspaper reporter Yasha Agazadeat at the Yasamal district police station as he was attempting to report on police violence in August. Also in August, the editor of Reytink ( Ratings ) newspaper was called to the Ministry of National Security and questioned about his sources for an article about Nagorno Karabakh. In November 1998 a Baku court sentenced Fuad Gakhramanly to eighteen months of imprisonment for an unpublished article that authorities claimed outlined tactics to overthrow President Aliyev. Gakhramanly was freed in July, after Azerbaijani nongovernmental organizations mounted an extensive international campaign demanding his release.

In August, police in Kachmaz detained Ibrahim Ikrameddin, an adherent to the Jehovah's Witness faith, and searched his home without a warrant, confiscating religious literature. He was subsequently sentenced to fifteen days of administrative arrest, during which time he reported being beaten and threatened by police. Also in August, police and conscription commission officials harassed Rovshan Mursalov, also an adherent to the Jehovah's Witness faith, after he attempted to apply for alternative military service as a conscientious objector. Mursalov reported in November 1997 that a Baku procuracy investigator summoned him and others to the procuracy, where the investigator insulted and beat them in an attempt to force them to renounce their faith.

Defending Human Rights

In a highly welcome move, authorities allowed some Azerbaijani nongovernmental organizations to conduct monitoring visits in pretrial and post-conviction detention facilities, including the fifth corpus of the Bailov remand prison, which holds some political prisoners serving life sentences. During the visits, these monitors were permitted to interview detainees and take photographs. However, the government continued to deny international humanitarian organizations routine access to all detention facilities; this was deeply alarming given persistent reports of physical abuse in pretrial detention and rampant tuberculosis in post-conviction facilities.

The Role of the International Community

Council of Europe

The Council of Europe continued to review Azerbaijan's application for full membership. Unfortunately, as of this writing, the application process yielded limited progress in Azerbaijan's compliance with Council of Europe human rights norms.

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)

President Aliyev met with Armenian President Robert Kochariyan on several occasions during the year for direct talks aimed at a settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict, while representatives of the OSCE pursued a resolution through its Minsk Group.The talks sparked public demonstrations and hunger strikes in September and October by some members of the opposition, protesting the government's position in the negotiations. The OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media, Freimut Duve, much to his credit, actively pushed for greater press freedom in Azerbajan. He visited Azerbaijan in February, urging reform of libel laws and intervened in the Gakhramanly case. Addressing the Permanent Council in July, Duve called for investigations into violence against journalists and criticized the lack of licensing for independent television stations.

United States

The U.S. State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1998 noted Azerbaijan's dismal human rights record in a wide range of areas, including denial of registration to political parties, suppression and detention of peaceful public demonstrators, detention of religious minorities, restrictions on freedom of the media including denial of broadcast licenses to independent television stations, and lack of an independent judiciary. In May, the U.S. State Department expressed disappointment that Azerbaijan had rejected appeals to release journalist Fuad Gakhramanly.

On the whole, however, U.S. policy toward Azerbaijan focused on promotion of oil and gas transport routes from the Caspian Sea region, while downplaying the government's continued failure to implement the institutional and legal reforms necessary to ensure respect for human rights, peaceful transitions of power through free and fair elections, and sustained, equitable economic development.

Relevant Human Rights Watch Report:

Azerbaijan: Impunity for Torture , 8/99
REPUBLIC OF BELARUS

Human Rights Developments

On July 20, Belarusian President Lukashenka entered a two-year extension of office granted in a controversial November 1996 referendum. The controversy surrounding President Lukashenka's legitimacy caused the government to up its campaign against its perceived opponents throughout the year, cracking down hard on civil society, and especially against demonstrators, the independent media, and nongovernmental organizations. In a new, deeply disturbing phenomenon, prominent opponents of the government "disappeared" under highly suspicious circumstances.

Three prominent opponents of the government and an independent publisher disappeared in 1999, with strong suggestions of state security services involvement. Tamara Vinnikova, former chair of the national bank, who had been arrested in January 1997 on embezzlement charges, disappeared on April 8. Vinnikova had been held under house arrest, guarded at all times by live-in KGB agents, her telephone calls and visitors strictly screened.

On May 7, former interior minister, Yury Zakharenka was last seen being bundled into a car by a group of unidentified men. His wife later told reporters that for two weeks prior to his abduction, Zakharenka had complained of being tailed by two cars. Zakharenka had appealed to law enforcement agencies in early 1999 not to obey orders from the president after July 20 and had also been in the process of forming the Belarusian Union of Officers, a potentially powerful body.

On September 16, Viktor Gonchar, vice-speaker of the Thirteenth Supreme Soviet, and Anatoly Krasovsky, a businessman and head of the "Krasika" publishing house, did not return home from a local sauna. Gonchar's wife reportedly contacted city authorities without result. Gonchar had been due to address a sitting of the Thirteenth Supreme Soviet on September 19 regarding the OSCE-mediated talks with the government.

The government yet again targeted the independent print media. In September, in a clearly politically motivated move, authorities closed Naviny [The News] for publishing an article entitled, "Who Lives in the Little Palaces?" The article intimated that a country cottage outside Minsk belonged to Secretary of State Security Victor Sheyman. On September 24, a Minsk court ruled in favor of Sheyman in a libel suit, fining Naviny 10 billion Belarusian rubles (U.S.$33,300), and the author of the article the equivalent of U.S.$16,600. The average monthly wage in Belarus is approximately U.S.$30 per month. On September 29, authorities seized paper reserves belonging to Naviny while the newspaper's printers and distributors refused to handle the newspaper further.

In November 1998 intruders had broken into Naviny's editorial offices and stolen computer hard-drives containing databases and a complete archive of the newspaper. No other items of value were taken, suggesting a political motive.

On February 15, the State Press Committee announced official warnings to six independent newspapers: Belaruskaya Delovaya Gazeta (The Belarusian Business Paper), Svabodnye Novosti (Free News), Naviny , Narodnaya Volya (The People's Will), Pagonya (The Emblem), and Imya (The Name). Most of the newspapers had carried advertisements for alternative presidential elections, an action the Ministry of Justice considered a call for the overthrow of the state. Imya's owners, who received a warning for publishing an article on elections, closed the newspaper in August, citing government harassment as the prime reason. On October 4, the State Press Committee canceled the registration of nine independent newspapers, including Naviny 's just-founded successor, Nasha Svaboda (Our Freedom), Belaruskiye Novosti (The Belarusian News), Novogrudskiy Kurier (The Novogrudok Courier), Politsobesednik (The Political Interlocutor), and Kurier (The Courier) for failing to gain the approval of local authorities to operate.

On September 9, authorities launched widespread tax inspections against all major independent newspapers, a tactic often used in the past to censor critical coverage or financially harass independent publications.

In a positive move, on December 22, 1998, the Supreme Economic Court ruled against the Belarusian State Press Committee in its accusation that the Nasha Niva (Our Land) newspaper had been using an incorrect spelling of the Belarusian language for which the newspaper had been threatened with closure. The court fined the State Press Committee the equivalent of U.S.$24.

Authorities continued to crack down on academic freedom. On January 19, 1999, the Gorky Agricultural Academy expelled students Denis Bobikov and Anatol' Britsen, members of an independent student association and the editors of an independent student magazine. Ostensibly expelled for "public drunkenness" and "hooliganism," the charges were believed to be the result of their independent activities. Authorities systematically blocked independent educational initiatives by denying organizers access to premises on spurious grounds such as fire inspections, or even citing an unspecified "epidemic."

Belarus did not abolish or suspend use of the death penalty. By August 5, the state had executed twenty-nine prisoners in 1999.

On January 22, President Lukashenka announced an amnesty for 34,000 inmates of Belarusian jails who fall into certain social categories such as pensioners and victims of the Chernobyl nuclear disaster. The amnesty, the second of its scale under Lukashenka's tenure, purported to relieve overcrowding in Belarusian jails, yet did little to address the key reason for prison overcrowding: Belarus' extremely high incarceration rate.

On May 16, voting concluded in "alternative" presidential elections, organized by a coalition of Thirteenth Supreme Soviet members, opposition parties, and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) to protest the extension of President Lukashenka's term of office. They featured two candidates, the exiled leader of the Belarusian Patriotic Front, Zenon Pazniak and jailed former prime minister, Mikhail Chygir. Election organizers declared the process invalid due to governmental interference. This included the arrest or occasional assault of the organizers and participants, and multiple spot searches of opposition party and NGO premises. For example, on March 1, police violently assaulted and arrested shadow electoral commission head, Victor Gonchar, on charges of holding an illegal meeting in a private cafe, for which he served ten days in detention. Prior to his release, Gonchar was charged with "abuse of office," a case which, by the time of his disappearance in September, had not been brought to trial.

Mikhail Chygir, the former prime minister, was arrested on March 30 on charges of embezzlement. Authorities accused Chygir of impropriety in making a loan in 1995, when he was head of the Agro-Industrial Bank. The timing of the arrest, before the May alternative elections in which Chygir was a candidate, points to a political motive, as does the authorities' refusal to grant bail.

On January 27, the government moved to disrupt the work of political parties, trade unions, and NGOs with a presidential decree forcing them to re-register via an onerous bureaucratic procedure before July 1. The decree punished representatives of unregistered organizationswith fines and imprisonment, and greatly increased the minimum number of members needed to register trade unions and political parties. Although the re-registration deadline was extended, of the 2,502 organizations subject to re-registration, only 1,537 applied to be re-registered, with the government rejecting 211 of these applications.

On December 15, 1998, the Belarusian House of Representatives passed an election law barring those convicted of an administrative or criminal offense from standing for public office. Many feared the law would be used to exclude from future elections opposition figures found guilty of minor offenses connected with public demonstrations. Since local council elections, held on April 4, were boycotted by the opposition, the law's effect had yet to be witnessed in Belarus.

On February 5, members of the Russian National Unity Party (RNE), a neo-Nazi group that advocates Slavic supremacy, viciously assaulted three activists of the pro-democracy coalition, Charter 97. The activists-former deputy foreign minister Andrei Sannikov, Dmitry Bondarenko, and Oleg Bebenin-encountered a group of youths wearing arm bands with the RNE insignia. A verbal altercation ensued when Bondarenko refused to accept an RNE leaflet, whereupon the youths attacked the three men, focusing in particular on Sannikov; they beat him unconscious, causing three broken ribs, a broken nose and multiple bruises. A passing police car declined to intervene or transport Sannikov to a hospital. Although an official investigation was instigated, as of this writing the assailants remain at large.

Throughout 1999, authorities harassed Vera Stremkovskaya, who is a defense attorney and the director of the Human Rights Center, an NGO. In late 1998, the Minsk bar association threatened to strip Stremkovskaya of her license to practice law following comments she allegedly made at an NGO meeting in October 1998 in New York. In December 1998, during her defense of Vasily Starovoitov, an elderly and infirm commercial farm director, Stremkovskaya came under concerted attack. Three separate criminal charges were filed against her, and she received a strict reprimand from the bar association, simply for questions she asked in court. In addition, Stremkovskaya was charged with criminal libel charges for expressing concern in court on April 15 about the whereabouts of forty bottles of cognac confiscated from Starovoitov's farm.

On May 30, fifty-four people were trampled to death when a sudden, violent storm drove a crowd of several thousand young people to flee an open-air festival and concert for shelter at a nearby metro station entrance. President Lukashenka blamed democracy for the tragedy: "We treat all this democracy too freely-go where you want, do what you please. Tragedies happen when there is no order." On September 10, in response to the tragedy, Lukashenka issued a new decree on public events that added a variety of new limitations beyond those set out in the restrictive 1996 law on demonstrations.

On July 22, the trial of Andrei Klimov began. Klimov was a deputy of the Thirteenth Supreme Soviet and in 1998 served on a committee that investigated constitutional violations committed by President Lukashenka. Klimov was charged with large-scale embezzlement, but the timing of his arrest in February 1998, the day after he distributed a letter summarizing the committee's investigation, strongly suggested that the charges were politically motivated. As of this writing, Klimov remained in jail as the trial continued.

Defending Human Rights

On September 9, the Ministry of Justice informed the Mogilev Human Rights Center that the center could not defend individuals or groups or prepare or publish reports, and warned the center that its "exposure of human rights violations" could interfere with the work of state bodies. However, the Belarusian Helsinki Committee, which faced similar obstacles, successfully re-registered without changes to its mandate on September 9.

Re-registration hampered many local human rights groups' ability to work effectively. On October 4, ten police officers raided the offices of Spring 96 without a warrant and seized the group's computers, printers, photocopier, and the latest edition of their human rights bulletin. Human rights workers were often caught up in the dragnet of arrests during police crackdowns on the alternative presidential elections. Ales' Bilatsky, head of Spring 96, spent ten days in jail in March for participating in an "illegal" demonstration. Vera Stremkovskaya was told by the Minsk bar association to choose between human rights work or her work as a lawyer, although despite continued harassment, as of this writing, she continued to work in both capacities.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

On August 20, the government of Belarus made a public commitment before the United Nations Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights to improve its human rights record radically. It committed to an extensive program of change, including signing and ratifying the European Convention on Human Rights, holding free and fair elections in 2000, and permitting equal access for all to state media. A written report to the sub-commission on these and other commitments was promised by August 2000.

The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)

The year 1999 witnessed extensive engagement by the OSCE with the Belarusian government, including a much more active and visible response to human rights violations from its Advisory and Monitoring Group (AMG) in Minsk than had been observed in 1998. The AMG began visiting political prisoners, intervened publicly on high-profile cases-notably the arrests of Mikhail Chygir and Victor Gonchar-and made a concerted effort to engage the government and opposition in dialogue.

In a February report to the Permanent Council, OSCE Representative on Freedom of Media Freimut Duve criticized the restrictive practices of the Belarusian State Committee for the Press, an issue that he also highlighted in a March trip to Minsk. In a July statement to the Permanent Council, Duve supported efforts aimed at dialogue on 2000 parliamentary elections, but cautioned that free and fair elections could not be achieved "without major changes in the freedom of media."

From December to March, the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights worked with the AMG on a program to train domestic election monitors. Meanwhile, the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly sent repeated delegations to the country and issued two resolutions on Belarus in 1999 calling for steps to organize democratic parliamentary elections in 2000.

Council of Europe

As of this writing, there had been no rapprochement between the Council of Europe and Belarus, whose special guest status with the Parliamentary Assembly was suspended in January 1997. On June 9, the Council of Europe called upon the government to release Mikhail Chygir, and drew attention to the absence of minimum democratic standards in Belarus, the restoration of which would be a necessary "first step" toward rebuilding relations with the Council of Europe. A September statement also expressed concern over the spate of disappearances and called for their prompt investigation.

European Union

Relations between the European Union (E.U.) and Belarus improved slightly, with the return in February of E.U. member state ambassadors to Belarus and a May E.U. decision repealing the visa ban on Belarusian government officials. Nonetheless, the E.U. remained critical of the human rights situation in Belarus, issuing repeated condemnations of the arrests and disappearances of key opposition figures and urging the government to enter into dialogue with the opposition and establish conditions for free and fair parliamentary elections in 2000. In an April statement on Belarus before the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, the E.U. condemned "state interference in trials, the pressure imposed on judges, the long terms of pre-trial detention, and . . . the conditions of imprisonment." These views were echoed in a March 11 resolution by the European Parliament.

United States

Although the U.S. ambassador returned to Minsk in September, relations between the countries remained strained, with the U.S. government repeatedly condemning human rights conditions in Belarus. On March 31, the State Department condemned the arrest of Mikhail Chygir and called for his immediate release; it repeated this demand in April, when Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott met with former deputy foreign minister Andrei Sannikov. The meeting was designed "to demonstrate . . . strong support for those in Belarus struggling to restore democracy." The U.S. government also issued repeated statements calling on the government to initiate an unconditional dialogue with the opposition; in September, it echoed the concern of other international bodies over the disappearances of Gonchar, Vinnikova, and Zakharenka.

Relevant Human Rights Watch Report:

Violations of Academic Freedom in the Republic of Belarus, 7/99
BOSNIA AND HERCEGOVINA

Human Rights Developments

There were significant improvements in several areas of human right concern in Bosnia and Hercegovina during 1999, the fourth year of implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement (DPA). Six persons indicted for war crimes were arrested, and one extradited, including several high-ranking officials; "minority returns" (returns of refugees and displaced persons to an entity where the post-war majority is of a different ethnicity) increased somewhat during the year, including to areas that had previously experienced few returns; the death penalty was abolished in the Federation, and legislation was introduced for its abolition in the Republika Srpska; and the authorities increasingly complied with the decisions of national human rights institutions. Despite these improvements, there continued to be widespread human rights abuses, and progress often came only after substantial international pressure.

Political Developments

In negotiations leading up to the DPA, the parties had agreed to binding arbitration to resolve control of the Brcko area in eastern Bosnia. On March 5, arbitrator Roberts Owen ruled that Brcko should be a neutral district administered jointly by all three ethnic groups. Politicians from all parties in Republika Srpska rejected the decision and withdrew for over two months from common (inter-entity) institutions.

On the same day as the Brcko decision, High Representative Carlos Westendorp dismissed Nikola Poplasen as president of the Republika Srpska (RS), claiming that Poplasen had abused his power and blocked the will of the people of RS by refusing to nominate Milorad Dodik as prime minister, even though Dodik was the only candidate who could have garnered a majority in the National Assembly. However, Poplasen ignored Westendorp's decision and continued to act as president until Dodik's caretaker government barred Poplasen from his office in September. This political struggle left the RS with only a caretaker government and no legal president during this period, which created uncertainty, for example, about the validity of laws passed by the National Assembly.

In the days immediately following these controversial decisions by the international community, international representatives were attacked on several occasions. In Ugljevik, soldiers of the Stabilization Force (SFOR) killed a local politician after they were attacked by him when they left a restaurant on March 5. In other places in the Republika Srpska, offices and vehicles of international organizations were damaged by violent crowds. When NATO began bombing the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY) in March, most international organizations withdrew their international personnel from the RS for fear of being further targets of violence. They fully resumed their operations again in June.

On March 28, Federation Deputy Minister of Interior Jozo Leutar died from injuries sustained in a car-bombing on March 16. Leading Bosnian Croat politicians immediately claimed that the explosion had been an act of Bosniaks against the Bosnian Croat population of Bosnia and Hercegovina and temporarily suspended their participation in common and Federation institutions. As of this writing, the perpetrators had not been identified and the investigation appeared stalled.

War Criminals

In December 1998, SFOR arrested General Radislav Krstic, commander of the Fifth Corps of the Republika Srpska Army, on the basis of a sealed indictment that accused Krstic of war crimes during the fall of Srebrenica in July 1995. In July 1999, SFOR troops arrested Radoslav Brdjanin, a former Bosnian Serb vice-president under Radovan Karadzic. On August 25, the Austrian police arrested General Momir Talic, chief of staff of the Republika Srpska Army, while he was attending a conference in Vienna. Talic and Brdjanin are both accused of conducting "ethnic cleansing" operations in the Prijedor and Sanski Most regions in 1992. Moreover, SFOR troops arrested indictees Kolundzija and Kovac in June and August respectively, and Dragan Gagovic was killed while resisting arrest by SFOR in January. On August 9, Croatia extradited Vinko Martinovic, who is accused of crimes related to the "ethnic cleansing" in Mostar in 1993.

Thirty-one publicly indicted persons remain at large. Although the majority are believed to reside in the RS, RS authorities made no effort to arrest indictees.

Return of Refugees and Displaced Persons

On December 2, 1998, the Republika Srpska National Assembly finally passed new housing legislation, abolishing the "Law on Abandoned Property" which had been a significant impediment to the return of refugees and displaced persons. Despite the new legislation, however, few claims were resolved during the year, in large part because of a lack of trained personnel and resources, as well as the political will, to implement the law. Moreover, in several places the military interfered, sometimes even physically, to prevent soldiers from being evicted from the apartments they occupied so that the pre-war owners could be reinstated. In the Federation, a growing number of property claims were resolved, but the police often remained unwilling to execute eviction orders.

Given the lack of substantial minority return during 1998, the Office of the High Representative (OHR), established by the DPA to oversee the implementation of the civilian provisions of the peace agreement, developed an "action plan," which set a goal of 120,000 minority returns in 1999. As a result, some refugees successfully returned to their pre-war homes in areas such as Zvornik, Nevesinje, and other parts of eastern Republika Srpska that had previously had virtually no minority returns. Nevertheless, the number of minority returns fell far short of the 120,000 goal set by the plan. According to the "Statistics Package" of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), only an estimated 9,500 minority returns had taken place between January 1 and July 31, 1999, of which less than 1,000 were to the RS. In part, this may be explained by the crisis in FRY: international agencies diverted personnel and resources to Kosovo and tens of thousands of refugees fled from FRY to Bosnia during the first half of 1999.

Meanwhile, ethnically motivated violence also continued to obstruct return. On March 20, unknown perpetrators bombed a Bosniak-owned house in the Croat-controlled town of Stolac, which has been the scene of widespread violence, including explosions and arson, targeting Bosniak returnees, in 1998. In April, several houses of Bosniaks returnees were set on fire, and the local mosque was damaged by a hand grenade in Prozor-Rama. In Kotor Varos, a group of Serbs blocked the road to prevent Bosniaks from returning to the town after the municipal assembly voted unanimously against their return. In Modrica, approximately 500 Serbs assaulted a group of sixty Bosniak returnees, injuring several people, in June. On September 9, seven mortar grenades were fired at Fazlagica Kula, a Bosniak village near Gacko (RS).

Media

The independent media in Bosnia and Hercegovina continued to face harassment and governmental pressure. On several occasions during the year, municipal authorities tried to interfere with the work of independent journalists. Early in the year, journalists in Gradacac were allegedly forced to submit articles for review to a municipal official before publishing. In May, the mayor of Zenica, Ferid Alic, informed the editor-in-chief of RTV Zenica that he would be removed from his position unless several editors from the station were freed. After the editors sent a letter to OHR, the situation was diffused. Other journalists were harassed or even physically attacked. Two journalists from Rijeka were beaten by unknown assailants in Mostar, who accused them of publishing articles criticizing Croatian President Tudjman. The offices of the independent Radio Osvit were demolished by angry crowds after the Brcko decision was announced.

Criminal libel statutes continued to be a tool used by government authorities against the independent press. On May 27, a Sarajevo court sentenced Senad Avdic, editor-in-chief of Slobodna Bosna , a Sarajevo weekly, to three months in prison and a one-year suspended sentence for libel. On July 30, Carlos Westendorp suspended the sanctions for libel and defamation in the entities' criminal codes and ordered the authorities to replace the respective articles with civil remedies for libel by the end of the year.

On April 29, the Independent Media Commission (IMC), acting under the auspices of the OHR, published a code of conduct for journalists and established an SOS Hotline for journalists under threat. In the course of the year, the IMC penalized several media that did not adhere to the code of conduct or otherwise violated the rules of the IMC.

Rule of Law

The new Federation penal code, which came into force in November 1998, abolished the death penalty. It is expected that the new Penal Code in the Republika Srpska, which should be passed by the end of the year, will also abolish capital punishment.

In late 1998, the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Hercegovina (UNMIBH) initiated the Judicial System Assessment Programme (JSAP) to evaluate the judiciary. In its first report, JSAP concluded that among other problems, the judiciary suffered from inappropriate political influences. This was abundantly clear in the trial of the Zvornik Three, three former Srebrenica residents who were detained and tried for murder without due process. Several days before the final hearing in the case, the judge was called to a meeting with the minister of justice, where the exchange value of the suspects was discussed. At the hearing itself, a Ministry of Justice official was seen entering the judge's room. Although the Supreme Court ultimately quashed the judge's verdict and ordered a retrial, it did not address the issue of political interference.

There were positive developments as well: in March, Bosnian Serb Miodrag Andric was acquitted of war crimes by the Sarajevo Cantonal Court, after the court for the first time allowed witnesses to be heard in a court in Rogatica (RS) and agreed to a re-enactment of the crime in the RS. In April, a court in Sokolac (RS) acquitted six suspects who had been severely tortured during the investigation into the murder of a local police commander. In June, a court in Sarajevo quashed the initial verdict in the case of Ibrahim Djedovic and ordered a retrial because of procedural irregularities and human rights violations during the initial trial.

Defending Human Rights

Both Bosnian and international nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) were generally able to perform their work, although they did report some incidents of harassment, particularly in times of heightened tensions in the RS. While the authorities in both the Federation and the RS failed to comply with legally binding decisions of the Office of the Ombudsperson and the Human Rights Chamber in a number of cases, their overall compliance increased substantially over previous years.

The Federation Ombudsmen continued their invaluable work to ensure human rights protection. However, there were growing concerns that the institution might lose its independence once its initial mandate expires and new ombudsmen are appointed by the Federation government. In the RS, the establishment of an Ombudman's office was delayed by negotiations regarding the ethnic composition of the institution.

The Role of the

International Community

Most of the positive developments made during the past year would not have been achieved without continued pressure by the international community, and often were the direct result of decisions imposed by international institutions. While there was some controversy about the level of international control exerted in Bosnia and Hercegovina, it was obvious that the current authorities remained unwilling to implement key provisions of the DPA without sustained pressure from the international community.

The Office of the High Representative (OHR)

The OHR played the leading role among international organizations charged with the civilian implementation of the DPA. When the authorities were unwilling or unable to resolve their differences, the High Representative Carlos Westendorp often imposed a solution to key issues such as the extensions of the deadlines for reclaiming accommodations, the cancellation of permanent occupancy rights issued during and after the war, and the suspension of the power of municipal authorities to reallocate socially owned land. The high representative also dismissed several officials who obstructed the implementation of the DPA. In addition to the dismissal of RS President Poplasen, Westendorp dismissed the mayors of Bugojno, Drvar, and Sanski Most, and ministers in the Livno and Tuzla cantons.

In August, Wolfgang Petritsch took over from Carlos Westendorp as high representative. In his speech to the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board Ministerial Council in September in New York, Petritsch stated he aimed to "accelerate the rate at which responsibility for governance and particularly the creation and effective operation of state institutions is assumed by the local political leaders." Although it is too early to judge whether Petritsch's policy will deviate significantly from that of Westendorp, this statement indicated that he may be less willing to impose laws or dismiss obstructive officials. Nevertheless, Petritsch dismissed several local officials during the first weeks of his tenure.

Stabilization Force (SFOR)

SFOR, consisting of some 30,000 troops from forty countries, continued to provide a secure environment for the civilian implementation of the DPA. In September, NATO announced that SFOR would be reduced to around 21,000 troops. SFOR played a more active role than in previous years in providing security for returnees through increased patrolling and the deployment of the Multinational Specialized Units in case of civil unrest. Moreover, at this writing, SFOR had contributed directly to respect for human rights by detaining four indictees, although thirty-two publicly indicted war crimes suspects remained at large.

United Nations

On November 30, 1998, the General Assembly requested the Secretary General to provide a comprehensive report on events in the U.N. Safe Area of Srebrenica from its establishment in 19993 until the signing of the DPA in 1998. Although the report was due on September 1, at this writing the report had not yet been finished. In December 1998, the General Assembly accepted a resolution calling upon the Bosnian authorities to respect their human rights obligations, and, among other things, strongly condemning the RS authorities for their failure to cooperate with the ICTY. In April 1999, the Human Rights Commission accepted a resolution which, among other, once again called attention to the plight of "floaters," i.e. people who have been evicted from their accommodation but have remained in their home-towns without alternative housing.

In July 1998, the Security Council expanded its mission in Bosnia to include a program to monitor and assess the court system, the Judicial System Assessment Programme.

The U.N. International Police Task Force (IPTF) continued its work to restructure the police forces and monitor their activities. Special attention was paid to the police department in Stolac, the scene of a series of return-related incidents. The whole Stolac police department was put on a three-month probation, and a one hundred day Agenda for Action was implemented to ensure that the Stolac police department would meet the minimum policing standards. UNMIBH's Human Rights Office (HRO) played a significant role in enhancing respect for human rights by investigating and publicizing police abuses. As a result of its work, the IPTF commissioner dismissed several police officers for abusive behavior or obstruction of the DPA. UNHCR continued to play a leading role in advancing the return of refugees and displaced persons. One of the instruments used by UNHCR was inter-entity buslines, which encourage displaced persons to visit their original homes to assess for themselves whether conditions are suitable for return.

International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)

As of this writing, the ICTY had thirty-one indictees in custody, while two indictees were released pending appeals. However, another thirty-two publicly indicted war crimes suspects remained at large, including prominent leaders like Karadzic, Mladic, Naletilic, and Milosevic. In 1999, the ICTY achieved convictions for rape in two cases, Celebici and Furundzija. In the Tadic case, in July the court accepted the prosecutor's appeal that the war in Bosnia and Hercegovina was in fact an international conflict, sentencing Tadic to twenty years in prison. Furthermore, the court sentenced Zlatko Aleksovski to two years and six months in prison for outrages on personal dignity.

On September 15, Carla Del Ponte took over as chief prosecutor from Louise Arbour.

The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)

The OSCE decided to postpone the local elections, slated for September, until April 2000, because the OSCE was still in the process of drafting a permanent election law, which aims to foster more moderate politics and encourage politicians to garner support beyond their own ethnic group. Moreover, the OSCE remained involved in the implementation of election results from the 1997 and 1998 municipal elections in Srebrenica, Drvar, and other places.

The Human Rights Department of OSCE's mission to Bosnia, apart from addressing human rights abuses through its field offices, published a report on employment discrimination finding widespread employment discrimination which is often a factor in the decision of refugees not to return to their homes.

Council of Europe

In December 1998, the Eminent Lawyers' Report on Bosnia and Hercegovina concluded that the human rights situation in Bosnia and Hercegovina did not conform to Council of Europe standards. In April, the rapporteurs of the Political Affairs Committee and the Legal Affairs Committee again drew attention to significant shortcomings in this respect. On May 26, the Political Affairs Committee published a list of conditions to be fulfilled by September 1999, including adoption of a permanent election law, compliance with the national human rights institutions, cooperation with the ICTY, restructuring of the police, and implementation of housing laws. Although significant progress had been made on some of these issues, Bosnia and Hercegovina still did not meet the conditions articulated by the council, and further progress was needed. The rapporteur of the Political Affairs Committee, in his report of August 1999, came to a similar conclusion. Meanwhile, the Council of Europe's representation in Bosnia continued its activities on freedom of expression, trafficking of women, legal reform, prison systems, and other issues.

European Union

The European Union (E.U.) was the initiator of the "Pact for Stability in South Eastern Europe," which aims to develop peaceful and good neighborly relations and "to accelerate the transition in the region to stable democracies ... in which human rights ... are respected..." The pact aspires to enhance stability through regional cooperation and the prospect of integration into "Euro-Atlantic and global institutions."

The E.U. and its member states continued to be among the biggest donors for reconstruction programs in Bosnia and Hercegovina: the E.U. has contributed around 1 billion Euro in the period 1996-1999 (1996: 442 million; 1997: 360 million; 1998: 295 million; 1999: 210 million plus 45 million balance of payment assistance). In July 1999, the European Commission reached an agreement with the Bosnian Council of Ministers on a 69 million Euro aid package for reconstruction of housing and infrastructure.

Individual E.U. states continued to contribute to the reconstruction effort as well. The Dutch government announced a project to reconstruct eighty-nine houses and water systems in Novi Travnik. The German Technical Cooperation Agency ( Gesellschaft fur Technische Zusammenarbeit , GTZ) concluded a project to build accommodations for displaced Bosnian Serb families in Bijeljina, which enabled Germany to repatriate thirty-six Bosniak families that had been prevented from returning because their houses had been occupied by these families.

United States

Together with the E.U., the United States was one of the biggest donors of reconstruction aid. Since the end of the war, the United States has contributed some $800 million to the reconstruction efforts in Bosnia and Hercegovina. The bulk of this sum was spent on infrastructure projects, business development, and economic restructuring, while smaller sums were spent on democratic reform and human rights. The United States, like other donor governments and agencies, was severely disturbed by reports that as a result of corruption over $1 billion had disappeared in Bosnia and Hercegovina, a substantial part of which consisted of uncollected taxes. The U.S. government quickly reassured the public that no U.S. aid had gone astray. Nonetheless, enormous amounts of public funds appear to have been misused, enriching the ruling political elite rather than benefiting the Bosnian population. The U.S. Congress has set up a committee headed by Robert Frowick, former head of OSCE's mission to Bosnia, to investigate allegations of widespread corruption.

During 1999, the United States strongly backed Milorad Dodik, the moderate caretaker prime-minister of the RS, in his struggle against hardline political elements, including the dismissed Republika Srpska president, Nikola Poplasen. However, Dodik consistently failed to deliver on his promises. On crucial postwar issues such as the return of refugees and the arrest of indictees, hardly any progress was made, despite considerable political and financial support.
BULGARIA

Human Rights Developments

Despite some progress, the human rights situation did not substantially improve in Bulgaria in 1999. Democratic institutions remained stable. Ninety-six parties registered to participate in the October local elections. The most significant legislative change occurred on December 10, 1998, when the Bulgarian parliament officially abolished the death penalty and replaced capital punishment with life imprisonment. Overall, however, the government's actions turned out to be largely inconsistent with its stated commitment to human rights.

Legislative changes, international commitments, and national programs on human rights issues appeared to indicate positive prospects for reform; however, the government failed to actualize many of these initiatives. Despite the government's commitments to adopt international arms trade controls, no such legislation had been introduced by October and arms sales to abusive armed forces continued. On February 18, 1999, the parliament ratified the Council of Europe's Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities, but the governmenthas not passed laws to implement the convention. In April, the government approved a national program for Roma, which addresses race discrimination, police brutality, education, and public participation of Roma, but the government has not implemented any laws to put this program into action. In May, the parliament passed a new refugee law, which defines refugees and creates an Agency for Refugees. Yet, in April, the government had stopped accepting Kosovar Albanians as refugees, granting them transit visas instead. Bulgaria also continued to experience serious problems with freedom of religion and expression, including police abuse and attacks against ethnic minorities, religious minorities, and journalists.

Police brutality and violent attacks by private citizens against Roma continued at an alarming rate. The Bulgarian Helsinki Committee (BHC) reported cases of three Roma who were shot dead by police under reportedly suspicious circumstances: Nikolay Filipov on May 13, shot after police chased him for a suspected car robbery; Gancho Vuchkov on June 6, shot after police chased him for a suspected car robbery; and Oleg Georgiev on July 13, shot during an attempted border-crossing. The Human Rights Project (HRP) also documented many cases of police abuse, such as that of Kiril Nikolov Spasov, a Rom from Russe. Two policemen beat Spasov and forced him to give false testimony in January 1999. Romany were also the victims of severe and often fatal attacks by private citizens. Blago Atanassov, a Rom from Ghelemenko, was beaten by unidentified assailants on January 16, 1999, and died later that night from his wounds. Although the district prosecutor in Pazardjik started an investigation into this incident, it had not been completed as of this writing. On June 15, Nadezhda Dimitrova, a Roma beggar, was beaten to death in the center of Sofia by four school boys, ages fifteen to sixteen, as they shouted insults. Following the incident, the minors were arrested, and an investigation is currently underway.

The Bulgarian government's stance toward some religious minorities appeared to improve. However, activities of unregistered religious movements, such as the Unification Church, remain illegal, and local authorities continue to harass them. In October 1998, Bulgaria's Council of Ministers officially recognized the Jehovah's Witnesses. That month, the parliament also passed the Substitution of Military Obligations by Alternative Service Act, which, despite some problems, signals a step forward for conscientious objectors. However, these changes did not prevent two local Jehovah's Witnesses activists from being fined by a Plovdiv court for "illegitimate religious activity," as a result of organizing a prayer meeting. Another Jehovah's Witness, Krassimir Savov from Plovdiv, was imprisoned in December 1998 for refusing military service, despite the new alternative service act. After serving half of his one-year sentence, Savov was pardoned by President Stoyanov and released.

Violations of freedom of expression continued to be rampant in 1999, including police abuse, attacks by unidentified assailants, and criminal prosecution of journalists. On June 28, 1999, Aleksei Lazarov, a media writer for Kapital , suffered multiple knife wounds and a broken leg after being violently attacked by unidentified assailants. The Bulgarian National Combat Service Against Organized Crime launched an investigation into the attack, but there had been no progress as of this writing. No one has been held responsible for the violent May 1998 acid attack on Anna Zarkova, well-known for her work on corruption. Repeated reports of police abuse of journalists, such as the police destruction of Darin Kirkov's film which he took of municipal workers in Varna pulling down illegal buildings, prompted Interior Minister Bonev's July 1999 order banning police violence against journalists.

In addition to attacks, the notorious libel laws continued to cripple free expression. In January 1999, Public Prosecutor Tatarchev launched a criminal investigation of Tatiana Vaksberg, a freelancer for Radio Free Europe's Sofia Bureau, who wrote a critical commentary of Tatarchev. The government proposed amendments to the libel laws, including the removal of prison sentences for libel offenses, which were still pending before parliament as of September.

Defending Human Rights

Local nongovernmental organizations remained very active in 1999. The Bulgarian Helsinki Committee (BHC), the Human Rights Project (HRP), Bulgarian Lawyers for Human Rights, and the Tolerance Foundation, among others, continued to report on human rights abuses and initiate programs to address those abuses. As a result of a debate about the program "For Equal Participation of Roma in the Public Life of Bulgaria" initiated by the HRP in early 1998, the Bulgarian government agreed to a national program for Roma in April 1999, although, as of September, there has been little progress in its implementation.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

In May 1999, the U.N. Committee against Torture cited several positive developments in Bulgaria, including the ratification of the European Convention on the Prevention of Torture, the abolition of the death penalty, and reform in domestic human rights law. However, the committee expressed concern about reports of continued ill-treatment of minorities and the lack of a clear definition of or prohibition against torture in the law.

European Union

In light of its assistance during the Kosovo crisis, Bulgaria's chances for E.U. membership have greatly improved. Several nations have expressed support for Bulgaria's accession to the E.U., including the U.S., Greece, Turkey, Italy, the U.K., Spain, and Germany. At its December summit, the E.U. will invite Bulgaria to begin accession talks.

Council of Europe

In April 1999, a delegation of the Council of Europe's Committee for the Prevention of Torture visited police establishments, investigation detention facilities, prisons, and psychiatric establishments. In September 1999, the working group on Romany problems made specific recommendations to Bulgaria for the implementation of the Roma national program the government approved in April. The European Court for Human Rights (ECHR) issued a judgment in the case of Nikolova v. Bulgaria on March 25, 1999, ruling that Nikolova had been denied her right to be brought before a judicial officer and that the eventual judicial review of her detention had been inadequate. On May 18, the ECHR declared admissible the application of A.V. v. Bulgaria , a case about a Rom man killed while in police custody in Pleven.

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)

In 1999, the Office of the OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media was active in Bulgaria, consulting on a draft media law and intervening in the case of Tatiana Vaksberg, a journalist who became the subject of a criminal investigation after criticizing Public Prosecutor Tatarchev in a story.

United States

In a June 1999 visit to Bulgaria, Secretary of State Albright praised the country for its support during the Kosovo crisis and promised support for Bulgaria's reforms. Vice President Gore, in a July 27 letter to Prime Minister Kostov, praised Bulgaria for its economic and political reforms in the past two years and stated that Bulgaria can serve as a model for the region. Bulgaria also won praise and appreciation from members of Congress who sponsored a resolution supporting Bulgaria's desire to join the E.U. and NATO. At the same time, the U.S. State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1998 , released February 1999, criticized Bulgaria for corruption, police brutality, and violence and discrimination against minorities. The U.S., in its 1999 Annual International Religious Freedom Report , also criticized Bulgaria for the harassment of unregistered religious groups by local authorities.

Relevant Human Rights Watch Report:

Bulgaria: Money Talks: Arms Dealing with Human Rights Abusers, 4/99
CROATIA

Human Rights Developments

Most of the key challenges to human rights in Croatia remained unmet in 1999, except for some limited and belated progress with regard to cooperating with the international community on war crimes. The government largely failed to implement measures designed to facilitate the return of internally-displaced and refugee Serbs to their homes, resulting in very limited returns, while the murder of a Serb in Eastern Slavonia, surprise war crimes indictments against Croatian Serbs, and continued uncertainty over the scope of the 1996 Amnesty Law underscored the lack of progress on reconciliation. Reform of Croatia state television did not address the international community's key concerns regarding editorial independence from the government and ruling party; putting the fairness of forthcoming legislative elections in doubt. Critical newspapers were subjected to spurious legal action.

Under the threat of United Nations Security Council sanctions and pressure from the United States and the European Union, Croatia agreed in September to extradite indicted Bosnian war crimes suspect Mladen Naletilic (a.k.a "Tuta") to the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and proposed that ICTY judges determine whether the ICTY has jurisdiction over the 1995 "Flash" and "Storm" military operations against Serb rebels in the Krajina and Western Slavonia regions of Croatia. At this writing the extradition was pending. Croatia had earlier transferred Vinko Martinovic (a.k.a. "Stela"), his subordinate, in August. Between December 1998 and July 1999, the ICTY was subjected to repeated criticism by senior government officials in Croatia, including President Franjo Tudjman, who accused the ICTY of bias against Croats and threatened to end Croatia's cooperation with it. At this writing, Croatia remained in non-compliance with multiple document requests by the ICTY prosecution related both to the disputed operations and to alleged abuses by Bosnian Croat forces in the Bosnian war.

A Croatian court found Nazi-era concentration camp commander Dinko Sakic guilty of crimes against humanity in October, but the Croatian government remained reluctant to examine its own recent wartime record and it continued to prosecute Croatian Serbs for alleged war crimes without referring the evidence or indictments to the ICTY for review, despite promises to do so. Between January and May, courts in Eastern Slavonia and Baranja issued new indictments against ninety-one persons without referral to the ICTY and failed to respond to a request from the ICTY to review the evidence against twenty-three Serbs from Dalj village who were among those indicted.

The application of the 1996 Amnesty Law remained confused, leaving it unclear who was eligible for amnesty, and little progress was made in clarifying the identity of many of the 13,575 persons amnestied thus far. The Committee on Trust and Reconciliation, charged with coordinating efforts to reintegrate Croatia's Serb citizens, barely functioned. In line with its obligations, the government finally provided adequate funding and status for the Joint Council of Municipalities, a consultative body of elected Serb representatives for Eastern Slavonia, although it remained politically marginalized.

For most of the more than 300,000 Croatian Serb refugees and internally-displaced persons, the promise of obtaining identity documents necessary for return and of reclaiming occupied homes offered by the government's 1998 program and procedures for return failed to materialize. Although at this writing more than 30,000 Serb refugees had returned to Croatia since the beginning of 1996, mostly from Bosnia and Hercegovina and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY), a similar number had fled the country during the same period. The procedure for organized return administered by the Croatian Office for Displaced Persons and Refugees functioned adequately for the most part, but lack of accommodation left many cases pending and most Serbs who returned did so unassisted. Refugees attempting individual return from Bosnia's Republika Srpska and FRY were frequently frustrated by slow or non-functioning consulates in Banja Luka and Belgrade in their efforts to obtain travel documents. Refugees returning to Croatia unassisted faced delays in accessing the short-term social benefits associated with return.

For those inside or able to return to Croatia, lack of access to housing remained a key obstacle. Municipal housing commissions established to oversee property claims resolved few cases involving occupied Serb homes, despite the issuance of operational instructions in February, while courts continued to evict displaced Serbs occupying Croat homes. Evicted Serbs unable to return to their own occupied homes were rarely provided with acceptable alternative accommodations or compensation. The government commission established to oversee the work of the housing commissions and other elements of the return process did not function. No progress was made in framing regulations to deal withabolition of discriminatory war-time housing legislation, leaving many Serb property owners and former tenancy-right holders in limbo. Access by Serbs to reconstruction assistance to repair war-damaged homes remained limited by existing legislation even after a new "non-discriminatory" program for reconstruction was introduced in December 1998.

Discrimination against Croatian Serbs was not limited to housing and the right of return. At this writing, the law on "areas of special state concern," which allows for permanent legal expropriation of Serb-owned property by current temporary occupants, and the law regulating the status of refugees remained on the statute books despite repeated government promises to amend or repeal them. Implementation of the "convalidation" law allowing recognition of administrative documents issued during the war by de-facto Serb authorities remained uneven.

There was an increase in intimidation and violence against Serbs in some parts of Eastern Slavonia and Baranja during the spring of 1999. Much of the violence centered on the village of Berak, near Vukovar. The exhumation of Croat war victims in the village in April prompted recently returned Croat residents to demonstrate against Serb war-time abuses and provided a pretext for harassment of Serb residents and the assault of a Serb police officer in May. Some Serb families fled their homes as a result. In August, Djuro Mutic, a thirty-nine-year-old Serb from Berak, was beaten to death outside his home by a group of Croat former refugees. One suspect implicated in earlier incidents was taken in for questioning, but at this writing investigations were continuing and no charges had been brought. Harassment and intimidation of Serbs also occurred in Borovo, Beli Manistir, Cakovci, Sotin, and Mirkovci, among other places.

Broadcast media, widely cited as having a decisive role in the ruling party's victory in the 1997 local and presidential elections,

remained under the firm editorial and political control of the HDZ, with a disproportionate representation of the ruling party's views on three television channels of Croatian Radio-Television (Hrvatska Radiotelevizija, HRT). In July, a license was granted to Nova Television in July to establish a private fourth national channel, but Nova's close ties to HRT raised questions about editorial independence.

Independent newspapers and journalists continued to face harassment by the courts and police. In June, the editor of the weekly Nacional (Zagreb) was arrested in his home after an investigation into corruption in the country's secret service. In July, a journalist with Jutarnji List (Zagreb) received death threats after reporting on prison conditions. Nacional and the satirical weekly Feral Tribune (Split) continued to be the subject of multiple libel suits by the government and government officials.

Defending Human Rights

There were no reports of restrictions on the freedom to monitor by international or local nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), although local nongovernmental organizations were periodically attacked in the pro-government press. Recognizing the importance of free and fair elections for the development of other human rights, several NGO coalitions, including Citizens Organizing to Oversee Voting (Gradjani Organizirano Nadgledaju Glasanje, GONG) and the Women's Ad Hoc Coalition, were active in preparing for the elections to the House of Deputies. Continuing its monitoring and advocacy, the Croatian Helsinki Committee issued a major report documenting violence against Serbs in 1995 and condemned attacks on press freedom. The Croatian Law Center worked to promote legal reform and the rule of law, while the Civil Rights Project and the Knin Legal Aid Project continued to provide legal assistance in housing, citizenship, and other discrimination cases.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

The U.N. Committee Against Torture considered the second periodic report of Croatia in November 1998. While praising Croatia's incorporation of the crime of torture into its national legislation, the committee expressed concern at allegations of ill treatment and torture by Croatian security forces, especially members of the police. The January report of the U.N. Special Rapporteur to the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, Jiri Dienstbier, highlighted ongoing discrimination against Serbs in Croatia. Considering his report in April, the commission called for electoral reform and further progress on equal rights for Serbs.

During a visit in May, the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights signed an agreement with the Croatian government for her office in Zagreb to provide human rights training for the police, military, and prison officers. Despite limited resources, the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees continued its efforts to promote the return of Serb refugees to Croatia and assisted refugees and displaced persons inside the country. The U.N. Security Council extended the mandate of its military observer mission to the disputed Prevlaka peninsula twice, in January and July.

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)

The OSCE remained at the forefront of international efforts to promote respect for human rights in 1999. With 250 international staff in 16 field offices, the mission benefited from improved internal reporting structures, notably the resuscitation of the field activities report. January, May and September reports to the Permanent Council were much more critical than those during 1998, reflecting a new willingness to point out the gap between Croatia's commitments and its actual performance. The mission also began to put detailed information on its website.

The need for greater press freedom and especially electronic media reform in Croatia was noted by visitors from a range of OSCE institutions, including Chairman-in-Office Knut Vollebaek, Parliamentary Assembly President Helle Degn MP, and the representative on freedom of the media, Freimut Duve. Mr. Duve issued a March report detailing the curbs on media freedom in Croatia, linking them to the forthcoming national elections and recommending urgent reform of the state broadcasting service, HRT.

Council of Europe

The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) continued to scrutinize Croatia's progress toward meeting the human rights standards required of Council of Europe members. In April, the Assembly noted Croatia's ratification of the Convention on Human Rights but expressed concern at the lack of progress on media and electoral reform, and ongoing discrimination against Croatian Serbs. The monitoring procedure was extended for an additional year. An April report by the PACE Committee on Migration, Refugees and Demography also noted the range of obstacles for Serb refugees and internally displaced persons wishing to return to their pre-war homes. A June visit to Croatia by an expert delegation on media from the Council of Europe underscored the need to bring Croatian law on telecommunication and broadcasting into harmony with Council of Europe standards.

European Union

In the context of the internationally negotiated Stability Pact for Southeastern Europe, the European Union (E.U.) undertook a major restructuring of its framework of relations with the countries of the "Western Balkans" during 1999. The new arrangement had little immediate effect on the E.U.'s position toward Croatia but held the promise of significantly closer ties in the near future. In May, E.U. foreign ministers approved a new "stabilization and association process" which combines additional economic and legal conditionality and the possibility of future E.U. membership with the existing political conditionality of its 1997 "regional approach for southeastern Europe."

In June, E.U. foreign ministers determined that Croatia's progress on human rights and democracy was "insufficient" to permit Croatia to receive assistance (and political legitimacy) from the PHARE reconstruction program, but indicated that if progress was maintained it could benefit from such assistance in the near future. In September, the E.U. governments expressed concern over Croatia's limited cooperation with the ICTY and postponed a decision about a consultative task force on contractual relations between Croatia and the E.U. Nevertheless, the foreign ministers' statement in June and the resumption in July of an informal E.U.-Croatia political dialogue which was suspended in 1995 suggested that the E.U. may be willing to relax its previous human rights conditionality, a signal that is only likely to worsen Croatia's performance. In 1998 the E.U. provided an estimated 24 million Euro (U.S. $25.2 million) to Croatia including 600,000 Euro (U.S. $630,000) for human rights and democracy. Assistance in 1999 was slightly higher at around 25 million Euro (U.S. $26.2 million).

United States

The United States consolidated its strategic relationship with Croatia during 1999, providing a security guarantee in case of Serbian attack to Croatia in March following the start of NATO airstrikes on Kosovo, and making Croatia eligible to purchase U.S. armaments in April. Washington also continued to provide an estimated U.S.$425,000 through the international military education & training (IMET) program. Croatia's image as a U.S. ally was bolstered by the invitation of the Croatian Foreign Minister to Washington in March for discussions with the U.S. Secretary of State and the tone of a September meeting between U.S. Representative to the United Nations Richard Holbrooke and Croatian President Franjo Tudjman.

The U.S. was sometimes willing to call Croatia to task on its failure to uphold human rights, notably on cooperation with the ICTY and the need for electoral reform. Around half of the estimated U.S.$12 million provided to Croatia under the support for Eastern European democracy (SEED) program went directly toward democratization. On the question of the return of Serb refugees to Croatia, the U.S. showed more willingness to give Croatia the benefit of the doubt, promising U.S.$5 million in May in support of the government's refugee return plan despite continued legal and administrative obstacles to return. The State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1998 indicated that the U.S. was well aware of Croatia's failure to comply with many international human rights standards.

Relevant Human Rights Watch report:

Second Class Citizens: The Serbs of Croatia, 3/99.

CZECH REPUBLIC

Human Rights Developments

Despite several positive legislative reforms in 1999, the Czech Republic continued to lag in redressing a number of serious human rights issues, most notably the widespread discrimination against the ethnic Roma minority. The Czech Republic drew severe criticism from the international community for its policy toward Roma, which, coupled with a sagging economy and public ambivalence about European integration, led to growing concern that Czech accession to the European Union might be delayed.

In July, the Chamber of Deputies approved an amendment to the Czech citizenship law. The law, passed after the 1993 split with Slovakia, had been widely criticized because it rendered tens of thousands of Roma stateless, classified them as aliens, and denied them voting rights and social benefits. The new legislation allowed Roma who were permanent citizens of the Czech Republic to regularize their status. The government also passed Resolution 279 in April, which laid out a twelve-point program to improve minority relations, decrease Roma unemployment, which was a staggering 80 percent in 1998, and better integrate Roma into society.

However, violence against Roma continued at an alarming rate. In May, a group of ten to fifteen skinheads attacked a Roma family in its home in Pilsen. The attackers apparently heard them speaking Romany through an open window and began yelling insults at them. When the family closed the window and called the police, the perpetrators broke down the door and beat them with sticks. One of the attackers was detained temporarily and then released.

On August 27, in the southern Moravian village of Dvorek u Ohrazovic, two neighboring families were attacked in their homes by a group of approximately thirty skinheads, who fired guns and threw bricks and stones into the houses. One man suffered a head wound and was hospitalized. Police eventually charged twelve men with rioting, damaging property, and violent acts, but refused to recognize any racial motivation behind the attack. In May, U.S. Ambassador John Shattuck criticized Czech courts for leniently sentencing perpetrators of crimes against Roma.

The much-publicized plans to build a wall separating a Roma housing compound from its neighbors in Usti nad Labem were temporarily stalled when the Czech cabinet voted to block construction on the grounds that it promoted racial discrimination. However, local authorities claimed that the cabinet had no jurisdiction to interfere in the plan, and on October 13, the concrete wall was erected with local police guarding the site. That same day, the Czech parliament voted to override the local government's decision, and local officials promised to appeal to the Constitutional Court. A senior E.U. official warned the government that the wall could prevent the Czech Republic from gaining E.U. membership. The government had come under

intense national and international pressure to block the plan, which was condemned by President Vaclav Havel, the U.N. Committee Against All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and the Council of Europe, among others.

In June, a group of Roma parents assisted by the European Roma Rights Center (ERRC) filed a lawsuit against the state, claiming racial discrimination on the grounds that Romany children are fifteen times more likely than other Czech children to be sent to schools for the mentally retarded. According to a report by the ERRC released the same day, 75 percent of Roma children were placed in special schools, where they comprised 50 percent of the population, although Roma made up an estimated 5 percent of the total population. Only 4 percent of other Czech children were placed in special schools.

Roma requests for political asylum in the U.K. reached an all-time high of 588 in the first half of 1999, compared to 512 requests in all of 1998, which caused concern that Britain would impose a visa requirement. Most of the applicants claimed state persecution, but none were granted asylum.

Concerns about police brutality remained unresolved. Although government Human Rights Commissioner Petr Uhl acknowledged that police used arbitrary force and made arbitrary arrests during the 1998 Global Street Party, when about fifty demonstrators were beaten and detained, no police officers were indicted for misconduct. The Ministry of the Interior claimed that it was impossible to identify, and thus prosecute, the culpable police officers. In April the Czech Helsinki Committee issued a report documenting widespread police violence, corruption, and discrimination against women in recruitment. The group called for a number of reforms, including the creation of an independent, impartial body of review.

In July, the government proposed a bill that would give the Ministry of Interior power to dissolve extremist organizations which are deemed threatening to human rights.

Commissioner Uhl charged Interior Minister Vaclav Grulich with training police to identify racially motivated crimes.

A bill that would legalize homosexual partnership and afford homosexual couples the financial benefits and rights of conventional marriages was delayed after the lower house in parliament, at the initiative of the Christian Democrats, sent the bill back to committees for reworking.

International journalist organizations condemned a proposed press law which they feared would curb freedom of the press. For example, the law would ban free discussion of certain topics including the Czech constitution, require that subjects who felt their "honor, dignity or privacy" had been violated by a publication be granted space to print a reply, and require publications to register their political "tendency."

Defending Human Rights

Human rights groups worked relatively unencumbered, with one notable exception, to bring attention to various abuses and to improve the situation of the Roma minority. On January 27, fifteen police officers reportedly forcibly removed Stanislav Penc, a member of the Czech Human Rights Committee, from a restaurant in Prague and beat him as they escorted him to the police station. Penc was detained for an hour, and was never charged with a crime or given an explanation for the incident, despite his request for a written statement. The case was under investigation by the Prague Police Complaints and Inspection Department.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

The United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD) urged the government to take more pro-active measures to abolish discrimination against Roma, and specifically to act decisively in preventing the plan to create a segregated community in Usti nad Labem.

Council of Europe

The Czech Republic benefitted from Council of Europe programs of governmental cooperation aimed at training police in Council of Europe standards. In a positive step, the lower house of the Czech parliament voted by a large majority to adopt the Council of Europe's European Social Charter, a condition for E.U. membership which, however, did not require any major change in Czech legislation. The Charter awaited final ratification by the Senate.

European Union

The Czech Republic's slow progress in harmonizing its legislation with European Union (E.U.) standards threatened to keep the country out of the first wave of E.U. expansion to Eastern Europe. Upon Finnish assumption of the E.U. Presidency in July, Finnish Prime Minister Paavo Lipponen stated that the Czech Republic must abolish discriminatory practices toward the Roma population in order to join the E.U. Commissioner Uhl acknowledged that Czech law fell short of the European Convention on Protection of National Minorities.

In addition to concerns about minority relations, both the E.U.'s November 1998 and October 1999 reports on progress toward accession highlighted the need for judicial reform and more effective measures to fight corruption. The E.U. also pressured the government to declare obsolete the 1945 "Benes decrees," which revoked the citizenship and property rights of Germans and Hungarians in Czechoslovakia and expelled most Germans from the Sudetenland.

North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)

In March the Czech Republic entered NATO. As a result of the process of NATO accession, the Czech Republic was required to upgrade its military, raising concerns that weapons made obsolete would be sold to abusive regimes in other parts of the world. In April, Human Rights Watch urged NATO and the Czech Republic to ensure that sufficient arms trade control mechanisms were implemented. Prime Minister Zeman assured Human Rights Watch that the Czech Republic did not export arms to areas with violent conflicts and that Czech weapons were thus "not accessible to malevolent military forces." However, in September he announced the sale of Soviet made T-54 and T-55 tanks to Yemen, and human rights groups were concerned that the tanks would be diverted or resold to another country.

United States

The United States Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) voiced concern over the violence against Roma and foreigners in the Czech Republic and regretted the lack of progress on the issue of property restitution to non-citizens. U.S. assistance to the Czech Republic focused on facilitating its NATO accession with an estimated U.S.$3.8 million in military financing, training, and assistance. The administration requested that Congress appropriate $9.1 million for these purposes in fiscal year 2000.

Relevant Human Rights Watch Report:

Arsenals on the Cheap: NATO Expansion and the Arms Cascade , 4/99.
GEORGIA

Human Rights Developments

Georgia's already poor human rights record deteriorated in advance of October 31 parliamentary elections. The elections will determine whether President Eduard Shevardnadze's ruling Citizens Union party will retain control over the legislature in the face of popular discontent over the government's failure to raise living standards, pay wages and pensions on time, and curb rampant corruption.

Multilateral lending institutions disbursed substantial credits to Georgia in June and July after protracted discussions regarding the government's unwillingness to collect taxes, especially from large taxpayers.

There was no substantial improvement in the Ministry of Internal Affair's dismal record in the treatment of detainees, and the ministry actively blocked reforms in a number of significant areas. Mistreatment and physical abuse of detainees continued to be rampant. On March 22, Ivane Kolbaya fell to his death from a fifth-floor window of the Tbilisi Central Police Department during questioning by police officials. He was the fifth person in the past four years to die by falling from a window under suspicion circumstances while in police custody. An investigation in May reportedly confirmed initial ministry findings that all five had died as a result of suicide.

In a striking setback to reform, the parliament voted in May and July to repeal reforms in the criminal procedure code that had been slated to go into effect in mid-May. The amendments replaced nearly half of the new code, which would have ensured detainees access to the courts prior to trial to redress abuses by the procuracy and security forces during criminal investigations. The government's move to restrict access to the courts was dismaying given its public support for a high profile reform of the judiciary. The repeal of the reforms came just one month after Georgia gained admission to Council of Europe on April 27.

On May 29, Guldani police violently broke up a prayer meeting of Assembly of God adherents, threatening and beating several participants. The group's pastor and other adherents reported that throughout June, Ministry of Internal Affairs officials mounted a campaign of harassment and threats against them. The group filed a civil suit against Guldani police officials in August, alleging that they had illegally dispersed the meeting, but a trial court ruled that the police had acted properly. The judge stated in his decision that the meeting participants had been overly loud, but refused to view a video tape made of the incident, claiming that he was unwilling to wait for electricity to be restored to the court room after a temporary power outage.

In June, a political party filed a suit requesting the government revoke the registration of the Jehovah's Witness' organization on the grounds that it was "anti-state" and its teachings contrary to the Georgian Orthodox Church. The judge denied a motion filed by the Jehovah's Witnesses that the suit was spurious and that political parties do not have legal standing in Georgia to file such suits. As of this writing, the Jehovah's Witnesses had appealed the decision to the Supreme Court. A lawyer representing the Jehovah's Witnesses stated that the suit was a political stunt to gain publicity in the run up to the election. The suit was brought by Georgia Over All, a nationalist political party led by Guram Sharadze, a member of parliament.

Hope that a transfer of detention facilities from the Ministry of Internal Affairs to the Ministry of Justice would result in an improvement of poor conditions in the facilities were quashed in July when legislation was adopted to effect the transfer. The facilities will continue to bepredominately staffed by Ministry of Internal Affairs personnel. Moreover, the ministry demanded that it be allowed to conduct "operative investigative measures" or investigations in the penitentiary system to gather evidence for trial.

The abusive nature of such measures was illustrated by the case of Giga Shukashvili. In 1997, police at the Guldani District police station severely beat Shukashvili to coerce him into signing false testimony regarding a theft. He was later taken to the Tbilisi City Main Police Department, where, he reported, he was placed in a room with six, and at times more, inmates who were allegedly police informers, who brutally beat him intermittently over a period of about eighteen days to force him to sign further testimony. In July 1999, more than a year and a half after the incident, the procuracy claimed that it was continuing to investigate. After being released following his trial, Mr. Shukashvili's family reported in May that he had been detained again briefly in order to intimidate him to withdraw his complaint against the police and that he was subject to harassment by visitors he identified as connected with the police officers who abused him.

Defending Human Rights

The Lawyer's Collegium, which formerly was subordinated to the Ministry of Justice but whose status is currently unknown, filed suit against the Tbilisi municipality in early August in an attempt to halt an innovative project supported by a number of nongovernmental organizations. The project would station lawyers - employees of the municipality chosen through competitive examination - in Tbilisi-area police stations to advise detainees of their rights on a pro bono basis. In October, a court ruled that the Collegium lacked the legal status to bring such a suit. In April, another project by nongovernmental organizations to monitor conditions in pre-trial detention in Tbilisi and provide free legal service failed after Ministry of Internal Affairs staff denied access to monitors. Several journalists and members of nongovernmental organizations, including the Liberty Institute, suffered harassment and threats from individuals apparently linked to the Ministry of Internal Affairs officials in an attempt to block the monitoring project.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

On July 31, the U.N. Security Council extended the mandate of the ninety-eight member U.N. observer mission in the breakaway region of Abkhazia. The Security Council described the situation in the conflict zone as volatile and unanimously adopted a resolution noting a lack of progress in reaching a political solution to the conflict. The resolution demands that Georgia and Abkhazia deepen their commitment to the U.N.-led peace process and display the political will to find a solution.

The council reiterated the right of all refugees and displaced persons affected by the conflict to return to their homes, and condemned the ongoing activities by armed groups which it stated endanger the civilian population and impede the work of humanitarian organizations. The U.N., in conjunction with the OSCE, maintained a human rights office in Sukhumi that engaged in support for capacity building of nongovernmental organizations.

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)

The OSCE maintained a human rights office in Tbilisi that actively raised a wide range of issues with government officials, including legislative reform, visited detention facilities, monitored significant trials, and provided free legal consultations.

Council of Europe

Georgia gained full membership in the Council of Europe in April and ratified the European Convention on Human Rights in May. The repeal of legal reforms, continued police abuse, and the failure to ensure a climate of religious tolerance immediately after accession was highly dismaying.

European Union

The European Union (E.U.) actively raised human rights issues with government officials throughout the year. The E.U. earmarked funding for judicial reform activities and targeted assistance to nongovernmental organizations in regions outside of Tbilisi, a welcome move to develop civil society and to increase ties between regional and Tbilisi-based nongovernmental organizations.

United States

The United States (U.S.) cultivated closer ties with Georgia, as part of its efforts to support the development of an East-West energy corridor from the Caspian Sea region. As part of the effort, U.S. President Bill Clinton met with President Shevardnadze in September. The U.S. and its allies continued to engage in training Georgian security forces, including, but not limited to, the army and Border Guards. This activity is highly alarming given the Georgian government's repeal of reforms in May intended to strengthen the court system's ability to serve as check on abuses by the security forces. The U.S. State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1998 correctly noted that Georgian civilian authorities maintain inadequate control of the law enforcement and security forces.
HUNGARY

Human Rights Developments

Discrimination and police violence against Roma and the ill-treatment of asylum seekers and refugees remained persistent problems in Hungary in 1999. Despite the backdrop of systematic human rights violations by state actors targeting minority groups and refugees, Hungary gained NATO membership in March and continued the process of accession with the European Union.

Relations between the Roma community and the police deteriorated in 1999 despite pressure from western governments and human rights groups urging the Hungarian government to curb rampant police abuse. In the town of Hajduhadhaz, eastern Hungary, the European Roma Rights Center (ERRC) reported that police routinely beat, verbally abused, and searched the apartments of Roma without cause. Of the fifteen cases opened against police officers in Hajduhadhaz in recent years, all remain either unresolved or ended in acquittals. Following the March 1999 broadcast of a nationally televised news program, Fokusz , about police brutality in Hajduhadhaz, police arrested and beat a Roma man who appeared on the program. Two other Roma men who were interviewed on the program went into hiding fearing retaliation. In response to intense public pressure by local Roma rights groups and the media, the Ministry of Interior admitted on June 18 that Hajduhadhaz had the highest reported level of police violence in Hungary and that half of the town's police force, twenty-six officers, were under investigation for alleged abusive conduct.

In June, the Budapest-based Roma Press Center reported that police beat a Roma university student named L$szlJ S$rk zi as he walked through a park in Budapest. Three police officers repeatedly kicked the Roma man and yelled racial epithets at him. When the man promised to report the officers' mistreatment, they beat him further. Mr. Sarkozi filed a lawsuit against the officers.

Though the government has publicly acknowledged maltreatment of Roma in statements to the European Union and to the press, blatant discrimination persists in education, healthcare, and employment. In a pattern that local groups said is nationwide, school officials continued to segregate Roma students in separate classrooms and even separate buildings from the general pool of students.

Prosecutors failed to pursue vigorously perpetrators accused of racially motivated crimes. Only three people were convicted under the racially motivated crimes statute of the criminal code, though none were convicted for crimes against Roma. Activist groups complained that the law is underutilized and that law enforcement officials are not trained to investigate racially motivated crimes.

The 1998 changes in Hungary's asylum laws, including the lifting of geographical reservations of the 1951 Refugee Convention, which excluded non-European asylum seekers, were followed in 1999 by uneven enforcement and continuing poor conditions for asylum seekers in designated detention centers, especially on Hungary's borders. In January 1999, citing inhuman conditions in detention facilities and the arbitrary application of asylum procedures, an Austrian court recommended that Austria cease repatriating asylum seekers who crossed into Austria from Hungary without hearing their claims. Hungary's parliamentary human rights ombudsman, Katalin Gonczol, reported to the Hungarian parliament in February 1999 that conditions in the border facilities were "uncivilized and intolerable." In response to such criticism, the government agreed to close the worst facilities, though as of this writing they remained opened. In July, dozens of asylum seekers in the Nyirbator Border Guard Community Shelter went on hunger strike demanding long awaited decisions on their asylum applications and transfer to camps with better facilities. The strikers complained that the facilities were unhygienic, overcrowded, and did not allow for freedom of movement.

In late 1998 the government lifted "temporary" asylum status for refugees from the conflicts in Croatia and Bosnia Hercegovina. All such asylum seekers were forced to return to their home countries or apply for regular asylum despite credible evidence that conditions in their home countries were often not conducive to safe return.

Hungary signed the International Criminal Court treaty on December 15, 1998, but its parliament has yet to ratify it.

Defending Human Rights

Hungary's NGO community continued representing the rights of Roma and exposing human rights violations. The European Roma Rights Center conducted advocacy and research campaigns throughout 1999, focusing on police abuse and discrimination against Roma and offering training for local activists. The Legal Defense Bureau for National and Ethnic Minorities (Nemzeti 6s Etnikai Kisebbs6gi Jogv6dN Iroda, NEKI) provided legal representation to Roma victims of racist attacks and again published its "White Notebook," detailing dozens of specific cases of abuse against Roma.

The Role of the International Community

Council of Europe

Hungary held the chairmanship of the Council of Europe Committee of Ministers in the first half of 1999, during which period important developments included the decision to establish the post of European Commissioner for Human Rights. In July, Hungary ratified the Council of Europe Social Charter, providing an important new basis for combating discrimination against Roma with regards to economic and social rights.

European Union

As accession talks between Hungary and the European Union (E.U.) progressed, Hungary continued to fall short of human rights benchmarks set for in its accession framework document. In its December 1998 interim report on accession, the E.U. cited continuing abuses against Roma-especially in the area of educational discrimination and conditions in police detention centers-as key points of improvement required for Hungary to obtain full E.U. membership.

United Nations

The United Nations Committee against Torture, in its concluding observations on Hungary's third periodic report to the committee, expressed concern about police torture of criminal suspects and abusive conditions of detention in prisons, detention facilities, and refugee holding centers. Stephan Berghund, the Budapest representative of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees, visited Hungary's refugee detention centers in February and expressed serious concerns about overcrowding, especially in light of the influx of refugees from the Kosovo conflict.

United States

The U.S. State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1998 criticized Hungary's failure to protect the Roma population from police abuse and to make progress combating discrimination against Roma in education, housing, and access to public services. The report also highlighted the ill-treatment of criminal suspects in pre-trial detention-especially Roma and foreigners-and law enforcement authorities' lax attitude toward spousal abuse against women. Hungary received an estimated U.S. $5 million from the U.S. to finance military upgrades required for NATO membership. Concern emerged that as Hungary purchased new military equipment, its old weaponry-especially small arms-would be sold to human rights abusers worldwide ( see Arms Division Chapter).
KAZAKHSTAN

Human Rights Developments

The deteriorating human rights situation in Kazakhstan in 1999 mirrored the country's deepening economic and demographic crisis. During preparations for pre-term elections for president, parliament, and local councils, the government continued to harrass opposition political activists, cripple the independent media, and block public demonstrations.

Political rights became the first casualty of early elections. After blocking several opponents from the ballot on grounds that they had participated in an "unregistered public association," including former Prime Minister Akezhan Kazhegeldin, President Nazarbaev won re-election on January 10 with more than 79 percent of the vote. International monitors including the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) concluded that the election "fell far short" of meeting Kazakhstan's international commitments. An OSCE assessment mission noted interference in the campaign efforts of the Communist Party candidate and extremely one-sided media coverage, as well as irregularities in voting procedures.

Under international pressure, Kazakhstan amended its election law, lowering registration fees for candidates, and lowering to forty the number of administrative offenses for which candidates could be excluded. The Central Electoral Commission (CEC) also relented, admitting to the parliamentary ballot scheduled for October several candidates who had earlier administrative offenses. However, the courts once again prevented former prime minister Kazhegeldin from standing for election, citing an ongoing criminal investigation for tax evasion. The day after his disqualification, police arrested him in a Moscow airport in response to an extradition request from Kazakhstan's procuracy. The Russian procuracy released Kazhegeldin several days later, and Kazakhstan's procurator general later announced he was withdrawing the order to arrest Kazhegeldin. Opposition candidates claimed extensive vote fraud in the October 10 poll, the results of which were announced a full seven days later, further heightening doubts about falsification. Many single-district seats will be decided in a second round of voting, while of the ten seats allotted by party slate, only the opposition Communists gained entry, with two seats.

Civil freedoms suffered, too, in the 1999 election. In July, parliament passed a new Law on the Mass Media which even the speaker of parliament himself criticized as "undemocratic," though, like previous laws, it forbids censorship. In June, a court in Almaty closed the popular newspaper Nachnem s Ponedel'nika (Let's begin on Monday) for two months, pending the outcome of several libel actions totaling nearly 500 million tenge. Damages of more than five million tenge (nearly U.S. $36,000) awarded in mid-September in another libel action will most likely force the paper to close. The paper likewise stood accused of inciting national enmity. Many believe that actions against the paper aimed to silence its harsh criticism of President Nazarbaev's rule, and in particular an article published in May entitled "Kazakhstan must not become a bandit-run police state." Authorities closed Radio Rik after two journalists whose previous television and radio ventures had been lost in the 1997 closed auctions took over the management of the radio.

Harassment of the media through various government agencies continued as well. After government and private presses canceled printing contracts for Sol-Dat (successor to the independent Kazakh-language paper Dat closed in 1998; "that Dat," in Kazakh playing on the Russian word for soldier, soldat), the paper was forced to publish in Russia; in September, customs agents impounded several issues of the paper.

In a rare positive development, parliament declined to consider a more restrictive draft law on religion early in the year after the draft drew harsh criticism from home and abroad. Nevertheless, in June, a court in western Kazakhstan gave an Islamic activist a six-month suspended sentence and fined him a fifth of his monthly wages for that period for allegedly establishing an illegal public institution. In July authorities detained sixty participants in an Islamic summer camp, seven of whom were charged, held for one month, but then released. In September, President Nazarbaev created a commission to counter the threat of religious "extremism."

Though President Nazarbaev claimed that Kazakhstan had 2,000 registered NGOs, the government continued to use registration procedures to prevent the operation of groups it deemed politically threatening. The nongovernmental Movement for Honest Elections, despite submitting its registration materials in October 1998, never received an official response to its application. The organization of the Russian Community ( Russkaia obshchina ) held a press conference on June 23 to protest authorities' two-year denial of national registration, which renders its members ineligible to serve as observers at polling stations. Several of its members who had planned to stand for election to parliament and local councils were disqualified after being charged with administrative offenses. After the Russian Community demonstrated in August, it was promised national registration.

In April, police in Almaty stopped members of the Union of Semirechie Cossacks from entering an Orthodox cathedral for Easter services, claiming that the traditional military uniforms worn by the Cossacks violated the ban on creating "military organizations with uniforms and insignia"; the Almaty procurator charged the Cossack's leader with this offense.

In February, Kazakhstan forcibly deported three young Uighur political asylum seekers to China, where they were reportedly executed.

Prosecutor General Iurii Khitrin announced his office discovered that eighty-three citizens were illegally detained in the first six months of 1999. Reports of twenty-one attempted suicides among convicts in May showed that conditions in Kazakhstan's places of detention remain appalling. Prisoners cut open their abdominal cavities to protest "repeated beatings" by the administration of their labor colony. In a cost-cutting measure, the government decided in June to free one-quarter of Kazakhstan's prisoners, or 20,000 persons.

Defending Human Rights

There were no known instances of direct harassment of Kazakhstan's main human rights organizations, the Almaty Helsinki Group and the Kazakhstan International Bureau for Human Rights and the Rule of Law (KIBHR). However, authorities in Petropavlovsk once again refused to register the local KIBHR bureau, after the branch submitted its documentation in 1998.

The Role of the International Community

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)

After protesting the exclusion of opposition candidates from the presidential ballot and the preparations for early presidential elections, the OSCE declined to send a full observer mission to the January 10 elections, dispatching instead a fourteen-member assessment mission. That mission proclaimed that the vote "fell far short" of OSCE standards. From January through July, the OSCE, which opened a center in Almaty early in the year, exerted pressure on the Kazakh government to amend election legislation.

The Representative on Freedom of the Media visited Kazakhstan in April and criticized Kazakhstan at the Permanent Council in May for its pre-election crackdown on the independent media. After refusing to send observers for the January poll, the OSCE announced on September 1 that it would send a full observer mission to the October 10 elections to the lower house of parliament, cautioning that, in its view, the decision to observe "does not, in and of itself or a priori, add legitimacy to the election process." Its preliminary assessment of the vote claimed that conduct of the polling was satisfactory in most of the polling stations but observed that "illegal interference" by authorities before the vote "undermined" the process.

Council of Europe and the European Commission

The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe sent a delegation to Kazakhstan in May, after taking the decision to consider Kazakhstan for observer status.

The European Commission criticized Kazakhstan's presidential elections in a January statement, but did not allow this criticism to delay the entry into force of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with Kazakhstan on July 1. Three weeks later, the E.U.-Kazakhstan Cooperation Council reviewed that agreement and, while "emphasizing the importance they attach to democratic values," concluded that cooperation in 1999/2000 should focus first and foremost on "the improvement of the business climate."

United States

The United States (U.S.) relied mainly on exhortation to convince Kazakhstan to uphold its human rights obligations, publicly criticizing Kazakhstan's human rights record on several occasions. The State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1998 provided a full and unstinting account of violations in Kazakhstan. The Department of State made several public statements condemning the November 1998 exclusion from the ballot of Mr. Kazhegeldin and expressed disappointment in the conduct of the January 10 presidential elections. In response to congressional inquiries, the secretary of state wrote on July 9, that "we had made it clear to the highest levels of Kazakhstan's government that harassment of opposition figures is not acceptable," and that "a fundamental component of U.S. policy in Kazakhstan is promotion of democracy and human rights...."

Only when scandal erupted over Kazakhstan's transfer of conventional weapons to North Korea, however, did the Administration intimate in September that it would consider cutting assistance to Kazakhstan.
KYRGYZSTAN

Human Rights Developments

The year 1999 was a troubled one for Kyrgyzstan. Armed clashes with militants in the south of the country put the region in crisis. Torture in police custody continued, as did widespread trafficking of women into forced prostitution abroad. The government's adoption of a flawed election law and its ongoing campaign against the independent media continued a downward trend in respect for human rights in Kyrgyzstan.

In August, armed militants, apparently en route to Uzbekistan, clashed with Kyrgyz government troops in the southern Batken region. On August 3, the militants took four Kyrgyz citizens hostage in the village of Zardaly, Osh region. The militants released the hostages on August 13 following the reported payment by the government of an unspecified ransom. The crisis escalated two days later when the Kyrgyz army, backed by Uzbek warplanes, began to attack suspected strongholds of the militants both in Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan. In response, on August 22, another group of militants, reportedly numbering between 500 and 1,000, entered Kyrgyzstan via the border with Tajikistan and took approximately twenty persons hostage, including four Japanese geologists and a general of the Kyrgyz army, Anarbek Shamkeev. The militants released four ethnic Kyrgyz hostages on August 31 and reportedly demanded the release of wrongfully jailed Muslim believers held in Uzbekistan, including those held in connection with a series of bomb explosions in Uzbekistan in 1999. The Russian government agreed to consider supplying military equipment to the Kyrgyz army, but ruled out sending troops to the region.

Victims of the crisis multiplied on August 29 when the Uzbek airforce mistakenly bombed the village of Kara-Teyit, killing four, injuring 280, and rendering thirty-one families homeless. As of this writing, estimated casualties from the numerous and ongoing clashes were at least twenty government soldiers killed, with around half that number wounded. The government claimed to have inflicted similar casualties on the militants although that claim could not be independently verified. As of this writing, at least nine persons were still being held hostage, although some reports suggested that figure may be much higher. Independent human rights activist Tursunbai Akunov assumed the role of mediator in the crisis and reported on September 10 that the hostages were alive and well. Akunov stated that the militants were overwhelmingly ethnic Uzbek with Tajiks, Kyrgyz, and Afghans making up the remainder.

The government's response to the crisis was indiscriminate: In September, police systematically rounded up hundreds of ethnic Uzbeks, Tajiks, and Afghans in the city of Jala-Abad and the capital, Bishkek on the pretext of passport checks, holding them in custody for up to two days. As of this writing, it was unclear how many remained in custody. Local human rights groups reported that over 5,000 persons had been displaced in the conflict and were located in government-organized camps, while on September 9, the director of the Federal Migration Agency, Cholponkul Arabayev, put that figure at 7,500. As of mid-October, reports stated that many internally displaced persons had begun to return home with between 3,000 to 5,000 remaining in government camps. On September 3, the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights reported that many of those displaced complained of inadequate food and medicine in the camps and expressed fears that their difficulties would be exacerbated by the imminent onset of winter.

The government continued to crack down on the independent media using forcible break-ins, libel suits, and tax inspections in an attempt to silence dissent. On the night of April 24, the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights reported that the premises of the independent Bishkek newspaper, Asaba (The Standard) were broken into and information related to members of the Ministry of National Security erased from computers. No items of value were stolen, strongly suggesting a political motive, a supposition strengthened by statements reportedly made by the deputy minister for national security two days prior to the break-in, calling for information held by the newspaper on the ministry's members to be handed over and threatening legal action if the information were published.

On February 18, the independent Bishkek newspaper Res Publica (The Republic) published an appeal to President Akaev and other senior government officials in which journalists and employees of the State Television and Radio Company alleged that they had been unfairly dismissed by the head of that company, Amambek Karepkulov. Karepkulov immediately filed a lawsuit to defend his "honor and dignity" under article 18 of the civil code. On March 30, the Pervomaisky court in Bishkek found in Karepkulov's favor and awarded him 200,000 som (approximately U.S.$5,000) in damages. As of this writing, Res Publica 's appeal against the decision was pending.

On August 18, the government stepped up its attack on the independent media with a series of tax inspections on Vecherny Bishkek (The Evening Bishkek), a daily mass-circulation independent newspaper. On August 24, tax police threatened Vecherny Bishkek editor and majority shareholder Alexander Kim with arrest after he refused to admit inspectors onto the newspaper's premises. Kim alleged that the newspaper was due to undergo a tax inspection in December, a full year after the previous inspection, and that any additional inspections contravened the Kyrgyz tax law. Kim further stated that the multiple inspections began after the paper carried interviews with several opposition politicians, including potential candidates in the 2000 presidential elections. In addition to the tax inspections, local printing presses came under direct pressure from the presidential administration not to print the paper. On September 21, Kim resigned as editor of the newspaper, citing the tax inspections, along with internal staff difficulties, as the reason. As of this writing, Vecherny Bishkek continued to be published.

On June 24, the government adopted a new electoral code. While containing numerous praiseworthy clauses that safeguard the transparency of the electoral process, a clause excluding candidates convicted of an administrative or criminal offense from standing for public office left the code open to politically motivated abuse.

In a positive move, on December 5, President Akaev signed a decree imposing a two-year moratorium on the death penalty. The decree was announced three days after the declaration of an amnesty for 2,000 prisoners, mostly minors, women, and those guilty of economic crimes. The moratorium and amnesty were announced to commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights.

On December 15, a Bishkek court issued its ruling in the case of three ethnic Uighurs- Kurban Yasin, Kular Dilaver, and Jalal Mahmud Kasarly-arrested in April 1998 on charges of disseminating Wahhabi literature, inciting inter-religious hatred, terrorism, forgery, and the illegal possession of weapons. The court sentenced Kasarly, a Turkish citizen, to fourteen years of imprisonment for illegal possession of weapons and armed resistance to the authorities. The court sentenced Yasin, a Chinese citizen, to time served and acquitted Dilaver, a Turkish citizen.

Defending Human Rights

In 1999, authorities attempted to dissolve the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights (KCHR) and replace it with a state-sponsored proxy of the same name. The government annulled the KCHR's registration on September 28, 1998, as the organization actively worked to protest an October referendum on constitutional amendments. Although the KCHR continued to function in its non-registered capacity and submitted an application to re-register, authorities informed the KCHR on April 21 that a new Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights had been "re-registered" with an entirely different staff, headed by a Mr. S. Botaliev. Botaliev, a former member of the KCHR, had been expelled from the organization in 1996 for violating committee rules. In June, authorities unsuccessfully attempted to appropriate the KCHR's office equipment and furniture for the new committee. On August 12, following protests and multiple interventions by international human rights groups and institutions, the Ministry of Justice revoked the registration of the bogus KCHR and on August 19, the true KCHR successfully re-registered.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

In January, the U.N. Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women issued its concluding observations on Kyrgyzstan's initial report and noted numerous problems including the increase in all forms of violence against women, including gang rape, the classification of lesbianism as a sexual offense, increased prostitution and trafficking of women, and poverty and unemployment among women. In August, the U.N. Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women raised concern over discrimination against non-ethnic Kyrgyz "in the fields of employment and housing, in particular against the Russian-speaking minority."

European Union

The European Union (E.U.), while acknowledging "a clear need [for the Kyrgyz government] to increase efforts regarding implementation of existing laws" concerning democracy, rule of law, and respect for human rights, remained silent on specific cases of human rights abuse in 1999. The E.U. disbursed 10.4 million euros (U.S.$11.2 million) under its Action Program for 1999, a program that aims to support Kyrgyzstan's transition to democracy and a market economy through structural and institutional reform and infrastructure development.

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)

January saw the opening of an OSCE Center in Bishkek. The office's activities included advising the government on establishing a human rights ombudsman, making recommendations on a new election law, holding seminars on topics such as the human rights ombudsman, democracy, and free and fair elections, as well as consulting with local human rights groups and alleged victims of human rights abuses. The OSCE Center played a key role in resolving the dispute surrounding the re-registration of the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights.

The OSCE chairman-in-office, Foreign Minister Knut Vollebaek of Norway, visited Kyrgyzstan in September as part of a broader trip to the region to meet with political leaders and nongovernmental organizations. The Organization for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights visited Kyrgyzstan in April and May to initiate a project on training election monitors and to implement a series of projects intended to advance human rights and democratization.

United States

The United States criticized the government's harassment of the independent media and gave an accurate and impartial account of human rights abuses in its annual Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1998 . Aid to the country continued, however, with U.S.$70.4 million allotted for fiscal year 1999.
MACEDONIA

Human Rights Developments

In 1999, Macedonia was overwhelmed by the rapid influx of Kosovar Albanians who were forced to flee abuses committed by Serbian and Yugoslav forces during the NATO bombing of Yugoslavia. At its peak in May, more than 250,000 refugees were in the tiny country of two million people, posing a serious challange to Macedonia's stability.

Despite promises, the international community was slow to provide the Macedonian government with the help it needed to deal with the crisis. NATO and the U.N. were clearly not prepared to deal with the large number of refugees.

The Macedonian government often violated its obligations under international law to provide refuge and fair treatment for those fleeing well documented persecution and abuse. The government closed the border to refugees on a number of occasions, forcing thousands of ethnic Albanians back into Kosovo and leaving thousands of others stranded for days at the border in appalling conditions. Incidents of physical abuse of Kosovar Albanian and Roma refugees in Macedonia, restrictions on their freedom of movement, and inadequacies in their registration as refugees were all serious problems throughout the crisis.

From the moment the first refugees arrived in late March, the Macedonian government understandably demanded rapid assistance from the international community, as well as promises that refugees in Macedonia would be relocated to third countries. There was considerable fear in the government, overwhelmed by the crisis, and the general population that the influx of Kosovar Albanians would tilt the already fragile inter-ethnic balance in the country and endanger Macedonia's stability. Such concerns, however valid, did not justify closing the border to those fleeing legitimate persecution. Refoulement is strictly forbidden by the 1951 Refugee Convention, of which Macedonia is a signatory.

By early April, as many as 65,000 refugees were trapped in Blace, a "no-mans land" between the borders of Kosovo and Macedonia, waiting to enter Macedonia. Traumatized refugees were held in alarming conditions, with no shelter and little humanitarian relief or medical assistance. International aid agencies were granted restricted access to the area.

In the late night of April 3, most of the refugees in this area were forcibly cleared by the Macedonian authorities without advance notice. Refugees were provided no information about where they were being taken and did not give their consent to be moved. International aid workers were apparently not informed about plans to transfer the refugees and were not present during the relocation. Thousands of refugees were transported to Albania. In many cases, family groups were forcibly divided, and some of them ended up in different countries, without proper records to facilitate their reunification. Other refugees were transported to camps inside Macedonia that had been built by NATO.

Refugees reported cases of harassment, intimidation, and violence during their stay in the Macedonian camps. Armed Macedonian police officers guarded some of the camps and occasionally abused the refugees. Movement outside some of the camps was restricted.

Problems remained even after most refugees had returned to Kosovo in June. In September, the Macedonian government temporarily denied entry into the country for approximately 450 Roma from Kosovo, who were fleeing revenge harassment and attacks by ethnic Albanians. Many Kosovar Albanians view Roma in Kosovo as having been willing collaborators with the Serbian government.

Aside from the treatment of refugees, an important human rights issue continued to be the government's treatment of non-ethnic Macedonian citizens, especially ethnic Albanians, who make up at least 25 percent of the population. As in previous years, Albanians, Roma, Turks, Serbs, Macedonian Muslims, Bulgarians and Vlachs were underrepresented in state institutions, although there were some improvements in this regard during the year. The government allowed the controversial private ethnic Albanian university in Tetovo to operate without interference, but continued not to recognize the school's diplomas.

The new government elected in October 1998, made up of the formerly opposition Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization (VMRO-DPMNE), Democratic Alternative, and Democratic Party of Albanians, did initiate some improvements during the year, such as an effort to include Albanian as an official language and more willingness to discuss the use of minority languages in university education.

After initially refusing, President Kiro Gligorov signed an Amnesty Law on February 6 that released approximately 900 prisoners, including the ethnic Albanian mayors of Tetovo and Gostivar, Alajdin Demiri and Rufi Osmani respectively. Both men were convicted in 1997 for raising Albanian state flags in front of their town halls in violation of a constitutional court ruling, prompting riots with police in which three ethnic Albanians were killed and many others were wounded, including nine police. Demiri and Osmani's trials failed to meet international standards of due process.

State discrimination against the country's sizable Roma population continued as in previous years. In addition to some cases of police abuse, Roma experienced prejudicial treatment in education and employment. A government working group was established to discuss possible revisions to Macedonia's 1996 citizenship law that denied citizenship to many Roma who have lived in Macedonia for extended periods, but the law remained unchanged.

On July 8, the government lifted a fifty-year ban on books in the Bulgarian language. The issue of language has been a long-standing point of contention between Macedonia and Bulgaria, since Bulgaria claims that Macedonian is just a dialect of Bulgarian. Some books from Albania had also been confiscated under this law in previous years.

A number of human rights issues crossed ethnic lines and affected all of Macedonia's citizens. As in previous years, police abuse continued to be a problem, although there were fewer reports of police using excessive force. Police still engaged in the illegal behavior of conducting "informative talks"-summoning a person to the police for questioning-and suspects were sometimes held for more than the twenty-four hours allowed by law. There continued to be corruption in the courts, and victims of abuse rarely obtained redress through the legal system.

In December 1998, the Constitutional Court struck down several disputed articles of Macedonia's 1997 Law on Religious Communities and Groups, including the ban on "religious work and rituals" by unregistered groups. Some articles remained controversial, such as the need for a permit to hold religious events in public. The Serbian and Macedonian Orthodox Churches continued to refuse to recognize one another, and the Macedonian government occasionally denied Serbian priests entry into the country.

Freedom of the press was generally respected in 1999, as many private radio and television stations and printed media operated throughout the country. In December 1998, the car of Simeon Marjanov, owner and manager of TV Iris in Stip, was destroyed by fire. Marjanov claimed that he had received phone threats prior to the attack, although the perpetrators and their motivations remained unclear. In January, a Macedonian state radio commentator, Gorica Popova, was demoted after expressing her personal view about the stay of several foreign guests who were invited by the Macedonian government to honor a controversial inter-war hero.

Defending Human Rights

Human rights groups, such as the Macedonian Helsinki Committee, reported no government restrictions on their work in 1999. Many foreign human rights organizations, governmental and non-governmental, were active in Macedonia between March and June, interviewing Kosovar Albanian refugees about war crimes in Kosovo.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

After Macedonia's recognition of Taiwan in January, the Chinese government exercised its Security Council veto on the extension of the U.N. presence in Macedonia. On February 28, the mandate of the United Nations Preventive Deployment Mission in Macedonia (UNPREDEP) came to an end.

Beginning in March, however, the U.N. was once again very active in Macedonia, with UNHCR struggling to deal with the large-scale influx of Kosovar Albanian refugees. UNHCR's response was initially slow and poorly coordinated since the organization was unprepared for such a large and sudden exodus. In addition, it did not take a strong enough stance against the Macedonian government on protection issues, particularly when refugees were being denied entry into the country. The emergency response improved within a few weeks, but was difficultto coordinate due to the participation of NATO and the rapid proliferation of nongovernmental organizations. As of October, UNHCR was conducting an independent review of its emergency response in both Macedonia and Albania.

In May, the U.N. Committee Against Torture reviewed Macedonia's periodic report, noting that Macedonia should adopt a specific crime of torture into its domestic laws. The U.N.'s International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia was active in Macedonia between March and June collecting information about war crimes in Kosovo.

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)

The OSCE maintained a small permanent presence in Macedonia, known as the Spillover Monitor Mission to Skopje, which observed internal and external threats to the country's stability. During the NATO bombing against Yugoslavia, a large OSCE team was in the country to help register refugees and take statements on human rights abuses committed in Kosovo.

The OSCE high commissioner on national minorities continued his work in Macedonia with an ongoing emphasis on higher education for ethnic minorities. He visited the country in May during the refugee crisis and called on the international community to provide immediate assistance in order to avoid further destablization.

OSCE monitors observed the October/November 1998 parliamentary elections and the presidential elections on October 31, 1999, both of which were considered free and fair.

North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)

Macedonia was a crucial base of operations for NATO during its air campaign in Yugoslavia, although offensives were never launched from the country. As of October, 7,000 NATO forces, members of the Kosovo Force (KFOR), were still in the country providing logistical support to the mission in Kosovo. NATO stated that it would respond to any attempts by Yugoslavia to threaten Macedonia's security. Relations soured slightly on August 28, when a KFOR truck accidentally hit and killed a minister in the Macedonian government, Radovan Stojkovski, along with his wife and young daughter.

During the Kosovo refugee crisis, NATO provided much needed transportation supplies, logistical support, and assistance to set up refugee camps in the country, which were later turned over to UNHCR and non-governmental relief organizations.

European Union

In its six-month assessment of Macedonia's compliance with the criteria of the E.U.'s "Regional Approach" to relations with the Balkan states, the European Commission described Macedonia's performance as "exemplary." Citing Macedonia's cooperation with NATO, as well as human rights improvements, the E.U. determined to work on upgrading its relations with Macedonia by negotiating a Stability and Association Agreement to establish closer economic and political ties.

Council of Europe

Macedonia remained subject to the Parliamentary Assembly's monitoring procedure, with a debate on the rapporteur's report expected in January 2000. In May, the European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (ECRI) published its first report on Macedonia, noting improvements in the representation of ethnic Albanians in public life, but continued tension between Macedonians and Albanians, as well as discrimination against Roma. ECRI also cited a need "to keep the Law on Citizenship under review," with special regard to naturalization and fair implementation of the law. There must be monitoring, the report said, "to ensure that criminal and administrative law is applied impartially and implemented in a non-discriminatory manner."

United States

As in previous years, the United States maintained close relations with the Macedonian government, even though three new political parties were in power. Mutual concerns centered on the Kosovo crisis and Macedonia's role in the NATO campaign against Yugoslavia, which made the U.S. government hesitant to criticize the Macedonian government's human rights record, especially the unlawful treatment of Kosovar Albanian refugees.

In September, the U.S. State Department issued its first annual report on freedom of religion, which highlighted some problems with Macedonia's Law on Religious Communities and Groups (see above) and the ongoing restrictions against the Serbian Orthodox Church.

The U.S. government gave an estimated $34.5 million in assistance to Macedonia in 1999, more than half of it for military training or equipment. Another $9 million was provided for economic reform.
ROMANIA

Human Rights Developments

In 1999, ten years after the bloody overthrow of the Ceaucescu dictatorship, Romania continued to inch toward stability, democracy, and a market economy. But the legacy of communism remained, impeding rights protection. Roma and homosexuals continued to face discrimination and sometimes violence and were rarely able to obtain legal redress. There were, as before, cases of excessive force by the police, and criminal defendants faced long periods in pre-trial detention. Journalists, especially those reporting on corruption, faced growing intimidation, as well as prosecution, under Romania's criminal libel statute.

As in previous years, discrimination against Roma in the penal system, education, employment, housing, and social services continued to be widespread, and many Roma sought asylum outside the country. Despite continuing international pressure, Romania did not provide redress to Roma victims of the 1993-94 pogroms that occurred in at least thirty villages. Though some of the perpetrators had been tried, the charges against them were less than the evidence would have suggested; many more were arrested and released without being charged. InJanuary, in one notable exception, five men were convicted of murder and civil rights violations, including property damage, for their roles in the 1993 attack on Roma in the town of Hadareni, in which three Roma were killed. Although the men were sentenced to up to six years in prison, a 1997 clemency law guaranteed that they would serve no time. Four other men were sentenced to up to two years in prison for property damage but were also to receive clemency. Hundreds of other participants in the violence were never detained, investigated, or charged. The Roma victims did not receive promised reparations from the government, and many continued to be homeless.

The police continued to use excessive force in making arrests and pursuing criminal suspects, and such cases rarely resulted in prosecution or disciplinary measures. The Romanian Helsinki Committee reported that in 90 percent of the police abuse cases it had monitored in the past six years, the Military Prosecutor's Office ruled that there should be "no indictment."

Aurel Uluiteanu, aged forty-four, was charged with disturbing public order and arrested at his house in Barcanesti on the morning of September 25. That afternoon, his parents were informed that he had died in police custody. Aurel's father reported that the death certificate indicated that Aurel died due to injuries sustained during a violent beating.

Cristian-Venus Dumitrescu, detained on September 9 in Craiova on suspicion of theft, was reportedly severely beaten during several hours of interrogation at the municipal police station. Family and friends who saw Cristian briefly at the police station reported that he had been "kicked in the liver," and that he was suicidal. Later on September 9, while being transferred to the police lock-up, Cristian reportedly threw himself from a third-story window. He died the next day from his injuries. The case is currently under investigation by the Craiova Territorial Military Prosecutor's Office.

In June, however, three police officers were sentenced to up to two years in prison for having tortured a ten-year-old boy in 1997. The boy had stolen ice cream and refused to reveal his home address to the officers, at which point they dangled him off a bridge by his feet, beat him with batons, and threatened him with a pistol.

Blatant discrimination against homosexuals continued in 1999, and the government failed to provide protection to those who came under attack. The government did not act on its promises to the Council of Europe and others to repeal the articles of the penal code that criminalize same-sex sexual conduct and outlaw "propaganda" supportive of the rights of homosexuals. President Constantinescu failed to pardon all persons jailed under these laws, as he had promised to do in January 1998, and the numbers of persons imprisoned under these articles remained unknown.

The Agency for Media Monitoring noted a sharp increase in mid-1999 in the number of attacks on Romanian journalists investigating corruption cases. For example, in September, three journalists investigating illegal business deals were the targets of violence. Marian Tudor, a journalist for the Journalul de Constanta , was attacked and thrown from a moving train on September 23 as he carried manuscripts to Bucharest for printing. Only his manuscripts, which were about an illicit local business deal, were taken by the assailants. Four days later, Lorena Boros and Dorina Tartaran of the Gazeta de Nord-Vest were attacked at a construction site they were investigating in Satu Mare. When they called the police for assistance, the police detained them instead. The head of the Satu Mare police department publicly apologized after a story on the incident was published.

The government also failed to rescind the prohibitions on "defamation of the nation" and "defamation of public officials" frequently used to harass and punish journalists who report governmental or bureaucratic corruption. Several journalists were arrested and tried during the year for reporting on corruption by local government officials. Cornel Sabou was sentenced to ten months of imprisonment for his article about a local judge who abused her position. President Constantinescu, under intense international pressure, pardoned him at the end of January. In September, the European Court of Human Rights ruled in Dalbon v. Romania that the state had violated Ionel Dalbon's right to freedom of expression after he was sentenced to three months in prison and fined 300,000 Romanian lei (approximately U.S.$115) for publishing an article in 1992 alleging that the head of a state-owned agricultural company had committed fraud.

The status of non-traditional religious groups in Romania remained unclear and a source of concern. Under the current legal system, only a few, previously permitted religious groups have received official recognition, been granted government subsidies, and permitted to function as religions. Groups that were denied legal status were unable to own state-ceded property, operate independent schools, or receive state subsidies and tax exemptions. As of this writing, the draft law on religious affairs did not address these problems. Indeed, as currently drafted, religious groups are required to have at least 2,000 members (the size of the smallest currently recognized religious group) in order to register. Further, under the draft law, any religious group seeking recognition from the state would be required to disclose the names of its members, and anyone wishing to change his religious affiliation would be required to notify his former religious group and the state.

Romania also began to address abuses committed during the communist period. Marian Clita was sentenced to twenty years in prison for the 1959 murder of anti-communist dissident Gheorghe Ursu. Clita, who was in prison at the time of the murder for theft, shared a cell with Ursu and was apparently hired by the Securitate to kill Ursu. A law passed by the Chamber of Deputies in June will allow Romanians access to their secret police files and requires that the Romanian Information Service reveal if candidates for public office were members of the Securitate.

Defending Human Rights

Rights groups in Romania continued to work to bring attention to human rights abuses, particularly focusing on police brutality, prison conditions, and rights of minorities. Human Rights Watch was not aware of any attempts to hinder the work of these groups in 1999.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

In July, the Human Rights Committee commended Romania for progress in harmonizing legislation with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and in strengthening judicial independence. It also welcomed the creation of an ombudsman and the Department for the Protection of National Minorities, particularly the National Office for Roma within that department. The committee expressed concern over a number of continuing human rights problems, including abandoned and homeless children, pre-trial detention practices, domestic violenceand unequal representation of women in public office, discrimination against Roma, prison conditions, and limits on free expression. Sir Nigel Rodley, United Nations special rapporteur on torture, visited Romania in late April, but at this writing his report had not been released.

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)

The office of the Representative on Freedom of the Media carried out its first assessment mission to Romania. Reporting to the Permanent Council in July, the representative praised progress over the past ten years, but expressed dismay that the Romanian parliament had recently voted down legislation that would have eliminated criminal libel provisions from its penal code.

Council of Europe

Although Romania continued in breach of its commitment to amend provisions of its penal code criminalizing same-sex sexual conduct, the Parliamentary Assembly did not restart its monitoring procedure on Romania. In March, the European Committee Against Racism and Intolerance issued its first periodic report on Romania, noting that "problems of intolerance and manifestations of racism persist, particularly as regards discrimination and violence against members of the Roma/Gypsy community."

European Union

In its November 1998 progress report on Romania's application for European Union (E.U.) membership, the European Commission concluded that Romania met the Copenhagen political criteria for membership (stability of institutions guaranteeing democracy, the rule of law, human rights, and respect for and protection of minorities). At the same time, the commission concluded that "much remains to be done in rooting out corruption, improving the working of the courts and protecting individual liberties and the rights of the Roma." At this writing, it appeared likely that Romania would by the end of the year be included in an enlarged group of states in active negotiations for membership. Romania joined the E.U.-led Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe, which promised additional resources and assistance for its E.U. accession effort.

United States

Romania garnered substantial political and economic support from the United States in exchange for its support of the NATO bombing in Kosovo, notwithstanding its strong historical ties to Serbia. It benefited from an estimated $5 million in U.S. military training and financing aimed at improving compatibility with NATO, as well as an estimated $21 million for economic development.
RUSSIAN FEDERATION

Human Rights Developments

Renewed hostilities in Chechnya in September, led off by Russian air strikes that drove 185,000 civilians from their homes and raised the specter of the ghastly 1994-1996 war. Otherwise, the year's events were dominated by President Boris Yeltsin's political maneuvering in the run-up to the December parliamentary and June 2000 presidential elections. He fired three prime ministers within a year, keeping the country in constant turmoil. As a result, long-awaited reforms, needed to improve human rights in the criminal justice system, were pushed off the agenda. Press freedom also suffered under pre-election battles. With the government disengaged from reform, the Constitutional Court was the main source of progress in the field of human rights. It issued rulings de facto abolishing the death penalty and significantly changing several problematic aspects of criminal procedure.

In August, fighters from Chechnya invaded several villages in Dagestan, triggering a new Caucasian war. Russian forces bombed the villages and engaged the rebels, eventually dislodging them. In September, Russian planes started bombing Chechnya, and Russia later sent ground forces into northern Chechnya. As of mid-October, more than 150,000 people were reported to have fled their homes in Chechnya, mostly for neighboring Ingushetia. The Russian government banned ethnic Chechens from other internal border crossings. Russian police apparently allowed ethnic Russians through the Chechen-North-Ossetian internal border but forced ethnic Chechens back into northern Chechnya in early October, even as hostilities were ongoing. Russian authorities furthermore forbade ethnic Chechens from leaving Ingushetia-an impoverished region that was overwhelmed by the new crisis- for other cities in Russia, where many had relatives who could care for them. The Russian government failed to provide adequate aid to these displaced persons.

While Russian authorities claimed they were targeting military objects only, by mid-October it became increasingly apparent that numerous bombs had hit civilian targets, deliberately or through indiscriminate bombing, often killing civilians. Explosions in an open-air market in Grozny on October 21, reportedly caused by surface-to-surface missiles Russian forces launched from North Ossetia, killed 140 civilians and wounded hundreds of others. According to Memorial , a Russian human rights organization, Russian artillery shelled villages and fields indiscriminately.

In September, almost 300 people died in Moscow and two other Russian cities in four bomb attacks, which the Russian and Moscow authorities were quick to blame on Chechen operatives. In reaction, the Moscow city government unleashed a ferocious crackdown on non-Muscovites, targeting Chechens in particular as well as people from other regions of the Caucasus. The authorities forced all non-Muscovites to re-register with police and housing authorities, and rounded up and "deported" from the city limits thousands who lacked registration documents. For years, Moscow has had an appalling record of police violence and discrimination against people from the Caucasus and Central Asians. Police have used the registration system as a pretext for extorting bribes, and city authorities have used it as a pretext for keeping outnon-Slavs or people from Russia's poorer regions. In the latest crackdown, police precincts throughout the city refused to re-register ethnic Chechens, citing an "order from above." Police also allegedly planted drugs or ammunition on numerous ethnic Chechens.

Regional politicians and their sponsors increasingly used the media as a tool in their struggles for power, securing control by exploiting the dire economic straits most media outlets face. Consequently, a number of regional newspapers became mouthpieces of governors and mayors. According to the National Press Institute, this trend intensified as parliamentary and presidential elections drew closer. In numerous cities and regions, including Ekaterinburg, Yaroslavl, and Leningrad province, previously independent newspapers significantly changed their editorial line after they came under the control of local political figures.

Intimidation and harassment of journalists remained common. By August, the Glasnost Defense Foundation had registered fifty-four incidents in which journalists or newspapers were attacked or threatened. Eight journalists were killed, several apparently for their professional work.

One of the more severe examples of government threats to the independent media took place in Vladivostok. Radio Lemma, a Vladivostok independent station, faced intimidation for airing interviews with opponents of regional governor Evgenii Nazdratenko and his supporters. In June, Yuri Kopylov, a Nazdratenko ally and the appointed mayor of Vladivostok, ordered Radio Lemma's editors to stop providing air time to Nazdratenko's opponents. In July, a Radio Lemma journalist, Yuri Stepanov, was beaten up by unidentified men, apparently to intimidate the station's employees. After the station broadcasted its request for any witness to contact the station, the editor's daughter was briefly kidnaped and instructed to tell her father to stop his calls for witnesses. Around the same time, the radio station was ordered to vacate its state-owned office space, despite an ongoing contract.

On July 6, President Boris Yeltsin established a new press ministry headed by Mikhail Lesin, who promptly announced that he would defend the state against the media. In August, Lesin scolded television stations for broadcasting footage of rebel warlords in Dagestan and issued ORT (Russian Public Television) a written warning that it had violated Russia's media law by broadcasting an interview with rebel leader Shamil Basaev. Russian television stations subsequently refrained from showing direct footage of the rebels, instead referring only to their press statements.

While draft regulations were still under discussion, the Federal Security Service (FSB) started to force Internet, telephone, and pager providers throughout the country to install surveillance hardware. The FSB formally needed a judicial warrant to tap calls and on-line communications; however, the surveillance hardware allowed it to tap telephone calls and electronic communications without the providers' knowledge, making it impossible to know whether the FSB really obtained judicial warrants before accessing communications.

Almost all Russian telephone companies and Internet providers complied with the new rule, apparently following FSB threats of tax audits and withdrawal of licenses. Indeed, Bayard-Slavia Communications in Volgograd, the only Internet provider known to have refused to comply, faced tax audits, a fire department inspection, and other administrative harassment. Apparently at the instigation of the FSB, the State Telecommunications Committee eventually took away the provider's access and took steps to revoke its license. The FSB also required telephone and Internet providers to present full lists of their clients, including passwords where applicable, and to update this information monthly.

Undeterred by the judiciary, the FSB continued to persecute environmentalists, journalists, and scientists working in the field of nuclear safety. In October 1998, the St. Petersburg City Court sent back to the FSB the espionage case against former navy captain and environmental activist Alexander Nikitin, stating that the FSB's indictment was too vague and lacked evidence. After the Supreme Court rejected appeals from both the defense and prosecution, the FSB ordered another flawed expert assessment of the report Nikitin had co-authored for the Norwegian Bellona Foundation in 1995, which was the source of the case against him. On July 2, the FSB indicted Nikitin for the eighth time, basing the charges once again on secret legislation that was applied retroactively. A new court hearing was expected for late 1999.

In another FSB-led case involving nuclear safety, a Russian military court in Vladivostok acquitted military journalist Grigorii Pasko of espionage charges on July 20, 1999, finding him guilty of much less serious charges of improper military conduct, and immediately releasing him under a nationwide amnesty. The court excluded several pieces of evidence, citing falsification by the FSB. Pasko was arrested in November 1997 for allegedly passing on secret information to Japanese journalists.

In July, the FSB searched the laboratory and home of nuclear scientist Vladimir Soifer of the Pacific Oceanographic Institute in Vladivostok, raising fears of eventual criminal charges. The FSB suspected Soifer, who had been studying the effects of a 1985 nuclear accident on a military submarine in the Chazma Bay near Vladivostok, of mishandling classified documents and doing work that "posed a threat to the state security." Soifer denied any wrongdoing, stating that he only studied levels of radioactivity, which, because they may threaten the environment, cannot under Russian law be classified as a state secret. As of this writing, the FSB had not instituted criminal proceedings against Soifer.

Reform of the criminal justice system remained stalled, save for several landmark Constitutional Court rulings. The procuracy failed to investigate torture complaints properly and continued to routinely sanction arrests made by the police. The courts offered no protection against such abuses.

Police officers systematically detained suspects under false pretenses and denied them access to counsel. Police tortured numerous detainees in order to secure confessions, using methods like beatings, asphyxiation, electroshock, and suspension by body parts, as well as psychological intimidation and torture by proxy. Prosecutors used coerced confessions in court, often as the primary evidence of a defendant's guilt.

The torture of Aleksei Mikheev was a particularly egregious example of Russian police methods. On September 10, 1998, police in Nizhnii Novgorod detained Mikheev on misdemeanor charges but subsequently questioned him regarding the presumed murder and rape of a teenage girl. Mikheev confessed after police reportedly beat and electroshocked him; when police wanted him to confess to five more murders, Mikheev jumped out of the third-floor window of the interrogation room, breaking his spinal cord. Several days later, the girl, whom Mikheev confessed he murdered, turned up in perfect health.

The procuracy stalled the investigation into Mikheev's torture allegations, citing-incredibly-his physical condition, and in general failed to investigate torture complaints promptly and adequately. Such inquiries were overwhelmingly superficial and plagued with delays,and therefore rarely led to formal criminal investigations. Procurators generally failed to interview the complainant or to question alleged abusers; instead, they often forwarded complaints to police precincts, instructing the police chief to sort out what had happened.

Despite a general consensus that conditions in pretrial detention were intolerable, the government, as in previous years, lacked the political will to tackle the problem. Compounding overcrowding in pretrial facilities, the procuracy continued its widescale use of custody, often unnecessarily. For example, as of this writing Il'ia Hoffman had been in pretrial detention for more than ten months on charges of large-scale computer fraud. Doctors concluded that conditions in detention directly threatened Hoffman's life, as he suffers from asthma. In prison, Hoffman contracted pneumonia three times and the measles once. The procuracy claimed that Hoffman might attempt to abscond justice, despite the fact that Hoffman had punctually appeared for interrogations and expert assessments prior to his arrest in November 1998.

The Procuracy General delayed for another full year the release of Sergei Mikhailov, who in 1995 was wrongly sentenced to death for the murder and rape of a minor. Although a procuracy investigator once more confirmed the conclusions of three earlier investigations that Mikhailov had not committed the crime, procuracy officials failed to initiate proceedings with the Supreme Court to overturn Mikhailov's conviction. Mikhailov has been in prison for five years.

As a result of pretrial detention policies and often tough sentencing by courts, Russia's prison population continued to increase in 1999: according to official figures, it grew by 42,000 prisoners in the first five months of the year. More than one million people were held in Russia's penitentiary institutions, almost 10 percent of whom suffered from tuberculosis. Pretrial detention centers held around 300,000 people. About 80,000 of these inmates contracted serious diseases in detention and about 2,000 of them died awaiting final court rulings.

In June, the State Duma passed an amnesty, under which up to 94,000 prisoners could be released. However, according to a Ministry of Justice official, the real number of prisoners released is likely to be closer to 60,000, as disciplinary offenders will not be released. The Moscow Center for Prison Reform reported that many places vacated by the amnesty were immediately filled with new inmates. Some officials appeared to see such amnesties, which have become a yearly event, as a substitute for reform of detention policy.

As of this writing, the State Duma did not adopt a new criminal procedure code to replace the Soviet-era code. Apparently under pressure from human rights groups, the presidential administration sent the draft code to the Council of Europe in late 1998 for an expert assessment on its compliance with the European Convention on Human Rights. The Council of Europe presented the results, which are not binding on Russia, to the administration in mid-September. At this writing, the assessment had not been made public. It remained unclear as to when parliamentary debate on the draft code would resume.

In April, the Constitutional Court found unconstitutional several provisions in the criminal procedure code that allowed judges to return criminal cases for further investigation. Because Russian judges are under pressure not to acquit criminal defendants, they frequently remand cases for further investigation when the prosecution has not proven the defendant's guilt; this causes severe delays, sometimes of many years, while defendants languish in the terrible conditions of pretrial detention. The ruling instructed judges to issue final decisions on criminal cases: conviction or acquittal.

Significant progress was made toward abolishment of the death penalty. On February 2, the Constitutional Court issued a ruling prohibiting all courts from passing death sentences. While the court did not find the death penalty itself unconstitutional, it argued that violations of the guaranteed right to a jury trial required that courts be banned from passing death sentences. Under Russia's constitution, all those facing a possible death sentence have the right to have their cases examined by a jury. However, jury trials have been introduced in only nine of Russia's eighty-nine regions; therefore only a small percentage of defendants facing a possible death sentence could exercise their constitutional right to a trial by jury.

On June 3, timed to coincide with a major conference on the death penalty sponsored by the Council of Europe, President Yeltsin signed a decree commuting the sentences of the last of Russia's 716 death-row prisoners. In preceding months, Yeltsin had gradually commuted the sentences of all death row prisoners to life imprisonment or twenty-five years.

About 200,000 children without parental care were in state-run orphanages, where they were often exposed to shocking levels of cruelty and neglect. Beginning with infancy, orphans classified as severely disabled were segregated into "lying down" rooms in the nation's 252 orphanages for young children, where they were changed and fed but are bereft of stimulation and lacking in medical care.

Those labeled retarded or "oligophrenic" (small-brained) faced another grave and consequential violation of their rights around the age of four. At that time, a state commission diagnosed them as "ineducable," and warehoused them for life in "psycho-neurological internats." After this diagnosis, it was virtually impossible for an orphan to appeal the decision. According to official statistics, in 1999 some 30,000 children were confined to these locked and isolated institutions, which were little better than prisons. The orphans might be restrained in cloth sacks, tethered to furniture, and denied stimulation, and were sometimes left to lie half-naked in their own filth. Orphanage staff frequently administered powerful sedatives to children without medical orders. In some cases children who tried to run away were sent to a psychiatric hospital for punishment or treatment.

Not only disabled orphans suffered violations of their rights in Russian state orphanages. Orphans in "regular" orphanages faced the possibility of beatings, being locked in freezing rooms for days at a time, or being sexually abused by orphanage staff. Staff also used public humiliation as a form of punishment. In one case researched in 1998, an orphan recounted how a teacher forced mischievous orphans to undress and stand in front of the open window in front of a full class room.

Regional authorities continued to harass so-called "non-traditional" religious groups. Tactics included administrative harassment, such as pressure on landlords not to rent space to such groups and evictions; hostile media attention at the instigation or with the support of regional officials; and groundless interrogations by law enforcement officials. In an extreme case, St. Petersburg authorities prosecuted members of a small nontraditional religious organization and confined them in a psychiatric hospital for several weeks for a psychiatric expert assessment. Several religious organizations and clergymen, including an Orthodox priest in Pskov, reported that local authorities and Orthodox church officials tried to obstruct their charitable activities.

The Ministry of Justice continued to administer the re-registration process for religious organizations; most large religious groups had been registered as centralized religious organizations under a 1997 law. Meanwhile, the Constitutional Court was expected to hear an appeal against the discriminatory 1997 law on religion in late 1999.

The Moscow procuracy sought to use the courts to ban the Moscow branch of the Jehovah's Witnesses, claiming the religious organization foments religious strife, creates rifts in families, and threatens people's lives by pressuring the ill to refuse medical help. In March, a Moscow court referred the case to an expert committee for further investigation. At the time of writing, it was unclear when the committee would present its conclusions. Similar attempts to close religious organizations were made in other parts of the country, though mostly unsuccessfully.

A rise in the number of attacks on synagogues and in anti-Semitic rhetoric led to an increasingly politically charged debate about anti-Semitism. In late 1998, State Duma deputies Albert Makashov and Viktor Iliukhin made blatantly anti-Semitic remarks in public, but were not censured by the Duma. On July 14, a neo-Nazi activist stabbed a prominent Jewish leader at the Choral Synagogue in Moscow. Two weeks later, an undetonated bomb was discovered at another Moscow synagogue.

Defending Human Rights

In late 1998, Russia lost one of its leading human rights activists and anti-corruption campaigners, Duma deputy Galina Starovoitova, who was brutally murdered near her St. Petersburg home. At the time of writing, law enforcement agencies were still investigating the murder, and the exact motives for it remained unclear.

Local justice departments refused to register or re-register several human rights organizations, often for outrageous reasons, and several nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) reported other forms of administrative harassment. The Moscow Department of Justice refused to register Ecology and Human Rights, a new NGO founded by outspoken environmentalist Aleksei Iablokov. The department claimed that "the defense of human rights" is a government task and that NGOs should not interfere with government activities. Inexplicably, this position was upheld by the Moscow City Court. The Krasnodar department of justice refused to re-register the Regional Association for the Defense of Human Rights, among others, because "it was impossible to understand what kind of verification of human rights violations this organization will carry out when checking reports on human rights violations [sic]." One of Russia's oldest NGOs, the Glasnost Foundation, was also refused re-registration. In February, the Moscow justice department informed the organization that its statute did not conform to several articles of the law on public organizations. However, the department refused to provide the organization with a list of specific deficiencies. Several activists who faced harassment or prosecution reported that they were forced to remove the words "human rights" from their organizations' names.

Moscow authorities tried to evict the Human Rights Research Center from its offices for reasons that were unclear. At the time of writing, it remained unclear whether the eviction would take place.

In Krasnodar, Vasilii Chaikin, a human rights activist accused of sexual intercourse with a minor, was released on April 17, 1999, after two full years in pretrial detention and immediately taken to the hospital for heart problems.  Criminal proceedings against him continue. In October 1998, Vasilii Rakovich, Chaikin's lawyer, was attacked by two unidentified men and beaten over the head. The attack appeared to be related to Chaikin's case.

On February 27 in the republic of Mari El in northern Russia, Viacheslav Poidoverov, chair of the local human rights organization and a member of the local parliament, was beaten outside his home. There were allegations that the incident was connected to his anti-corruption activities. The investigation into the incident was suspended in May.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson paid a week-long visit to Russia during which she met with numerous officials, human rights organizations, and the ombudsman, and visited several prisons and an orphanage. Robinson proposed to the Russian government the establishment of working groups to examine detention practices and de-institutionalization of orphans. She furthermore expressed concern about widespread torture practices to then-Prime Minister Sergei Stepashin and raised harassment of ethnic minorities by Moscow police with Moscow Mayor Yuri Luzhkov.

Inexplicably, UNESCO ignored Moscow's massive human rights problems and nominated Moscow for the City for Peace prize, which is awarded every two years to a mayor and municipality for exceptional actions taken to defend democratic freedom and human rights and the development of culture in the world. Moscow did not eventually win the award.

European Union

The European Union (E.U.) adopted a Common Strategy on Russia, which contained very weak language on human rights and the rule of law. In October, the E.U. presidency expressed some concern for civilians in Chechnya and for the internally displaced. In January, the E.U. Presidency delivered a demarche to the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs regarding rising anti-Semitism. It also discussed anti-Semitic remarks by high Communist Party officials with the leadership of that party. Numerous E.U. embassies sent monitors to Alexander Nikitin's trials in October 1998 and February 1999. The Swedish Embassy sent a trial monitor to the final day of Grigorii Pasko's trial.

The European Parliament adopted a resolution on March 11 expressing concern about violations of freedom of religion, increasingly frequent anti-Semitic acts, and conditions in the military and prisons. It called on the Russian government to combat acts of anti-Semitism, racism, and intolerance, to improve living conditions of soldiers, to adopt legislation introducing an alternative to military service, and to improve conditions in prisons.

Council of Europe

The Council of Europe Committee for the Prevention of Torture visited Russia in late 1998 and again in September 1999 to investigate torture and ill-treatment. The committee delegations visited numerous police stations, pretrial detention centers, and other prison facilities. The committee presented the findings on its first visit to the Russian government, but it remained unclear whether the government would make them public.

The Monitoring Committee of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) visited Russia in May 1999 to examine the implementation of Russia's discriminatory 1997 law on religion, religious intolerance, and anti-Semitism, but will publish its findings only after the June 2000 presidential elections.

United States

In late October, the Clinton Administration expressed concern about the indiscriminate use of force in Chechnya. The U.S. government responded to the bombings in Moscow with sympathy and an offer of increased cooperation and consultation in the field of counterterrorism. While the U.S. criticized the ensuing expulsions of Chechens and others from the north Caucasus from Moscow, official statements ignored the long history of such discrimination in the Russian capital. The State Department's September report on freedom of religion accurately depicted the situation in Russia, describing the discriminatory 1997 law and various forms of harassment employed by Russian authorities against "non-traditional" religions. In April, the special representative of the secretary of state for international religious freedom, Ambassador Robert A. Seiple, visited Moscow and met with numerous religious groups, human rights organizations, and government officials to discuss religious freedom.

The State Department issued two statements expressing concern over anti-Semitic attacks and calling on the Russian government to take appropriate steps against their perpetrators. Vladivostok and St. Petersburg consular officers monitored the trials against Grigorii Pasko and Alexander Nikitin, but no public statements were issued.

The U.S. government provided an estimated (U.S.) $10 million in training and technical assistance to Russian law enforcement agencies. Notwithstanding an obligation to do so under U.S. law, no meaningful steps were taken to ensure that the beneficiaries of this assistance were not those responsible for torture and police abuse, which is rampant in Russia's criminal justice system.

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

On July 9, at a Parliamentary Assembly meeting in St. Petersburg, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe adopted a strongly worded resolution condemning the prosecution of Alexander Nikitin. It called proceedings against Nikitin "unjustified" and urged the Russian authorities to "ensure proper implementation of necessary legal reforms related to the rule of law."

International Financial Institutions

Midyear allegations of widespread corruption and money-laundering that may have touched funds provided to Russia by international financial institutions provoked policy debates among international lenders who criticized the approach to Russia's development for not emphasizing political and institutional reform alongside economic reform.
SLOVAKIA

Human Rights Developments

Slovakia showed marked progress in its commitment to human rights in 1999, but problems remained for the newly elected government, especially in its treatment of Roma and other ethnic minorities.

In its first year in power, the Slovak Democratic Coalition (SDK), led by Prime Minister Mikulas Dzurinda, in an attempt to prepare Slovakia for membership in Western European institutions, began to address the legacy of human rights abuses committed under the previous government. In December 1998, the government created the new position of Deputy Prime Minister for Human and Minority Rights and appointed Paul Csaky, a member of the main Hungarian minority party, as minister. In May 1999, Slovak voters ended a year-long constitutional crisis during which there had been no president by electing Rudolph Schuster, the former mayor of Ko<ice, as head of state. The new parliament amended the constitution in January to allow for direct election of the president after the previous parliament refused to fill the position. The government presented a long awaited plan on Roma issues in September, though no major steps were taken to improve the conditions for Roma as of this writing.

In 1999, when thousands of Roma fled to Western Europe to seek asylum, some European Union (E.U.) countries reintroduced visa restrictions for Slovak citizens. This focused attention on the continued failure of the Slovak government to stop police and skinhead violence against Roma and to improve their general conditions of employment, education, and health care.

Only days after Dzurinda's government took power at the end of October 1998, police in the town of Hermanovce beat, handcuffed, shut in the trunk of a car, and detained without charges two Roma youth. The next day, around twenty police officers raided Roma homes in the village and beat Roma residents while they were still in bed. Similarly, on January 14, two undercover police officers in the eastern Slovak city of Ko<ice tormented Roma families in an apartment block, yelling racial epithets and pointing revolvers at the heads of some residents. The officers reportedly forced three Roma teenage sisters to disrobe and accused them of having incestuous relations.

Though government officials spoke publicly of the need to improve relations among Slovakia's minority groups, much of the public discourse on the issue served to inflame ethnic tension. Slovak National Party (SNS) leader Jan Slota, who also served as parliamentary vice chairman of the Slovak Security Service, said at a March rally that the way to deal with ethnic Hungarians is to "send in tanks and flatten Budapest." At the same rally he said Roma "steal, rob, and plunder."

Police and local officials failed to curb attacks and harassment by skinhead groups against Roma and other ethnic minorities. On July 24, skinheads attacked three Chinese residents of the capital Bratislava on a city bus, brutally beating a Chinese diplomat into a coma. In September, skinheads in Ko<ice, eastern Slovakia, allegedly stuffed Roma mailboxes with racially provocative appeals. Roma and Chinese residents complained that these types of attacks were commonplace, and that police did nothing to catch the perpetrators. The British embassy in Bratislava reported two attacks on its citizens of Asian descent in 1999.

Prosecution of skinhead crimes remained lax, and judges refused to convict perpetrators under racially motivated crimes statutes. In May, a judge in Banska Bystrica, central Slovakia, threw out the racially motivated crimes charge against a skinhead who was accused of verbally and physically assaulting a Roma university student. The judge based his decision on the precept that there are only three races, black, white, and yellow, and the assailant and victim were of the same race. The assailant was convicted on a separate charge of hooliganism.

After years of pressure from local minority groups and Western European bodies, such as the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Council of Europe, the government passed a law that went into effect on September 1, guaranteeing the use of minority languages in official state business. The largest Hungarian political party opposed the law, saying it did not go far enough in protecting their language, and two opposition right-wing parties, the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS) and SNS, gathered 380,000 signatures in support of a referendum to repeal the law. President Schuster refused to call the referendum, however, saying that to do so violated Slovakia's constitution, which bars referendums on human rights or minority policy.

Defending Human Rights

In March, the Budapest-based European Roma Rights Center and local counsel filed a complaint at the European Court for Human Rights challenging two-year-old decrees that banned Roma from entering or settling in the villages of Nagov and Rokytovce. Previous attempts by the Ko<ice-based Office of Legal Defense for Ethnic Minorities to challenge the ordinances in domestic courts failed. In mid-April, Slovak Deputy Prime Minister Laszlo Nagy ordered the two eastern Slovak villages to repeal the discriminatory laws.

The Role of the International Community

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)

OSCE Commissioner on National Minorities Max van der Stoel strongly urged Slovakia to pass a long awaited minority language law, which went into force in September. In a visit to Bratislava that coincided with the language law's enactment, van der Stoel met with Slovakia's deputy prime minister for human and minority rights, Pal Csaky, and expressed concern about Roma issues.

Council of Europe

In September, the Parliamentary Assembly rewarded Slovakia for its progress-in particular, the enactment of the minority language law-by voting to terminate its monitoring procedure for the country. It signaled, however, that other mechanisms would be employed to monitor further progress.

European Union

The European Union's (E.U.) regular report on Slovakia's accession application, which was published at the end of 1998, criticized police treatment and protection of Roma and emphasized the government's need to institute major reform in its policy on Roma if it is to gain E.U. membership. Still, the E.U. praised passage of the minority language law and the election of a president and announced in October that Slovakia would join the group of countries actively negotiating for E.U. membership.

United States

The United States State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1998 criticized Slovakia's failure to protect the Roma population from skinhead attacks and the widespread problem of domestic violence against women. The U.S. financed an estimated U.S. $3 million to retrofit Slovakia's military in preparation for possible NATO membership. Human rights advocates expressed concern that this upgrading would leave Slovakia with a cache of obsolete weapons that might then be sold to abusive regimes around the world (see Arms Division Chapter).
TAJIKISTAN

Human Rights Developments

The peace process between the Tajik government and the United Tajik Opposition (UTO) made significant progress in 1999, paving the way for a September constitutional referendum, November presidential elections and parliamentary elections planned for 2000. But these political advances were not accompanied by greater human rights protections. The personal security of most citizens remained precarious due to overall lawlessness, high levels of criminal and political violence, hostage-taking, and unprofessionalism and corruption in law enforcement agencies and the judiciary. In anticipation of the November presidential elections, the government sought to restrict the activities of political parties, obstructed the registration of opposition candidates, and imposed additional curbs on the media.

On the political front, agreements between the parties on proposed amendments to the constitution, the declaration by the UTO of the disbandment of its armed units, the appointment of many UTO members to government posts as stipulated in the peace agreement, and the amnesty of approximately 5,000 UTO fighters, led to the legalization of UTO political parties, a constitutional referendum, and presidential and parliamentary elections slated for November 1999 and 2000 respectively. According to official information, the September 26 constitutional referendum was passed by an overwhelming 92 percent majority, but unofficially the ballot was marred by widespread proxy and open voting, falsification of voter registration lists, and numerous technical and procedural flaws. The adoption of the amendments led to a clear expansion of presidential powers, as the term of the president was extended from five to seven years, and a two-chamber parliament was established in which 75 percent of the upper chamber was to be elected by indirect vote through local parliaments (already led by presidential appointees), with the remaining 25 percent to be appointed by the president. The changes also permitted the functioning of religion-based political parties.

The law on presidential elections required signatures constituting 5 percent of the electorate for nomination of candidates, an excessively prohibitive figure; it also lacked adequate provisions for media access and coverage. Amidst widespread expectations throughout the population that the ballot would be seriously flawed and that no substantial changes would be forthcoming, the presidential elections nonetheless risked becoming a farcical procedure when in mid-October the three opposition candidates decided to boycott the poll. They claimed that local government officials had prevented them from collecting the signatures necessary for candidate registration. In a last-minute effort to preserve the veneer of the democratic procedure, the government granted the Islamic Renaissance Party candidate registration just two weeks before the elections.

The government also sought to halt or impede the activities of political parties, mainly by charging party members with violations of the Law on Political Parties. As of this writing, the Agrarian Party and the National Unity Party had been banned, the registration of the Party of Justice and Progress had been annulled, the activities of the Party of Economic and Political Revival of Tajikistan were suspended, and the National Movement Party of Tajikistan had been denied registration. The leadership of these parties reported threats and harassment of party members by the authorities. There were also reports that members of local government administrations were fired or demoted when they refused to join the People's Democratic Party of Tajikistan, the president's party.

Media freedoms also remained severely curbed. Independent journalists and media faced killings and unprosecuted violence as well as pre-publication censorship, arbitrary denial to print at government printing houses, monitoring and "counselling" of press services by the authorities, and burdensome licensing procedures. Given these difficulties, many practiced self-censorship. As elections approached, only one independent newspaper containing substantial political information was in print, no independent radio stations had been licensed to operate, and independent television and television production stations continued to experience government harassment. The rare few who published critical political views suffered threats or professional harassment from the authorities.

The judiciary continued to operate under heavy political influence. Prime examples included the trials of those arrested in connection with the fall 1998 armed rebellion in Leninabad, in which there was credible testimony of forced confessions and the intimidation of judges. Local and international observers at the trial of the murderers of four United Nations Mission to Tajikistan (UNMOT) personnel in July 1998 recounted torture of the accused and flagrant violations of basic legal principles.

Assaults, killings, extortion, and abductions throughout the country in 1999 were emblematic of an uncontrolled culture of violence; many of these crimes were conducted by members of the security forces or pro-government, UTO, or unaligned armed factions. High-profile assassinations in 1999 included that of Tolib Boboev, former deputy procurator general of Tajikistan and ally of outcast northern political leader Abdumalik Abdullojonov. Safarali Kenjaev, chairman of the Socialist Party of Tajikistan, was assassinated in Dushanbe, amid widespread speculation that he was to pose his candidacy in the presidential elections, and Ministry of Interior press center chief Jumakhona Khotami was also gunned down in Dushanbe.

In July, approximately 1,600 Uzbek nationals who had fled political and religious persecution in Uzbekistan were threatened with imminent expulsion back to that country. When armed members of that group subsequently fled into Kyrgyzstan, they took local and international hostages, and there were credible reports that Tajik nationals took up arms to join them in Kyrgyzstan. Although the government announced in August 1999 that all of the Uzbek nationals had left the country, there were credible reports at the time of writing that they remained in the Karategin Valley. The events yet again restricted access by international humanitarian aid groups to the impoverished Karategin Valley.

Defending Human Rights

The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) continued to be denied access to prisoners in accordance with its standard procedures, and interventions by other international organizations in the prisons were limited, exacerbating already drastic conditions and the plight of high numbers of detainees languishing in pre-trial detention. The government and the international community increased their support of local nongovernmental women's organizations through the sponsorship of many seminars on women's issues, and a campaign against violence against women was conducted in a prominent Dushanbe-based Russian-language newspaper. Local monitoring remained at a minimum. However, the nongovernmental Fund in Memory and Defence of the Journalists of Tajikistan publicly protested restrictions on the media and secured the release of illegally-detained journalists. In late 1998, Tajikistan ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and its first Optional Protocol, and the International Covenant on Economic and Social Rights.

The Role of the

International Community

Off the record, representatives of the major international organizations and lending institutions in the country without exception acknowledged that electoral conditions were hopelessly flawed from the outset. However, as of this writing, no known conditions had been imposed on funding. The World Bank gave credits totaling U.S. $95 million for structural reforms, disaster relief, educational reform, rehabilitation of private farms, and organizational support to the civil service, and the Asian Development Bank gave close to $40 million in credits for improvements to the education, health, and social services sectors, and for reform in the energy and transport sectors.

United Nations

The United Nations Mission to Tajikistan (UNMOT) continued to focus its efforts on the implementation of the General Agreement, was instrumental in resolving crises between the two parties to the agreement, and geared its activities toward the holding of elections. But slow progress on the UNMOT murder trial forced the mission to restrict its activities for security reasons to Dushanbe until June. Soon afterward, it re-opened its field offices in Khorog, Kurgan-Tiube, and Khujand, closed since July 1998. The Garm office, which had also been closedat that time, remained inoperative as of this writing. Despite credible allegations of basic violations of due process from local and international experts who attended the murder trial, the U.N. made no comment.

The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) assisted in the repatriation of approximately 6,000 refugees from Turkmenistan, Kyrgyzstan, and Kazakhstan, but was unable due to security conditions to respond swiftly to the potential expulsion of approximately 1,600 Uzbek nationals from Tajik territory. United Nations Office of Project Services (UNOPS) launched a major job creation project, mainly involving the rehabilitation of public facilities and infrastructure, for hundreds of demobilized UTO fighters in the Karategin Valley.

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)

The OSCE mission in 1999 greatly increased its outreach to local NGOs, journalists, and politicians, sponsored effective conferences on the ombudsman's institution, the electoral law, and women's issues, and organized training for journalists. The mission established women's support groups in the south and organized country-wide seminars on women's issues. Several high-profile OSCE representatives visited Tajikistan, underscoring the OSCE's focus on elections preparation, but not one of the officials made use of the opportunity to denounce publicly the worsening human rights situation or deplore the lack of minimum conditions for free and fair elections. The mission maintained internationally-staffed field offices in Kurgan-Tiube, Shaartuz, and Dusti, and a locally-staffed office in Garm, and made periodic visits to the Leninabad region, but as of this writing had still not opened an office in the latter area.

Republic of Uzbekistan

Uzbekistan continued to accuse Tajikistan of harboring Islamic militants responsible for attacks in Uzbekistan, and was blamed by the Tajik government and the UTO for bombing Tajik terroritory when providing military support to the Kyrgyz offensive against Uzbek militants in the south of Kyrgyzstan. The two countries signed an agreement to cooperate in fighting terrorism, political and religious extremism, and drug-trafficking, and Uzbekistan upgraded its Dushanbe diplomatic mission to an embassy. Border crossings for Tajik citizens, and passenger and automobile transportation, continued in general to be arduous and erratic.

Russian Federation

In 1999, President Rakhmonov called Russia "the only reliable partner and guarantor of stability and security in Tajikistan," paving the way for Russia to open a permanent military base. Russia and Tajikistan signed cooperation agreements on defense, arms, and narcotics smuggling, as well as to counter Islamic fundamentalism.

United States

United States embassy international staff continued to be based in Almaty for security reasons. The absence of a full diplomatic staff weakened the U.S. political profile in the country, as well as its ability regularly and effectively to raise human rights violations with the government as it had in previous years. The U.S. nonetheless continued to be one of the major funders of international NGOs working in the country, and the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1998 provided an unbiased review of the immense scope of abuse in the country.
TURKEY

Human Rights Developments

The Turkish government failed to build on the very modest progress of the preceding two years. Apparently genuine intentions to enact reform were not turned into practical measures permanently to ungag journalists, release prisoners of opinion, protect detainees from torture, or account for the "disappeared." Government ministers seemed to be hostages to the system they nominally controlled while progress was impeded by vested interests within the state and in particular the military, still an overriding political force. The chief of general staff openly instructed the government that leftist separatism and political Islam are the principal public enemies of Turkey. Political parties and organizations reflecting these beliefs were prosecuted or closed down, and their members detained, ill-treated, or otherwise harassed.

High-ranking judges eloquently condemned the judiciary's lack of independence and the flawed constitution imposed by the military in 1982. They also criticized the prosecutions and imprisonments arising from laws which conflict with Turkey's obligations under the European Convention on Human Rights. Intense debate on human rights was stimulated when Abdullah Ocalan was brought to Turkey in February, and throughout his subsequent trial, but the limits to free expression constrained argument on the political, cultural, and language rights of the Kurdish minority.

Brutal punitive security operations, marked by allegations of torture and extrajudicial execution, were carried out in the cities and countryside, though less frequently than in recent years. This reflected a lessening in activity by armed opposition groups. Death in police detention persisted because the government failed to take the key steps to combat torture.

In January, President Demirel asked B\lent Ecevit, leader of the Democratic Left Party (DSP) and caretaker prime minister since November, to form a new government, pending elections which took place in April. No party won an overall majority, but the DSP and the extreme right-wing National Action Party (MHP), both strongly nationalist, formed a coalition, with B\lent Ecevit continuing as prime minister and the Motherland Party (ANAP) as a third partner.

The conflict between the Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK) and government forces has shaped Turkish political history since 1984 and therefore the capture and trial of Abdullah Ocalan, leader of the PKK, was the dominating fact of the year. Expelled from Syria in November, he soon thereafter appeared in Italy, where he stayed until January, when he was allowed to flee Italian custody. He was finally abducted from Kenya by Turkish special forces in February and transported to Turkey to stand trial.

Abdullah Ocalan was charged with treason and tried at a special annexe of Ankara State Security Court established, for reasons of security, on Imrali island in the Sea of Marmara. The investigation and trial did not meet international standards. The initial interrogation contravened Turkish and international law, and the prisoner's access to legal counsel was unsatisfactory. International human rights organizations criticized the presence of a military judge on the panel that would preside over Ocalan's trial, pointing out that this had been criticized by the European Court of Human Rights ( Incal v. Turkey , 1998) as a breach of the right to a fair and independent tribunal. In June, the Turkish constitution was changed to remove the military judge from security court trials, including Ocalan's.

In June, Abdullah Ocalan was sentenced to death under Article 125 of the Turkish Penal Code, pending appeal. Turkey has not carried out a death sentence since 1984.

In September, the PKK announced its intention to abandon the armed struggle. As of this writing, it was unclear whether or not this declaration would be implemented.

International governmental organizations (and some commentators within Turkey) urged the Turkish government to take advantage of the capture of Abdullah Ocalan and recent military success against the PKK as an opportunity to grant political, cultural, and language rights to the Kurdish minority. However, no progress was made on language or cultural rights. During the course of Abdullah Ocalan's trial, the People's Democracy Party (HADEP), a legal political party with a mainly Kurdish membership viewed by the authorities as close to the PKK, was subjected to repeated brutal police raids.

HADEP narrowly escaped closure by the Constitutional Court on grounds of "separatism" prior to the April elections, when electorate and candidates were subjected to severe intimidation. Ballots cast for HADEP were destroyed in at least one constituency. The party failed to secure any parliamentary seats but gained control of thirty-seven local authorities in the southeast, including Diyarbakir.

In February, the Democratic Mass Party (DKP), another party with a largely Kurdish membership, was the fifteenth political party to be closed down by the Constitutional Court since Turkey returned to civilian rule in 1983. The party's program (which urged recognition of minority rights within the existing state of Turkey) was deemed to have included separatist propaganda.

In May, the Constitutional Court prosecutor brought an action to close the Islamist Virtue Party (Fazilet), successor to the Welfare Party (Refah) which was closed in January 1998. This initiative was precipitated by newly elected Fazilet deputy Merve Kavakci's attempt to take her parliamentary oath while wearing a full headscarf. Although there was no legal basis to deny her the right to wear a headscarf within the parliament building, her action was denounced by the prime minister as an affront to the secular state, and she was unable to take her oath. Regulations barring university students, civil servants, lawyers, and judges from wearing the headscarf while on government premises were made more restrictive and applied more widely. Those who protested headscarf restrictions risked prosecution. In March, Sadi Carsancakli, lawyer and president of the Istanbul branch of Mazlum-Der, was indicted for "incitement" at Istanbul State Security Court under Article 312 of the Turkish Penal Code, along with sixteen women and several journalists, for organizing and participating in a nationwide nonviolent demonstration against the headscarf restrictions in October 1998.

In March, Fazilet mayor of Istanbul Recep Tayyip Erdogan, sentenced to ten months of imprisonment under Article 312, went to prison. His offense had been to read a few lines from a poem which contained no advocacy of violence and which had, in fact, been approved by the Education Ministry. He was released in July, with remission, but the conviction results in a lifetime political ban, apparently the chief motivation for the prosecution.

Political influence over the judicial process and constraints on free expression were strongly criticized by two high-ranking judges. In March, the president of the Constitutional Court Ahmet Necdet Sezer stated that the constitution imposed unacceptable restrictions on the basic freedoms of Turkish citizens-including limits on language rights-and called for harmonization of Turkish domestic law with the European Convention. In September, at the official opening of the judicial year and in the presence of the president and prime minister, the president of the Appeal Court Dr. Sami Selcuk rated the legitimacy of the constitution as "almost zero" and expressed the hope that Turkey would not enter the 21st century under a regime which continues to "crush minds and stifle voices." Those present applauded the speech but neglected to take steps to remedy the shortcomings of the constitution or lift the legislation limiting expression. In May, Prime Minister and former newspaperman Bulent Ecevit expressed regret when journalist Oral Calislar was sentenced to twenty months of imprisonment under Article 8 of the Anti-Terror Law for conducting interviews with Kurdish political leaders, but his administration's only gesture towards freedom of expression was, in September, to suspend for three years all sentences imposed on writers and broadcasters.

Even this unsatisfactory measure, which resulted in the release of about a dozen journalists and writers, did not apply to those who had been prosecuted for public speeches.

Esber Yagmurdereli, a lawyer who has been in prison since June 1998 because of a speech he made at an HRA meeting in 1991, therefore remained in Cankiri prison. As a result of a 10-month sentence under Article 8 of the Anti-Terror Law he lost remission on an earlier life sentence imposed by a martial law court after an unfair trial, and has twenty-two more years to serve.

Local courts confiscated newspapers and books almost daily. Mehmet's Book - soldiers who have fought in the southeast tell their stories by journalist Nadire Mater, for example, was confiscated in June by an Istanbul court for "insulting the armed forces."

Torture was widespread. Detainees accused of theft and other common criminal offenses reported torture, and in one case died in police custody. As in previous years, those interrogated for offenses under the Anti-Terror Law were particularly at risk. Many detainees reported sexual assault and there were three allegations of rape in custody. Muzaffer Cinar, a HADEP official, was detained in July and interrogated in incommunicado detention for eight days at Siirt police headquarters on suspicion of supporting the PKK. After his release without charge, he reported that had been beaten, that his testicles been pulled using a noose, that he had been suspended by the arms and hosed with cold water under pressure. He stated that police officers detained his wife and threatened to rape her. Medical and photographic evidence of widespread grazing and bruising corroborate his account. At the time of writing, no prosecution had been opened against the alleged torturers.

There were seven reported deaths in custody during the year. Suleyman Yeter, dockers' union official and one of nineteen plaintiffs in an ongoing trial of eight police officers who had allegedly tortured and raped detainees in 1997, was again detained during a police raid on the magazine Dayanisma (Solidarity) in March. He died during the third day of incommunicado interrogation at Istanbul police headquarters. While the chief of police announced that "preliminary findings indicate a heart attack," medical examination revealed that Suleyman Yeterhad wounds on both sides of his head and to his chin, and extensive bruising to the rest of his body. At the time of writing, no charges had been issued related to his death.

One of the first actions of B\lent Ecevit's new government was to issue a circular announcing that priority would be given to human rights and warning that police stations would be subject to impromptu checks. Unfortunately, the urgent and energetic supervision promised in the circular failed to materialize. Blindfolding continued to be routine, and safeguards for the protection of children in custody were frequently ignored. Incommunicado detention, condemned by United Nations (U.N.) and Council of Europe specialists as a major factor in torture, was not abolished.

There were no verified reports of "disappearance," but the authorities continued to ignore demands for investigation of the pattern of "disappearances" from the mid-1990s. The Saturday Mothers, relatives of the "disappeared" who who have held a vigil in Istanbul every Saturday since 1995, were finally forced off the street in May by weekly detentions, harassment, ill-treatment and prosecution on manifestly trumped up charges. Meanwhile, the European Court of Human Rights continued to investigate outstanding cases. In July, it found the Turkish government responsible for the torture and death of Ahmet Cakici, who "disappeared" in the custody of gendarmes in Diyarbak^r province in 1993, and in September, the court visited Turkey to question witnesses to the "disappearance" of Kenan Bilgin at Ankara police headquarters in 1994.

Cases of ill-treatment in prisons mainly arose when police or gendarmes were permitted access to prisoners during times of unrest, or when transferring prisoners to other prisons, to the hospital, or to court. There were reports from a number of prisons, including the newly opened Soganlik Special Closed Prison in Istanbul, that inmates were held in small-group isolation, known to be a threat to prisoners' mental and physical health. At Soganlik prisoners held under the Anti-Terror Law are kept in a social and physical environment that is drastically limited and monotonous with no out of cell time. Human Rights Watch, while recognizing that the Turkish prison system's move away from traditional large wards may have benefits for the prison population, urged the Justice Ministry not to impose small-group isolation on any class of prisoners.

Compared to past years, there were fewer reports of attacks on civilians and killing of prisoners by illegal armed organizations. Following the death sentence imposed upon its leader, the PKK carried out "punitive" bombings and other attacks which claimed civilian lives. PKK members machine-gunned a right-wing cafe in Elazig in July killing Ferhan Bulut, Sukru Tuna, Idris Yeter and Bilal Comert. The organization formally called off such attacks later that month.

Defending Human Rights

Human rights workers were harassed, ill-treated, prosecuted, and obstructed in their legitimate activities. In February, the Office of the Chief of General Staff made a public statement that human rights were partial and operated as a wing of armed organizations. Similar groundless accusations had provoked an attack on Akin Birdal, president of the Human Rights Association, in 1998, as a result of which he remains partially paralyzed. His imprisonment this year was a grave shock and affront to the human rights community. Akin Birdal was convicted under Article 312 of the Turkish Penal Code for a 1996 speech referring to "the Kurdish people" and began serving a one year sentence in June. Akin Birdal forfeited his HRA presidency and served three and a half months in prison until his sentence was suspended on health grounds in September.

The Diyarbakir HRA branch remained closed on the orders of the local governor for the third successive year. The Gaziantep branch was temporarily closed for three months in July. The Bursa branch reopened in June after having been closed for seven months because it had hosted a hunger strike, and the Sanliurfa branch re-opened after closure for more than a year, when the appeal court overturned the local governor's decision that the branch had exceeded the terms of its statute.

Three Izmir HRA members and its president Ercan Demir were convicted of holding an "unauthorized demonstration" by making a press statement about unrest in a local prison in 1996 and sentenced to terms of imprisonment of more than a year. They are at liberty, pending appeal.

Other human rights organizations were also targeted. In January, the Sanliurfa branch of the Association for Human Rights and Solidarity with the Oppressed (Mazlum-Der) was closed indefinitely on the order of the local governor, pending the outcome of a prosecution for a calendar which allegedly contained statements insulting to the organs of state. Their Malatya branch was closed in May and other branches were raided by police.

In September, Mehmet Ali Irtemcelik, state minister responsible for human rights, made a public statement that seemed to promise a change of approach, when he expressed a wish to "strike a sound and honest communication" with nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) dealing with human rights. As of this writing, it was unclear whether or not this represented a genuine new initiative.

The Role of the International Community

The capture, trial, and sentencing of Abdullah Ocalan provoked responses from many governments and was intensely scrutinized by international governmental organizations.

In March the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture visited Abdullah Ocalan on Imrali island to examine the conditions of custody and methods of interrogation. The committee was satisfied that he was not being subjected to torture, but raised concern about his access to legal counsel and the isolated character of his confinement.

The European Parliament, the European Union, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights sent delegates to attend Ocalan's trial. When the court handed down a death sentence, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe reminded President Demirel that in 1997 he had joined other heads of state in a pledge to abolish the death penalty.

Council of Europe

The political, investigative, and judicial arms of the Council of Europe were closely and actively engaged with human rights developments in Turkey.

The Turkish government finally gave permission for publication in February of the report of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture on the committee's visit to Turkey in October 1997. This represented a significant acknowledgement of the problem of torture, and progress towards openness - though several other reports remained unpublished. The report confirmed that Turkey was "moving in the right direction" but regretted that the committee had, as in previous visits, received many reports of torture, corroborated in some cases by medical evidence. In March, the Turkish authorities also gave the committee permission to publish observations from its visit that month to Abdullah Ocalan (see above). During that visit, the committee also inspected Istanbul police headquarters and reported in a tone of some exasperation that it had again found credible evidence that torture was still being inflicted there.

In an unprecedented resolution in June, the Committee of Ministers censured Turkey for "repeated and serious violations" committed by its security forces, and expressed impatience that there had been "no significant improvement."

As of September, over nine thousand petitions against Turkey were under consideration by the European Court of Human Rights. The court handed down decisions in a series of cases representing a wide variety of violations committed by the Turkish authorities: violations of freedom of speech, imprisonment for expression of nonviolent opinions, and violations of the right to life, including one "disappearance" case.

European Union

In November, the European Union (E.U.) Commission produced its first regular report on Turkey's progress towards accession. The commission commented on the "persistent violations of human rights," the "great failings in the way minorities are treated" and the "lack of real civilian control over the army."

In March, in response to an influx of asylum seekers from Iraq and surrounding countries, the European Parliament passed a resolution which referred to the instability caused by Turkish incursions into Northern Iraq, and called for the Turkish government to "seek a political solution to the Kurdish problem."

In June, the E.U. presidency condemned the imprisonment of Akin Birdal and called for the sentence to be deferred at least on humanitarian grounds in view of his poor health.

Significant differences between the E.U. and Turkey on issues that include Turkey's human rights record kept Turkey outside the E.U. enlargement process.

United Nations

Two thematic mechanisms published their reports on visits to Turkey made during 1998. The findings of the special rapporteur on torture complemented those of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture. The extent of torture was unambiguously stated as "widespread" and in some areas "systematic," to the extent that it is a pervasive technique used "regardless of approval or disapproval at higher levels of the public service." The report of the U.N. Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances, by contrast, was disappointing. Relatives of the disappeared had hoped that the working group's visit would uncover the truth in at least a small number of individual cases, and draw some conclustions about the general pattern. Instead, the working group failed to make a clear determination in a single case - even where there was a strong body of evidence of security force responsibility. Its description of the volume of reported disappearances in Turkey (not less than a hundred in the 1990s and perhaps several hundred) as "relatively low" betrayed a certain complacency in their approach.

The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)

In March, at the Permanent Council in Vienna, the Representative on Freedom of the Media Freimut Duve urged Turkey to adopt "a more liberal attitude" in the application of laws currently used to inhibit political discussion, but expressed appreciation of Turkey's otherwise energetically pluralist media landscape.

As of this writing, Turkey was planning to host the OSCE's Summit of heads of state and government in Istanbul in mid-November. Officials of the OSCE's member states expressed the hope that the summit would prove a catalyst for needed reform in Turkey.

United States

In various statements, the United States government contrasted the Turkish authorities' public commitment to respect for human rights with their lack of determination to combat persistent and serious violations. The State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1998 communicates the "substantial but indirect influence" exercised by the military over politics and its role in inhibiting free expression in Turkey. The report reflects the breadth and gravity of violations committed by government security forces, from torture and forcible evacuation to extrajudicial execution, and shows how those who torture or kill in the name of the state escape prosecution. Assistant Secretary of State for Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, Harold Hongju Koh stated, during a tour of Turkey in August, that there could be "no purely military solution to Kurdish issues. Any enduring solution must lie in the expansion of democracy, and in bold and imaginative political, social, and economic measures to foster full democratic political participation for all of Turkey's citizens and to promote broader freedom of expression on the Southeast." This view met bitter criticism and warm praise from different quarters of the media. Harold Koh visited Ankara Central Closed prison to meet the Kurdish former member of parliament Leyla Zana where she is serving a fifteen year sentence on charges of separatism, and also Ak^n Birdal.

U.S. Congress approved delivery, beginning in July, of fifty Sikorsky S-70 Black Hawk utility helicopters. This class of helicopter has been used to commit human rights violations in Turkey, including "disappearance." Human Rights Watch pressed the U.S. government to insist that effective systems are put in place to ensure end-use monitoring of this equipment.

TURKMENISTAN

Human Rights Developments

In 1999, the government of Turkmenistan intensified its unrelenting repression against its own citizens, launching a campaign to control or to stop the activities of all civil and religious associations as well as individual dissidents. With parliamentary elections scheduled for December, the state continued to suppress even the most benign political expression. One political prisoner died in custody; the government released two political prisoners, but imprisoned several others for their political views.

On September 9, political prisoner Khoshali Garaev, age thirty-seven, died under extremely suspicious circumstances. Garaev had been in custody since 1994. Prison officials reportedly had transferred Garaev to solitary confinement on September 8 and claimed they found him hanging the next morning. Garaev's family rejected this explanation, stating that not only was Garaev in relatively good health, but that since he had served much of his term in solitary confinement he was not likely to be distraught by the isolation. His wife noted further that in recent letters and during a June 1999 visit, Garaev was in good spirits. Garaev's co-defendant, Mukhametkuli Aimuradov, who was also sentenced to a long additional term at the end of 1998, is known to be in poor health and is being denied adequate medical treatment.

Turkmenistan added to the ranks of its political prisoners in August with the sentencing of two men who expressed a desire to run in parliamentary elections. Dr. Pirikuli Tangrykuliev received an eight-year sentence for alleged financial improprieties. Arrested in June, Tangrykuliev, a former Supreme Soviet deputy and critic of President Niazov's government, was held for six weeks without charge. On August 5 a court sentenced Ayli Meredov, a former government education official, to five years in prison, but released him from custody under an amnesty after Mr. Meredov signed a statement confessing to the "crime." He is ineligible to run for elected office for ten years under Turkmenistan's election law.

Shakhrat Razmetov, whose only crime was to attempt to meet with foreign diplomats, was sentenced to three years of imprisonment for "hooliganism." At his trial witnesses openly stated that authorities had coerced their testimony against him. In January the government freed the last two living members of the eight men imprisoned for participation in a July 1995 demonstration, Gulgeldy Annaniazov and Kurbanmurad Mammednazarov, after Annaniazov made a televised statement of "repentance."

In June, the government demanded the re-registration of many nongovernmental organizations. According to unofficial reports, the Ministry of Justice revoked at least fifteen NGO registrations. In January, the National Security Committee (KNB) broke up a meeting of journalists intending to form an independent professional association, detained some of the participants, and threatened others.

Only Russian Orthodox and Sunni Muslim confessions enjoy legal status, while the state denied registration to other confessions. Harassment of those faithful who defied this ban intensified in 1999. Baptists, Seventh Day Adventists, and Pentacostals were all subject to increased persecution: police and security forces forcibly entered their private homes without warrants and broke up prayer meetings, confiscated religious literature, and threatened worshipers with the loss of their jobs. In August, Baptist pastor Shagildy Atakov was sentenced to four years in prison and fined the equivalent of U.S. $12,000 for alleged financial misdealings, but more likely for his religious activity. In September, officials summoned Pastor Korobov, head of the Evangelical Baptists in Turkmenistan and threatened to arrest him if all worship services did not cease. Also in August, KNB officers destroyed a Hare Krishna temple and forcibly deported a Krishna leader. Three Jehovah's Witnesses imprisoned for conscientious objection to military service were freed early in the year.

Free expression is non-existent, thanks to a government monopoly on the media. Foreign media outlets, such as newspapers from Russia, were often confiscated from private citizens at the border. Turkmen correspondents for Radio Liberty reported that they work under constant surveillance and in fear of arrest: KNB officials questioned Saparmurad Ovezberdiev, a stringer, after his meetings with international human rights monitors. The KNB warned several journalists not to meet with an advisor to the OSCE Special Representative on Freedom of the Media who visited Turkmenistan in April.

Amnesties in February reportedly freed 3,000 prisoners, while at the end of the year the government promised to free 6,000 to 12,000 more. Witnesses recounted that torture in prisons and pre-trial detention is routine. On December 31, Turkmenistan announced a moratorium on carrying out the death penalty.

Turkmenistan curtailed freedom of movement with its withdrawal from the CIS visa-free regime early in 1999; later restrictions made obtaining an exit visa more difficult for Turkmen citizens.

Defending Human Rights

Turkmenistan has no formal nongovernmental human rights monitoring groups. Groups such as the Russian Community ( Russkaia obshchina ), which attempted to protect the rights of its ethnic brethren, were consistently denied registration and faced serious harassment. On January 21, KNB officers arrested its co-chairman, Viacheslav Mamedov, but released him on February 3 after forcing him to sign a statement promising not to engage in any "political activities" or to speak to the press. Mamedov's co-chairman, Anatolii Fomin, remained in Russia after learning that he faced arrest upon his return to Turkmenistan.

The government also attempted to curtail the ability of international organizations to monitor human rights. On February 3, Turkmen authorities deported Sasha Petrov, deputy director of Human Rights Watch's Moscow office, for distributing human rights materials. Petrov had been part of a fact-finding mission that visited the country at the invitation of the Turkmen government. Before the mission arrived, security forces contacted many of the delegation's nongovernmental interlocutors and warned them not to have contact with the monitors, and during the mission, security forces summoned and debriefed those who met with the monitors.

Turkmen security officials deported Russian human rights monitors Vitalii Ponomarev and Nikolai Mitrokhin after initially allowing them entry into the country. They were said to be among the twenty-five Russian journalists on a persona non grata list banned from Turkmenistan.

The Role of the International  Community

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)

The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Center in Ashgabad opened in February. As of this writing, Turkmenistan has not agreed to the Memorandum of Understanding with the OSCE's Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR), which would allow the center to begin carrying out its mission. The ODIHR representative in Ashgabad observed the Supreme Court appeal of Dr. Tangrykuliev in August.

The OSCE Special Representative on Freedom of the Media strongly criticized Turkmenistan before the Permanent Council in May, noting that although the constitution of Turkmenistan guarantees freedom of expression, thanks to overwhelming repression "we could find no person willing to avail himself of that privilege."

European Union

The European Union (E.U.) made statements praising Turkmenistan for suspending the death penalty and expressing concern about the arrest of Dr. Tangrykuliev. The ratification process for the partnership and cooperation agreement with Turkmenistan continues to be suspended due to human rights concerns.

United States

The U.S. Embassy in Ashgabad closely monitored violations of basic rights in Turkmenistan and reported them comprehensively in the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices in 1998 . The Annual Report on International Religious Freedom likewise described Turkmenistan's prohibition of free worship for minority religions. These efforts as well as the attention paid to human rights by high-level delegations, including that of Energy Secretary Bill Richardson, were totally undercut, however, by continued promises of financial support for the construction of the trans-Caspian pipeline without any human rights conditions attached. The U.S. released the third tranche of a grant to carry out a feasibility study for the pipeline during the same week that Dr. Tangrykuliev was sentenced. Congress allocated U.S. $102.9 million in Export-Import Bank guarantees for Turkmenistan in 1998.
UNITED KINGDOM

Human Rights Developments

Continuing disagreement over disarming paramilitary groups stalled implementation of the Good Friday Agreement and threatened to impede progress on the agreement's human rights provisions. Peter Mandelson replaced Marjorie Mowlam as secretary of state for Northern Ireland in October, causing concern in the human rights community that there would be a setback in the human rights progress made during Mowlam's tenure.

Continuing police abuse and the reform of the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) were the most significant human rights issues in Northern Ireland in 1999. The Independent Commission on Policing for Northern Ireland (Policing Commission) issued its report on police reform in September despite the political impasse but failed to address several key human rights concerns. Fresh allegations of collusion in the 1989 murder of Belfast lawyer Patrick Finucane and concerns about the investigation into the March 1999 murder of human rights lawyer Rosemary Nelson led to renewed efforts to press the government to respond to persistent police intimidation of defense lawyers, an issue ignored in the Policing Commission's report. The director of public prosecutions' (DPP) failure to call for prosecutions in two controversial police abuse cases exacerbated the lack of public confidence in the criminal justice system, underscored the need for police accountability, and raised serious concerns about the prosecutor's independence. Nationalist demonstrators charged the RUC with the excessive use of physical force when protesters were brutally removed while blocking a road during the annual marching season.

In September, the Policing Commission-established by the Good Friday Agreement and chaired by current European Union Commissioner for External Affairs Chris Patten-released its report on police reform. The report called for "a human rights-based approach" to policing and recommended renaming the force the "Northern Ireland Police Service"; a new oath, including a pledge to uphold fundamental human rights; new codes of ethics and practice based on the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR); human rights training for officers; establishment of a civilian oversight police board; and the creation of a new complaints system based on a previous report recommending an independent police ombudsman.

The report called on members of the Catholic and nationalist communities-long disaffected from the RUC due to the force's record of persistent human rights violations-to join the force but did not lay the groundwork for building confidence in a "new" policing service primarily because it failed to recommend a screening process to keep abusive officers from continuing to serve on the force. For example, the commission recommended closing the notorious "holding centers"-specially designated detention facilities for political suspects-but did not require that detectives who operated within those centers be held accountable for egregious, well-documented physical and psychological abuse of detainees over the last three decades. The report also failed to address the past misconduct of the RUC Special Branch, the unit responsible for dealing with political violence. Credible allegations of Special Branch collusion with loyalist paramilitaries in the 1989 murder of Belfast solicitor Patrick Finucane have fueled urgent calls for the British government to establish an independent judicial inquiry into the killing. The commission also failed to recommend the repeal of emergency laws that have provided cover for the abusive practices of the RUC, to ban the use of potentially lethal plastic bullets, and to recommend measures to combat the well-documented systematic intimidation of defense lawyers by RUC officers.

In February 1999, British Irish Rights Watch submitted a confidential report to the British government containing new evidence of collusion between the RUC and the loyalist paramilitaries who murdered defense lawyer Patrick Finucane in 1989. In April, John Stevens,deputy commissioner of the London Metropolitan Police, was enlisted to reopen the Finucane murder investigation. In June, the Stevens team arrested William Stobie and charged him with Finucane's murder. Stobie subsequently claimed in court that he was an informer for the Special Branch at the time of the murder-he told the police on two occasions that a person was to be shot and the whereabouts of the murder weapons after the killing-but the police failed to take action. A June 27 Sunday Tribune article alleged that Stobie was charged with arms possession in 1991 but threatened the DPP that he would expose publicly RUC complicity in the Finucane murder if prosecuted. The DPP subsequently offered no evidence against Stobie and he was found "not guilty" of the charges.

The author of the Sunday Tribune article, Ed Moloney, was served with a court order under the Prevention of Terrorism Act in July requiring him to surrender notes from 1990 interviews with Stobie, upon which the June 1999 article was based. Human rights organizations protested the order arguing that it could result in a "chilling effect" on reporting on governmental accountability and that coercing journalists who explored collusion-while shielding the police from a full judicial inquiry into the Finucane murder-contributed to the perception that the government had something to hide.

Moloney challenged the court order at an August hearing during which it was revealed that Stobie was actually arrested in 1990 for questioning in the Finucane murder. A member of the Stevens team testified that Stobie admitted to the police then that he was the quartermaster for the paramilitary group responsible for the murder and a police informer at the time, and that he had supplied the murder weapons and led the police to them after the killing. Stobie thus admitted to the police in 1990 the role that was alleged in the indictment against him in 1999. This account contrasts sharply with a prior statement by the DPP that during questioning in 1990, Stobie denied involvement in the murder. Stobie was granted bail on October 5, 1999. At the time of this writing, a decision on Ed Moloney's challenge to the court order requiring him to surrender his notes is pending.

The DPP came in for heavy criticism in early August when he decided not to prosecute criminally several police officers involved in the 1994 assault on David Adams, then a detainee at Castlereagh Holding Centre. In 1998, the Belfast High Court awarded Adams U.S. $50,000 in a civil action after finding that RUC officers lied under oath about their involvement in the assault on Adams. The court held that "all the principle injuries suffered by the plaintiff were the result of assaults by police officers and ...were not occasioned or contributed to by resistance on [Adams'] part." Human rights organizations urgently called for the DPP to offer a public explanation of the decision not to prosecute the officers for what appeared to amount to torture.

In another case of alleged police misconduct, the DPP decided on September 30 not to prosecute the officers present at the brutal assault on Robert Hamill, a Catholic man attacked by a mob of loyalists in Portadown in April 1997. Hamill subsequently died from serious head trauma. The Hamill family and witnesses to the attack alleged that the officers sat in a police vehicle twenty feet from the scene and failed to assist Hamill. The family is considering a private prosecution. The RUC commenced an internal investigation into the killing to determine whether disciplinary charges should be leveled against the officers.

Protesters demonstrating against an Apprentice Boys march on Belfast's Lower Ormeau Road on August 14, 1999, alleged that they were brutally removed from the road by police. The following week, the RUC raided homes on the road and arrested community leaders and others involved in the protests. Gerard Rice, spokesperson for the Lower Ormeau Concerned Community, was detained and charged with incitement to violence, reportedly for chanting civil rights slogans during the demonstration.

Defending Human Rights

On March 15, human rights lawyer Rosemary Nelson was killed in a car bomb attack near her home in Lurgan. A loyalist paramilitary group called the Red Hand Defenders claimed responsibility for the murder. Nelson represented clients detained under the emergency laws and was one of Northern Ireland's most prominent human rights defenders.

In recent years, Nelson had become the target of a campaign of harassment by the RUC. In September 1998, she testified before the U.S. House of Representatives Subcommittee on International Operations and Human Rights that RUC officers had threatened her personal safety and leveled death threats against her through warnings made directly to her clients. Nelson complained to the Independent Commission for Police Complaints (ICPC). The results of the ICPC's initial investigation were made public on March 22-one week after the murder-and concluded that RUC officers interviewed by the ICPC were hostile and evasive, and that "the behaviour and attitudes displayed by police officers in the course of interviews was such as to be seriously damaging to the credibility of the investigation itself." In response, the RUC chief constable appointed an English police investigator to review the original RUC investigation. Predictably, he found the investigation "adequate." Subsequently, a commentary by the chairman of the ICPC was leaked to the press in which he complained about a seriously negative attitudinal approach by RUC officers "possibly tolerated by the organisation" and severely criticized the police complaints system for practices that favor RUC officers and could be perceived as the "outrageous, systematic undermining of the investigative process."

Given abundant evidence of RUC antipathy toward Rosemary Nelson, human rights groups called for an independent investigation of her killing free of RUC involvement. The RUC chief constable appointed Colin Port, deputy chief constable of Norfolk constabulary, to conduct the investigation but Port maintained that RUC involvement was critical to the success of the investigation. Public confidence in the investigation has been severely undermined by the RUC's involvement.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

In November 1998, the U.N. Committee Against Torture (CAT) expressed concern over the continuation of emergency laws in Northern Ireland; recommended the closure of detention centers for political suspects; called for a ban on plastic bullets; and urged the "reconstruction" of the RUC in conformity with the objectives of the Good Friday Agreement.

In his January 1999 report, the U.N. Special Rapporteur on the Independence of Judges and Lawyers Param Cumaraswamy emphasized the ongoing intimidation of defense lawyers in Northern Ireland. The report alleged that the RUC exhibited "complete indifference" to crediblereports by nongovernmental organizations of lawyer intimidation and that the chief constable had "allowed the situation to deteriorate." The special rapporteur called again for an independent inquiry into Patrick Finucane's murder.

The special rapporteur's assessment of steady deterioration in the situation of defense lawyers was proven correct by the murder of lawyer Rosemary Nelson. In oral comments to the Human Rights Commission in April, Cumaraswamy stated that he raised the issue of Nelson's personal security and the threats on her life in communications to the U.K. government. He expressed hope that RUC involvement in the Nelson murder investigation "would not affect or taint the impartiality and credibility of the investigation" given the fact that Nelson had lodged complaints against RUC officers and she expressed no confidence in the RUC investigatory mechanism.

U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson spoke at a memorial service for Nelson held during the April 1999 Commission on Human Rights session.

Europe

In a January 20, 1999, letter to the newly established Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission, Council of Europe Secretary General Daniel Tarschys underscored the centrality of human rights protection to the Northern Ireland peace process. On March 16, 1999, Tarschys expressed "deep sadness" at Rosemary Nelson's killing and supported the call for an "independent and transparent" investigation into her murder.

The European Parliament passed a resolution on April 15, 1999, condemning the murder of Rosemary Nelson and calling for an independent police investigation of the murder, free of RUC participation.

United States

The U.S. House of Representatives passed a resolution in March condemning Rosemary Nelson's killing, calling for a murder investigation "totally independent" of the RUC, and renewing its call for an independent judicial inquiry into Patrick Finucane's murder.

The U.S. House Committee on International Relations held a hearing on policing in Northern Ireland on April 22. Victims of human rights violations and representatives of human rights organizations gave testimony regarding RUC abuses. The record of the hearing was submitted to the Policing Commission in July.

The U.S. House of Representatives voted in July to stop funding RUC training and exchange programs in the U.S. as part of the American Embassy Security Act of 1999. The act required the U.S. secretary of state to "take all appropriate steps" to ensure that RUC members do not participate in any educational or exchange programs unless the president certifies that independent investigations into the murders of defense attorneys Rosemary Nelson and Patrick Finucane have been initiated by the U.K. government.

In September, the House Subcommittee on International Operations and Human Rights held an open meeting focusing on the Policing Commission report. Commission chairperson, Chris Patten, testified. Members of the committee expressed concern over the absence in the report of an accountability mechanism for past human rights abuses by the RUC and the report's failure to call for the repeal of emergency legislation and a ban on plastic bullets.

The U.S. State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1998 was disturbingly lacking in criticism of the U.K. government and contained several critical errors both of fact and interpretation. Instead of casting him as a defense lawyer or human rights lawyer for political suspects, the report described Patrick Finucane as "counsel to many IRA suspects" thus associating him with the views of his clients. The report also failed to report that in late 1998 the U.N. Committee Against Torture called for a ban on plastic bullet use and for the closure of Castlereagh Holding Centre. The report frequently recorded the U.K. government's justifications for dubious measures to address political violence without including any counter-arguments.

UZBEKISTAN

Human Rights Developments

Human rights protections in Uzbekistan deteriorated rapidly and dramatically in 1999. Following the explosion of five bombs in the capital on February 16, police detained thousands of men. Police and security forces particularly targeted members of the political opposition and independent Muslims. Among the arrested were hundreds of members of Hizb-ut-Tahrir (Party of Liberation), an unregistered Islamic organization.

Nineteen men were sentenced to death following patently unfair show trials for their alleged participation in the February 16 bombings or other acts of violence. Others were given lengthy prison terms. Courts also doled out harsh sentences for members of Hizb-ut-Tahrir. Some were convicted purely on the basis of their religious beliefs while others had allegedly fabricated charges of narcotics or weapons possession brought against them.

Police and security forces used brutal tactics in carrying out the campaign. They systematically tortured defendants, using barbaric methods such as electric shock, beatings with batons, and temporary suffocation with a plastic bag, coined "the bag of death." There were several credible reports that authorities also threatened to rape defendants' family members if they did not sign self-incriminating statements.

The family members of independent religious or political leaders were singled out for harsh treatment by authorities. Female relatives of independent Imam Obidhon Nazarov, believed to be in hiding since March 1998, were briefly detained, as was the wife of an associate of Nazarov, Imam Tulkun Ergashev. Male relatives of Nazarov were imprisoned on allegedly fabricated charges, and it was reported that the imam's youngest brother, Abdumalik Nazarov, was sent to a prison in Karakalpakstan, said to be designed for religious prisoners and known as "the place from which no one returns." Relatives of men sought in connection with the February 16 bombings reported being detained and even tortured. At least two fathers were reportedly imprisoned because of charges against their sons. This was part of the implementation of the government's collective punishment policy in which, according to the minister of internal affairs, "fathers will suffer, too."

Azim Khodjaev, the father of two young men sought for alleged Islamic extremism, was convicted and imprisoned in Karakalpakstan. His body was returned to his family around July 14 and reportedly showed hideous signs of torture, including extracted fingernails. In July, authorities at the prison also reportedly tortured to death Jurakhon Azimov, a leader of the political opposition group, the Popular Movement Birlik (Unity), in Andijan. He had been sentenced to sixteen years in prison on May 5 after a trial that reportedly relied wholly on fabricated evidence of his "anti-state activities." Azimov's family saw his body after it was removed from the Karakalpakstan prison and reported that the left half of his face was smashed in beyond recognition, and his body was covered with large bruises and razor-blade cuts. Officials gave the cause of death as heart failure. Authorities in that prison reportedly tortured to death at least six other men in 1999.

Other shocking reports of death from torture came to light in 1999. Human Rights Watch viewed the body of Furkhat Usmanov, a young man who died in detention. His body showed unmistakable signs of torture, including severe bruising all over his body. Heart failure was the official cause of death. Usmanov (age forty-two) had been detained just eleven days before his death for alleged possession of a Hizb-ut-Tahrir pamphlet. Other reports of deaths in custody, including those of a young Hizb-ut-Tahrir member in Tashkent, and two other orthodox Muslims in the Fergana Valley, followed the same pattern. The body of independent Imam Kobil Muradov spoke volumes of the treatment he apparently endured in pretrial detention. His injuries reportedly included broken ribs and a broken collarbone, missing teeth, and extensive bruising. Authorities gave disparate and unconvincing explanations for his death, first claiming that he had fallen from his bunk and later that fellow prisoners had beaten him to death.

The release in August of five Christians unjustly imprisoned in 1999 was seen as a positive development, although the timing of the releases appeared to be calculated to coincide with publication of the U.S. government's report on religious freedom. Those released included Rashid Turibayev of the Full Gospel Church in the Autonomous Republic of Karakalpakstan and two of his fellow worshipers, Parakhat Yangibayev and Eset Tanishev, all charged with illegal possession of narcotics. Authorities also accused Turibayev of violating a May 1998 law that imposed severe restrictions on permissible religious practice. That law also banned proselytism, the charge on which Ibrahim Yusupov, the head of a Pentacostal congregation inTashkent, was convicted. Bukharan Pastor Na'il Asanov of the Church of Christ, who had been convicted in June for alleged illegal possession of narcotics, was released together with Yusupov in late August.

Secular figures as well as religious ones fell victim to state repression. Disregarding allegations of torture, an Uzbek court on August 18 convicted six men because of their alleged affiliation with Erk (Freedom), a political party founded in 1990 and banned by Uzbek authorities in December 1992. Its leader, Muhammad Solih, was the only candidate to run against President Islam Karimov in the presidential elections of 1991 and was forced into exile in 1994. The men-Muhammad Bekjanov, Rashid Bekjanov (Solih's brothers), Kobil Dierov, Mamadali Mahmudov, Ne'mat Sharipov, and Iusuf Ruzimuradov were sentenced to prison terms ranging from eight to fifteen years for participation in a "criminal society" and for using the mass media to insult publicly the President of Uzbekistan, among other charges. The government publicly implicated Solih as a conspirator in the bombings, a charge he denied.

Freedom of expression and of the press continued to be severely restricted. There were no independent local journalists or media outlets functioning in the country. Government-controlled media were used as relentless propaganda tools to discredit independent Muslim groups, human rights activists, and members of the political opposition in Uzbekistan and abroad.

The Uzbek government dealt another blow to freedom of information in 1999 when it recentralized all internet providers in the country under one government umbrella agency. The move, establishing a government monopoly on that medium, was presumably designed to control access to and monitor internet communications.

Defending Human Rights

In 1999, the Uzbek government clamped down on human rights activists with unprecedented vigor and brutality. Over a dozen human rights defenders were detained, beaten, or otherwise harassed. Government-controlled local and national media routinely broadcast and printed propaganda to discredit rights defenders as "supporters of terrorism," "traitors," and "enemies of the state." The government's campaign appeared designed to silence activists' criticism of official policy and stop the flow of information to foreign governments, media, and other observers.

In June, Akhmadhon Turakhonov, a member of the Independent Human Rights Organization of Uzbekistan (IHROU), died in prison, apparently from diabetes that went untreated, following his conviction in March on politically motivated and wholly spurious charges.

Chairman of the IHROU, Mikhail Ardzinov, was savagely beaten and detained for over twelve hours by officers of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. They levied the spurious charge of "hooliganism" against him. Authorities denied Ardzinov access to a lawyer or medical exam and confiscated his passport, office equipment, and archive of human rights documents. A medical exam conducted by a U.S. Embassy doctor the day after his release found that Ardzinov had suffered broken ribs, contused kidneys, and a concussion, in addition to cuts and bruises to the face.

On September 29, a district court condemned Ardzinov's colleague, Ismoil Adylov, to six years in prison. The trial was based on wholly spurious charges that Adylov possessed Hizb-ut-Tahrir leaflets and that he was guilty of anti-constitutional activities because of the ideas contained in those leaflets. Eyewitnesses reported that police had planted the religious literature in Adylov's home at the time of arrest. Authorities held him incommunicado for over twenty-four hours and denied him access to an attorney during the initial period of detention. Authorities continued to deny him medical treatment in detention for a chronic kidney ailment.

Just days after the arrest of Adylov in July, another IHROU member, Mahbuba Kasymova, was condemned to five years in prison. Her trial, on all counts a farce that lasted less than three hours, fell far short of international standards. The presiding judge denied Kasymova the right to counsel of her choice, failed to hear key witnesses, and ignored exculpating testimony. The primary charge against Kasymova was that she had hidden a "criminal," Ravshan Hamidov, who was arrested at her home in May . Witnesses to the arrest reported that the police had planted religious leaflets, narcotics, and a grenade among Hamidov's belongings prior to his arrest, raising serious doubts about the charges against him. In any case, the state presented no evidence that Kasymova knew or should have known about Hamidov's alleged illegal activity.

In September 1998, authorities arrested Muidin Kurbanov, a member of the Human Rights Society of Uzbekistan (HRSU) chapter in Jizak. Police beat him repeatedly and questioned him about his human rights organization and the whereabouts of Imam Obidhon Nazarov. On the basis of fabricated charges, a judge sentenced him, without a lawyer or prosecutor present, to three years in prison. Kurbanov wasreleased from prison in January 1999 under a presidential amnesty decree. Authorities in Jizak have since repeatedly harassed Kurbanov and threatened to charge him with membership in the Islamic organization Hizb-ut-Tahrir.

In October 1998, Tolib Yakubov, executive director of the HRSU, was brutally attacked by unidentified men while in Warsaw to attend the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) implementation meeting. It was believed the attack, which sent Yakubov to the hospital with severe injuries, was in retaliation for his outspoken criticism of Uzbekistan's rights record. In 1999, Yakubov reported that authorities forced him to attend a public "hate rally" they had organized in his home town, in which neighbors and local government officials showered him with insults and labeled him an "enemy of the state."

On April 11, HaidbaiYakubov, an HRSU member in Khorezm province, was detained for three hours by officers of the Urgench district police station. An investigator questioned Yakubov about his human rights activities and threatened to jail him if he did not name all who had sought his help. When Yakubov refused, a masked officer wielding a nightstick reportedly beat him repeatedly before he was finally released.

On July 16, Haidbai Yakubov accompanied a Human Rights Watch researcher on a field mission to the Autonomous Republic of Karakalpakstan. They were denied access to their destination and ordered to turn back to Khorezm. On the return trip, Yakubov and the Human Rights Watch researcher were repeatedly detained by police in Karakalpakstan and Khorezm. In the city of Khiva, the head of the police's criminal investigation team threatened to put Yakubov in jail. When asked what charges he could possibly bring, he reportedly responded, "We'll find something."

On the night of March 4, officers in plain clothes entered the home of independent activist Mukhtabar Akhmedova, confiscated her computer and other office equipment, and detained her. At the local police station, authorities accused her of assisting "Islamic terrorists" and sentenced her to ten days of administrative detention. Following her strenuous protests, the police released the sixty-year-old woman after twenty-four hours. First, however, they forced her to attend the public meeting they had organized in which she was labeled an "enemy of the state" and accused of complicity in the February 16 bombings. As of this writing, Akhmedova was at liberty; however, police threatened to charge her with anti-constitutional activities and refused to return her belongings.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

International press reported in September that High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson met with Muhammad Solih, the exiled leader of the Uzbek opposition party Erk. During the meeting she reportedly expressed her deep concern regarding accounts of arrests and convictions of political and religious dissidents in Uzbekistan and stated that her office would conduct a mission to the country to investigate the allegations. In May, the United Nations Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances considered the cases of six men-Mahmudov, Dierov, Sharipov, M. Bekjanov, R. Bekjanov, and Ruzimuradov-whose whereabouts were then unknown. The working group submitted these cases to the government of Uzbekistan and called on the proper officials to investigate the cases and ensure the protection of the men's rights. (For details on the fate of the six men, see above.)

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)

Although the OSCE increased its engagement in Central Asia, and in Uzbekistan in particular, the organization's message on human rights was not consistent. In April, OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media Freiment Duve visited Uzbekistan, after which he reported to the Permanent Council that "there is, in Uzbekistan, a near absence of independent media," due in part to "the insidious effects of `structural censorship'. " He also recounted his surprise visit to a government office where he found officials "perusing newspapers paragraph by paragraph for unacceptable coverage."

In May, the director of the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, Ambassador Gerard Stoudman, headed a delegation to Uzbekistan to assess conditions for upcoming parliamentary and presidential elections. The delegation concluded that the Uzbek government needed to undertake numerous reforms, including the registration of opposition parties and the establishment of independent media, in order to approach international standards. In meetings with President Karimov and other officials, Stoudman obtained assurances that the OSCE Central Asia Liaison Office would be provided with the correct names, places of detention, and charges of all detainees and arrestees-data not previously available. Unfortunately, the office failed to follow up with the government and had not received the promised information as of this writing. The chairman-in-office, during his visit to Uzbekistan in October, apparently also failed to make any progress on the OSCE initiative to obtain access for independent international monitors to prisons and other places of detention. As of October, no international monitors had access to Uzbekistan's prisons, believed to be among the worst in the region.

OSCE Chairman-in-Office Knut Volleb0k appointed Ambassador Wilhelm Hoynck as his personal representative to develop proposals for coordinated and enhanced OSCE engagement in Central Asia. Hoynck visited Uzbekistan in June and met with several government officials. Unfortunately, he declined to meet with any local or international human rights observers in the country. Chairman-in-Office Vollaebek visited Uzbekistan in early October, though he failed to press human rights concerns with the same vigor as the ODIHR delegation.

The Central Asia Liaison office in Tashkent continued its monitoring of human rights in Uzbekistan, making particular use of reports from local and international nongovernmental human rights organizations and participating in some trial monitoring activities.

European Union

On the occasion of the Uzbek foreign minister's address to the OSCE Permanent Council meeting in July, the European Union (E.U.) issued a demarche on human rights abuses that included a strong denunciation of the beating of rights defender Mikhail Ardzinov and the ongoing arrests of political and religious dissidents. In the September Permanent Council debate on the Hoynck report, the E.U. again emphasized the importance of human rights improvements.

Nevertheless, the member states of the E.U. put into effect its Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with the Republic of Uzbekistan on July 1, 1999, ignoring the rapidly deteriorating human rights situation in Uzbekistan. This agreement, which specifies respect for human rights as an essential element, awarded Uzbekistan preferential trade status and other potential economic benefits, despite the country's abysmal human rights record. In September, the E.U. held its first Cooperation Council meeting with Uzbekistan to consider that country's compliance with the agreement. Member states were expected to raise concerns regarding Uzbekistan's poor human rights record, including egregious cases of torture and death in detention.

United States

Senior government officials expressed dismay at Uzbekistan's continued practices of arbitrary and discriminatory arrests of religious Muslims and other forms of religious persecution. Stephen Sestanovich, ambassador-at-large for the Newly Independent States (NIS), visited Uzbekistan as part of the biannual meeting of the United States-Uzbekistan Joint Commission. He articulated U.S. concerns regarding the lack of progress on human rights issues. Also part of the delegation, the ambassador-at-large for international religious freedom, Robert Seiple, met with government officials to urge them to register unregistered religious groups. He discussed abuses against religious minorities and orthodox Muslims with religious leaders and human rights organizations. The U.S. Department of State's Annual Report on International Religious Freedom for 1999 , issued in September, was sharply critical of Uzbekistan's record. The report stated categorically that "[t]he Government's record on respect for the right of religious freedom worsened during the period covered by this report" and that "[t]he most serious abuses of the right to religious freedom were committed against Muslim believers."

Despite harsh criticism of Uzbekistan's deplorable rights record and characterization of the government as "authoritarian," the U.S. allotted an estimated U.S.$30 million in assistance to Uzbekistan in 1999, a major increase from the $22 million in aid given in 1998. The appropriations request for the year 2000 signified another leap to $40 million, a near doubling of U.S. assistance during a two-year period.

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF YUGOSLAVIA

Human Rights Developments

The federal government of Yugoslavia dominated by President Slobodan Milosevic continued its brazen disrespect for human rights and international law during 1999, prompting the indictment of Milosevic, three high Serbian officials, and a Yugoslav Army official by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for crimes against humanity.

The most egregious abuses took place in Kosovo during the NATO bombing period from March to June when Serbian and Yugoslav forces conducted a brutal "ethnic cleansing" campaign in which thousands of ethnic Albanians were killed. But these forces also committed many serious abuses in Kosovo before the NATO bombing of Yugoslavia began in March, including summary executions and indiscriminate attacks on civilians.

Abuses also took place after NATO entered Kosovo in June, but this time the victims were Serbs, Roma, and other minorities who did not depart with the government forces, as well as some Albanians considered collaborators with the Yugoslav government. Vengeful Albanians, some of them Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) soldiers, harassed, beat, abducted, and sometimes killed civilians who stayed behind. The international community present in Kosovo lacked both the mechanisms and the political will to protect the endangered populations or to stop the exodus of Serbs and Roma that ensued.

Ethnic Serbs were also subjected to persecution by the Milosevic government in 1999. Throughout the year, journalists, opposition politicians, and civil society activists were harassed, imprisoned, and sometimes beaten due to their anti-government activities or opinions. One prominent journalist, Slavko Curuvija, was murdered in April, and the police used excessive violence against anti-government street protesters in October.

The most serious abuses clearly took place in Kosovo. After eight months of internal armed conflict between government forces and the KLA, in which an estimated 2,000 ethnic Albanian civilians were killed, a cease-fire was declared in October 1998, and international monitors from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) were deployed. The monitors helped alleviate tensions in the province and provided ethnic Albanians with a certain sense of security. But by early 1999, an increasing number of violent incidents were being reported, some of them provoked by the KLA.

On January 15, Serbian special forces attacked the village of Racak, killing forty-five persons. Although the attack might have been provoked by a KLA ambush of three Serbian policeman a few days before, government forces responded by indiscriminately shooting at civilians, torturing detainees, and committing summary executions. The evidence suggests that special police forces had direct orders to kill village inhabitants over the age of fifteen.

The massacre in Racak, well documented by the OSCE mission, inspired the international community to assume a more determined position vis-a-vis the Serbian and Yugoslav governments' policy of violence in Kosovo. NATO increased its threats of military action, made numerous times before, if attacks on civilians did not stop.

Those threats were implemented after the failed Serbian-Kosovar Albanian negotiations in Rambouillet, France, that took place in February. Serbian and Yugoslav forces took advantage of the negotiating period to expand their presence in Kosovo, apparently in preparation for a major offensive. The military campaign began on March 19, the day the OSCE withdrew from Kosovo. NATO bombing of Yugoslavia commenced five days later.

The following seventy-eight days saw a well strategized and implemented campaign of "ethnic cleansing" by Serbian and Yugoslav forces in which more than 800,000 ethnic Albanians were forced out of the province, mostly into Albania or Macedonia, causing serious crises in both of those countries. On many occasions, groups of Albanians were systematically executed by Serbian special police or paramilitaries. Most of the victims were military-age men, apparently an attempt to eradicate the KLA, but dozens of women and children were also killed. In some cases, large families were executed in their homes, which were then set on fire.

Serbian and Yugoslav forces targeted some prominent Albanians for killing. On March 25, the police detained and executed Bajram Kelmendi, a well-known human rights lawyer, and his two sons. Fehmi Agani, an important and moderate politician, was killed on May 6 as he tried to flee to Macedonia.

Throughout Kosovo, villages were systematically cleansed, with long columns of displaced persons led along roads, into cities, and then out of the country. The vast majority of Albanians were robbed of their valuables, including their identity papers, and many were beaten. Looting and the burning of civilian property usually followed.

Serbian police and paramilitaries, as well as Yugoslav soldiers, also committed rape against ethnic Albanian women. Despite the social taboos associated with rape, some women reported being dragged out of refugee columns and assaulted; in other cases women were separated from the village's men and held for as much as three days in private houses where they were sexually abused. The United States (U.S.) and British (U.K.) governments reported rape camps in Dakovica and Pec, but no hard evidence emerged to support those claims.

NATO and the United Nations (U.N.) estimated that 10,000 Albanians were killed between March and June, but the precise death toll is still unknown. Approximately 1,500 people were still missing as of September; many of them were known to have been taken into custody by government forces between March and June. At least 2,000 other Kosovar Albanians were known to be in Serbian prisons as of October on charges of terrorism or anti-state activities. Abuse in detention was common, especially in the first days of custody, and very few of the detainees were provided access to a lawyer or family visits.

All of the security and military forces in Kosovo cooperated closely with one another to carry out the systematic campaign of ethnic cleansing. While the Yugoslav Third Army in Kosovo, headed by General Nebojsa Pavkovic, was less implicated in the more serious war crimes, such as executions, it clearly participated in the shelling of civilian targets and helped organize the mass expulsions. Most of the egregious abuses in Kosovo were committed by Serbian special police forces, anti-terrorist units, or paramilitaries, some of whom had fought in the Bosnia conflict between 1991 and 1995. There was a clear criminal element in the campaign with security forces and paramilitary volunteers -some of whom were released in March from Serbian prisons-allowed, and even encouraged, to target wealthy Albanians, steal, and loot as a reward for their actions. The systematic nature of the campaign, and the intensity of the violence, left no doubt as to the criminal responsibility of Serbia and Yugoslavia's political and military leadership, including President Milosevic, who was indicted by the ICTY for crimes against humanity on May 27. Others indicted by the tribunal included Chief of the Yugoslav Army's General Staff Colonel General Dragoljub Ojdanic and Serbian Minister of the Interior Vlajko Stojiljkovic.

After a gradual intensification of NATO bombing, NATO and FRY military leaders signed a military technical agreement on June 9 that stipulated the withdrawal of all government forces from Kosovo. Serbian and Yugoslav troops began withdrawing the next day, and NATO troops entered the province on June 12. As of October, 50,000 NATO troops, known as Kosovo Force (KFOR), were in Kosovo as peacekeepers and the United Nations Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) was in the process of establishing civic institutions and planned ultimately to organize elections.

On June 20, KLA leaders agreed to a wide-scale demilitarization by September 19. After last minute negotiations on September 20, the KLA agreed to transform itself into a lightly armed Kosovo Protection Corps, meant to deal with natural disasters and civic emergencies, although KLA leaders continued to present the corps to their constituents as a defensive force. Military head of the KLA, Agim Ceku, became chief of the corps.

Ethnic Albanian refugees returned to a devastated Kosovo almost immediately after the withdrawal of Serbian and Yugoslav forces, and soon began a series of revenge attacks against the region's minority populations. A wave of arson and looting of Serb and Roma homes quickly deteriorated into harassment and beatings of individuals. Most serious was a spate of abductions and murders of Serbs

since mid-June, including the massacre of fourteen Serb farmers in Staro Gracko village on July 23.

Some of the perpetrators were traumatized Albanians eager for revenge; others were criminal gangs, including men from Albania, taking advantage of the lawless atmosphere in post-war Kosovo. But members of the KLA were also directly implicated in much of the violence. The KLA leadership condemned the revenge attacks on a number of occasions but did not take the necessary measures to bring its soldiers under control. The international community also failed to provide Kosovo's minority populations with adequate protection (see section on the international community).

A new wave of displaced Serbs and Roma from Kosovo met a cool reception in Serbia, which was already hosting approximately 550,000 refugees, the vast majority of them Serbs from Croatia and Bosnia. As of this writing, the Serbian government continued to make it difficult for displaced persons from Kosovo to register their children in Serbian schools, and some local authorities were not willing to provide communal spaces for collective centers. As a discriminated ethnic group, the Roma were particularly susceptible to mistreatment by Serbian authorities. The Montenegrin government was more accommodating and, as of September, approximately 10,000 Roma from Kosovo were in refugee camps there. On August 16, 105 Roma died when a smuggler's boat en route to Italy capsized in the Adriatic Sea.

The end of the Kosovo war shifted attention back to the Yugoslav domestic scene, particularly the Milosevic government's efforts to remain in power and relations with the federation's second republic, Montenegro, which was openly critical of the Milosevic government. The fractured political opposition in Serbia began a series of anti-government demonstrations in July and again in September. In Montenegro, the government proposed a restructuring of the federation to allow the republic more autonomy, and, as of this writing, a tangible independence movement was gaining momentum.

The Serbian and Yugoslav governments responded to developments in Serbia with violence and by restricting the work of opposition politicians, critical media outlets, and civil society activists. As of September 30, the government had used violence against demonstrators on two occasions, beating protesters in Belgrade who were offering no resistance to the police. A number of other political activists were arrested in September and October.

Such harassment had already begun earlier when the government declared a state of war in March. A number of journalists, opposition politicians, and human rights activists were forced to flee the country, or sought refuge in Montenegro during the war.

Throughout 1999, the state-run television and radio continued to broadcast government propaganda, especially aggressive during the war, while police repression and legal actions stymied independent journalists. More than a dozen journalists or editors were fined for violating Serbia's draconian Public Information Law, which is in clear violation of freedom of expression standards in both Serbian and international law. On March 24, the authorities confiscated independent Radio B-92's transmitter and briefly detained the radio's editor. On April 2, local authorities took over the station and appointed its own staff to continue broadcasts, but on July 28 the station began broadcasting from another location under the name B2-92. A number of other media outlets, such as Radio Television Cacak and the newspaper Glas Javnosti , experienced restrictions during the year.

The most violent attack was the April 11 murder by unknown individuals of Slavko Curuvija, editor of Dnevni Telegraf and the magazine Evropljanin, both based in Belgrade. Curuvija, once close to Milosevic's powerful wife Mira Markovic, had been openly critical of the Yugoslav government. A commentary on the state-run TV news three days before his death accused him of supporting the NATO bombing. Dozens of other journalists were harassed by the police, and some were beaten during the year, including five journalists who were beaten at an anti-government demonstration on September 29.

Police abuse was another essential element of Milosevic's grip on power. Student organizations, such as OTPOR (Resistance), the independent trade union Nezavisnost, and some opposition political activists were all victims of violence by the police during the year.

Defending Human Rights

Yugoslavia has many human rights organizations working on a spectrum of issues, from legal reform to minority rights. The Humanitarian Law Center and the Helsinki Committee in Serbia were, by far, the most progressive in reporting on atrocities in Kosovo. Other Serbian human rights groups were less vocal during the NATO campaign, a period of intense government pressure, or they focused on government restrictions against the media or the political opposition. The Montenegrin Helsinki Committee monitored the treatment of Kosovar Albanian refugees in Montenegro.

Many human rights activists in Serbia and Montenegro experienced pressure and harassment, including police interrogations, but there were no reports of state violence. The head of the Council for Human Rights in Leskovac, Dobrosav Nesic, was imprisoned for one month in May for accusing the local state-run radio station of primitivism. On May 29, three workers for the humanitarian organization Care, two Australians and one Yugoslav, were found guilty of espionage. The foreigners were pardoned on September 1, but the Yugoslav, Branko Jelen, was still in prison serving a six-year sentence.

Human rights groups in Kosovo were under constant pressure from security forces, and many activists were forced to flee or were expelled from Kosovo in the spring. Some activists of the Council for the Defense of Human Rights and Freedoms were killed, including the lawyer Bajram Kelmendi. A number of others remained in prison as of this writing.

The Role of the International Community

North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)

After repeated threats of military action, NATO began bombing Yugoslavia on March 24, despite the lack of U.N. Security Council approval. Aside from standard military objects, NATO targeted bridges and a few tunnels, oil storage facilities, refineries, civil-military factories, television and radio transmitters, and electrical transformer stations and high voltage towers. Not all of these were appropriate military targets under international humanitarian law.

Although according to the U.S. Defense Department, there were only twenty incidents in which Yugoslav civilians died from bombing, research conducted by Human Rights Watch concluded that the number of civilian casualties was at least four times higher, although the number of deaths was only a third of the 2,000 casualties reported by the Yugoslav government.

NATO troops entered Kosovo on June 12 as Serbian and Yugoslav forces were departing, and approximately 50,000 troops were in Kosovo as of mid-September. Concerns about the safety of KFOR's troops, a lack of experience in law enforcement functions, and, above all, a shortage of available personnel frequently rendered KFOR units unable and unwilling to take the initiatives necessary to build confidence among Serbs and Roma in Kosovo, most of whom fled the province.

United Nations

On June 10, the United Nations Security Council adopted Resolution 1244, which authorized the deployment of an international civilian administration in Kosovo. By mid-September, the U.N. Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) had approximately 850 personnel to organize a civil administration, coordinate humanitarian assistance, promote democratization and institution-building, and foster economic reconstruction.

UNMIK's key failure was its inability to protect Kosovo's non-Albanian population from revenge attacks. The U.N.'s civilian police force was very slow to deploy, largely because individual countries were remiss in providing personnel, leaving KFOR to undertake certain police functions. By mid-September, UNMIK had 1,300 civilian police, and that number was expected to double by November. An Ad Hoc Task Force on Minorities was established with KFOR and other agencies on the ground in an attempt to coordinate protection efforts, but it was unable to stem the tide of Serbs and Roma fleeing the province.

The U.N.'s human rights mechanisms were active throughout the year. The high commissioner for human rights, Mary Robinson, traveled to Kosovo, regularly briefed the human rights commission, and issued numerous statements and two reports. A senior representative from her office was placed in the office of Bernard Kouchner, head of UNMIK. The special rapporteur for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, and Yugoslavia, Jiri Dienstbier, also visited the region.

After a slow start, the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) began intensively investigating war crimes committed in Kosovo, eventually leading to the May indictment of Milosevic and four other top officials. ICTY teams were in Macedonia and Albania during the refugee crisis and, after June, they were in Kosovo collecting information to amend and expand those indictments.

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)

The OSCE played an active role in Yugoslavia, beginning with the Kosovo Verification Mission deployed in November 1998, which reported publicly on the massacre in Racak (see above). The mission pulled out in March before NATO bombing, and returned in June with NATO forces. As of September, 868 OSCE staff were working on human rights monitoring, media development, and the rule of law. The OSCE was also responsible for running the police training academy which began training the future Kosovo police force.

European Union

After years of equivocating half-steps, the European Union (E.U.) took measures against the Milosevic government in mid-1998, banning investment in Serbia and flights by Yugoslav Airlines, and freezing Serbian and Yugoslav government funds abroad. In April 1999, after the commencement of NATO bombing, the E.U. significantly strengthened its sanctions and added an oil embargo against Yugoslavia and a visa ban on more than three hundred of Milosevic's political, military, and economic allies.

After the war, Yugoslavia was excluded from the E.U.-led Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe as long as Milosevic remained in power, although the E.U. committed to provide economic and political support to Montenegro and Kosovo. In September, the E.U. also announced targeted aid to Serbian cities run by opposition forces.

The E.U. supported Montenegro by providing approximately 40 million Euro (U.S. $42 million) in 1998-1999, as well as 15.7 million Euro (U.S.$16.7 million) in humanitarian assistance to deal with the 64,000 IDPs from Kosovo. The E.U. did provide 35.2 million Euro ($37.4 million) to Serbia for humanitarian assistance and, as of September, it was contemplating 137 million Euro ($145.6 million) for the reconstruction of Kosovo.

United States

In addition to its substantial contribution to the NATO air campaign and KFOR, the United States government committed considerable resources to investigating and reporting on war crimes in Kosovo. The State Department published regular reports on abuses and FBI investigators were later sent to Kosovo to collect evidence for the ICTY. In April, the U.S. government gave $500,000 to the tribunal for outreach. In May, the U.S. extended sanctions against Yugoslavia to include a ban on oil sales and a freeze on the Serbian government's assets in the United States. Substantial funds were also provided for refugee assistance in the region during the conflict and post-war reconstruction, including a temporary resettlement program for Kosovar refugees in the U.S.

After the Kosovo war, President Clinton announced that Serbia would receive no aid as long as Milosevic remained in power. Approximately $10 million, however, was earmarked for the independent media, local nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and the labor movement in Serbia. In June, the U.S. offered a reward of up to $5 million for information leading to the arrest or conviction of persons indicted by the ICTY.

Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:

Deepening Authoritarianism: The Purge of the Universitites , 1/99

A Week of Terror in Drenica, 2/99

Ticking Time Bombs: NATO's Use of Cluster Munitions , 4/99

"Ethnic Cleansing" in the Glogovac Municipality , 7/99

Abuses against Serbs and Roma in Kosovo , 8/99
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA OVERVIEW

Human Rights Developments

Independent citizens and locally-based organizations from Morocco to Iran challenged anachronistic laws and undemocratic systems of governance, monitored and publicized human rights violations, and demanded an end to impunity. There were setbacks as well as progress, but the voices of activists on the ground reached local and international audiences. In Algeria, the persistence of families of the "disappeared" and their advocates gave the issue visibility in the presidential race and put it on the agenda of the new head of state. Tunisia's beleaguered human rights community was increasingly active in 1999 despite continuing government harassment. Human rights organizations in Egypt received broad support from counterparts worldwide as they opposed passage of a deeply flawed law that appeared designed to restrict the activities of nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). Palestinian activists similarly rallied support to pressure the executive branch of the Palestinian Authority to implement a progressive NGO law that incorporated activists' input.

Palestinian and Israeli NGOs' strategy of flooding Israel's High Court of Justice with petitions yielded results. The court ruled in a landmark decision in September that the General Security Service's systematic use of torture during interrogations was illegal, and agreed in January and April to hear petitions challenging the legality of Israel's policies of holding Lebanese nationals hostage for future prisoner exchanges and revoking the rights of Palestinian residents of Jerusalem to live there. Women's rights activists in Jordan were joined by other concerned citizens in an unprecedented nationwide campaign to raise awareness and eliminate the horror of "honor killings," which claimed the lives of twenty-two women in Jordan in 1998 and another sixteen in 1999 as of this writing. The campaign's grass-roots petition drive to abolish penal code provisions that sanctioned lenient punishment for family members who kill women relatives gathered some 8,000 signatures in the first month. Women's rights activists elsewhere in the region continued to challenge discriminatory laws and practices, and campaigned against domestic violence and genital cutting (see Women's Human Rights, below).

These local initiatives occurred in distinct counterpoint to the bleak and static situation in countries where authorities tolerated no form of political dissent. In Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Syria, government-controlled Iraq, and Libya, the development of civil society remained hostage to punishing restrictions on the exercise of freedom of expression, assembly, and association. Following the releases in 1999 of Rachid Mesli in Algeria and Khamais Ksila in Tunisia, Syria was the only country in the region where human rights defenders continued to serve lengthy prison terms.

Major political events in the region included changes of the heads of state in Lebanon, Jordan, Morocco, Bahrain, Algeria, and Israel; and unsurprising landslide victories at the polls for the long-serving presidents of Syria, Egypt, Yemen, and Tunisia. Saudi Arabia's Crown Prince Abdullah Bin `Abd al-`Aziz served as de facto ruler in place of his ailing brother King Fahd, and his statements on the need for social and economic reforms reopened debate on the role of women. The political rivalry between factions of the leadership in Iran appeared to drive and even promote violations of human rights.

A new Lebanese government was installed in December 1998 following parliament's unanimous election of former army commander Gen. Emile Lahoud to a six-year presidential term in October 1998. The deaths in 1999 of King Hussein of Jordan, Amir Sheikh `Issa Bin Salman Al Khalifa of Bahrain, and King Hassan of Morocco resulted in succession by their sons in unchallenged hereditary transitions. No-choice presidential referendums in Syria and Egypt produced endorsements of new terms of office for former air force commanders Hafez al-Asad and Hosni Mubarak, respectively. The presidential campaign in Algeria, which was characterized by lively debate and genuine choices among the seven candidates, was marred by the last-minute withdrawal of six candidates who charged election rigging to favor Abdelaziz Bouteflika. The region's only free and fair vote occurred in May in Israel, where prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu was defeated by former IDF chief of general staff Lt. Gen. Ehud Barak, who promised a speedy conclusion of final status negotiations with the Palestinians and withdrawal from south Lebanon. In September, Yemen's first direct presidential election resulted in an overwhelming victory for President Ali Abdullah Saleh. Leading opposition political parties boycotted the polls after parliament rejected the nomination of their candidate. On October 24, Tunisian President Ben Ali was reelected with 99.42 percent of the vote, according to the official count. The ruling party captured 92 percent of the vote for parliamentary seats; however, a new electoral law reserved 20 percent of the seats for other parties.

Most newly installed heads of state and some other appointed public officials pledged support for rights-related reform or took some encouraging steps to address long-standing human rights problems:

P Lebanon's new cabinet of ministers on December 21, 1998, lifted the controversial ban on demonstrations that had been in effect by decree since September 1993.

P Jordan's King Abdullah instructed newly appointed prime minister Abdel Raouf Rawabdeh on March 4 to form a government that would "entrench democacy" and "protect human rights." The king also endorsed the amendment of laws that inflicted "injustice" on women and undermined their rights.

P Qatar held its first municipal elections in March, in which citizens over the age of eighteen, including women, had the right to vote. Six women competed as candidates but none won seats. In July, Amir Sheikh Hamed bin Khalifa al-Thani appointed a thirty-two member Committee for Preparing a Permanent Constitution. It was given three years to draft the document which will include provisions for an elected parliament.

P Saudi Crown Prince `Abdullah Bin `Abd al`Aziz spoke repeatedly on the need to expand women's role in society, saying in April that "we will allow no one, whoever they are, to undermine her or marginalize her active role in serving her religion and country."

P Amir Sheikh Jabr al-Ahmad Al Sabah of Kuwait issued a decree in May allowing women to vote in general elections beginning in the year 2003. The decree, issued after parliament had been dissolved, was subject to parliamentary review. Some parliamentarians who opposed the process by which the decree was issued nevertheless introduced separate legislation supporting women's sufferage.

P Israel's new minister of justice, Yossi Beilin, promised in July to push for an end to emergency regulations that Israel used to administratively detain Lebanese nationals as hostages for future negotiations.

P Egypt's new prosecutor general, Maher Abdel Wahid, pledged in August that his office would carry out closer oversight of prison conditions, a responsibility under Egyptian law that had long been systematically neglected by his predecessor.

P Algerian President Bouteflika discarded the prevailing official discourse that sought to minimize the devastation wrought by that country's internal conflict. He announced in June that the number of Algerians killed was actually 100,000 and abandoned the insistence that the state had no role in the phenomenon of "disappearances."

P King Mohamed VI of Morocoo began implementing pledges of reform, permitting the return from exile of the country's most prominent former political prisoner, Abraham Serfaty. Arrested in 1974, tortured, and then imprisoned for life for his leftist political activities, Serfaty refused to petition King Hassan II for clemency or to yield to his demand that he recognize the disputed Western Sahara territory as part of Morocco. Serfaty was freed in 1991 but immediately expelled to France on patently spurious grounds that he was not a Moroccan citizen. His eight-year-long campaign to return to the country of his birth bore no fruit under King Hassan II.

There were disappointing restrictions on freedom of expression, including academic freedom and freedom of the press. The patterns of harassment and arrest of independent journalists were somber anachronisms in the face of increasing global circulation of news, information, and opinions of all kinds on the Internet and the regional popularity of uncensored political programming on Qatar's al-Jazeera satellite television station.

Academic freedom came under new assault in Egypt, Jordan, and Kuwait. Government censors banned a variety of books at the prestigious American University of Cairo (AUC), including Children of Gabalawi by Naguib Mahfouz, Woman at Point Zero by Nawal el-Saadawi, and Muslim Extremism in Egypt by Giles Kepel. The head of the government's press and publications department charged that AUC was "deliberately ordering books that can't be allowed in the country because they violate our religion, culture and traditions." The president of the University of Jordan, reportedly capitulating to pressure from the prime minister and the head of the General Intelligence Directorate, on July 14 demanded the resignation of Mustafa Hamarneh as director of the university's Centre for Strategic Studies (CSS). Under Hamarneh, it had gained regional and international recognition as an independent research center, and published an opinion survey on June 20 showing a decline in the government's popularity.

An appeals court in Kuwait on October 4 sentenced Ahmad al-Baghdadi, chair of Kuwait University's political science department, to one month in prison for a 1996 article in a student newspaper that discussed the Prophet Muhamed. Although al-Baghdadi said that he had not written about the prophet as a person but about his style of proseletization, the court found him guilty of "spreading views that ridicule, scorn, or belittle religion" under the press and publications law. Professors at Kuwait University went on strike to protest the ruling, which was also condemned by the journalists' association and members of parliament. Al-Baghdadi was released on October 18 after being pardoned by the amir, Sheik Jaber Al Ahmed Al Sabah.

In October, an investigating magistrate in Lebanon revived a case against the internationally prominent Lebanese singer and composer Marcel Khalifa, recommending criminal prosecution for "insulting religious values by using a verse from the chapter of Joseph from the Holy Koran in a song." Kahlifa's 1995 album included "I am Yousef, O Father," based on a work of Palestinian poet Mahmoud Darwish, which included this line from a Koranic verse: "I saw eleven stars, and the sun and the moon bowing down before me." The spiritual leader of Lebanon's Sunni Muslims, Sheikh Muhamed Kabbani, said that musical arrangements of Koranic verses were prohibited. Khalifa faces imprisonment of six months to three years if charged and convicted. Lebanese Muslim and Christian intellectuals, politicians, and religious figures quickly denounced the action, rallied to Khalifa's defense, and gave him a standing ovation when he performed the song in Beirut on October 5.

Lebanon's 1962 publications law permitted the minister of information to ban by decree "any foreign publication that disturbs security, harms national feeling, breeds discord among the people, and provokes confessional frictions." In May, the ministry banned From Israel to Jerusalem , a book published in 1999 in the U.S. It was written by Robert Hatem, a former aide to Lebanese Forces militia leader Elie Houbeika, and included allegations of crimes committed by Houbeika and his associates during Lebanon's civil war. The information ministry also banned publication of any excerpts from the book, and confiscated several issues of the United Arab Emirates daily al-Ittihad because the paper published parts of the book. The book was accessible to readers in Lebanon in its entirety on the Internet.

Authorities throughout the region targeted independent newspapers and journalists. Syria banned the entry of the pan-Arab daily newspaper al-Quds al-Arabi (London), and Tunisian authorities blocked distribution of selected issues of the French dailies Le Monde and Liberation . In Iran, four independent newspapers were shut down between November 1998 and September 1999. A Kuwaiti court in May ordered al-Hadath magazine closed for one month and fined two of its journalists for publishing an article which included what the information ministry termed "indecent phrases and words." The case followed a January ruling by an appeal court to repeal the closure order and six month jail sentence on blasphemy charges against al-Qabas newspaper's editor in chief Mohammad Saqr. Kuwait's constitutional court had refused in that case to review the legality of Kuwait's 1961 press law.

Independent journalists faced harassment, detention, and imprisonment. In Egypt, where libel remained a criminal offense under the penal code, three journalists from the opposition biweekly al-Sha'b were sentenced to two years in prison in August for articles that were harshly critical of the minister of agriculture. The editor in chief of Jordan's independent daily al-Arab al-Youm , Azzam Younis, was arrested in September for publishing articles critical of the government's crackdown on senior Hamas members in the kingdom. Taoufik Ben Brik, oneof the few Tunisian journalists willing to write about the country's repressive atmosphere, was briefly detained and suffered harassment throughout the year.

Restrictions on movement due to Israel's closure of access to and between the West Bank and Gaza made it difficult for Palestinian journalists to carry out their work. The Israeli Defense Force (IDF) sometimes imposed "closed military zones," blocking access of journalists to areas where demonstrations, house demolitions, or settlement expansion was taking place. Palestinian Authority security forces used arrests, interrogations, and closures to intimidate critical journalists. In Yemen, independent journalists were harassed and faced prosecution in criminal courts and newspapers were closed. Journalists in Iran were also detained and prosecuted. For example, a revolutionary court in June ordered the closure of the student bi-weekly newspaper Hoveyat-e Khish and its editor and director were detained on accusations of "spreading anti-Islamic propaganda." In July, the press court ordered the detention of an editor of Sobh-e Emrouz , a reformist daily, following publication of an article that the Tehran public prosecutor said distorted and insulted Islam.

Parliaments in Jordan and Iran reexamined press laws. Jordanian journalists and others raised concerns about the 1998 law, calling for more progressive legislation. In September, parliament annulled the law's controversial article 37, which banned writing on fourteen topics, including anything that disparaged the king and the royal family, or criticized leaders of "Arab, Islamic or friendly countries." Parliament also voted to reduce capital requirements for nondaily newspapers, lower fines for journalists, and allow newspapers to publish while on trial for press law violations. Despite the elimination of article 37, Jordanian journalists remained fearful of criminal prosecution for writing on subjects made taboo in the penal code. In October, King Abdullah reinforced this fear with a warning to journalists that press freedom should not be used to "harm Jordan's image," "relations with its sister states," and "national unity." In Iran, amendments to the 1985 press law which would weaken limited press freedom safeguards passed a first reading in July.

Despite these setbacks, free expression continued to make inroads through satellite television and the Internet. The blunt political programming on Qatar's news and information satelllite television channel, al-Jazeera, which began broadcasting to the Arab world in 1996, continued to attract large audiences and offend governments throughout the region. Financed for its initial five years with $137 million from the Qatari government, the station hosted political dissidents and featured uncensored debates on topics ranging from polygamy to human rights. In November 1998, Jordanian authorities shut down Jazeera's office in Amman by revoking the press credentials of the station's employees. The action followed a broadcast of the popular talk show al-Itijah al-Mu'akis (The Opposite Direction) during which host Faisal al-Qasim, a guest, and call-in viewers made comments that the government considered "slander" against Jordan. The office was permitted to reopen in March 1999. Kuwait's ministry of information closed the office of Jazeera there on June 19 and revoked the work permits of its staff after a caller criticized the amir in a live broadcast; the ban was lifted on July 31 after negotiation with the station. On June 29, Bahrain expelled the host of the program, Hamad al-Ansari, professor of Islamic law at Qatar University, who was there to give a lecture. Security forces reportedly told al-Ansari that he was being expelled for insulting the Kuwaiti amir.

Internet users grew to an estimated one million in the Arab world, and another 600,000 in Israel. Saudi citizens were able for the first time to obtain Internet access locally. Iraq and Libya were the only countries without Internet connections, while Syria was linked but allowed access to only selected segments of society. Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Tunisia, and the United Arab Emirates were among the countries that blocked access to one or more political or human rights websites that displeased the authorities. In Jordan, Egypt, Morocco, Algeria, and elsewhere authorities were not known to restrict political content online, thereby allowing local users access to information that was taboo in the local print and broadcast media. However, users in some countries, including Tunisia and Bahrain, voiced wariness about possible government surveillance of e-mail and monitoring of political "chat rooms."

As citizens around the region organized themselves and publicly advocated reform, there was evidence that at least two governments sought to undermine the independence and vitality of civil society organizations. In May, Egypt's president Mubarak signed Law No. 153 of 1999, which provided for sweeping state regulation of virtually every aspect of NGO activity, from raising funds to affiliating with other NGOs locally and internationally. The legislation generated controversy from the moment it began circulating in draft form in 1998 because of the wide powers of monitoring and interference it granted to the social affairs ministry, including actions to dissolve NGOs and deny them legal status. The law also set forth ten "crimes" under which activists were subjected to fines and imprisonment of up to one year for a carrying out vaguely worded banned activities.

Support by the Palestinian Legislative Council (PLC) for an expanded role for local NGOs made it a target in the Palestinian Authority's crackdown on human rights organizations. After failing in December 1998 to obtain approval of a clause requiring NGOs to register with the ministry of interior in the draft NGO law, President Arafat refused to sign the law and insisted on an additional irregular vote in May. When legislators and NGOs stood firm, the executive mounted a public campaign against NGOs, accusing them of corruption and treason, and passed its amendments by engineering a legislative vote on August 12.

The prevailing environment remained one of discrimination and tolerance for violence against women, despite some positive developments such as Egypt's banning and revocation of the law that allowed rapists to marry their victims and escape prosecution, and the participation of women in Qatar's first municipal elections. Women across the region continued to face legal, political, and socio-economic discrimination that violated their rights to equality and full citizenship. For example, Syrian women were considered minors under the personal status code and thus in need of a male guardian to contract marriage. Egyptian women married to foreigners or stateless men could not pass their nationality to their children, and women in Jordan could not be issued a passport without the approval of a male guardian. Women's subordinated status in the family and society, and their marginalization and underrepresentation in public life, made them all the more vulnerable to political and domestic violence. Compounding the problem of high rates of domestic violence, incidents of violence against women were underreported, and victims faced inadequate and biased investigations, lack of legal redress, and insufficient budgets for shelters and for provisions of counseling services. As for political violence, women in Algeria continued to be targeted by militant Islamist groups. They were abducted, enslaved, raped and often later murdered.

Women activists launched public campaigns to publicize abuses, eliminate violence and discrimination, and claim their rights. For example, Palestinian women in the West Bank and Gaza continued to press for improvements through a "model parliament" on women's status and family law. Israeli women mobilized in support of a bill in parliament enabling women to choose between religious and civil courts inmatters of divorce and child custody. Although eleven countries in the region ratified the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), the majority had reservations to the convention that undermined and contradicted its letter and spirit.

The killing and injury of civilians that accompanied internal political violence in Algeria, Egypt, Israel, and the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip was at the decade's all-time low, although military operations in Iraq, Lebanon, and northern Israel killed and injured civilians. The comprehensive U.N. Security Council economic sanctions remained in place against Iraq and continued to impose life-threatening conditions to civilians that were only partially offset by the "enhanced oil-for-food" program.

Lebanon remained the primary stage for the ongoing military confrontation between Israel and Lebanese guerrillas fighting to end the occupation in the part of south Lebanon that Israel termed its "security zone," and it was again in Lebanon where the overwhelming majority of civilian casualties in this conflict occurred. For example, on December 22, 1998, a Lebanese woman and her six children were killed when missiles fired from Israeli F-16 aircraft hit their house in the Beka' valley. IDF chief of general staff Gen. Shaul Mufaz termed the casualties a "mishap" caused by "human error." The reported target was a nearby Hizballah radio station. Guerrillas responded by launching indiscriminately some sixty Katyusha rockets into northern Israel which injured twelve Israelis. In a statement claiming responsibility, Hizballah said: "Violence must be answered by violence. Their blood must be spilled for ours." Guerrillas again fired rockets into northern Israel on May 18, 1999, after an Israeli aircraft attack killed two Lebanese civilians in Zawtar al-Sharkiyeh village on May 17.

On June 24, outgoing prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu ordered the Israeli air force to bomb civilian infrastructure throughout Lebanon, killing ten civilians. The attacks were reprisals for Hizballah rockets launched into northern Israel, which in turn were characterized as reprisals for earlier attacks by the IDF and its auxiliary Lebanese militia which it financed and armed, the South Lebanon Army (SLA), that killed and injured Lebanese civilians. Destruction of transformers at the Jamhour electrical power plant in Beirut's suburbs, followed by attacks on the Bsalim station several hours later, left the capital in darkness and with electricity supplied only erratically for weeks thereafter. Two facilities providing electricty to Ba'albeck and Bint Jbail, and the power relay station north of Sidon, were also attacked. IDF Brig. Gen. Dan Halutz said at a press conference on June 25 that the infrastructure targets "had been selected a long time ago," and that "the government decided to carry out an attack on Lebanese infrastructure and not only on Hizballah objectives...in order to stress that all power brokers in Lebanon who support Hizballah's murderous activity are liable to attack." Hizballah responded by firing additional Katyushas into northern Israel, leaving two Israelis dead.

Lebanese civilians continued to be forcibly expelled from occupied south Lebanon by the SLA. The victims, who included children and the elderly, received no advance notice and were not permitted to bring personal possessions with them. The expulsions, which have been carried out since 1985, have dispossessed hundreds of Lebanese who were punished because relatives deserted the SLA, refused to join the militia, or were suspected members of guerrilla groups. Others were expelled for refusal to serve as informers for the SLA's intelligence apparatus. The expulsions from Israeli-occupied territory violated international humanitarian law and constituted grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions.

In September, Israel's ministry of defense admitted for the first time that the General Security Service (GSS) trained SLA interrogators at Khiyam prison in occupied south Lebanon where torture appeared to be systematic. Responding to a High Court of Justice petition brought by Israeli human rights organizations, IDF Brig. Gen. Dan Halutz wrote in an affidavit that "GSS personnel cooperate with members of the SLA, and even assist them by means of professional guidance and training." Halutz added that the GSS did not "participate in the frontal interrogation" of detainees in Khiam, although he conceded that "certain detainees under interrogation are examined by means of polygraph by the Israeli side in the framework of the cooperation" between the SLA and the IDF.

In Iraq the expanded "oil-for-food" program authorized under Security Council Resolution 1153 (1998) had some positive impact on the humanitarian crisis stemming from the comprehensive Security Council embargo and the Iraqi government's policies. The overall humanitarian situation, however, remained critical. One indication was the UNICEF child and maternal mortality survey released in August showing that infants and children under five in the area controlled by the government of Iraq were dying at more than twice the rate of a decade ago, before the embargo was imposed. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) warned in May of the "steady deterioration of living conditions" and stressed that "humanitarian action alone can not be a substitute for the country's needs." Referring to its own water, sanitation and health sector programs, the statement said: "While, for the ICRC, action comes first, it is also its duty, as the guardian of humanitarian law, to draw the attention of the world community to the prevailing humanitarian situation in Iraq."

On December 16, 1998, U.S. and U.K. forces commenced four nights of missile and aircraft attacks on Iraq following the report of the chairman of UNSCOM, the U.N.'s special disarmament commission, that Iraq had again failed to cooperate with it fully. Between December 28 and October 3, 1999 according to U.S. military sources, U.S. and U.K. warplanes launched 27,000 sorties and dropped 1,650 bombs against 385 targets, mainly antiaircraft installations which they claimed challenged enforcement of the "no-fly" zones in the north and south of the country. The U.S. military reportedly dismissed as "exaggerated" Iraqi claims that nearly 200 civilians had been killed and nearly 500 injured in these attacks.

Defending Human Rights

There were sharp contrasts in the treatment of human rights defenders in the region, reflecting official attitudes that ranged from tolerant to hostile. In the repressive environments of Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Iraq, Libya, and Syria it was impossible to monitor and report openly on human rights developments. Five activists remained behind bars in Syria, serving prison terms of eight to ten years that the supreme state security court imposed in 1992. One of them, writer and journalist Nizar Nayouf, continued to suffer from poor health in solitary confinement at Mezze military prison, and Syrian authorities were unresponsive to repeated appeals from Arab and international NGOs for his release on humanitarian grounds. In Algeria, human rights lawyer Rachid Mesli left prison in July after serving three years for "advocating terrorism," a charge introduced into his trial at the last minute.

In the absence of independent human rights organizations in Iran, journalists and intellectuals filled the gap, reporting violations in the press and raising questions about state policies. In a promising development in August, the establishment of the Association to Protect Press Freedom brought together writers, editors, journalists, and publishers in defense of freedom of expression. In another positive development,Tunisian activist Khamais Ksila, a vice president of the Tunisian League for Human Rights, was conditionally released after serving the second year of a three-year prison term imposed because a communique he wrote in his own name sharply criticizing the lack of civil liberties under President Ben Ali.

Palestinian Authority (PA) officials and the semi-official Palestinian press accused human rights activists and organizations of treason and corruption for publicizing violations and accepting foreign funding, and threatened prosecution. The PA security apparatus continued to target and harass human rights defenders. Prominent activist Dr. Eyad Sarraj, director of the Gaza Community Mental Health Program, was summoned on August 5 to Gaza Police Headquarters and informed that President Arafat had ordered his arrest and interrogation because of his article about the P.A.'s crackdown on human rights organizations in the August issue of the monthly magazine People's Rights (Jerusalem). After questioning, Sarraj was informed that he could not leave the country until further notice because his case was under investigation.

Bahraini, Tunisian, and Palestinian human rights lawyers also came under pressure during the year. Lawyers in Bahrain were warned not to defend certain clients in security cases, and Abdullah Hashim, who had earlier been acquitted on an adultery charge intended to disbar him, was prevented from traveling in January after filing a writ of habeus corpus for a client. Outspoken lawyers in Tunisia were subjected to highly visible surveillance which intimidated their clients, and over twenty lawyers were denied passports for part or all of the year. P.A. security forces arbitrarily denied Palestinian lawyers access to clients. In May police barred lawyers with three human rights organizations from seeing clients in prisons under police custody in Gaza.

In Egypt, local human rights organizations took the lead in opposing the government's proposed new NGO law, repeatedly warning that its restrictive provisions would cripple independent civil society. As of this writing, criminal charges remained pending against the secretary general of the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights (EOHR), lawyer Hafez Abu Sa'ada, and EOHR lawyer and researcher Mustafa Zeidan, who were targeted for publishing a report that documented police torture in a predominantly Christian village in Upper Egypt in 1998. The inhospitable climate for rights groups in Egypt was exemplified in June when social affairs minister Mervat Tellawi said at a press conference that the organizations were "illegal" because they were not registered with her ministry and their publications included "groundless claims."

Human rights defenders launched several initiatives to promote joint work on regional and international rights issues. The First International Conference of the Arab Human Rights Movement was held in Casablanca on April 23-25, attended by one hundred participants and observers from forty human rights organizations based in fifteen countries. It was organized by the independent Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies and hosted by the Moroccan Organization for Human Rights. The conference adopted the Casablanca Declaration, a detailed document that described the international context of the Arab human rights movement; affirmed the right to self determination and peace based on justice; condemned violence in internal armed conflicts and "intellectual terrorism" of all kinds; and articulated ten responsibilities of the Arab human rights movement, including recognition of women's and children's rights, promotion of human rights in Arab and Islamic cultures, and achievement of economic and social rights.

Egyptian NGOs established in May the Egyptian Coalition for an International Criminal Court. In June, the Cairo-based Arab Center for the Independence of the Judiciary and the Legal Profession organized in Beirut the First Arab Conference on Justice, which saw the creation of the Arab NGOs Coalition for an International Criminal Court. Its thirty-two founding members included independent Arab organizations based in Algeria, Egypt, France, Jordan, Kuwait, Morocco, Palestine, Tunisia, and Yemen. The coalition's goals included public education concerning the importance of the ICC and advocacy directed at Arab states' ratification of the statute of the International Criminal Court statute.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

In an unprecedented move, the High Contracting Parties (HCP) of the Fourth Geneva Convention (relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War) met on July 15 to discuss "measures to enforce the Convention in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including Jerusalem, and to ensure respect thereof in accordance with common article 1." Common article 1 required HCPs "to respect and ensure respect for the present Convention in all circumstances." The meeting adjourned only minutes after opening, with HCPs reaffirming "the applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention to the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including Jerusalem," but refraining from taking any action or setting a date for future meetings, pointing instead to an "improved atmosphere in the Middle East as a whole" following the election of a new Israeli government. The meeting had been called for in a series of U.N. General Assembly Emergency Special Session resolutions, dating back to 1997, but strong U.S. pressure to prevent a meeting and Swiss reluctance to take responsibility for organizing it had caused repeated delays.

European Union

Human rights did not appear prominently on the agendas of the E.U. or of member states in 1999. Iran and Algeria, two countries previously high on the E.U. agenda had embarked on political reforms that indicated intent to improve civil and political rights in those countries. European leaders generally endorsed the policies of President Mohamed Khatami of Iran, and expressed approval of the efforts of Algeria's new president, Abd al-Aziz Bouteflika, to end the civil strife there. At the same time, setbacks to human rights in other countries, from Tunisia to Bahrain, generally did not attract public comment or affect political and commercial relations.

According to the most recent available data, compiled by the U.S. Congressional Research Service, six Middle East countries-Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Egypt, Algeria, Israel and Kuwait-were among the top seven recipients of arms transfers in 1998. European countries, led by France and the U.K., continued to be major suppliers of military weapons and services in the region, accounting for 36 percent of total arms transfer agreements in the 1995-98 period.

There was little movement in 1999 in the "Barcelona process" of establishing a Euro-Mediterranean free trade and cooperative security zone. Efforts in this area were immobilized for much of the year by the impasse in Israeli-Palestinian negotiations, and by resistance in some Middle East countries to the dislocations likely to accompany the requisite economic restructuring and privatization. However, the association agreement with Morocco was ratified by Belgium in December 1998 and by Italy in October 1999, paving the way for its going into operation. In July negotiations on an association agreement with Egypt were concluded, after four years.

Tunisia remained the only country with an operational Association Agreement, but as the parties prepared for a November 1999 ministerial meeting the E.U. gave no indication of how it planned to reconcile Tunisia's deplorable human rights record, especially its harsh treatment of human rights defenders, with article 2's stipulation that the agreement was premised on "respect for human rights and democratic principles." There was no public discussion of the means with which compliance with these treaty obligations could be effectively monitored and its implicit human rights conditionality made operational.

With regard to human rights, the "chairman's formal conclusions" of the Third Euro-Mediterranean Conference of Foreign Ministers, held in Stuttgart in mid-April, could only report that they had "welcomed the continuing initiatives relating to the exchange of information on the signature of international instruments in the fields of disarmament and arms control, terrorism, human rights, and international humanitarian law." The ministers also agreed that Libya, which attended the Euro-Mediterranean ministerial meetings for the first time as a guest, would become a "full member" of the process once all U.N. Security Council sanctions were lifted.

United States

The U.S. continued to devote considerable high-level diplomatic attention to the Middle East. Assistant Secretary of State Martin Indyk, in the administration's foreign assistance budget presentation to Congress for fiscal year 2000, identified "advancing the Middle East peace process, countering the Iraqi threat, ensuring stability in the oil-rich Gulf, and promoting democratic values and religious tolerance" as top priorities. $3.3 billion of the department's $5.5 billion request for regional programs covered grants for sales of military equipment and services. Proposed funding for democracy programs was approximately $25 million, more than half of which was allocated to the West Bank and Gaza for "[s]trengthening the capacities of the legislature, executive authority, and judiciary, as well as civil society organizations." The presentation cited opportunities for supporting human rights and democracy efforts in Algeria, Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, and Yemen while avoiding reference to Tunisia and Bahrain or other Persian Gulf states.

Congressional and public diplomatic attention to human rights in the region was generally confined to issues of religious freedom. Ninety-three senators and representatives wrote Egypt's President Mubarak in February concerning reports of police torture of mainly Christian inhabitants of al-Kosheh and the subsequent arrest of the secretary general of the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights following the release of that organization's report on the incident, and President Clinton privately raised the question of treatment of Egypt's Christian community during President Mubarak's official visit to Washington in June. Robert Seiple, who was sworn in as ambassador at large for international religious freedom, visited Israel, Egypt, and Saudi Arabia, and met with officials of those countries and the Palestinian Authority. The first Annual Report on International Religious Freedom , mandated by the U.S. International Religious Freedom Act of 1998 and released in early September, included extensive coverage of the Middle East. The majority of specific U.S. interventions concerned treatment of native or resident Christian communities or individuals. An exception was the attention of the U.S. embassy in Morocco to that government's continued house arrest of Shaikh Yassine, the country's leading Islamist figure.

According to the 1999 Congressional Research Service annual report on conventional arms sales, Middle East countries represented two-thirds of all U.S. arms sales agreements to developing countries in the 1995-1998 period. U.S. companies and institutions accounted for more than 35 percent of all arms transfer agreements with the region in this period, with nearly 65 percent of the largest country market, Saudi Arabia. According to U.S. Department of Defense data for fiscal year 1998, Middle East countries accounted for $7 billion in deliveries of "defense articles and services" and construction, more than half of the global total of $13.9 billion for that year.

The Work of Human Rights Watch

Human Rights Watch documented and protested wide-ranging violations across the region, with a primary focus on freedom of expression, assembly, and association. We advocated reform of repressive laws and protection of the expression of diverse viewpoints. We welcomed government initiatives to address long-standing human rights abuses but demanded an end to impunity and challenged state sovereignty particularly in the face of crimes against humanity. We pressed the U.S., and also looked beyond it to European and regional governments as well as intergovernmental bodies not to sacrifice human rights for political or other considerations in their dealings with states in the region.

We extended our outreach to broader segments of the region's population through greater use of translations into Arabic, Farsi, and French; wider dissemination of our published materials in print and broadcast media; and the launch of an Arabic web-site. The web-site enabled Human Rights Watch to inform Arabic speakers about the worldwide activities and campaigns of the organization, establish linkages with human rights related web-sites and associations in the region and elsewhere, and experiment with web-based campaigning techniques.

One of our highest priorities remained consultation and coordination with local and regional human rights groups aimed at effective action to end abuses and to ensure that our priorities reflected the concerns in the region. We attended and presented papers at the First International Conference of the Arab Human Rights Movement and the First Arab Conference on Justice. Both events provided opportunities to exchange information and discuss strategies with local and regional NGOs. In April we participated in an NGO conference on Human Rights and Citizenship in the Mediterranean Region, which addressed a number of human rights concerns to the parallel meeting of Euro-Mediterranean foreign ministers. Human Rights Watch representatives also visited Bahrain, Egypt, Israel, the occupied territories and Palestinian Authority controlled areas, Iran, Jordan, Lebanon, and Morocco and met with local human rights activists, journalists, government officials, judges, and diplomats, among others.

We gave greater emphasis to strategies for protecting and enlarging the public space for diverse points of view, and throughout the year we called attention to restrictions on freedom of expression and association. We contacted government officials in Jordan and Lebanon about the press and publication laws; in Egypt about penal code provisions that enabled criminal courts to imprison journalists; and in the Palestinian Authority about illegal arrests of journalists and closures of media outlets. In October we published our findings on state regulation of the press in Iran and called for legal and administrative safeguards to protect the media from being muzzled. We also documented state regulation of the Internet, and published our findings and recommendations in June.

We protested restrictions on freedom of association and assembly in Egypt, Tunisia, and Iran. We communicated our concerns about Egypt's new NGO law in letters to government officials and members of parliament. In Tunisia we pressed interior minister Ali Chaouch togrant legal status to a newly formed human rights organization, the Conseil National des Libertes en Tunisie (CNLT), and in May and June we protested the arrests of Omar Mestiri and Moncef Marzouki, respectively, for activities related to the CNLT. In July, we condemned the apparent victimisation of Abderraouf Chammari in reprisal for the human rights activities of his brother, Khemais Chammari, who lived in France.

We condemned the July 9 assault on students in residence halls at Tehran University and urged Leader of the Islamic Republic of Iran Ayatollah Ali Khamenei to prosecute those responsible and ensure the release of detained students. Following the subsequent violent clashes between students, security forces, and armed militias we called for a public inquiry and appealed for fair trials for detainees accused of instigating the violence.

We campaigned throughout the year on behalf of imprisoned and persecuted human rights defenders in Tunisia, Syria, and Egypt. In Tunisia they included Khemais Kesila, who was released in September, and lawyer Radhia Nasraoui who in July received a six-month suspended sentence after a grossly unfair trial which was attended by observers representing several international human rights groups, including Human Rights Watch. We continued to call for the release on humanitarian grounds of Syrian writer and human rights activist Nizar Nayouf, who was serving a ten-year sentence at Mezze military prison in Damascus and was reportedly in poor health and suffering from Hodgkin's disease, despite denials from authorities. We responded quickly when two Egyptian human rights lawyers were threatened by prosecutors in December 1998 and one was detained for six days.

As part of our efforts to bring an end to impunity, we continued to press governments to account for past abuses-including torture, deaths in custody, and "disappearances"-and bring to justice those responsible and compensate victims and their families. We wrote to Egyptian officials in March about the still-unpublished findings of the official investigation into the 1994 death in custody of lawyer Abdel Harith Madani. In September, as a measure to combat torture, we urged Egypt's new prosecutor general to conduct prompt and transparent investigations of all deaths in police custody and to hold accountable those found responsible for actions contributing to such deaths. Also in September, following the Israeli High Court of Justice's ruling that many of the General Security Service's interrogation techniques were illegal, we urged the minister of justice to begin torture prosecutions and to introduce legislation to outlaw torture definitively. As in past years, the Syrian government did not reply to our letters of inquiry about individual cases of "disappearances."

In light of the Algerian government's failure to conduct or allow any credible investigation into killings which have taken the lives of over 100,000 people, and routine practices such as torture and "disappearances" attributed to government security forces, we urged the U.N. Human Rights Commission to establish a special rapporteur on Algeria. We also recommended that the commission's member states press Algeria to allow representatives of the various U.N. human rights mechanisms to visit the country. As of this writing, requests of Human Rights Watch to visit Algeria went unanswered.

As the international community witnessed the gradual crumbling of the defense of "national sovereignty" by those opposed to being held accountable for of crimes against humanity, we encouraged governments in the region to join Jordan and over eighty other states worldwide to sign the treaty to establish the International Criminal Court. Human Rights Watch joined forces with other NGOs in seeking opportunities to expose perpetrators of crimes against humanity and where possible to bring them to justice. In August we urged the governments of Austria and Jordan to take into custody and bring to justice Izzat Ibrahim al-Duri, vice-chair of Iraq's Revolutionary Command Council, who had visited Vienna for medical treatment and returned to Iraq via Amman.

In July, we published documented cases of summary expulsion and forced transfer of civilians, including women, children, and the elderly from their homes and villages in Israeli-occupied Lebanon. The expulsions had been carried out since 1985 with little international publicity. We released a report of the findings at simultaneous press conferences in Beirut and Jerusalem. Israeli defense ministry officials refused meetings with Human Rights Watch representatives in July to discuss the issue.

Human Rights Watch also used visits of high-level officials to and from countries in the region as a focus for advocacy work. For example, during the March visit of President Khatami to Italy-the first state visit by a president of the Islamic Republic to an E.U. country-we urged Italian premier Massimo D'Alema to raise the issue of extrajudicial executions attributed to the government and the scores of assasinations abroad of government opponents. In the same month we urged U.S. first lady Hillary Clinton, who was visiting Egypt, Morocco, and Tunisia to raise issues of discrimination and violence against women, and we pressed President Clinton to raise with visiting Palestinian President Arafat concerns about grossly unfair trials, sometimes leading to executions, before the P.A.'s military and state security courts.

We were critical of the U.S. when it appeared that its rights-related actions or statements weakened or undermined the universality and enforceability of international standards. For example, in July we expressed to President Clinton our dismay at statements by Vice-President Al Gore and Assistant Secretary of State Martin Indyk aimed at derailing a precedent-setting meeting of the High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention to discuss measures to enforce the convention in the Israeli-occupied territories. We urged the administration to affirm publicly that respect for international humanitarian law generally and the Geneva Conventions in particular remained a bedrock of U.S. policy, and that the protections afforded by the conventions were not a matter for negotiation between parties to a conflict. In October we raised with attorney general Janet Reno her decision to order the deportation of Hani El-Sayegh to Saudi Arabia. The U.S.said it had obtained assurances from Saudi Arabia that El-Sayegh would not be tortured, and thus satisfied a narrow reading of its Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment or Punishment obligations, but ignored other likely serious violations, including grossly unfair trial and execution.
ALGERIA

Human Rights Developments

Dramatic political developments, coupled with a decline in violent incidents, fueled optimism among Algerians that the country had turned the corner on the worst years of civil strife. The new president, Abdelaziz Bouteflika, won popular support for his blunt talk about government corruption and for offering a partial amnesty to Islamist rebels as a step toward achieving peace and reconciliation. However, he devoted little energy to establishing safeguards against future human rights violations or accountability for past abuses.

If the numbers of arrests, killings, and "disappearances" were down, Algeria remained the most violent country in the Middle East and North Africa. While the Islamic Salvation Army (Arme Islamique du Salut, AIS) generally respected a cease-fire it declared in 1997, others, particularly the groups known under the Armed Islamic Group rubric (Groupe islamique arm, GIA), continued to target civilians indiscriminately. Hundreds of unarmed men, women, and children were slaughtered in brutal fashion in attacks, particularly in rural areas, that were officially blamed on "terrorists." Scores of teenage and adult women were abducted in these attacks. According to the testimony of women who had survived captivity, some abducted women were enslaved, raped, and later executed.

The GIA generally did not claim responsibility or explain motives for particular attacks on civilians, although communiqus issued in its name were occasionally received by foreign media. There was speculation that in many instances families or villages were selected for indiscriminate slaughter because members were suspected of opposing or withdrawing assistance from the armed groups.

Within the framework of fighting "terrorism" and "subversion," the security forces continued to employ brutal methods. Accounts of army and police operations carried by the Algerian press, which was constrained to rely heavily on security sources, continued to depict raids that resulted in the deaths of unnamed "terrorists" but almost never their capture. But reports of torture, which had become systematic since 1992 in the interrogation of security suspects, declined along with the number of confirmed new arrests.

Algeria's conflict continued to be characterized by an extreme lack of accountability for abuses. Tens of thousands of persons were killed, "disappeared," or abducted since 1992, without, in the vast majority of cases, law enforcement authorities formally investigating and elucidating what happened. Nor did trials serve often as a venue for carefully weighing evidence that linked deeds to particular individuals.

In August and September 1997, large massacres, officially attributed to "terrorists," claimed a total of more than 600 civilian lives in Bentalha, Rais, and Beni Messous, on the outskirts of the capital. Yet authorities never produced a complete list of victims, named suspects in the attacks, or issued the results of any inquiry into how assailants could commit such carnage close to military bases without being challenged by the security forces.

Similarly, there was no prosecution in the most widely publicized case of abuse perpetrated by the thousands of "self-defense" militias that were armed and officially supervised by the security forces as local allies in repelling Islamist attacks. The case involved two mayors in Relizane province who, together with their armed subordinates, allegedly carried out a series of abductions and executions of suspected Islamists and their relatives. The two were arrested briefly in April 1998 and later dismissed from their posts, but had not been brought to trial as of October 1999.

Bouteflika, a former foreign minister, was elected to a five-year term April 15 in a vote marred by the last-minute withdrawal of the other six candidates, who charged the outcome was being engineered in his favor by the military establishment. This turn of events disappointed many who had been encouraged by the vigor and pluralism of the race, in which important issues were debated on television, in the print media, and in public meetings and rallies.

Inaugurated April 27, Bouteflika moved quickly on his plan for peace. He unveiled a draft "Civil Harmony law" after the AIS offered to make its 1997 cease-fire permanent. The law, which developed the terms of a 1995 clemency decree, was adopted by parliament in July and overwhelmingly endorsed in a national referendum September 16. Bouteflika also freed some persons imprisoned in connection with the conflict and shed the official discourse that sought to minimize the devastation it had wrought. On June 27, he announced that 100,000 Algerians had died since the strife began in 1992, a number more than three times greater than the last official figure to be issued. He also spoke with sympathy about the thousands of Algerians who had "disappeared," and abandoned the official line that denied a security-force role in the phenomenon.

But if more candid than his predecessors, Bouteflika accorded low priority to investigating the grave violations of the recent past and pursuing some form of justice for the victims. Explaining in a July 7 Radio France Internationale interview why relatives of the "disappeared" had to be patient, he declared, "We must first try to establish peace and security....If we try to attack all the problems at once we shall lose our way." When advocates of the "disappeared" continued to press their case he betrayed exasperation, chiding them at a public appearance in Algiers on September 15, "I have no interest in keeping [the "disappeared "] in my pocket!....How are you going to leave this war behind if you don't forget?"

While there were few reports of persons "disappearing" in 1998 or 1999, almost no Algerians who had "disappeared" in earlier years reappeared; nor was their fate or location revealed. Bureaus that the Interior Ministry had established in 1998 to receive and investigate complaints of "disappearances" closed quietly without, in the vast majority of cases, producing information.

Meanwhile, human rights workers and relatives of the "disappeared" expanded the list of documented cases to over 4,000. This figure included only those cases with some evidence of security force involvement, usually either witnesses who saw the person being arrested or, at some point, in custody.

Counted separately from "disappearances," and usually referred to as "abducted," were Algerians missing after apparently being seized by armed groups since 1993. Little progress was made in determining the fate of these victims, estimated in the thousands by groups embracing their cause such as Djazarouna (Our Algeria) and Sumoud (Steadfastness). A link was presumed between these abductions and the mass graves in abandoned wells in the Mitidja region, the discovery of which was reported by the Algerian press during 1998 and 1999. The press often attributed these discoveries to surrendering rebels who revealed where the armed groups had disposed of their victims. Yet, much to the frustration of organizations representing victims of "terrorism," the authorities themselves said little about these discoveries and divulged almost no identifying or forensic information about the scores of bodies-many decomposed-reportedly found at these sites. Absent such information, it was not possible to confirm whether some or all the victims were indeed persons kidnaped and then executed by armed groups, or others who had "disappeared" into secret security force custody.

The Civil Harmony law offered an exemption from prosecution for persons "implicated in acts of terrorism and subversion" who turned themselves in by January 2000 and vowed to cease all such actions. It offered reduced sentences, but no amnesty, to surrendering militants "responsible for causing the death or permanent injury of a person or for rape, or for using explosives in public places or in places frequented by the public." Rebels responsible for crimes meriting the death penalty or life imprisonment would be subject instead to a maximum twenty-year sentence. As of early October, officials said 531 persons had turned themselves in under the amnesty law; it was not yet possible to confirm this number or assess the treatment they had received.

While Bouteflika expended less effort than earlier officials on whitewashing the abuses committed by security forces, he never insisted that they be held accountable. The situation in Algeria was too "complex" for a truth commission, he said in an interview with El Pas published July 28. "The devastating deviations of a minority should not choke the aspirations of the majority," the Spanish daily quoted him as saying. "What Algeria needs is reconciliation, democracy, liberty, and development."

And in September, Bouteflika warned rebels who did not turn themselves in by the expiration of the amnesty on January 13, 2000 that they would be combated with "all the means the state has at its disposal." He declared ominously, "I want to say this before everybody-before the United Nations, before Amnesty International, before the world community. We will use all means."

On June 26, Bouteflika announced that "thousands" of prisoners "detained for supporting terrorists" would be freed on the occasion of Algeria's independence day, July 5. "Those convicted of shedding blood and of rape," however, would not be eligible. No official number was given for prisoners actually released on and since that date, but some press reports put the number as of late September at about 2,500.

Many defendants jailed since the mid-1990s were convicted in group trials on "terrorism"-related charges in which the prosecution did not materially link individual defendants to specific acts of violence. Judges presiding over such trials were often presented with claims by defendants that their confessions and statements-usually the sole pieces of evidence presented by the prosecution-had been extracted under torture, in violation of domestic and international law. Yet the presiding judges rarely if ever ordered medical examinations of the defendants to determine the veracity of their claims of torture.

Some of those freed had been convicted under broadly worded statutes that criminalized acts of speech or nonviolent association. The penal code's article 87b is, in particular, provided that anyone who belonged to or participated in a "terrorist" organization and who is aware of its objectives and activities is subject to prison terms of between ten and twenty years. Persons who "advocate, encourage, or finance" acts of "terrorism" or "subversion" or who reproduce or knowingly distribute materials that advocate such acts are subject to prison terms of five to ten years.

The releases begun in July freed only a portion of Algerians imprisoned in connection with the conflict. At that time, the prison population was thought to have changed little from the level reported by the official Human Rights Monitoring Body (l'Observatoire national des droits de l'Homme, ONDH) for the end of 1997, namely 34,000 inmates, of whom slightly fewer than 15,000 had been charged or convicted of acts connected to terrorism or subversion. Of the latter figure, the ONDH said, the large majority were persons suspected not of committing acts of violence but rather related offenses such as "failure to report crimes to the authorities" and providing "assistance to terrorist groups."

President Bouteflika maintained the seven-year-old state of emergency, which empowered authorities to prevent public gatherings and otherwise restrict civil rights. Meetings and gatherings deemed critical of the government were frequently banned, especially if they coincided with diplomatic meetings taking place nearby. Authorities stopped three consecutive attempts to organize rallies in Algiers to protest alleged election fraud, on April 16, April 26, and May 6.

Bouteflika said he would not re-legalize the banned Islamist Salvation Front (Front Islamique du Salut, FIS), unless it was reorganized under a new leadership. The 1996 Constitution and 1997 law on political parties outlawed parties whose basis is religious, linguistic, racial, or regional. Although Algeria had two legal parties with an Islamist coloring, the FIS had been banned since 1992.

Bouteflika showed little urgency in addressing gender inequality under the law. Algerian women's rights groups had long demanded the abrogation or amendment of the discriminatory provisions of the 1984 Family Code. This goal was endorsed by the U.N. Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, which in January 1999 examined Algeria's report on its compliance with the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. The committee, while condemning the impact on women of "fundamentalism and terrorist violence," urged the government to undertake legal steps that would "harmonize the provisions of the Family Code with the text of the convention and with the principle of equality set out in the Algerian constitution." Yet, although Algeria's elected legislature had been functioning again since 1997, neither Bouteflika nor his predecessor, Liamine Zeroual, exercised any leadership in efforts to reform the code.

During 1999, a growing number of people inside Algeria went online. Benefitting from a 1998 decree governing the Internet, private companies were preparing to break the state's monopoly on selling online access. Algerian authorities were not known to block access to any Internet content, even though the Internet hosted much political material that was taboo in the Algerian news media.

Defending Human Rights

Information about human rights conditions was heavily restricted by government policies on information and access. Major international human rights organizations were prohibited from visiting the country. Foreign journalists were granted visas selectively and then assigned armed escorts, ostensibly for their own protection, who often got in the way of interviewing ordinary people. Censorship prevented the Algerian press from reporting independently on security force operations. The U.N. rapporteurs on torture and on extrajudicial, summary, or arbitrary executions were again unable to secure invitations to visit Algeria, despite long-standing requests to do so.

Nonetheless, a limited but important space existed for the work of Algerian human rights defenders. A small number of lawyers documented cases and published reports about abuses committed by government forces, receiving some coverage of their efforts in the local private media. A grassroots movement on behalf of the families of the "disappeared" continued to document cases and brought their cause to national attention, both during the presidential election campaign and afterward. Women's rights and victim's rights organizations were also active.

The government imposed limits on the public activities of human rights organizations, particularly when they coincided with a diplomatic or official human rights event. The independent Algerian League for the Defense of Human Rights was blocked from holding a conferencein December 1998 to commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It was also prevented from holding a conference on human rights in Africa to coincide with the summit of the Organization of African Unity in Algiers in July. Many of the foreign invitees were denied visas.

Relatives of the "disappeared" were permitted to hold weekly rallies in Algiers and a presidential aide hospitably received a delegation from the National Association of Families of the Disappeared in July. However, the government refused to grant legal status to the organization and on at least three occasions since December 1998 police forcibly dispersed rallies on behalf of the "disappeared."

On October 10, the International Committee of the Red Cross resumed visits to prisoners in Algeria, seven years after such visits were suspended. The government agreed to allow access to all persons held in facilities under ministry of justice auspices, a program that would provide outside, albeit discreet, monitoring of the treatment of inmates.

Rachid Mesli, a prominent human rights lawyer, was freed from prison in July, only days before completing a three-year sentence imposed in an unfair trial in 1997. After the original verdict was quashed in December 1998, the court refused to free him pending his re-trial, which took place June 20 and reaffirmed the earlier conviction. Although convicted of praising "terrorism," most of the questioning after his arrest in 1996 centered on his informal collaboration with Amnesty International, Mesli said.

In September, President Bouteflika declared on more than one occasion that Amnesty International, and human rights organizations generally, were welcome in Algeria. However, as of this writing, no major international organization had been issued entry visas for its representatives. Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch, the International Federation of Human Rights, and Reporters sans Frontires all had been unable to enter Algeria since at least early 1998, despite having submitted requests to visit.

The Role of the International Community

European Union

The European Union (E.U.) was less engaged with Algeria on human rights issues than during 1998, when public horror at repeated massacres created pressure for action. The muted approach was attributable in part to the decline in violence, the favorable reception of President Bouteflika's early steps toward reform, and decidedly mixed reviews of the European dmarches taken in 1998.

There were no high-profile E.U. missions such as the 1998 visits by a nine-member European Parliament delegation and by the junior foreign ministers of the troika (representing the preceding, current, and next presidents of the European Council), and no human rights hearings such as those held in the parliament in November 1997. However, shortly after Bouteflika's inauguration, the E.U. Presidency submitted a private letter to Algiers requesting information on a number of cases of "disappearances" and other abuses. No reply had been received as of the end of September.

The European Parliament took a stand for press freedom in November 1998, at a moment when several of Algeria's private newspapers had been suspended. A resolution asked the European Commission to support all projects aimed at promoting press freedom and to consider such freedom as an essential element of E.U.-Algerian cooperation.

The E.U. made clear it would not push for resolutions critical of Algeria at the meeting of the U.N. Human Rights Commission in Geneva in March-April. Instead, an E.U. statement delivered on March 31 welcomed Algeria's cooperation with the U.N. "Panel of Eminent Persons" in 1998 while cautioning that "its visit is not a substitute for cooperation with the procedures and mechanisms of the United Nations in the field of human rights....The E.U. urges Algeria to facilitate early visits of U.N. human rights mechanisms, particularly the U.N. special rapporteurs on torture and on extrajudicial, summary, or arbitrary executions and to give full effect to the [1998] concluding observations of the U.N. Human Rights Committee." The statement said the E.U. "continues to remain concerned over reports of involuntary disappearances...and calls upon the government to invite the [U.N.] Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances to visit the country..."

The late United Kingdom minister of state for foreign affairs Derek Fatchett addressed more pointedly Algeria's continuing refusal to allow visits by the U.N. mechanisms, an issue that the E.U. delegation to the U.N. Commission one year earlier had vowed to revisit "if there has been no progress." Fatchett criticized "the repeated denial of access by Algeria to Special Rapporteurs of the Commission." Algeria, he admonished, "should not choose to undermine the credibility of United Nations mechanisms in this way."

The E.U. responded cautiously to the developments around the Algerian election, indicating in an April 21 declaration by the Presidency that relations would be guided more by how Bouteflika governed than by how he had been elected. The next statement by the E.U. Presidency on Algeria, issued September 21, confirmed E.U. enthusiasm with Bouteflika's record at that juncture. Hailing the referendum that endorsed his peace plan, the E.U. urged a resumption of talks on a E.U.-Algerian Association Agreement.

The European Commission approved a 57 million Euro financial agreement to support small and medium-scale Algerian enterprises. Under the European Commission's MEDA Democracy program, 10.3 percent of an approximate overall amount of 10 million Euros was allocated for various human rights and democracy projects in Algeria in 1998. At the time of this writing it was not possible to obtain the breakdown for 1999. However, the allocation of funds to projects in Algeria under the MEDA program had increased steadily since 1996, and the government of Algeria reportedly did not stand in the way of E.U. assistance to nongovernmental entities. Well over half of Algeria's exports and imports were with E.U. nations.

France

France eagerly mended relations with Algeria during 1999, pleased to find in President Bouteflika a willing partner. Yet French enthusiasm with a "new era" in bilateral relations was not colored by any public display of concern for governmental human rights abuses that remained systemic, albeit on a scale lower than in previous years.

Paris had remained quietly supportive of the Algiers government during the 1990s, despite strains caused by Algeria's internal strife and its spillover effects in France. Algeria's former ruler and its adversary in a brutal independence war, France was home to the world's largest Algerian diaspora community. It remained the country with the closest links to Algeria and played the leading role in setting E.U. policy. France provided little direct bilateral aid but its generous credit guarantees helped to preserve its place as the leading exporter of goods to Algeria.

In contrast to the U.S., the government of France remained silent in the lead-up to the presidential elections about what kind of voting environment it hoped to see. Its first pronouncement, issued the day after the poll, was a cautious expression of "concern" about the circumstances of the vote. After a sharp retort from Algiers about "unacceptable interference," the two countries quickly set about establishing warmer ties. President Bouteflika received Interior Minister Jean-Pierre Chevnement in June and Foreign Minister Hubert Vedrine the following month. French statements following these meetings were upbeat. "President Bouteflika is making statements and gestures that demonstrate a real opening, both on the internal level, and on the international level," Vedrine told the French Journal du dimanche upon his return. "The climate has changed. A breath of freedom has returned to Algiers."

French praise of the new president intensified following the referendum September 16 in which Algerians voted heavily in favor of Bouteflika's peace plan. The president, Vedrine told Europe 1 radio on September 17, "seems motivated by the determination to make up for lost time and eager to confront all of Algeria's problems...[and] to situate Algeria in the modern world such as it is....In this respect, I repeat: France stands ready." On September 21, at the United Nations, it was Prime Minister Lionel Jospin's turn to meet with President Bouteflika and reaffirm the new era in relations. 

During this process, France indicated that it was working to address issues of concern to Algerians, including the ease of movement for Algerian citizens and air traffic between the two countries, and the reopening of closed French consulates. However, senior French officials avoided any public mention of human rights abuses committed by the state. Nor, in praising Bouteflika's peace plan, did they comment on how its durability might be affected by a failure to address grave violations.

United States

During the first half of the year, Washington remained restrained in seeking warmer ties in part because of Algeria's record of human rights abuses and manipulated elections. Algeria received no U.S. bilateral aid and for Washington paled in geopolitical significance next to the Arab-Israeli conflict, Egypt, Iran, and Iraq. The State Department's budget presentation to Congress for fiscal year 2000 maintained the U.S. has no "vital" interests in Algeria, but said "the transformation of this country into an open democracy, with a market economy would present the U.S. with major economic opportunities."

Washington continued to encourage U.S. corporations to increase their stake in natural gas-rich Algeria. The U.S. Eximbank, which provides loans and loan guarantees to assist U.S. firms doing business abroad, had a level of exposure in Algeria that was second only to Saudi Arabia among Middle East and North African countries.

Public expressions of concern about human rights were not limited to the annual State Department Country Reports . Ambassador Cameron Hume spoke out publicly on several occasions. For example, he told Le Matin daily in an interview published December 28, 1998, the U.S. "wanted to see from Algeria greater severity toward security forces that are guilty of excesses...They must be brought to justice." He also urged authorities to publish a detailed list of "disappeared" persons, according to Le Matin.

The U.S. did not press these points during the March-April meeting of the U.N. Human Rights Commission in Geneva and, in contrast to the statements made by the E.U. in 1999 and by the U.S. itself in 1998, did not criticize Algeria's refusal to allow visits by U.N. human rights rapporteurs.

The U.S. did, however, urge Algerian authorities to ensure a clean election. At an April 2 background briefing, a senior State Department official said, "If this election is reasonably open, we think that also opens the way to better bilateral relations." Washington voiced disappointment that Algiers had refused to admit international election observers, and then outright dismay the morning after Bouteflika won what had turned into a one-man race. State Department spokesman James P. Rubin said, "We are clearly disappointed by the events of recent days, which led to allegations of fraud and the withdrawal of six of the seven candidates....The Algerian leadership now assumes a heavy responsibility to pursue credible reform."

The U.S. proceeded to put its relations with Algeria under a ninety-day review. It held no high-level bilateral meetings and broadened its existing ban on licensing private-sector sales to Algeria of lethal weapons, extending it to other types of munitions. And, while the U.S. refrained from sending Bouteflika a congratulatory telegram, First Lady Hillary Clinton received two Algerian women whose children "disappeared" during the Algerian strife, allegedly at the hands of security forces. This meeting, which took place three days after Bouteflika's inauguration, was widely reported in the Algerian press.

But Washington soon began to warm to Bouteflika. A meeting between the Algerian head of state and President Clinton at Moroccan King Hassan II's funeral in July was followed by other contacts. The U.S. maintained its policy of licensing no lethal weapon sales but resumed consideration, on a case-by-case basis, of commercial applications to sell other types of munitions to Algeria.

Assistant Secretary of State Martin S. Indyk met at length with Bouteflika in Algiers on September 6 and declared the following day, "President Clinton has been impressed by the start" that had been made by Bouteflika in the areas of political and economic reforms and human rights. "Our support for the strengthening of the democratic process, for press freedom, for the rule of law, and for human rights remains fundamental to our policy toward Algeria," Indyk declared. On September 7, Indyk hosted a meeting at the U.S. Embassy with Algerian human rights activists representing victims of abuses by the state and by the armed groups, including "disappearances" and abductions. "Disappearances," the U.S. Embassy told Human Rights Watch in an August 23 letter, is an issue "we have raised...with senior levels of the government and will continue to do so."

President Clinton sent a congratulatory telegram to President Bouteflika following the September 16 referendum. Then on September 28, Vice-Admiral Daniel Murphy, commander of the U.S. Navy's Sixth Fleet, met with President Bouteflika in Algiers. This unprecedented visit, Murphy told the press the same day, was intended "to demonstrate U.S. support for the bold, fundamental steps the Algerian leadership has taken towards a reconciliation and a real prospect for enduring democracy....The United States military is very much in partnership with the United States political leadership...in our desire to strengthen our relations with the military of Algeria."

If the U.S. was pleased to see Bouteflika trying to resolve the armed conflict and talking with more candor than his predecessors about human rights problems, it remained to be seen whether continued improvement in bilateral relations would require his taking concrete actions to curtail institutionalized abuses and establish safeguards against their recurrence.
BAHRAIN

Human Rights Developments

On March 6 Sheikh Hamad Bin `Issa Al Khalifa succeeded his late father Sheikh `Issa Bin Salman Al Khalifa as amir. The change of government brought a mild respite from the political unrest that began in December 1994, as all involved waited for a government-imposed three month mourning period to end. While there was no repetition of the widespread street clashes of 1994 to 1997, restrictions on freedom of association and expression continued to be severe, and Human Rights Watch continued to receive reports of torture and ill-treatment by security forces, arbitrary arrests and detention, and unfair trial.

The government maintained its policy of providing no information to the public concerning the numbers or identities of persons arrested, tried, convicted, acquitted or released under the State Security Law or brought before the State Security Court, where procedures did not meet basic fair trial standards and verdicts were not subject to appeal. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) reported in June that in 1998 it had visited 1,327 persons detained for security reasons in thirteen places of detention.

On June 6 the amir announced the phased release of three hundred and twenty untried detainees and forty-one convicted prisoners, and the pardon of twelve individuals living in exile. Days later he also announced that those released would receive assistance finding jobs; previous security detainees had reported that Ministry of Interior policies made it nearly impossible to find employment in public or private sectors after their release. As of this writing the government had not responded to requests by Human Rights Watch and other international human rights organizations for the names of those released, or for information about their convictions, making it impossible to evaluate the true extent and terms of the pardon. Bahraini press accounts and reports by opposition groups suggested that many if not most of those amnestied were youths who had been held for months or years without trial, including Ahmed `Ali Ahmad Hussain, an intermediate school student held for one year and four months, and Jaffar `Ali Hassan, a seventeen-year-old who had been held for two years and nine months.

The amir pardoned Sheikh `Abd al-Amir al-Jamri on July 8, one day after State Security Court had sentenced him to ten years in prison, a 5,000 Bahraini Dinar fine, and an unprecedented 5,709,247 Bahrain Dinar (more than U.S.$15 million) in damages for property losses incurred during several years of political unrest in Bahrain. The sixty-two-year-old Shi'a religious leader had been detained since January 1996 (see Human Rights Watch World Report 1999), and was only brought to trial in February 1999 after the expiration of the maximum administrative detention period allowed in Bahraini law. The four court sessions together lasted a little more than three hours and were closed to the public. As in other security court cases, Al-Jamri's lawyers had only very limited access to their client. Al-Jamri's pardon came after he had signed a statement apologizing for his actions and undertaking not to carry out acts against the state or incite others to do so. The government did not make public the text of the undertakings, but individuals who met al-Jamri immediately after his release said that it included a ban on all public speaking, including religious sermons. Family members alleged that the statement was coerced, as al-Jamri was in poor health and had been returned to solitary confinement for three weeks prior to his release. As of this writing he remained restricted in his movement and in his contacts with those outside his immediate family. Six of the seven opposition leaders arrested at the same time as al-Jamri remained in prison without charge or trial: Hassan Sultan, `Ali `Ashur, Hussayn al-Daihi, Hassan Mishma'a, Sayyid Ibrahim Adnan al-Alawi, and `Abd al-Wahab Hussayn. `Ali Bin Ahmad al-Jedhafsi was released on July 26, 1999. According to the Bahrain Human Rights Organization (BHRO), family members reported that al-Daihi and `Ashur were denied medical treatment for injuries in June, and Hussayn was hospitalized in early September.

Individuals, associations, and trade and professional organizations continued to face severe restrictions on freedom of expression, association, and assembly. Trade unions remained banned and in August security forces raided and reportedly confiscated documents and computer files from the offices of the General Committee of Bahraini Workers, a registered organization that had asked for the right to bargain collectively. Membership activities and cultural publications of the `Uruba cultural club continued to be heavily monitored, and a seminar on "Women and Political Participation" planned for June 9 was banned. In a December 21, 1998 letter, the president of the Supreme Council for Youth and Sport, the agency with oversight powers over cultural and sport associations, accused the club of violating the 1989 law governing associations by inviting other clubs to meet to discuss sanctions against Iraq. The letter threatened actions to "return [the club] to its proper place" and "force it to respect" the council.

The Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs had used the 1989 associations law to remove the elected board of the Bar Society in 1998. After lengthy negotiations with the government, the Bar Society was finally allowed to hold elections on March 3 in exchange for agreeing to drop its court case challenging the board's removal, and members voted out of office the government-appointed board. Shi`a religious charitable societies were also closely monitored, and had to report all expenditures, as well as the names of all volunteers, donors, and students enrolled in training programs. Some charities reported being warned not to provide monies to particular families or individuals.

The practice of forced exile of perceived dissidents continued, despite the June pardon of twelve exiles. According to the BHRO, in July at least seven Bahraini citizens and their families, a total of thirty-two people in all, were refused entry when they attempted to return to Bahrain. In some cases they were interrogated prior to deportation, and some individual with expired passports were issued with one year extensions.

Defending Human Rights

No human rights organizations were permitted to operate in Bahrain. Defense lawyers in state security court cases faced harassment for fulfilling their legal duties, as in the case of attorney `Abullah Hashim, who was prevented from traveling abroad immediately following his filing a habeas corpus appeal on behalf of his client, Sheikh al-Jamri, in January. Several lawyers told Human Rights Watch that they had been warned by security personnel not to provide information about arrests and security court trials to the press or to international human rights monitors.

Security personnel closely monitored the movements and telephone conversations of a Human Rights Watch delegate who visited Bahrain in April. From June 28 to July 2 Amnesty International (AI) delegates met judges and senior government officials during its first visit to Bahrain in twelve years. AI noted with regret that "its delegates were not permitted to meet privately with other sectors of society concerned with human rights promotion and protection" and said that it had "sought assurances that similar restrictions will not be imposed in future visits."

Outside of Bahrain the BHRO and the Committee for the Defense of Human Rights in Bahrain (CDHRB) compiled information on detainees, deaths in custody, and other issues, and campaigned for resolutions critical of the government's practices at meetings of the U.N. Commission on Human Rights and in other fora.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

On August 4 Bahrain withdrew its reservation to article 20 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, which allows the committee to conduct confidential investigations of allegations of torture (see Human Rights Watch World Report 1999 ). As of this writing it had not acted on its August 1998 promise to allow a visit by the U.N. Working Group on Arbitrary Detention in 1999, nor had it responded positively to requests by U.N. special rapporteurs on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions to visit Bahrain.

The Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination canceled the special review of Bahrain's implementation of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (CERD) scheduled for its March session after Bahrain submitted its initial report in late February. Bahrain had not submitted any of the five periodic reports due since it ratified the treaty in 1990, and the special review was to have responded to the absence of a report. The review of Bahrain's report was scheduled for the committee's March 2000 session.

In an October 14, 1998 note verbale to the U.N.'s secretary-general Bahrain said that statements by Human Rights Watch and the International Federation of Human Rights Leagues in their submissions to the fifty-forth session of the Commission on Human Rights were "groundless and blatantly political allegations," but did not address the specific concerns raised.

Iran

Iran and Bahrain resumed diplomatic relations on January 26, 1999. Both countries had recalled their ambassadors in 1996.

United States

The headquarters for the U.S. Fifth Fleet, Bahrain continued to enjoy strong U.S. support. In March Secretary of Defense William S. Cohen, who was in Bahrain for meetings with Amir `Isa the day of the amir's death, described the amir as "a strong and loyal friend to the United States and particularly to the U.S. Navy," whose "care and concern for the people of Bahrain made him an effective and beloved leader." Shortly after the visit the Department of Defense also announced the sale of a U.S.$110 million air-to-air missile system, and said that it would install a special telephone line to facilitate communication between the Pentagon and the Bahraini defense ministry.

On September 29, 1999 the U.S. and Bahrain signed a bilateral investment treaty, the first such treaty between the U.S. and a gulf state.
EGYPT

Human Rights Developments

Although political violence reached its lowest ebb in almost a decade, the government of President Hosni Mubarak appeared impervious to demands for political reform. In a major setback, legislation was enacted that appeared carefully crafted to decrease the independence of civil society organizations. Substantial curbs on freedom of association and assembly prevailed, ensuring that peaceful political opposition activities remained marginalized or restricted. No steps were taken to address the grave human rights violations that had accompanied the state's pursuit of armed Islamist militants-including torture, deaths in detention, extrajudicial executions, and "disappearances"-and the architects and perpetrators of these acts continued to enjoy impunity. Evidence continued to mount that local police forces were employing similar torture techniques against ordinary citizens that elite security forces had used systematically against suspected armed militants, their families, and supporters.

On September 26, some 18.6 million citizens voted in a national referendum and 93.97 percent approved Hosni Mubarak's fourth six-year term of office, according to the interior ministry. As in past referenda, there were no other candidates. Earlier in the month, opposition politicians and intellectuals launched a petition drive to support reforms for a pluralistic political system: suspension of the virtually permanent state of emergency; release of nonviolent political prisoners; freedom to establish political parties, newspapers and other media; guarantees for the independence of trade unions and civic and professional associations; and free and fair elections. In pointed criticism of the powerful institution of the presidency, the petition endorsed a future with governments "accountable to the people" and presidents "elected among various candidates and for no more than two terms."

The state's battle with armed militants inside Egypt appeared to be drawing to a close, although continuing rights abuses marred some otherwise positive developments. On March 25, the clandestine Islamic Group issued a statement announcing that all of its cadres "inside and outside" the country would bring "armed operations" to a halt. In April, some 1,000 to 1,200 known or suspected Islamic Group members were reportedly released from prison, bringing to about 6,000 the number set free under Interior Minister Habib el-Adli, who assumed his post in November 1997. In welcoming the releases, the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights (EOHR) called on authorities also to reverse the ban on visits to inmates at Tora, Fayoum, and Liman Abu Za'bal prisons, and improve the appalling conditions, including gross medical neglect, at these and other facilities. In a positive move in August, the new prosecutor general, Maher Abdel Wahid, pledged closer oversight of prisons through periodic unannounced visits of prosecutors to inspect conditions and take complaints, a legal responsibility that had beensystematically neglected by his predecessor, Raga' el-Arabi, during his long tenure. "Any prosecutor who fails to abide by these directives will be taken to task. If he says he has inspected a prison and then some fault is found, he himself will be interrogated," Abdel Wahid warned in an interview with al-Ahali (Cairo) newspaper. He also ordered the local prosecutor to reopen the investigation of alleged police abuse, including torture, in al-Kosheh village in August 1998 (see below).

Egypt's criminal, state security, and military courts continued to impose capital punishment on defendants in criminal and political trials. Amnesty International reported that in 1998 the courts issued seventy-four death sentences and forty-eight individuals were executed; in 1999, sixty-two people had been sentenced to death and thirteen executed as of August 10.

Egyptian authorities, reportedly with assistance from U.S. law enforcement and intelligence agencies, vigorously pursued Islamist militants based outside of Egypt, particularly those believed to be associated with exiled Saudi dissident Ossama bin Laden, whose International Front for the Struggle Against Jews and Crusaders, formed in 1998 prior to the August bombings of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania, included Egypt's underground Jihad Organization as a member. On April 18, the supreme military court handed down sentences in a mass trial of 107 alleged Jihad members that began on February 1. Some of them were reportedly captured abroad and handed over to Egyptian authorities from countries such as Albania, Saudi Arabia, and Azerbaijan, and sixty were tried in absentia. The court acquitted twenty defendants, and sentenced nine to death, all in absentia, including Ayman al-Zawahri, widely described as the leader and military commander of Jihad. The others received terms ranging from one year to life. Decisions of the military court could not be appealed to a higher tribunal and thus fell short of international fair trial standards.

Ordinary Egyptians continued to suffer torture at the hands of local police, and deaths in police custody remained a serious unaddressed problem. For example, EOHR documented five deaths in custody between February 16 and July 17, involving men arrested on suspicion of nonpolitical offenses such as theft and narcotics possession. EOHR said that it "found evidence that the victims were subjected to torture by the police." One of the victims, Saeed Sayid Abdel Aal Salim, was arrested on April 15 on suspicion of hiding stolen property and died in custody two days later. The local chief prosecutor examined the body and, according to EOHR, reported a variety of injuries. In actions reminiscent of security forces behavior in previous years when suspected Islamist militants died in custody under suspicious circumstances, police reportedly guarded the local cemetery for ten days after instructing the family to remain quiet about the death and bury the body quickly.

As in past years, the pattern of restrictions on the rights of free expression, assembly, and association was largely unchanged, but worsened in several significant respects. Continuing a disturbing trend that began in 1998, three journalists were sent to prison and others were questioned, facing the prospect of criminal prosecution. Despite ongoing protests from the journalists syndicate and human rights groups about its use to punish controversial but peaceful expression, libel remained a criminal offense subject to fines and a maximum sentence of one year in prison, doubled in cases involving public officials. On August 14, the South Cairo Criminal Court sentenced three journalists from the opposition biweekly al-Sha'ab- writer Salah Badawi, cartoonist Essam Hanafi, and editor-in-chief Magdi Hussein-to two years in prison and fines of LE20,000 each (about U.S. $6,000) after finding them guilty of libeling agriculture minister and deputy prime minister Yousef Wali in a series of articles that claimed his ministry's agricultural cooperation with Israel amounted to "treason," among other harsh criticisms. In sentencing the journalists, the judge said they had "filled their pens with black hatred instead of black ink and launched a blind and unfair campaign against their victim." In February, state security court prosecutors questioned editor Abbas al-Tarabili and journalist Muhamed Abdel Alim of the opposition daily al-Wafd on accusations of "publishing false reports and propaganda undermining public interest and threatening national security" for reporting about a strike at the Central Bank. They were released on bail but faced imprisonment if tried and convicted.

Authorities also openly acknowledged and justified the banning of books. In reply to complaints about scores of titles that censors had prohibited at the private American University in Cairo (AUC), Lutfi Abdel-Kader, director of the government's press and publications department, was quoted in the March 18-24 issue of al-Ahram Weekly (Cairo) as saying that the AUC was "deliberately ordering books that can't be allowed in the country because they violate our religion, culture, and traditions. They are trying to infiltrate our identity and culture. But we'll never permit this infiltration." Among the books reportedly banned were Children of Gabalawi by Nobel prize-winner Naguib Mahfouz; Woman at Point Zero by Egyptian feminist Nawal el-Saadawi; and Muslim Extremism in Egypt by the French scholar Giles Kepel.

Secular activists continued to face restrictions on the right to freedom of assembly. Security forces prevented human rights activists from peacefully protesting the British and U.S. bombing of Iraq on December 17, 1998, the day it began, and blocked opposition political parties from a similar protest on December 24. On March 12, 1999, five people who attended a meeting in the Shubra al-Kheima section of Cairo to discuss the draft labor law were arrested, reportedly for undermining social peace and inciting workers to strike. They were detained overnight and then released on bail. Three of them were members of the Tagammu Party, a legal leftwing political party which had arranged the meeting.

The right to establish political parties remained severely circumscribed because the anachronistic political parties law of 1977 required newly formed groups to seek legal status from the Political Parties Committee, an entity that lacked independence and has historically denied licenses in arbitrary fashion. Harassment and arbitrary arrest of known or suspected members of the nonviolent but unauthorized Muslim Brotherhood also continued, possibly to weaken the influential group's ability to field independent candidates in the parliamentary elections scheduled for November 2000. As hundreds of suspected militant Islamists were released from prison, Muslim Brothers, including doctors, engineers, and teachers, were arrested, detained, and questioned by prosecutors throughout the year, typically suspected of membership in an illegal organization, possession of illegal leaflets, and attempting to reactivate the group by recruiting new members. In January, interior minister Habib el-Adli ruled out any role for the Brotherhood in the political system: "They are a banned group. They have no legal status and, hence, there will be no meetings or dialogue."

The enactment in May of the controversial Law No. 153 on nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) served as a powerful reminder of the state's reluctance to loosen its grip on political and civil life. On May 14, four leading Egyptian human rights organizations described the legislation as "a reflection of the government's general intention to restrict further any form of independent association, be it political parties, unions, professional syndicates, or NGOs." The law's seventy-four articles provided a detailed blueprint for the government's micromanagement of all aspects of NGO operations. Article 11 of the law prohibited NGOs that "threaten national unity," "violate public order or morality," or "practice any political or trade-union activity exclusively restricted to political parties and trade unions." Article 75 set fortha harsh regime of criminal penalties, including fines and prison terms ranging from three months to one year for violations of various provisions of the law. In June, social affairs minister Mervat Tellawi made clear the government's intention to prevent NGOs from engaging in activities that the government deemed political. "I am not allowing, by this law, for the creation of 14,000 political parties," she said. In July, she wrote in a letter to the Financial Times (London) that the new law "does ban [NGOs] from taking part in partisan activities." As of October 22, the executive regulations to operationalize the law had not yet been promulgated.

As the government proceeded with IMF-prescribed privatization and economic deregulation, Egyptian workers continued to be denied the legal right to strike and engage in collective bargaining, and hundreds of thousands of children were unprotected from abusive workplace conditions. The Brussels-based International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) concluded in a June report that there were "serious violations of trade union rights" in Egypt, noting that "[i]n both the public and the private sectors, the government considers strikes a form of public disturbance and therefore illegal" and that "security forces have often used violence to bring an end to industrial disputes." The ICFTU also reported widespread employment discrimination based on gender, and extensive use of child labor in both rural and urban areas, citing Ministry of Health statistics of some two million child workers between six and fifteen years old.

Under Egyptian law, children over twelve years old are permitted to work up to six hours daily in the agricultural sector. But the Land Center for Human Rights (LCHR), an independent Egyptian NGO, found in its 1999 study of state- and privately-owned cotton gins in the Nile Delta that thousands of children between eight and fifteen years old worked eight-hour shifts without lunch or rest breaks for a daily wage of two or three Egyptian pounds (less than U.S. $1.00). The children, who lacked any type of legal protection, labored in extremely dusty environments without masks or respirators. Some had contracted respiratory diseases and sustained injuries for which only token compensation was provided to their poverty-stricken families. The LCHR reported that there was no effective inspection and supervision of these workplaces by the local offices of government ministries, and initiated lawsuits on behalf of the child workers to press for safer working conditions and medical care for job-related injuries and illnesses.

Egypt's Christian minority continued to have legitimate grievances about discriminatory treatment under the law and in practice. They were underrepresented in senior-level positions in government, including universities, and military and security forces. Church construction and repair were subjected to discriminatory authorization procedures, including the need for a presidential decree in order to build a new church. The U.S. State Department reported in its Annual Report on International Religious Freedom , published on September 9, that there had been "a significant increase" in the number of approvals that governors granted in 1998 for church repairs. The internationally recognized right of men and women to marry and found a family was restricted because Islamic law prohibited Egyptian Muslim women from marrying non-Muslim men.

Defending Human Rights

Egypt's human rights community faced an unprecedented crisis when the state security prosecutor on December 1, 1998, accused the secretary-general of EOHR, lawyer Hafez Abu Sa'da, of three criminal offenses: disseminating information abroad that harmed Egypt's national interests; accepting funds from a foreign country with the goal of carrying out acts harmful to Egypt; and receiving donations without government permission. Abu Sa'da was summoned to appear that day as a witness in the investigation opened on November 24, 1998, of the EOHR report published in September 1998, "Collective punishment in al-Kosheh village: Random arrest, torture and degrading treatment of citizens." The report documented police abuse of hundreds of mainly Christian residents in al-Kosheh, near Sohag in Upper Egypt, following the murder there of two Christians in August 1998, and called on Egyptian authorities to investigate the torture allegations and prosecute those found responsible. The prosecutor acted in the wake of continuing controversy inside Egypt and internationally about the report's findings, and also examined financial support that EOHR received from abroad, based on allegations made in the Egyptian press that the report was financed with foreign funds.

Abu Sa'da was questioned on December 1 and ordered to serve fifteen days in preventive detention while the investigation continued. He was released on bail on December 6 as condemnation of his arrest mounted in Egypt and internationally. The same day, however, the state security prosecutor summoned for questioning EOHR lawyer Mustafa Zeidan, who conducted the fieldwork for the report. Zeidan was accused of disseminating false information for the purpose of harming Egypt's national interests. As of this writing, the criminal charges against the two had not been dropped.

The continuing inhospitable environment for local human rights organizations was illustrated in remarks of social affairs minister Mervat Tellawi at a press conference in June. She said that the groups were "illegal" because they were not registered with her ministry and that their publications included "groundless claims." Rights organizations continued to operate and publish their reports freely, although their future status under the new NGO law remained unclear.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

Torture and workers rights were among the issues raised by U.N. bodies during 1999. The Committee against Torture considered Egypt's report on compliance with the Convention against Torture and on May 14 noted as positive developments the release of prisoners who had been detained under the emergency law, a reduction in the number of complaints about mistreatment, and decisions of civil courts to provide compensation to torture victims. But the committee also stressed its continuing concern about the large number of torture complaints and deaths in detention at the hands of police and security forces, including mistreatment of women. It recommended that Egypt undertake effective measures to prevent torture and protect women from threats of sexual abuse while in custody. It also suggested that authorities "establish and maintain a proper [public] registry of detainees" held by police and security forces, and asked it to provide the committee "with information about the number of circumstances of deaths in custody over the past five years."

The pre-sessional working group of the U.N. Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights noted on May 21 the issues to be addressed in Egypt's first report on compliance with the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. These included a request that the government clarify why all trade unions were required by law to join the nationwide Egyptian Trade Union Federation, andwhy the government tolerated "the practice of hiring labor on condition of their denouncing or resigning from labor unions." The group also asked for information about "numerous cases of forced early retirements, arbitrary dismissals and unemployment, as well as the wholesale shutdown of factories" that have accompanied the state's privatization program.

European Union

Egypt and the European Union (E.U.) concluded four years of negotiations on the text of a Euro-Mediterranean Association Agreement shortly after the E.U. Council of Ministers agreed on June 21 to a final offer on agricultural export quotas. Egypt reportedly also secured E.U. agreement to a joint declaration on the "fair treatment" of workers legally residing in either territory, including some 400,000 Egyptian workers in Europe. Article 2 states that "respect for human rights and democratic principles" constitutes "an essential element of the Agreement." As in similar agreements with Tunisia and Israel, either party may take unspecified "appropriate measures" if the other fails to fulfill its obligations. Egypt's ambassador in Brussels, Ra'uf Sa'ad, stated in late March that Egypt considered the human rights language to be a "reference," not a "condition." E.U. and Egyptian officials expected the text to be initialed before the end of 1999 and signed early in 2000. The agreement must be ratified by the parliaments of Egypt, the E.U., and the E.U. member states before taking effect.

E.U. officials said they closely monitored developments related to the new NGO law, and awaited with concern the promulgation of its implementing regulations. In July, then-European Commission vice president Manuel Marin wrote to Human Rights Watch that the commission was "aware of the restrictive nature of the law and the criminal penalties foreseen in the text," and acknowledged that there were "current uncertainties with regard to the scope of legal NGO activities in the future."

United States

The State Department said in 1999 that Egypt would be moving from "an aid-based relationship to a trade-based relationship" with the U.S., and that discussions had been held with the Egyptian government to reduce economic assistance by half over a ten-year period. But in fiscal year 1999 the U.S. remained Egypt's largest supplier of foreign aid, which totaled $2.1 billion in fiscal year 1999: $775 million in economic support funds and $1.3 billion in military assistance. "A significant portion of the funds in both assistance categories are used by Egypt to acquire U.S. goods and services," the State Department said in its annual Country Reports on Economic Policy and Trade Practices , published in January 1999. On March 11, U.S. Defense Secretary William Cohen announced in Cairo the Clinton administration's support for Egypt's request for $3.2 billion of U.S. weapons, and stated that " a strong military relationship supports a strong diplomatic and political relationship that builds peace and security in the region."

There were no signs that the Clinton administration utilized this massive financial leverage to press actively and publicly for measurable improvement in human rights conditions, despite the largely accurate and extremely negative assessment provided each year in the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices. As in past years, it closely coordinated diplomatic, military, and commercial ties that cemented the bilateral relationship, with little said in public about human rights and democratic governance.

During President Mubarak's June 26 - July 1 visit to Washington, D.C., there was no public criticism from senior administration officials for his government's poor human rights record. On June 29, Martin Indyk, assistant secretary for near eastern affairs, termed Egypt the "strategic partner" of the U.S. in the Middle East. Citing the Israeli-Arab peace negotiations and policy on Iraq, he added: "We share a common interest and a common vision for the region. We want to promote-together-more peace, more prosperity and more stability."

Prior to Mubarak's visit, the State Department spokesperson on May 28 issued an untypically strong public rebuke of the just-passed NGO law, stating that the U.S. was "deeply disappointed with the apparent thrust of the bill approved by the People's Assembly. We are still reviewing the text, but it appears the law increases the amount of government control of non-governmental organizations. This is the wrong direction to go if Egypt wants to energize civil society and promote development....Efforts to restrict non-governmental organizations are almost inevitably efforts to limit free speech and free association. We are raising our concerns with senior levels of the Egyptian Government." But at his June 29 briefing, Indyck considerably softened the earlier criticism. "[W]e were concerned about the impact of the new law on NGOs. We engaged with the Egyptian government on this issue, and we received assurances from the responsible minister about the way that the law would operate to ensure that NGOs would be able to operate freely in Egypt," he said.

The Clinton administration continued to praise the Mubarak government for moving forward with privatization and economic reform programs. U.S. ambassador to Egypt Daniel Kurtzer noted on July 18 that there was some $15 to $17 billion of U.S. investment in Egypt, and stressed the goals of "more privatization, more U.S. investors, and more trade." The State Department's economic policy and trade report published in January showed a rise in U.S. exports to Egypt between 1996-97, from $3.1 to $3.8 billion, and a decline in Egypt's exports to the U.S. over the same period, from $713 to $694 million.
IRAN

Human Rights Developments

Human rights progress continued to be held hostage to increasingly polarized conflict within the leadership of the Islamic Republic. The conflict resulted in disturbing outbreaks of political violence which threatened to quash hopes for reforms pledged by President Khatami since his election in 1997. A series of killings and "disappearances" of independent writers and government critics at the end of 1998 exposed the involvement of state officials in the illegal violent suppression of dissent. Student protests over restrictions on press freedom mushroomed into days of violent street protests in which competing political factions took their differences to the streets of Tehran and other major cities. Reformers faced criticism that their calls for greater freedom and democracy were resulting in anarchy.

In some cases, reform efforts were met with reactions from some in the leadership which led to a worsening in the human rights situation. For example, efforts to promote freedom of the press were met with attacks on journalists and editors, closures of newspapers, and proposals to pass new laws facilitating the prosecution of journalists for expressing their nonviolent opinions, and narrowing the scope of permitted debate. An even livelier debate about how to govern in an Islamic state prompted conservatives to declare that those who promoted new interpretations of Islam should be considered as "corrupt on earth" and sentenced to death.

Continuing efforts by the Khatami government to normalize relations with Europe and the rest of the world appeared to have provoked conservative opponents of such normalization to target religious minorities for persecution, and to engage in other inflammatory acts designed to provoke international outrage and embarrass the government.

Participation in the political process continued to be restricted to supporters of the clerical regime that has ruled Iran since the 1979 revolution. In February reformists associated with President Khatami overcame efforts by conservatives to bar their candidacy in direct elections to local and regional councils throughout Iran and triumphed at the polls.

The brutal killings of veteran political activists Darioush and Parvaneh Forouhar in their Tehran home on November 22, 1998, were part of a wave of killings and "disappearances" which created fear and uncertainty in intellectual circles, but also led to the resignation of the minister of intelligence, whose agents were blamed for the killings, and to the exposure of a sinister arm of the government engaged in the use of murder as a political weapon. Other victims of killings in November and December 1998 included Mohammad Mokhtari, and Mohammad Pouyandeh, writers and free-expression advocates who both had been briefly detained in October 1998. Pirouz Davani, a political activist for a banned left-wing organization "disappeared" in September 1998 and was believed to have been killed for his political views.

Although the killing of political dissidents at home and abroad was not new to Iran, popular reaction to these deaths was strong and immediate. Thousands of mourners marched in the funeral procession for slain leaders of the Iran Nation Party Darioush and Parvaneh Forouhar in Tehran on November 30. Different branches of the government, including the judiciary and the National Security Council (NSC), the latter headed by President Khatami, announced that inquiries would be established into the killings and the perpetrators brought to justice. Whereas the judiciary spoke of mysterious "domestic and external hands" being behind the murders, the NSC inquiry identified serving agents within the Ministry of Intelligence as responsible and took a number of them into custody. Minister of Intelligence Ghorbanali Dorri-Najafabadi and several of his senior deputies resigned in February as the extent of the ministry's involvement became known. However, although senior officials repeatedly promised an open trial of the suspects, no trial had started by the end of the year.

Speculation about where the ultimate responsibility for the killings lay played a direct role in the year's most traumatic incidents of political violence, the student protests of July and their suppression by a combination of uniformed and irregular forces. In June Salam , one of the most popular pro-reform newspapers, published an internal memorandum said to have been written by Saeid Emami, a detained ministry of intelligence official. In the memo, Emami sets out a policy to harass and stifle the independent press through a variety of legal and extralegal measures, remarkably similar to the actual experiences of the journalists and the press throughout the year.

In July, Salam was closed down and charges of spreading false information brought against its publisher, Mohammad Mousavi Khoeniha, in a Special Court for the Clergy. The closure triggered a peaceful protest by students at Tehran University on July 8. During the early hours of July 9, members of an unidentified uniformed militia force entered the university dormitories while the students slept and attacked them, throwing some out of windows and taking some away. The dormitory rooms were ransacked and furniture and equipment smashed. According to the witnesses at least four students were killed in the assault on the dormitory, three hundred wounded, and four hundred taken into detention.

The next day, students took to the streets to protest the assault on the dormitories, to demand an inquiry, and to call for the release of their colleagues from detention. The demonstration was broken up by hard-line enforcers associated with conservative leaders within the government, the Ansar-e Hezbollahi (Partisans of the Party of God), wielding clubs and chains while members of the security forces stood by or joined in the assault on the demonstrators.

However, student protests continued in Tehran on July 10 and spread to other cities with calls for the dismissal of Tehran police chief, Hedayat Lotfian and for the prosecution of those responsible for the raid. Outrage about the brutality of the initial night-time assault on the dormitories spread throughout Iranian society. Both President Khatami and Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamene'i condemned the raid and the minister of the interior, Abdullah Mousavi-Lari declared that it had taken place without any authorization from the ministry.

The student protests, also an outlet for popular expression of dissatisfaction with government policies in a wide range of areas, including the dire economic situation, the lack of opportunities for university graduates, restrictions on basic freedoms, and the slow pace of reform were likened by commentators to the mass demonstrations in 1978 and 1979 which preceded the overthrow of the Shah. The popular mood changed abruptly when the demonstrations deteriorated into looting and vandalism on July 12 and July 13. The leadership, with President Khatami and Ayatollah Khamene'i acting in concert, moved swiftly to ban further protests and to arrest hundreds of purported ringleaders. The student movement distanced itself from the activities of looters and lawbreakers, making a distinction between the peaceful protests of July 9 - 11 and the riotous behavior of the following two days.

Blame for the unrest was pinned on hostile, foreign-backed forces and several conservative leaders suggested that public support for a reform agenda was sowing confusion and leaving the nation vulnerable to attack by its enemies. In the following weeks the conservative press carried statements by Revolutionary Guard leaders calling for an end to President Khatami's "dangerous experiments with democracy."

President Khatami weathered this most serious challenge to his leadership to date, emphasizing a commitment to the rule of law. Senior Tehran police chiefs were charged with responsibility for allowing the raid on the dormitories, though the head of Tehran police, Hedayat Lotfian was exonerated of any responsibility, and a hard-hitting report that criticized the police and conservative militia groups was issued by the NSC in mid-August. President Khatami stated on August 12 that "police officers acting outside their authority and non-military personnel" were responsible for the dormitories raid, but no public criminal proceedings ensued, leaving the full story of who ordered the raid and which forces carried it out still shrouded in mystery. Eyewitnesses confirmed that the main force involved in the violent assault was not the Ansar-e Hezbollahi but a much more disciplined, better equipped, uniformed force which arrived at the scene in its own vehicles, entered the campus with cooperation from police officers, and vanished into the dawn a few hours later. Mystery also surrounded responsibility forthe incidents of looting and property damage on July 12 and 13 with speculation that the street violence was initiated by state-backed agent-provocateurs in order to discredit and undermine the protest movement.

Following the unrest, hundreds of students remained in detention or were unaccounted for. The head of Tehran's Revolutionary Court stated on September 11 that four unnamed individuals had been sentenced to death in connection with the pro-democracy protests. The sentences were handed down in secret Revolutionary Court trials in which procedures fall far short of international fair trial standards. In an interview with the conservative daily newspaper Jomhouri-Eslami , Hojatoleslam Gholamhossein Rahbarpour said two of the sentences had been confirmed by the Supreme Court and held out the possibility of further death sentences among the "thousand arrested" during the protests.

The struggle between conservatives and the independent press continued to result in restrictions on freedom of expression including closures of newspapers and prosecutions of writers editors and publishers. Independent newspapers such as Rah-e No (New Way), Jame'eh Salem (Healthy Society) , Iran-e Farda (Tomorrow's Iran), and Adineh (Friday), a cultural monthly were ordered closed by the Press Court. However, most continued to publish despite the closure orders, justifying their continued operation on the grounds that they had not received the formal closure orders. In the cases of Jame-eh Salem and Adineh , the jury found them in violation of the Press Law but recommended minimum punishment, not including closure. The judge disregarded the jury's recommendations and closed them both.

Following the Adineh decision, the jury protested the judge's action by not attending the next hearing, involving a complaint against Keyhan (Galaxy) newspaper, leading the judge to dismiss the five jurors who had absented themselves. Unable to proceed with trials after dismissal of the jurors, he required that accused persons post high bail in order to avoid detention. In May and June two prominent supporters of President Khatami, Fereydoun Verdinejad, the director of the official Islamic Republic News Agency (IRNA), and Mohammed Reza Zohdi, the publisher of Arya, a daily newspaper, were arrested and released on payments of the equivalent of U.S.$50,000 and U.S.$30,000 bail respectively. In August 1999, the High Judicial Disciplinary tribunal found that judge Saeid Mortazavi had exceeded his authority in ordering the dismissal of the jurors, but recommended no punishment and he remained in office. In September the press court ordered the closure of Neshat (Happiness) and in a subsequent trial, sentenced its publisher, Latif Safari, to a thirty month suspended prison sentence and banned him from his profession for five years.

The role of the jury in press courts was one among several contentious elements in the system of regulation of the press. Another was the use of courts other than the press courts to punish writers for views expressed in the media. In November 1998, Hamshahri reported that the Parliamentary Research Center was drafting legislation that would make writers, editors, and publishers liable to prosecution in courts other than press courts if their articles were deemed to be offensive. On March 4, a Special Court for the Clergy ruled that it would prosecute any newspaper that even mentioned the name of Ayatollah Hossein-Ali Montazeri, at one time the designated successor to Ayatollah Khameini as leader but who has emerged as a persistent critic of the institution of velayat-e faqih, on which the authority of the leader of the Islamic Republic rests. Since Ayatollah Montazeri's removal as designated successor by Ayatollah Khomeini in 1988, Montazeri and his relatives and followers have been subjected to persecution. In February, Mohsen Kadivar was detained and a case brought against him in a Special Court for the Clergy arising from his journalistic writings.

In March, Zan (Woman) magazine was ordered closed by an Islamic Revolutionary Court for publishing part of a New Year's greeting to the Iranian people from the former empress, Farah Pahlavi, now living in exile, and for publishing a cartoon deemed to be defamatory of the Islamic juridical tradition of diyah (blood money). Other magazines published Farah Pahlavi's message in full without any repercussions.

In June, a Revolutionary Court ordered the closure of the student bi-weekly newspaper Hoveyat-e Khish (Self Identity). Its editor, Heshmatollah Tabarzadi, and director, Hossein Kashani were detained on accusations of "spreading anti-Islamic propaganda." Kashani was released in June but Tabarzadi remained in detention. Mohsen Saeidzadeh, who had been detained by order of a special Court for the Clergy in June 1998 for his writings on women's rights and Muslim family law was released from detention in November 1998.

In the face of an unrelenting conservative campaign against press freedom, Deputy Minister of Culture and Islamic Guidance Ahmad Borghani resigned in January. The minister, Ataollah Mohajerani, was himself the subject of an impeachment motion which he survived by a vote of 135 to 121. Nevertheless, the pressure on Mohajerani and others associated with greater press freedom continued. During May charges were prepared against a senior official in the Ministry of Culture and Islamic Guidance, Issa Sakharkhiz. He faced up to three years in prison after granting permission to Zan newspaper to produce a special edition for the Tehran International Book Fair while the newspaper was under a closure order. His trial opened before a Special Court for Public Employees on May 31, and continued as of this writing.

In addition to efforts to control the press through closures, prosecutions of editors and publishers, and intimidation, conservative deputies submitted amendments to the Press Law to the Majlis which passed a first reading on July 7, by 125 votes to ninety with fifty-five deputies absent. The proposed amendments sought to change the composition of the five-person Press Supervisory Board and the three-person selection board of the press jury by adding representatives of the Islamic Propagation Organization and the Friday Congregational Prayer Leaders. The amendments would also authorize Revolutionary Courts to prosecute writers and journalists who overstep the bounds of permitted criticism.

The amendments were denounced by reformists including Minister of Culture Mohajerani, who told the parliament during the debate that "we have to create laws in accordance with freedom, not freedom according to our laws." In September, Head of the Judiciary Sayyed Mahmoud Hashemi Shahroudi, who had replaced leading conservative Ayatollah Mohammad Yazdi in August, criticized the proposed amendments to the press law and stated that the Islamic Commission for Human Rights, a judicial body, would be proposing its own draft amendments. However, Ayatollah Khamene'i himself resumed attacks on independent newspapers which he accused of "creating mental insecurity" by calling into question the commands of Islam. Conservatives went on the offensive against newspapers which had criticized the use of the death penalty, declaring that such comments constituted apostasy and were "against Islam."

Freedom of the press was not the only area of human rights which suffered because of the continuing struggle between reformists and hardliners in the government. In November 1998, police raided more than 500 private homes and offices being used by the Bahai Institute for Higher Education, a previously tolerated institution providing educational opportunities to Bahais who were denied entry to ordinary universities and colleges. Thirty-five faculty members in the institute were detained, and four were sentenced to between three and ten years by a Revolutionary Court for disturbing national security, bringing to seventeen the number of Bahais in prison because of their faith by the end of the year. Sina Hakimian was sentenced to ten years imprisonment, Farzad Khajeh-Sharifabadi and Habibullah Ferdousian-Najafabadi to seven years and Zeiyollah Mir Zamanpour to three years. In June, the government announced the arrest of thirteen members of the Jewishcommunity on charges of spying for Israel. The government did not reveal any evidentiary basis for the arrests, which had taken place in February and March, and held the detainees incommunicado for many months. The arrests appeared designed to embarrass President Khatami in his attempts to normalize relations with the West. After the announcement of the arrests, the president spoke out on the need to respect the rights of Iran's religious minorities, but other government leaders announced that the thirteen were guilty even before their trial.

The controversy continued over the jailing of former Mayor of Tehran Gholam Hossein Karbaschi, seen as a victim of factional conflict between reformists and conservatives. In May the trial began of eleven police officers accused of torturing two district mayors and other senior municipality officials in an attempt to gather evidence against the mayor. This was the first time that torture charges had been brought against police officers, although there were credible reports that use of torture remained widespread.

The holding of the first elections for local town and village councils in February represented a substantial achievement in participation in public affairs at the local level. Up until the last moment, it was unclear whether candidates associated with reform policies would be permitted to stand by a conservative-controlled Supervisory Council appointed by the parliament. Several prominent candidates, including the impeached former minister of the interior, Abdullah Nouri, were rejected by the council because of their "lack of belief in the clerical system," but their rejection was overruled by an arbitration committee established by President Khatami to settle differences between candidates and the council. In the end, reformist candidates triumphed at the polls. The issue of how candidates for the February 2000 parliamentary elections will be selected continued to be debated. In August, parliament agreed on a revised form of vetting which would require the council to provide rejected candidates with written reasons for their rejection. In the past, no reasons were given and a large proportion of prospective candidates were excluded. However, in September, the Council of Guardians vetoed the proposed amendment to the vetting procedure. Opposition political parties like the Freedom Movement of Iran continued to be denied permission to organize or to field candidates in elections.

Defending Human Rights

There were no independent human rights organizations active inside the country, and the government continued to obstruct visits by international monitors from nongovernmental organizations, and refused access to the U.N. special representative on Iran, Maurice Copithorne of Canada. Nevertheless, human rights monitoring and open debate of the government's human rights policies was a notable aspect of the activities of the independent press. Several prominent intellectual figures like Abdol Karim Soroush and Mohsen Kadivar developed sophisticated critiques of government policies in their writings advocating the need for respect for human rights as part of Islamic government. They suffered threats and persecution, but continued to disseminate their ideas. In August a group of prominent writers, editors, publishers, and journalists announced the formation of the Association to Protect Press Freedom which championed international standards in the field of freedom of expression in its founding declaration. It was not officially recognized, but it was able to function. In a positive move the government did register the National Association for Children's Rights in Iran which advocated the adoption of standards set out in the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child.

Human Rights Watch was able to send its researcher, who carries an Iranian passport, to Iran; however, other Human Rights Watch staff members, and representatives of other international NGOs were not granted visas.

Former deputy prime-minister Abbas Amir Entezam remained in prison following his arrest in September 1998 for making critical comments about Assadollah Lajevardi, the assassinated former head of Evin Prison, where he had spent seventeen years in prison on spying charges he has always denied. Entezam was a witness to widespread violations of human rights during his time in detention and has spoken out about his experiences. His trial on slander charges opened in February, but did not reach a verdict. He continued to be held in detention pending the completion of his trial on questionable grounds.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

Human rights violations in Iran continued to be a subject of concern to the United Nations (U.N.) General Assembly and the U.N. Commission on Human Rights. However, the international body increasingly recognized the reform efforts of President Khatami, who was praised by Secretary-General Kofi Annan as a "far-sighted leader." The General Assembly unanimously declared the year 2001 as the Year of Dialogue Among Civilizations, as proposed by President Khatami in his address to the Assembly in September 1998. The tone of the resolution passed by the commission was more positive than in previous years, noting a number of positive developments. It praised the expansion of freedom of expression and the emphasis on the rule of law. It noted with approval the local elections. And it praised the investigation of last year's series of political murders. It criticized torture and discrimination against minorities, as well as the large number of executions. In his report to the commission, Special Representative Copithorne praised President Khatami for trying "to create a more tolerant society in which the rule of law plays a part and which generally recognizes human rights to a considerable degree greater than in the past."

European Union

Despite some localized difficulties, notably in the bilateral relationship with Germany, the improvement in relations between the European Union (E.U.) and Iran continued. The European governments were explicit in their support of reform efforts. For example, in August, the new Norwegian ambassador to Tehran, resuming diplomatic relations for the first time since the Norwegian translator of Salman Rushdie's The Satanic Verses was stabbed to death by an Iranian hit man, said that Norway would be doing everything it could to support political reform.

In December 1998 the German Supreme Court confirmed the guilty verdict against Kazem Darabi, accused of having been dispatched by the Iranian government to murder Kurdish dissidents in Berlin in 1992. The Iranian government continued to hold German national Helmut Hoffer on charges of having had illicit relations with a Muslim woman. Bilateral relations were also strained by negotiations over the rescheduling of the payment of German loans to Iran. Trade relations with other European countries moved forward, notably in the energy sector.

Although the Khordad Foundation announced that its bounty for the killer of British author Salman Rushdie was still in force, the pledge in 1998 that Iranian authorities would do nothing to implement the death threat was sufficient to permit the exchange of ambassadors between the two countries in July. British Foreign Secretary Robin Cook stated in September that the British government was confident that the Iranian government had "stood by that policy" on Salman Rushdie. President Khatami carried out a state visit to Italy in April, including an audience with the pope at the Vatican. In September, President Thomas Klestil of Austria was the first European head of state to visit the Islamic Republic. He expressed the E.U.'s "dismay and preoccupation over the human rights situation" in Iran, and singled out the situation of four people sentenced to death because of their alleged part in student unrest in July, and the imprisonment of thirteen Iranian Jews facing trial on charges of spying for Israel. While in Tehran, President Klestil expressed his support for "President Khatami's reform policy," and emphasized the development of bilateral economic relations.

United States

There were signs of some easing in the relationship between Iran and the United States, notably in the lifting of the prohibition of the export of U.S.- produced foodstuffs to Iran in May. The U.S. government emphasized that no change of policy should be read into the lifting of its embargo. The U.S. continued to express objections to Iranian policies in the areas of weapons proliferation, support for terrorism, and human rights. In March, Secretary of State Albright characterized Iranian policies in each of these areas as "disappointing." The annual U.S. report on terrorism listed the Iranian opposition groups the National Council of Resistance and the People's Mojahedine Organization as terrorist organizations. The State Department's annual report on human rights practices spoke of "some improvements in a few areas" but noted that overall "the government's human rights record remained poor."
Israel, the Occupied West Bank & Gaza Strip,
and Palestinian Authority Territories

Human Rights Developments

Israel and the Occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip

A new government led by Ehud Barak took office on July 6 after elections to the Knesset and for the prime minister on May 17. New ministers promised to address human rights issues in areas under Israeli control including torture, prolonged administrative detention andhostage-taking, house demolitions, Jerusalem residency revocations, and discrimination against Palestinian citizens of Israel, but with limited progress to date. The High Court of Justice ruled many established interrogation practices illegal, though it did not decisively prohibit torture in all circumstances.

Widespread and systematic discrimination against ethnic and religious minorities and against women on issues such as personal status, housing, and employment continued to be a serious problem. In May the Ministry of Internal Security reported that there were more than 200,000 battered women in Israel-one in seven.

Despite some encouraging rulings on issues affecting non-Orthodox segments of the Jewish community, the courts overall were reluctant to challenge discriminatory laws and practices. For example, in its November 26, 1998 ruling the High Court of Justice acknowledged that "there is no equality for Arab religious communities in budget allocations of the Ministry of Religious Affairs," but declined to rule on whether Israeli law safeguarded the right to equality. In 1998 the ministry had allotted 1.86 percent of its budget to the combined Muslim, Christian, and Druze communities, although they comprised close to 20 percent of the population. The Legal Center for Minority Rights in Israel (Adalah) had asked the court to declare provisions of the Knesset Budget Law invalid based on the principle of equality, and to allocate resources according to the religious communities' percentage of the total population. The court found the requested remedy was too general because it did not provide a detailed and independent assessment of the communities' needs, and said the petitioners had not proved substantive inequality existed.

Labor conditions for foreign and Palestinian workers remained poor. Weak laws and poor enforcement left workers with few protections against exploitation by employers and labor contractors. On July 19 Thailand's ambassador threatened to stop the flow of Thai workers to Israeli farms if they were not paid the minimum wage. He estimated that approximately 17,000 Thais working in agriculture were owed $30 million because of underpayments. In July the High Court ordered the Ministry of Interior to bring foreigners awaiting deportation before a judge within fourteen days, but as of early October the ruling had not been implemented. The ruling was intended to prevent the prolonged detention without judicial review of migrant workers awaiting deportation.

Minister of Interior Natan Sharansky announced on October 17 that he had ended the enforcement of the so-called "center of life" policy, which revoked permanent residency permits of Palestinian residents of East Jerusalem who were unable to produce the many documents needed to prove that their "center of life" was within Jerusalem municipal boundaries. In September the Interior Ministry revised upwards its count of the Palestinians whose residency rights had been revoked under the policy to 2,721 for the period January 1996 through April 1999. The Bethlehem-based Badil Resource Center estimated that by including family members who also lost their residency rights due to the revocations, the total number of Palestinians affected was 10,884 for this period.

In contrast, the High Court met on April 22 to hear a petition challenging the revocations, and set a deadline of August for the petitioners and the State Attorney to submit additional information and prepare a joint report outlining their positions. The government delayed submitting its report, and as of mid-October the court had not acted on a petition for a temporary injunction against further revocations of residency rights.

Following its November 20, 1998 partial redeployment under the terms of the Wye River Memorandum, Israel exercised full or partial control over approximately 90 percent of the West Bank and 40 percent of the Gaza Strip, while the Palestinian Authority (P.A.) had full control over the rest. Under the terms of the Sharm al-Sheikh Memorandum signed on September 4, further redeployments scheduled for November 1999 and January 2000 would raise the portion of the West Bank under full P.A. control to approximately 18 percent. Other provisions of the Memorandum included a phased release of 350 of the Palestinian prisoners held by Israel, planned "safe passage" routes for travel between the West Bank and Gaza, and a one year deadline for completion of final status negotiations.

Israel retained extensive control over and placed restrictions on the freedom of movement of all West Bank and Gaza Strip Palestinians. For example, Israel had barred Palestinians living in the West Bank and Gaza Strip who lacked hard-to-obtain permits from entering or transiting through Israel or East Jerusalem since March 1993, and imposed closures and curfews on towns and villages under its control in the West Bank and Gaza. These policies obstructed Palestinian economic activity and access to health care, schools and universities, places of worship, and family members in other parts of the territories or in Israeli prisons. Despite Israeli claims that closure was a justified security measure, the arbitrary nature of the procedures and criteria for issuing permits and their indiscriminate imposition on an entire population made it an act of collective punishment.

Israel's expansion of settlements in Gaza and the West Bank (including East Jerusalem) that are illegal under the Fourth Geneva Convention (see Human Rights Watch World Report 1999 ) increased after the signing of the October 1998 Wye River Memorandum, and especially in the period around the May elections. According to the Israeli group Peace Now, between 1996 and July 1999 Jewish settlers erected forty-one new settlement outposts in the West Bank. Spending on settlement expansion continued under the new government. According to Peace Now, as of September 23 Housing Minister Yitzhak Levy had issued tenders for a total of 2,594 new buildings in West Bank settlements.

The demolition of Palestinian homes built without permits in Israeli occupied territories and in Israel also continued under the new government, despite Internal Security Minister Shlomo Ben Ami's statement in August that he was "opposed with every ounce of my being to the destruction of houses." According to the Society for the Protection of Human Rights and the Environment (LAW), as of September 20 there had been at least fifty house demolitions in the West Bank and Gaza, including seven since the Barak government came to power.

According to the Prisoners' Support Association (Addameer), after the September 9 release of 199 prisoners under the first phase of the Sharm al-Sheikh Memorandum Israel held approximately 1,800 Palestinians prisoners convicted of "security" offenses. A further 151 prisoners, including forty-two from Arab states, were released on October 15. Lawyers reported that Palestinian prisoners in Ashkelon prison were subjected to severe restrictions on family visits, and in June prisoners in the isolation wing went on hunger strike to protest the conditions there. Prisoners held a second hunger strike in August to protest the Israeli restrictions on the categories of prisoners released in September: among those excluded were prisoners from occupied East Jerusalem and Israel itself, members of Hamas and Islamic Jihad, and prisoners accused of killing or severely wounding Israelis.

The longest-serving administrative detainee held under military orders, Osama Barham, was released on July 18, just prior to the High Court hearing a petition challenging his detention. With the exception of sixteen days in 1994, Barham had been detained since November 1993. He was required to post a NIS 20,000 bond and report regularly to a police station as a condition of his release. As of September 23Israel held twenty-nine administrative detainees under military orders. The Office of the Military Advocate General refused Human Rights Watch's request to observe military court hearings on appeals against administrative detention orders in May.

In addition to those held under military orders, Israel continued to hold twenty-one Lebanese civilians hostage under Israeli civil law. On January 17 and May 26 an expanded nine judge panel of the High Court reviewed the 1997 ruling that Israel could administratively detain them as "bargaining chips," but had not ruled as of mid-October.

Torture by the General Security Service (GSS) was widespread and systematic, with one Jerusalem-based organization, the Public Committee against Torture in Israel (PCATI), reporting that by mid-September it had filed fifty-five petitions for injunctions against torture. Initial reports suggested that the use of torture declined or stopped in the days immediately after the September 6 High Court ruling that GSS officers were not authorized to use "physical means"-torture-during interrogations. However, the ruling stopped short of the absolute ban on torture and ill-treatment required by international law and left the door open for a torturer to escape punishment by invoking a "necessity" defense under article 34(11) of the Penal Law (1977), or for the Knesset to pass legislation legalizing torture or ill-treatment. On September 14 members of the Knesset submitted a bill authorizing the head of the GSS to order torture in cases where a suspect was believed to have information that could stop an imminent attack.

The High Court also relied on the "necessity" defense when it rejected a petition that sought to revoke the promotion of an Israeli Defense Force (IDF) commander and begin prosecution proceedings against him. The commander, identified only as Respondent No. 4, had shot a bound captive and then ordered another soldier to shoot him again during a 1993 commando raid in south Lebanon. The court based its ruling on the Military Attorney General finding that the commander was entitled to a defense of necessity because of his "responsibility for the safety of his soldiers," and the IDF Chief Commander's finding that Respondent No. 4 was "one of the best fighters of the IDF." The court ruled that "as judges we do not replace [the Chief Commander's] reasoning with our own," and ordered the petitioner to pay the respondents' legal expenses.

Israel continued to hold the bodies of `Adel and `Imad Awadallah, killed in suspicious circumstances by a police special forces unit in September 1998 (see Human Rights Watch World Report 1999 ). In March the Israel Information Center for Human Rights in the Occupied Territories (B'Tselem) and the Center for the Defense of the Individual (Hamoked) issued a report documenting at least twenty-two other Palestinians' corpses being held by Israel in so-called "cemeteries for enemy dead," where it said the bodies were buried "in a demeaning and shameful manner" with only minimal measures taken to ensure identification.

Palestinian Authority

Arbitrary detention without charge or trial, torture and ill-treatment during interrogation, grossly unfair trials, and restrictions on freedom of association and expression continued. Efforts by individuals, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and the Palestinian Legislative Council (PLC) to document and combat these violations were constrained by the lack of a legal framework clearly specifying the duties and responsibilities of the executive, judicial, and legislative branches of government. Palestinian Authority (P.A.) president Yasir Arafat's continued refusal to sign the Basic Law, as well as eight of the twenty-seven other laws passed by the PLC since 1996, further undermined efforts to institutionalize necessary safeguards and to limit serious executive branch abuses.

Palestinian security forces continued to carry out arbitrary arrests and detentions, holding detainees for years without charge and without access to lawyers or family visits, sometimes even after the P.A.'s attorney general or courts had ordered access to lawyers or releases. For example, Wa'il `Ali Faraj, arrested on April 25, 1996, remained in detention despite a February 20, 1999 High Court order for his release. Those released were sometimes immediately rearrested, as in the case of Dr. `Abd al-`Aziz al-Rantisi. Arrested on April 9, 1998 and ordered released on June 4, 1998, he was released on July 19, 1999-to attend his mother's funeral-but rearrested on August 8 after being quoted in al-Quds newspaper as saying his detention was due to P.A. security cooperation with Israel and the US. The court ordered his release on September 27, but as of mid-October he remained in custody.

Security forces sometimes detained or placed under house arrest the relatives of wanted individuals. For example, fifteen-year-old Bilal Yehya al-Ghoul was detained by the General Intelligence Service from 12 February to 2 March. The Gaza-based Palestinian Center for Human Rights (PCHR) reported that his arrest and torture was primarily to force his father, Yehya al-Ghoul, to surrender to police. The entire family had previously been placed under house arrest when the older al-Ghoul escaped from prison on December 11, 1998. Bilal was reportedly detained with adults and denied visits by his family and lawyer.

As of mid-October there had been one death in custody. Muhammad Ahmad Shrieteh died in hospital after being transferred from the Hebron police station in convulsions. According to LAW he had been detained without a warrant by Preventative Security Services on September 28.

Lawyers continued to report difficulty in seeing their clients, despite receiving permits from the attorney general or court orders allowing visits, with the denial of access sometimes having a punitive character. Beginning in May LAW, the Gaza office of Addameer, and PCHR were denied access to clients held in Gaza prisons controlled by the police department because of their reporting on violations of detainees' rights. According to LAW, Prison Service Director General Hamdi al-Rifi attributed the ban to a decision by Chief of Police Ghazi Al-Jabali. The Palestinian Bar Association held a one day strike on April 15 to protest interference in lawyers' fulfillment of their legal duties and the "lack of respect for the law, vacancy of the chief justice and attorney general's posts, failure to implement the Judiciary Law, and abandonment of the judiciary to suffer from a huge shortage of judges and administrative personnel."

Public protests against untried political detentions increased, with detainees holding lengthy hunger strikes and family members demonstrating to demand their trial or release. On January 13 the legislature passed a resolution calling for a prohibition on political detentions and the immediate release of political detainees. In late September Addameer estimated there to be 280 political prisoners in P.A. custody.

The judiciary continued to suffer from a severe lack of human and material resources, and trials fell far short of international fair trial standards. The June appointment of a chief justice and a civilian attorney general filled posts long vacant but had no effect on the State Security Courts (SSC) and military courts. President Arafat refused to sign and implement the Judicial Authority Law passed by the parliament in November 1998, leaving the West Bank and Gaza with separate judicial systems. In addition, Presidential Decree 28, issued September 19, gave the Gaza-based chief justice powers to discipline and transfer judges in both the West Bank and Gaza, although West Bank law and theJudicial Authority Law gave these powers to a Supreme Judicial Council. On October 11, a group of West Bank judges declared an open strike to protest transfers ordered by the chief justice.

Military and State Security Courts had the power to try civilians and denied almost all due process rights, including the right to appeal. Empowered to issue death sentences for a variety of vaguely worded crimes, they were responsible for the majority of the death sentences issued. Sentences were sometimes issued only hours after arrest, and often appeared to be influenced by political considerations, as in the case of Ahmed `Atiya Abu Mustafa, executed on February 26. Mustafa, who was arrested on February 21 on charges of raping a child, was sentenced to fifteen years hard labor for the rape, and under the 1979 Revolutionary Code was additionally sentenced to death for "inciting the public against the authorities," apparently in reference to public outrage and demands for his execution. On July 1 President Arafat expanded the jurisdiction of the State Security Courts by presidential decree to include "economic offenses."

Despite a proliferation of media outlets, press freedom remained restricted. Repeated interrogations and arrests of journalists, closures of media outlets, and the P.A.'s direct political or financial links to two of the three major daily newspapers ensured a climate of fear and self-censorship. Media oversight was split among a number of ministries and agencies with overlapping jurisdiction, often making it difficult to determine which, if any, agency had ordered a particular closure or investigation. Despite the 1998 court ordered reopening of the Islamist weekly al-Risala, police continued to harass its journalists and commentators, briefly detaining a journalist suspected of reporting on a sex scandal involving government officials on September 28 and on May 22 and 23 briefly detaining the publisher and two editors after the newspaper reported on a case of alleged police torture. Television and radio stations were also subject to repeated closures; as of mid-October the Bethlehem-based al-Ru'ah TV, which was ordered closed on May 17 after broadcasting a play that security officials alleged incited prejudice between Christians and Muslims, had not been allowed to reopen. The station, along with several others, had been ordered closed twice in 1998 after airing footage of protests against the U.S. bombing of Iraq.

The Palestinian Legislative Council's efforts to retain its legislative role despite increasing encroachments by the executive branch suffered a further setback on August 12, when its speaker called an unannounced vote to amend the NGO law it passed on December 21, 1998. The vote came at the end of the last session of the council's term, after many members had left, and violated its bylaws, which gave the president a one month deadline to sign or submit amendments and required a absolute majority vote to pass a presidential amendment. President Arafat had not returned the law to the council until April, when he sought an amendment to make the Ministry of Interior, and not the Ministry of Justice, responsible for NGO oversight. The PLC had rejected this demand during the bill's original consideration and again by a vote of thirty-eight to twelve on May 25. The government responded with the creation of Ministry of NGO Affairs and a series of attacks against human rights NGOs and activists (see below).

Defending Human Rights

pard

pard
Israel and the Occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip

Israel continued to permit human rights organizations to collect and disseminate information in the areas under its control, but closures often kept Palestinian human rights workers and lawyers, including those with Israeli citizenship or Jerusalem identity cards, from traveling freely within the West Bank, the Gaza Strip, and Israel. Palestinians who had previously detained were also refused access to prisons and detainees.

Sha'wan Jabarin, fieldwork coordinator for al-Haq, was subject to travel restrictions following his January 1998 release from administrative detention. A July 4 High Court ruling permitted him one exit and entry to attend a human rights training program abroad. The judge and the GSS told him informally that he could not travel via neighboring Arab countries, and that he would not be allowed to leave the country again.

Palestinian Authority

Palestinian NGOs, particularly human rights NGOs, were increasingly subject to police harassment and threats by P.A. officials, including major smear campaigns in the semi-official media. Many of the attacks were a direct outcome of the P.A.'s effort to override the provisions of the NGO law. For example, representatives of NGOs who refused to register their organizations with the Ministry of Interior reported that they were repeatedly called in for police interrogations and threatened with arrest under a 1909 Ottoman-era law prohibiting unregistered associations.

Other actions appeared to be aimed at silencing NGOs and activists who criticized P.A. abuses. In an August 28 letter to PCHR director Raji Sourani, Chief of Police Ghazi al-Jabali said "words are not sufficient, especially with those who sold their consciences and their pens to the interests of those who want us to have neither a state or law." Al- Jabali was responding to PCHR criticisms of gross fair trial violations in the trial of Iman Mohammed Abu Sa`ada, who was accused of killing a police officer. Abu Sa`ada, a civilian, was sentenced to death after a six hour State Security Court hearing. The letter was copied to the ministers of justice and NGO affairs, and to all regional police chiefs and stations "to acquaint them with the position of Raji Sourani and human rights organizations."

In June and July the directors of LAW and PCHR, and the secretary general of PICCR filed separate complaints asking for the prosecution under the press law of journalists and government officials who had made slanderous statements about them and their organizations during the June government campaign against NGOs. Individuals named in the complaints included Khalil al-Zaben, coordinator of the government-appointed NGO council, and P.A. Minister Nabil Amer, the editor of al-Hayat al-Jadida newspaper.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

Israel and the Occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip

The Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights reviewed Israel's first periodic report on its implementation of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) on November 17 and 18, 1998. The committee expressed concern over twenty-three different types of violations and restrictions on the enjoyment of economic, social, and cultural rights in Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territories, including discrimination against non-Jews, expropriation of Palestinian land and resources to expand exclusively Jewish settlements, the practice of house demolitions and restrictions on family reunification and residency rights, and the policy of closure. In its recommendations it urged Israel to review reentry policies for Palestinians "with a view to bringing such policies level with the Law of Return as applied to Jews"; to "recognize existing Arab Bedouin villages, the land rights of their inhabitants and their right to basic services, including water"; and "as a matter of the highest priority, to undertake to ensure safe passage at checkpoints for Palestinian medical staff and people seeking treatment, the unhampered flow of essential foodstuffs and supplies, the safe conduct of students and teachers to and from schools, and the reunification of families separated by closures."

In an unprecedented move, the High Contracting Parties (HCP) of the Fourth Geneva Convention (relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War) met on July 15 to discuss "measures to enforce the Convention in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including Jerusalem, and to ensure respect thereof in accordance with common article 1."

Israel continued to refuse to cooperate with Hannu Halinen, U.N. special rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967. In a letter to Halinen, Israel's ambassador in Geneva David Peleg said Israel would continue to refuse cooperation until the special rapporteur's mandate was revised to include both Israeli and P.A. abuses, be limited in time, and not start from an assumption of Israeli violations. Halinen, who submitted his fourth report to the Commission on Human Rights on January 20, had previously asked for similar changes in his mandate, and included information on P.A. abuses in his reports.

Palestinian Authority

On September 21, the U.N. secretary general appointed Terje Roed-Larsen as special coordinator for the Middle East peace process and his personal representative to the PLO and the P.A., effective October 1. The position included responsibilities previously in the mandate of the U.N. special coordinator for the occupied territories (UNSCO), a post Roed-Larsen held from 1994 to 1996.

In his January 20 report to the Commission on Human Rights, U.N. Special Rapporteur Halinen called on the P.A. to try or release administrative detainees, prohibit torture, and guarantee judicial independence, and undertake "determined legislative efforts" to enforce the rights of women and children. P.A. ambassador to the U.N. Nabil Ramlawi wrote a formal protest to the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the chairperson of the commission on April 12. He criticized Halinen for stepping outside his mandate and said that P.A. cooperation would only continue if Halinen remained within his existing mandate.

European Union

The European Union (E.U.) continued to be the largest single donor to the P.A. In 1999 it expanded its involvement in Israeli and Palestinian affairs, although its efforts remained focused on facilitating progress in advancing political negotiations between Israel and the PLO. The rotating E.U. presidency made multiple visits to Israel and the P.A. territories, in an apparent attempt to gain a larger role for the E.U. German Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer visited Israel and the P.A. in February and July, and Finnish Foreign Minister Tarja Halonen visited in August. The February visit came on the heels of a January 25 statement by the Council of Ministers that "deplored the continued suspension by the Israeli government of the implementation" of the Wye River Memorandum, which it said was "in contravention of both the spirit and the letter of the memorandum."

On March 3 the European Community and Israel signed a cooperation agreement allowing Israel to participate in the Fifth Framework research and development program. The decision reversed a December 1998 decision by the Council of Ministers to exclude Israel from a Euro 14.96 billion program because of its failure to implement the October Wye River Memorandum.

In conjunction with the signing of the Sharm al-Sheikh Memorandum E.U. President Halonen provided President Arafat with a letter of assurance that reaffirmed E.U. support for Palestinian self-determination and expressed the E.U.'s "conviction" that the memorandum would be implemented according to its time table, "regardless of developments in negotiations related to permanent status issues." Halonen also said the E.U. believed that final status negotiations could be concluded within the one year target period, called on both parties to "refrain from activities which prejudge the outcome of the final status negotiations and from any activity contrary to international law, including all settlement activity, and to fight incitement and violence," and promised the E.U.'s "full political commitment to facilitate the implementation of Sharm e-Sheikh Memorandum along the lines expressed in this letter." The language echoed statements made at the April Euro-Mediterranean Conference of Foreign Ministers and the March European Council meeting in Berlin.

As of October, France and Belgium had yet to ratify the Euro-Mediterranean Association Agreement between the E.U. and Israel.

United States

United States aid to Israel and the P.A. fell slightly in 1998/99, but Israel remained the largest recipient of U.S. bilateral aid. The U.S. held high level meetings with both Israeli and Palestinian officials throughout the year but was less directly involved in the Israel-PLO peace negotiations after Prime Minister Barak's election. While most meetings were concerned with furthering the negotiations and rarely addressed specific human rights violations, in February Robert Seiple, the U.S. special representative for international religious freedom, met with Israel's deputy minister of religious affairs, and with the P.A. President Arafat to discuss concerns about religious freedom under both Israel and the P.A.

Despite frequent expressions of concern over Israeli settlement expansion, U.S. officials strongly opposed efforts to convene the July 15 meeting of the Geneva Conventions High Contracting Parties. Assistant Secretary of State C. David Welch testified before the House International Relations Committee on July 14 that President Clinton had personally conveyed U.S. objections to the presidents of Switzerlandand France, and on May 23, Vice-President Gore told the annual meeting of the American-Israel Public Affairs Committee that "we will work diligently to halt the meeting....America will boycott it, and we will urge others to do the same." Statements by Assistant Secretary of State Indyk made clear that the U.S. considered enforcement of the treaty as secondary to finalizing peace negotiations, saying "[t]his meeting will not contribute to the peace process," and comparing it to "unilateral steps-such as unilateral declaration of statehood or provocative settlement activity-that could prejudge the outcome of permanent status negotiations," which the U.S. so often criticized.

Secretary of State Madeleine Albright facilitated last minute negotiations between Israel and the PLO leading to the September 4 signing of the Sharm al-Sheikh Memorandum. Albright also provided President Arafat with a letter of assurance similar to that provided by the E.U.

On June 18 President Clinton invoked a waiver to postpone moving the U.S. embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. The Jerusalem Embassy Act of 1995 had set a May 31 deadline for the move, but allowed a six months waiver to "protect the national security interests of the United States."
SAUDI ARABIA

Human Rights Developments

The lack of basic freedoms of expression and association, institutionalized discrimination particularly against women and religious minorities, and the use of corporal and capital punishments to suppress and intimidate political opposition remained Saudi Arabia's most pressing human rights problems during 1999. An absolute monarchy, the state allowed no criticism of the ruling family, established religion, or the government and used the threat of arbitrary arrest, detention without trial, torture, and execution to silence criticism.

Crown Prince `Abdullah bin `Abd al-`Aziz progressively took over the reins of power from his brother King Fahd, who had suffered a stroke in 1995, and was refreshingly outspoken about the country's economic problems, the fight against corruption, and the need for women to play a greater role in society. "We will allow no one, whoever they are, to undermine her or marginalize her active role in serving her religion and country" he stated in April, causing an unprecedented debate in Saudi society about the role of women. However, women continued to face institutionalized discrimination affecting their freedom of movement and association and their right to equality in employment and education. They were not allowed to drive, needed written permission from male relatives to travel, could not marry non-Muslims and their testimonies in court were equal to half those of a man. In response to the public debate, and perhaps as an indication of differences within the royal family, Minister of Interior Prince Nayef declared "we have no intention to allow women to drive." Women were compelled to cover themselves from head to toe in public, and those who did not risked beatings or detention by the Mutawwa'in, the religious police of the Committee for the Propagation of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice, which enforced Islamic norms by monitoring public behavior.

Saudi labor laws prohibited the right to organize and bargain collectively and gave employers extensive control over foreign workers' freedom of movement. Many foreign workers continued to suffer under oppressive working conditions and were denied legitimate claims to wages, benefits, or compensation. Labor protections did not extend to domestic workers and labor courts rarely enforced the few protections provided by law when workers sought to have their terms of contracts honored or pursued other claims.

While unemployment among the Saudi working-age population soared to around 27 percent, the campaign begun in October 1997 to limit the number of foreign workers continued. In September, Al-Bilad newspaper, quoting General Hassan Rashwan, head of Mecca's passport department, reported the arrest in the city of more than 10,000 foreigners without valid residency permits. Official figures released at the end of 1998 indicated that 1.5 million people, mostly from the Indian subcontinent, had been expelled while a further one million had regularized their residency.

At this writing the number of executions carried out in Saudi Arabia had risen to eighty-four, more than doubling the total of twenty-nine in 1998. Death sentences were typically imposed for such crimes as murder, rape, drug trafficking, and armed robbery, with the executions, usually beheadings, carried out in public after Friday prayers. The majority of those publicly beheaded were foreigners, including two Nigerian women, Hawa Faruk and Aisha Saada Kassem. Until the mid-nineties women were usually executed by firing squad in prisons and not in public. Public floggings was another type of cruel, inhuman, and degrading punishment handed down in Saudi Arabia. Victims included two Filipinos who were found guilty in August of performing illegal abortions and sentenced to two years and 700 hundred lashes each. Earlier, in April King Fahd had pardoned a Filipino nurse, Violeta Miranda, who was facing a seven-month jail term and 150 lashes for possession of five ounces of methamphetamine hydrochloride, as an act of goodwill ahead of a visit by a member of the ruling family to Manila. Miranda had admitted carrying the package for a friend but did not know its contents.

Concern about cruel punishments was further heightened by unfair legal procedures and by other factors which continued to undermine the independence of the judiciary, encouraged arbitrariness in sentencing, and allowed great scope for manipulation of the justice system by well-connected interested parties. These factors included the lack of a publicly disseminated penal code or code of criminal procedures; the broad powers enjoyed by the king in appointing and dismissing judges, and in creating special courts; and the wide discretion afforded judges in defining criminal offenses and setting punishments, including floggings, amputations, and beheading.

Under the Principles of Arrest, Temporary Confinement, and Preventative Regulations issued by the minister of interior in 1983, detainees had no right to judicial review, could be held for fifty-one days before their detention was reviewed by the regional governor, and could be held indefinitely if neither the governor nor the minister ordered their release or trial. Detainees had no right to legal counsel, to examine witnesses, or to call witnesses in their own defense. Saudi laws also allowed convictions on the basis of uncorroborated confessions. The minister of interior had virtually unlimited authority over suspects in "crimes involving national security," which were defined so broadly as to encompass nonviolent opposition to the government.

On July 2, clerics Salman al-Awadh, Safar al-Hawali, and Nasir al-'Omar were released after spending almost five years in detention without trial for publicly criticizing the government. As of this writing Sa'id bin Zaghir, a fourth cleric detained at the same time, remained in detention. In December 1998 some 3,500 prisoners were reported released as part of the annual holy month of Ramadhan amnesty.

Muslim religious practices deemed heterodox by government-appointed Islamic scholars, and all non-Muslim religious practices, were banned and subject to criminal prosecution. Both citizens and foreigners residing in Saudi Arabia were required to carry identity cards indicating the bearer's nationality and religion. While private religious worship appeared to be tolerated, public non-Muslim religious activities were not permitted and worshipers attracting official attention risked arrest and deportation. The U.S. State Department reported in its Annual Report on International Religious Freedom , published on September 9, that a Korean national was arrested in November 1998, accused of Christian proseletizing, and deported in January.

Grand Mufti `Abd al-"Aziz "Abdullah bin Baz died on May 13. As Saudi Arabia's highest ranking cleric and head of the Council of Senior Religious Scholars for three decades, bin Baz's religious rulings had strongly impacted on Saudi life, including the ban on women's driving. He was replaced by Sheikh `Abd al-'Aziz bin `Abdullah al-Sheikh.

The government continued its long practice of discrimination against the Shi'a community, which was often viewed with suspicion, particularly after the 1979 Iranian revolution. Shi'a faced unequal access to social services and government jobs and were rarely permitted to build private Shi'a mosques or community centers. While previous restrictions on public Shi'a religious processions, such as on the holy day of `Ashura, no longer pertained so long as marchers did not display banners or symbols, according to the Report on International Religious Freedom, in November 1998 several Mutawwa'in attacked and killed an elderly Shi'a leader in Hofuf for repeating the call to prayer twice -a traditional Shi'a practice.

The government owned all domestic radio and television stations, and closely monitored the domestic privately-owned but publicly subsidized print media, allowing no criticism of Islam, the ruling family, or the government. A 1982 media policy statement still in force instructed journalists to uphold Islam, oppose atheism, promote Arab interests, and preserve the cultural heritage of Saudi Arabia. The Ministry of Information appointed and could remove editors in chief and provided guidelines to newspapers on sensitive issues. Foreign publications were often censored or banned, and several important foreign-based print and broadcasting media were owned by members of the ruling family or their associates, including United Press International, al-Hayat , a major regional daily newspaper, and MBC, a London-based satellite television network.

Local access to the Internet was made available to the Saudi public in December 1998 once filtering technology was in place to screen out materials deemed by the authorities as dangerous for the nation's security or public morals. The government had asked the King Abdul Aziz City for Science and Technology (KACST) to create a proxy server for all Internet Service Providers which would block restricted sites according to an updated list of those deemed undesirable, however, in practice it appears that the system could not prevent some users from accessing unsanctioned sites and chat programs. In July, according to Dr Fahd Hoymany of KACST, the number of internet users had risen to 30,000.

Defending Human Rights

Human rights organizations could not operate under the strict controls on information and harsh suppression of freedom of conscience or expression. Government monitoring of telephone and mail communications created a climate of fear which prevented Saudis from commenting on human rights conditions there. Saudis living abroad often requested anonymity when providing human rights information, so as to avoid reprisals against their families inside the country. Two groups in exile, the Committee for the Defence of Rights, headed by Muhammad al Mas'ari, and the Islamic Reform Movement, headed by Sa'ad al-Faqih, publicly criticized the Saudi government and the lack of freedoms and rights in the country. Amnesty International reported that on November 30, authorities arrested and briefly detained al-Mas'ari's sister, Suha, upon her arrival from the United Kingdom. Although the reasons for her arrest where not known and she was released a week later without charge, her brother's activities in exile may have been a strong factor. No international organization has been granted permission to carry out research in Saudi Arabia in recent years. Foreign journalists needing visas to enter Saudi Arabia were often refused access.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

Of an original 33,000 Iraqi civilians, refugees, and prisoners of war allowed refuge in Saudi Arabia in 1991, following the end of the Gulf war, the United Nations High Commissioner on Refugees reported that the agency continued to monitor the situation of a remaining 5,390 who remained held in Rafha refugee camp near the Saudi-Iraq border. While most of the refugees were resettled or voluntarily repatriated to Iraq, none were granted permanent asylum in Saudi Arabia. Saudi Arabia is not a party to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees or its 1967 Protocol, and there are no legislative procedures for granting asylum to refugees.

United States

The U.S. does not have a formal defense treaty with Saudi Arabia, but the informal and discreet security relationship between the two countries is nonetheless extensive. Saudi Arabia continued to be a major customer for U.S. manufactured weapons systems as well as training and maintenance contracts, and the U.S. had 4,873 military personnel in the country as of September 1998. Although since October 1997 Saudi Arabia has not allowed the U.S. to launch air attacks against Iraq from Saudi territory, the government did cooperate by supporting airborne refueling and command and control operations. According to the latest U.S. Congressional Research Service annual report on conventional weapons, U.S. arms deliveries to Saudi Arabia increased from $10.5 billion in 1991-94 to $16.4 billion in 1995-98. The State Department reported that in fiscal year 1998 it authorized commercial military exports to Saudi Arabia worth $528.8 million. As of this writing, the Defense Department had not declassified its report of direct government-to-government Foreign Military Sales (FMS) for this period.

Secretary of State Madeleine Albright visited Saudi Arabia in late January to introduce Frank Ricciardone, the newly-appointed "special representative for the transition of Iraq," to high Saudi officials. Secretary of Energy Bill Richardson visited in February to discuss investments by U.S. firms in Saudi oil and natural gas industries. When Secretary of Defense William Cohen met with Saudi leaders in Riyadh in March he announced the sale of advanced air-to-air missiles and an increase in joint ground forces training activities. Robert Seiple, who was sworn in as the first ambassador at large for international religious freedom in May, visited Saudi Arabia and Saudi Arabia figured prominently in the State Department's first annual report on international religious freedom. The Saudi chapter stated that "freedom of religion does not exist" in the country and that "Islamic practice is limited to that of the Wahabi order." The report claimed that U.S. officials, including the ambassador, raised the issue of religious freedom on "numerous occasions," but the only specific references were to meetings around issues of mistreatment of Christians residing in the country and accused of proseletizing.

Other than the chapter on Saudi Arabia in the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1998 , U.S. officials made no public comments on Saudi Arabia's human rights record, although the U.S. statement on women's rights at the 55th session of the Commission on Human Rights observed that "[w]omen in Saudi Arabia continue to face institutionalized discrimination affecting their right to equality in employment and education." Saudi Arabia, however, was not mentioned in the State Department's budget presentation to Congress in connection with programs to promote democratic values, civil society, and human rights.
SYRIA

Human Rights Developments

Political life in Syria remained one-dimensional, dominated by the ruling Ba'th Party apparatus and a handful of smaller, pro-government political parties that comprised the National Progressive Front (NPF). Syria's quadrennial parliamentary elections took place on November 30, 1998, with 7,364 candidates competing for 250 seats. Interior minister Muhamed Harba announced on December 3 that 167 candidates affiliated with NPF parties won seats and the remaining eighty-three went to independents. On January 14, 1999, the new parliament approved unanimously the nomination for another seven-year term in office of President Hafez al-Asad, who has ruled the country since 1970. A national referendum followed on February 10 to endorse his presidency. According to the interior ministry, the overwhelming majority approved of another term, with only 219 of some 8.9 million voters casting ballots of "disapprove."

Peaceful opposition politics or human rights monitoring was not tolerated inside Syria, and punishment for either activity was severe. The country continued to lack a law under which any political party could apply for legal status, and membership in the Muslim Brotherhood was punishable by the death penalty, pursuant to Law No. 49 of 1980. Infrequent calls for meaningful reform came only from organized Syrian political exiles. For example, after a secret meeting of its ruling council, the Syrian Muslim Brotherhood issued a statement in July urging the release of all political prisoners and "lifting the state of emergency, revoking martial law and the adoption of political pluralism." The statement also criticized "economic and social corruption," which it said "enlarged the circle of poverty and widened the gap [between various classes of] society."

Authorities still viewed human rights activists as criminals and subjected them to harsh punishment. Five associates of the Committees for the Defense of Democratic Freedoms and Human Rights in Syria (known by the acronym CDF) were serving eight to ten year prison terms imposed by the Supreme State Security Court in an unfair trial in 1992. They were the only human rights advocates in the Arab world serving such lengthy sentences for the peaceful exercise of the right to freedom of expression and association.

Authorities were unresponsive to requests for information about "disappearances" of Syrians, Lebanese and other foreign nationals, and stateless Palestinians believed detained in Syria. Families continued to contact international human rights organizations about "disappeared" relatives, some of them last seen ten years ago or longer. Lebanese activists abroad again pressed for the release of several hundred "disappeared" Lebanese who were abducted on Lebanese soil and were believed transferred to Syria. Exasperation with the Syrian government's silence about the "disappeared" was apparent in the comments of one Jordanian official. In an interview published in the daily al-Dustour (Amman) on November 7, 1998, then-information minister Nasir Judah criticized the lack of information about Jordanians imprisoned in Syria. "The number of Jordanian detainees in Syria is increasing and we expect some Syrian clarification. Where are they? What are the charges brought against them? Can their relatives visit them? How and where were they tried, and in which prisons are they now? And what are their prison terms?" He added: "If a Jordanian enters Syria and commits an offense, there are norms and diplomatic channels through which the offense can be communicated to us."

On July 12, President Asad issued Legislative Decree No. 3 of 1999, which granted a general amnesty for persons charged or convicted of a wide variety of offenses, ranging from misdemeanors to military desertion, foreign currency violations, hoarding or speculating in subsidized food, and other economic offenses. The state-owned daily Tishrin initially reported on July 13 that the amnesty would apply to tens of thousands of citizens. On July 14, the pan-Arab daily al-Hayat said it covered some 2,200 people imprisoned for "economic crimes" and that another 150,000 cases before the courts for "hoarding-related offenses" would be dropped. Syrian justice minister Hussein Hassoun told the press on July 19 that certain so-called economic offenses were anacronistic: "We think that the sentences imposed by these laws [on economic crimes] are severe and that the amnesty complements the economic opening under way." Syrian officials told Agence France-Presse on July 19 that "more than 200,000 cases" were included in the amnesty, and officials who requested anonymity added that about 250 political prisoners would be released. The decree reportedly also applied to cases that had been tried in absentia, and media reports noted that acommittee had been organized to prepare lists of the amnesty's beneficiaries. In September, a report from the Gulf Center for Strategic Studies, published in Bahrain's daily Akhbar al-Khaleej , said that 300 political prisoners were released in the amnesty, most of them members of the Muslim Brotherhood. As of this writing, only a few unconfirmed names of released political prisoners were circulating.

As in past years, some political prisoners were not released after the completion of their lengthy prison sentences. Amnesty International publicized the case of Doha `Ashur al-Askari, who continued to be held in Adra prison after the expiration of her six-year term in February. `Ashur, who was prosecuted and sentenced in the Supreme State Security Court for alleged membership in an unauthorized political party, went on hunger strike in June and was released in July.

An undetermined number of Syrians who fled the country during the harsh repression of the 1980s continued to live abroad as political exiles under difficult circumstances. These men and women no longer had valid Syrian passports, placing them at risk of arrest or deportation. Exiles, and their wives and children, could not obtain passports at Syrian embassies if their names were recorded on black lists in Damascus. Entire families thus were left without documentation of Syrian nationality when their passports expired. Exiles also reported to Human Rights Watch that the names of children born to Syrian political exiles abroad could not be entered in Syria's civil status register, making it impossible for them to obtain passports and in effect depriving them of legal recognition of their Syrian nationality. The daughter of one exile, who left Syria with her mother and siblings when she was ten years old, said that her applications for a passport were repeatedly denied. Without a passport, she was unable to return to Syria to pursue advanced university studies and marry her Syrian fianc. In another case, an exile reported that his son, who earned a medical degree in Jordan but lacked a passport, could not travel outside of Jordan for specialized medical studies. At a meeting in 1999 with nine Syrian women who were the wives or widows of political exiles, Human Rights Watch counted among them seventy-seven children without Syrian passports who were effectively stateless. The twenty-six-year-old daughter of one of the women said: "My father is dead. What is my crime? I have a right to my Syrian nationality and I want to go back to my country."

Inside Syria, the relatives of political exiles also faced restrictions on freedom of movement and in some cases were not permitted to leave the country. Syrians required an exit visa to travel abroad, and there were reports that those on black lists had their passports seized at the time they applied for these visas in Syria. Some exiles who approached Syrian embassies abroad were reportedly given permission to return but then were either arrested on entering the country or were not allowed to leave again. For example, Medhat Tayfour, who was born in Hama in 1954, left Syria in 1983, living first in Saudi Arabia and then Jordan, where he worked as a construction foreman for five years. His brother was a member of the Muslim Brotherhood living in exile. The Syrian embassy in Jordan reportedly gave Tayfour a laissez-passer travel document to enter Syria, in lieu of his passport, but when he left for Syria on May 22, 1998, he was arrested at the border. As of this writing, his whereabouts were unknown. His wife and five children, aged three to fifteen years old, remained in Jordan.

The state owned and strictly controlled newspapers and the audio-visual media, although there was movement to provide limited Internet access to some segments of Syrian society and to introduce cellular telephones. In June, the information ministry banned the pan-Arab daily al-Quds al-Arabi (London) from distribution in Syria. According to the London-based Center for Media Freedom, the ban was in reaction to articles in the newspaper that discussed bilateral contact between Syria and Israel to revive negotiations concerning a peace treaty that had been suspended in 1996.

On April 25, some thirty-five state institutions, including universities as well as ministries, were reportedly connected to the Internet. On July 15, the government daily al-Thawrah (Damascus) reported that the Syrian Telecommunications Establishment (STE) "will start providing Internet services to private and public sector companies, as well as email, to individuals with legal status." The paper said that email service required "the subscriber to have professional status, like doctors, journalists, and lawyers." The article also suggested that the STE would closely monitor users: "STE will be the only service provider and will suspend any subscriber who encodes files sent outside the Syrian net." STE chairman Makram Obeid announced on February 11 that he was optimistic that mobile phones would be available to the public before the end of 1999.

Bilateral ties between Syria and neighboring Lebanon continued to be extremely close. Critics of the dominant Syrian role in Lebanese affairs, and the presence of Syrian intelligence operatives and tens of thousands of troops there, maintained that Lebanon was "occupied." Syrian vice president Abdel Halim Khaddam reportedly had been relieved of his responsibility for Lebanon and the "file" transferred to Col. Bashar Asad, the president's son and apparent successor. In an interview published in al-Kifah al-Arabi (Beirut) on February 4, Colonel Asad warned Lebanese against reactivating "confessional and sectarian tendencies," and said that Syria would not "endorse such a dangerous game." He also said that the "relationship between Lebanon and Syria is that of one people in two countries who are bound by historical and geographical links as well as a joint struggle. As such, we cannot reduce the relationship to a mere file."

To the consternation of many Lebanese, Syria set up some thirty-six voting booths throughout Lebanon so that Syrian residents of the country, and troops, could easily cast ballots in the February Syrian presidential referendum. The Daily Star (Beirut) noted that in many voting stations "guest books were distributed to Lebanese citizens to record statements supporting Hafez al-Asad." In advance of the vote, Lebanon's influential Maronite patriarch, Cardinal Nasrallah Boutros Sfeir, said that the polling stations insulted Lebanon's sovereignty. "In other countries, foreigners vote at their embassies because they are considered to be the country's territory. We do insist on the importance of maintaining close relations with Syria, but we also require our country's sovereignty," the February 7 Daily Star quoted him as saying. According to press reports, the voting booths were guarded by personnel from Lebanon's Internal Security Forces and supervised by Syrian intelligence operatives in plainclothes. A February 10 dispatch from Reuters in Beirut described how "[a]t polling stations near the border, Syrian soldiers with machineguns forced voters into queues and then prompted them to dance and repeat pro-Asad slogans."

Defending Human Rights

The harsh repression in 1991-92 of a fledgling network of human rights activists inside the country continued to have a pernicious effect. There were no locally based organizations that openly monitored and reported on human rights conditions, and information about developments remained a scarce commodity. Syrian rights activists abroad continued to stress that Syrian authorities must recognize the right of citizens to form independent nongovernmental organizations and release those imprisoned for exercising peaceful freedom of association and expression.

Of the original group of ten CDF members who were sentenced to prison terms of five to ten years in 1992, five were still behind bars: Nizar Nayouf, Muhamed Ali Habib, Afif Muzhir, Bassam al-Shaykh, and Thabet Murad. Conditions were particularly harsh for Nayouf, who had been held in solitary confinement in Tadmor and Mezze military prisons since 1993. As reports circulated of his deteriorating physical and psychological health, including information that he had been diagnosed with Hodgkin's disease but refused medical treatment unless he renounced his political beliefs and acknowledged that he made "false declarations concerning the situation of human rights in Syria," international and regional human rights organizations campaigned for his release on humanitarian grounds.

In a letter to Human Rights Watch on December 10, 1998, Walid al-Moualem, Syria's ambassador to the U.S., denied that Nayouf had Hodgkin's disease. "Rather, he is suffering [from] hernia of nucleus pulposus [slipped disc]. The doctors treating him have concluded that he did not require surgery, treatment with medicines should be sufficient. His health condition has since improved," the ambassador wrote. He added that Nayouf and the other CDF activists convicted with him in 1992, had "deliberately fabricated lies against Syria and caused her harm, under the pretext of defending human rights." Subsequently, Human Rights Watch received credible information that authorities reportedly provided Nayouf with treatment for Hodgkin's disease in early 1999, following the international campaigning on his behalf, and that his condition improved. As of this writing, the most recent reliable report indicated that Nayouf's disease had again returned in its life-threatening form, based on test results in August, and that chemotherapy was necessary to ensure his short-term survival.

Aktham Nuaissa, a lawyer and one of the CDF members sentenced to nine years in prison in 1992, was released in 1998 because of poor health. But he has been unable to obtain a passport and was informed that he was not authorized to leave the country, making it impossible for him to travel abroad for medical care or to participate in regional and international human rights events. Syrian authorities have typically imposed such restrictions on the freedom of movement of former political prisoners.

The Role of the International Community

United Nations

The U.N. Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination considered at its fifty-fourth session, March 10-11, four periodic reports submitted by Syria as a state party to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. The committee singled out as a principal subject of concern Syria's discriminatory treatment of the Kurdish minority, particularly Syrian-born Kurds who were stateless. The committee noted that the stateless Kurds were "considered either as foreigners or as maktoumeen (unregistered) by the Syrian authorities" and "face administrative and practical difficulties in acquiring Syrian nationality, although they have no other nationality by birth." It recommended that authorities take further action to "protect the rights of all persons belonging to ethnic and national groups...notably the right to nationality and cultural self-expression." It called on Syria to "review its legislation on nationality in order to find an expeditious solution to the situation of Syrian-born Kurds and refugee children born in the Syrian Arab Republic."

United States

Syria remained one of the seven countries that the U.S. designated as "state sponsors of international terrorism," along with Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, and Sudan. The State Department's "Patterns of Global Terrorism," released on April 30, found "no evidence that Syrian officials have engaged directly in planning or executing international terrorist attacks since 1986." But it cited continuing U.S. concerns, including Syria's provision of "safe haven and support to several terrorist groups," and its failure "to stop anti-Israeli attacks by Hizballah and Palestinian rejectionist groups in southern Lebanon." The report noted that "Syria allowed-but did not participate in-a meeting of Palestinian rejectionist groups in Damascus in December [1998] to reaffirm their public opposition to the peace process." The State Department also acknowledged in "Background Notes: Syria," published in April, that "Syria and the U.S. have worked together in areas of mutual interest," citing the Middle East peace conference in Madrid (1991) and Operation Desert Storm against Iraq (1990-91).

Syria received no U.S. aid. Pursuant to U.S. trade sanctions first imposed in 1979 and broadened in 1986- both on the grounds of Syrian involvement in terrorism-Syria was denied funding from the U.S. Agency for International Development (AID), the Commodity Credit Corporation Program for Agricultural Products, and the Export Enhancement Program. U.S. exporters to Syria also were not permitted to benefit from EXIM Bank and OPIC. Export licenses were also required for dual-use items such as "aircraft, aircraft parts, and computers of U.S.-origin (or containing 25 percent U.S.-origin components and technology," the State Department reported in 1999. Bilateral trade in 1998 totalled $161 million in U.S.exports to Syria, and about $45 million in Syrian exports to the U.S., according to U.S. Census Bureau data. In November 1998, the U.S.-based energy company Conoco and the French Elf-Aquitaine announced a joint $430 million natural gas development and infrastructure construction contract with the state-owned Syrian Petroleum Company.

Clinton administration officials only commented publicly about discussions with Syrian counterparts concerning the ongoing military conflict on the south Lebanon-Israeli border and resumption of peace negotiations with Israel. For example, on March 14, Assistant Secretary of State Martin Indyk met President Asad in Damascus and reported that they discussed "how to prepare the ground for an effort to resume negotiations on the Syrian and Lebanese tracks" after the Israeli prime ministerial elections. At a press conference in Washington with Israeli prime minister-elect Ehud Barak on July 19, President Clinton said that President Asad had "a golden opportunity" to resume talks with Israel. He also stated that the U.S. sought "more normal relations" with Syria and that "anything that Syria does to disassociate itself from terrorists is a positive step in the right direction." On a visit to Damascus on September 4 to meet Mr. Asad and other officials, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright delivered a similar message. She said that her task was to "explore the prospects" for the resumption of peace talks between Israel, Syria, and Lebanon, and discuss "the importance of restoring and maintaining calm in Southern Lebanon" because it was "an area where incidents of violence tend to feed each other."

Bilateral tension erupted on December 19, 1998, when Syrian demonstrators stormed and damaged the U.S. and British embassies and the U.S. ambassador's residence in Damascus during Operation Desert Fox, the codename for the U.S. and British bombing campaign against Iraq that commenced on December 17. In February 1999, the government-owned daily Tishrin quoted Syrian defense minister Mustafa Tlass saying that the demonstrators were "brave youth whose actions dealt a slap to the United States." Following an official U.S. protest, Tlass said that he had been misquoted.

European Union

In a January 7 report in al-Ba'th daily (Damascus), the government reported that Syria's trade with E.U. countries was slowly growing. It named Germany, Italy, and France as the leaders in exports to Syria in 1997, and said that the largest market for Syrian exports was Italy, followed by France, Spain, and Germany. There was no indication that any of these major European trading partners publicly raised human rights concerns.
TUNISIA

Human Rights Developments

A growing number of students, lawyers, union activists, and human rights defenders defied the government's intolerance of political dissent and criticism. Many were sanctioned with incessant surveillance, harassment, reprisals against family members, or imprisonment.

Suspected Islamist sympathizers continued to receive the harshest treatment. Actual or suspected members of the outlawed an-Nahdha movement remained in prison, in exile, or at liberty but subject to harsh restrictions and the whims of the local police. They continued to comprise the majority of Tunisia's political prisoners, estimated at between 1,000 and 2,000. Most were convicted of nonviolent offenses such as membership in or attending meetings of an "unrecognized" organization. Women were barred from wearing religious head scarves in schools, government offices, and in public and were forced to remove them when visiting prisoners.

Tunisia has been almost entirely free of political violence for several years. The exiled leadership of an-Nahdha cited this as evidence of the movement's nonviolence. The authorities credit instead their own vigilance and insist that an-Nahdha is extremist and terrorist, citing an Islamist role in sporadic disturbances and an alleged coup plot that preceded a massive crackdown in 1991-1992.

Torture and illegal detentions remained commonplace even as legal reforms were adopted at the initiative of President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali that broadened the definition of torture under domestic law and reduced the permissible length of incommunicado detention from ten days to three days renewable but once. But the problem with torture in Tunisia was less one of definition than a climate of impunity. That climate was fostered by a judiciary that ignored evidence of torture and routinely convicted defendants on the basis of coerced confessions.

Similarly, the problem with incommunicado detention was less the legal time limit than the police practice of exceeding the limit and then covering it up. Judges colluded by blocking defense efforts to demonstrate that police had falsified the real date of arrest.

The U.N. Committee against Torture in November 1998 declared itself "disturbed by the reported widespread practice of torture" in Tunisia and "concerned over the pressure and intimidation used by officials to prevent the victims from lodging complaints." The committee charged that by denying these allegations, "the authorities are in fact granting those responsible for torture immunity from punishment, thus encouraging the continuation of these abhorrent practices."

The lack of judicial independence was manifest in political trials throughout the year, including several attended by international observers. The most visible case involved twenty-one defendants, thirteen of them students, tried in a single twenty-hour session before the Tunis Court of First Instance on July 10. Sixteen of the accused had been in detention since their arrest in early 1998, following demonstrations that broke out on campuses over the conditions of study. They were initially charged with belonging to a criminal and terrorist gang, holding unauthorized meetings, defamation of the judiciary, and other charges. One of their lawyers, Radhia Nasraoui, and five others were later indicted as codefendants, including Nasraoui's husband, leftist activist Hamma Hammami. He and two others were tried in absentia and remained in hiding as this report went to press. Charges against one were dropped.

The sixteen defendants who had been in pretrial detention all disavowed their "confessions" and said, almost without exception, that they had been tortured into signing. They described to the court methods of torture including beatings on sensitive parts of the body, tying their hands behind the back and hanging them from the ceiling by the wrists; and the "rotisserie" (poulet roti ) method of tying their wrists together under the knees and passing a pole horizontally between arms and thighs.

The defendants were systematically refused medical examinations despite having exercised their right under article 13bis of the code of criminal procedure to request them. This provision "requires" a medical exam when requested by detainees or their relatives, according to the government's 1997 report to the U.N. Committee against Torture. The defendants were also prevented from calling witnesses whom they said would refute the date of arrest as recorded by the police. Thus, the judge prevented the defendants from challenging the "confessions" and instead used them as the main evidence to convict them all.

Despite the purely political and nonviolent nature of the offenses being prosecuted, twenty of the defendants-including the three in hiding-received prison sentences ranging from fifteen months to nine years. (Only one defendant, lawyer Nasraoui, escaped actual prison time and received a suspended six-month sentence instead.) In one sign of a bolder civil society, more than one hundred Tunisian lawyers appeared in court in solidarity with their colleague Nasraoui, many of them testifying in her defense.

There was also more assertiveness during the year among union dissidents seeking greater autonomy from government control of the General Union of Tunisian Workers. However, ten of them were detained briefly in May, apparently for their peaceful challenges to the union leadership.

Tunisian authorities continued to punish, in many cases administratively, former political prisoners ranging from opposition party head Mohamed Mouada in Tunis to obscure suspected Nahdha sympathizers living in rural villages. Authorities usually deprived them of passports, required them to sign in on a daily or other frequent basis with the police, and subjected their homes to searches without warrants. Public-sector jobs were off-limits and in many cases private-sector employers were pressured not to employ them.

Family members of political prisoners, ex-prisoners, political refugees abroad, and human rights activists were questioned, followed, subjected to home searches, denied passports, and sometimes imprisoned themselves on trumped-up charges.

1998 law enhancing judicial oversight of the issuance of passports provided no noticeable restraint on the practice of arbitrarily violating the right of critics and their relatives to travel abroad. For example, mathematician Moncef Ben Salem's son Oussama was refused a passport to study abroad for no apparent reason other than that his father had been imprisoned in the early 1990s for criticizing President Ben Ali and continued to speak out against the virtual house arrest imposed on him and his family.

In June, authorities conditionally released prisoners Rachida Ben Salem and Radhia Aouididi, respectively the wife and fianc e of political refugees in Europe. The women had been convicted for trying to leave the country illegally after their applications for passports had been refused. Following their release the two were required to sign in regularly with the police and as of this writing had not been permitted to travel abroad to join their fianc and husband. A brother of Aouididi and a brother of her fianc spent five months in prison in 1998-1999 on dubious charges that were eventually dropped. The charges were reinstated on appeal by the prosecutor and scheduled for a court hearing as this report went to press.

Prison conditions in Tunisia were severe by design rather than due to ecomonic constraints; the country's per capita income is one of the continent's highest. Overcrowding was severe and disciplinary measures cruel and degrading. Political prisoners were shuttled incessantly among institutions, forcing families to travel great distances for visits. Several leaders of the Nahdha movement, sentenced to long prison terms during unfair trials before military courts in 1992, were held in isolation cells and allegedly denied adequate medical treatment. For several years, leader Ali Laaridh has been held in round-the-clock isolation except when he received family visits, and was prevented from receiving reading and writing materials, his family reported.

Tunisia's television, radio, and daily press exhibited no independence when it came to examining government policies. However, smaller periodicals such as al-Mawqif monthly published some critical articles. Foreign newspapers were restricted from entering the country if they mentioned Tunisia in an unfavorable way. Fourteen issues of the Paris daily Le Monde and seven of Lib ration were banned during the first half of 1999, according to the French organization Reporters sans Fronti res.

Tunisians could access the Internet more easily than in previous years as prices dropped, applications were processed more quickly, and public pay-per-use access points opened for the first time. However, Tunisia's Internet legislation violated the privacy rights of users, the government continued to block the website of Amnesty International, and Tunisians voiced wariness that their online communications, like phone and fax lines, were subject to surveillance.

On October 24, President Ben Ali was reelected with an official tally of 99.42 percent of the votes cast. His Democratic Constitutional Rally party captured 92 percent of the votes for parliamentary seats; however, a new electoral law reserved at least twenty percent of the seats to other parties.

With respect to landmines, Tunisia could take pride in becoming in November 1998 the first North African country to ratify the treaty banning anti-personnel landmines. It has since begun to destroy stockpiles, as required by the treaty.
Defending Human Rights

Tunisians who discussed abuses publicly ran risks that included loss of work or passport, arrest, vandalism of property, harassment of relatives, and physical and phone surveillance. Despite these risks, the human rights community exhibited new vitality in 1999. The National Council on Liberties in Tunisia (NCLT), a monitoring organization formed by veteran activists in December 1998, issued critical bulletins throughout the year even though the minister of interior in March rejected legal status for the council, saying its application did not conform to provisions of the Associations Law. The council continued to speak out even after three of its founding members were arrested in separate incidents. Omar Mestiri was picked up on May 12 and held overnight. Moncef Marzouki was then arrested on June 5 by plainclothesmen who refused to identify themselves or show a warrant, and then released on June 7. Both were questioned by an investigating judge on various charges including maintaining an "illegal" organization, defaming "the public order" and "spreading false information intended to disturb the public order." Neither had been formally indicted as of this writing but they remained barred from foreign travel. In reprisal for his activism, Marzouki's work as a professor of medicine in a public university and hospital was sharply circumscribed and his home telephone service cut.

A third NCLT cofounder, Taoufik Ben Brik, endured even more severe harassment, no doubt because his accounts of repression in Tunisia published in European media made him stand out among a generally compliant Tunisian press corps. His phone and fax service were frequently interrupted throughout the year. His wife's car was vandalized. On April 28 he was prevented from traveling to Switzerland. On May 20, he was assaulted on the street with sticks and bicycle chains by three men that Ben Brik identified as among the more than twenty who kept his house under regular surveillance. Four days later, his house was extensively searched and he was detained for three hours. The government press office ridiculed Ben Brik's claims of being harassed, describing him as someone who "passes himself off as a martyr" in order "to escape from anonymity." The police opened an investigation into the assault but no suspects were identified.

At least twenty-five lawyers were refused passports at some point during the year. As of this writing, most had received them but rights lawyers Jamaleddine Bida of Tunis, Anouar Kousri of Bizerte, and Nejib Hosni of Le Kef continued to be barred from travel. Attorneys who were also office-holders within the Tunisian Human Rights League (Ligue Tunisienne des droits de l'Homme, LTDH) reported losing clients in their private practices due to pressure from authorities. Nejib Hosni, an outspoken human rights lawyer who had been released from prison in 1996 after serving two and-a-half years on spurious charges, remained barred from practicing his profession. Najet Yacoubi, one of the lawyers most active in the independent Tunisian Association of Democratic Women, remained under close surveillance for much of the year.

The lawyer most in the line of fire was Radhia Nasraoui. She was convicted as a "coconspirator" for organizing an "illegal" meeting in her office (see above). For over a year preceding the trial she had been placed under a judicial order preventing her from leaving greater Tunis, thus impeding her defense of political detainees elsewhere. In February she was given a two-week suspended sentence for leaving the capital to attend her mother-in-law's funeral after her application to do so was ignored. Nasraoui spent much of the year under intense police surveillance that extended to her eleven- and seventeen-year-old daughters and that was conducted in a manner calculated to unnerve and terrorize. The ransacking of her office in February 1998, in which case files were stolen, remained an unsolved crime as this report went to press. Nasraoui had publicly accused the police of being behind the break-in, which was not the first such suspicious assault on her property.

On September 22, Khema s Ksila, a vice-president of the Tunisian League for Human Rights, was conditionally released from prison, just before completing the second year of a three-year prison sentence imposed for a statement he had issued in his own name denouncing President Ben Ali's repressive policies. The day after his release, police briefly detained and pressed Ksila to sign an engagement not to discuss his situation; he refused. In March, while Ksila was still in prison, his son was prevented from traveling in March to Cairo to accept an award on his behalf. In a June 15 response to an inquiry about Ksila from the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights, the government noted that the prisoner had yet to petition for clemency. This argument seemed to reinforce the determination made in May by the U.N. Working Group on Arbitrary Detention that Ksila's imprisonment was "arbitrary." Its May 20 finding stated that, "contrary to the information provided by the government," Ksila's offending communiqu was "no call to violence but rather...a vigorous political criticism and a call to protest by peaceful means."The Working Group urged Tunisia to modify "its legislation to adapt it to pertinent international law."

The brothers of two leading two human rights campaigners were imprisoned on dubious charges indicating they had been targeted for reasons of kinship. Moncef Marzouki's brother Mohamed Ali Bedoui served a six-month sentence in 1999 for refusing to comply with an administrative order that he sign in daily with the police. He spent half of 1998 in prison on similar charges.

On July 30, Abderraouf Chammari was given a twelve-month sentence on charges of defaming public authorities and spreading false information in a remark uttered in a private conversation about high-level corruption. Chammari, a senior government bureaucrat with no previous reputation for political activity, denied making the comment. He is the brother of Khemais Chammari, an activist and member of a legal opposition party who has continued to defend human rights in his native land while living in France since 1997. On August 31 he was freed "on humanitarian grounds" after spending almost two months behind bars.

Tunisian rights groups remained hampered in their efforts to attract wider audiences. First, they were subjected to a blackout by the main Tunisian media except when their declarations could be presented as favorable to the government. Second, their offices and gatherings were subjected to conspicuous police surveillance that scared off all but the most committed members and determined victims. Third, attempts to hold gatherings of any size were blocked. For example, on December 12, 1998, participants in a fiftieth anniversary commemoration of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights had to crowd into the modest office of the Tunisian Human Rights League after authorities blocked their use of the larger venue they had reserved.

The Role of the International Community

European Union

The Euro-Mediterranean Association Agreement with Tunisia-the first and so far the only one in force-completed its first year without clear indications whether, and how, the European side intended to implement the human rights provisions in a concrete fashion. (Article 2 defines respect for human rights and democratic principles as an essential element of the accord.) The European Council gave no public indication through mid-October that the lack of improvement in Tunisia's human rights record might adversely affect relations. However, in a declaration made at the closed-door meeting of the bilateral Association Committee in Tunis on June 25, the E.U. insisted, over Tunisian objections, on the right to raise human rights concerns at these periodic "technical" meetings.

A March 1999 report prepared for the European Commission evaluated its "MEDA Democracy Program," a program of grants aimed at promoting democracy and human rights in the context of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership. The report focused on six countries receiving grants from the 22.85 million ecus disbursed between 1995 and 1999. It explained that Syria and Tunisia received the smallest grants due to "the severe political obstacles to directly assist[ing] NGOs in these countries without agreement by the governments and the totalitarian nature of the political systems." The European Commission had approved a grant to the LTDH to conduct training on electoral systems, but canceled it in response to objections raised by the Tunisian government. Meanwhile, the Commission provided a grant to the pro-government Higher Committee for Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.

United States

The U.S. continued to signal muted disappointment in the Tunisian government's human rights practices while praising its stability, liberal economic and pro-Western foreign policies, and its support for the Arab-Israeli peace process. The U.S. engaged in joint military exercises with Tunisia and made available to it equipment under its Excess Defense Articles program, but provided no direct economic or military aid. Through the U.S.-North African Economic Partnership launched in 1998, the U.S. promoted investment in Tunisia and its neighbors. A summit between presidents Clinton and Ben Ali planned for March was cancelled by the Tunisians, reportedly out of dissatisfaction with the level of protocol offered by Washington.

The only direct public criticism of Tunisia's record, at least through mid-October, came in the thorough survey of abuses provided by the State Department's annual Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1998. Privately, Washington discussed human rights with Tunisia "regularly and at senior levels, " according to the U.S. Embassy in Tunis. U.S. Ambassador Robin Raphel and visiting officials met on several occasions with Tunisian rights activists, and embassy staff attended at least four trials with human rights dimensions.

The two most senior officials to visit Tunisia during the year-Secretary of Defense William Cohen in February and Assistant Secretary of State Martin S. Indyk in September-met with the president and publicly hailed the state of bilateral relations while avoiding any public hint of dismay over human rights. At best, they refrained from bestowing unwarranted praise publicly on their ally's record on human rights and democratization. The same cannot be said for the State Department's budget presentation to Congress for fiscal year 2000, which hailed Tunisia as a "stable, democratic country" and overlooked its rights abuses and intolerance of political pluralism.

Unwarranted praise was conferred by First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton during her goodwill visit to the region. In a March 26 speech in Tunis she hailed Tunisia as a "model for the entire world" with respect to the progress made "on behalf of women and women's rights." But women, like men, were thwarted or punished whenever they exercised their rights to speak, associate, and assemble in a manner that displeased the authorities. Clinton, moreover, accorded almost no time to the independent rights community during her visit. But she did meet on March 27 with President Ben Ali and, according to U.S. officials quoted in the media, discussed human rights with him.
YEMEN

Human Rights Developments

On September 25 President Ali Abdallah Saleh won the first Yemeni direct presidential election, gaining an officially claimed 96.3 percent of the total vote, and entering his fifth term in office. The president pledged to fight corruption and build a modern state based on law and order. In his first act as he entered his new term he resigned his position as head of the Supreme Judicial Council, a measure that could contribute to judicial independence.

In 1999 human rights problems in Yemen received greater international attention largely because of the high-profile trial of eight British and two Algerian nationals on charges of planning terrorist attacks in the country. The trial in Aden, which resulted in convictions in August and prison terms of between seven months and seven years, highlighted serious shortcomings in the Yemeni justice system, including arbitrary detention, torture, and unfair trials. Women convicted of violating traditional sexual mores were sometimes held in detention beyond the end of their sentence until a male guardian collected them from the prison. Many prisoners and detainees were held in unregulated detention centers operated by tribal leaders or branches of the security forces.

Journalists and opposition political leaders were frequently subjected to detention, assault, or intimidation by security forces and unidentified armed gangs. Newspapers were subjected to closures and arbitrary restrictions in violation of local and international law. Reporters who exposed government corruption were particular targets. In the run-up to presidential elections in September, only one candidate was permitted to stand for elections against incumbent President Ali Abdullah Saleh and he was a member of the president ruling political party.

Many independent and opposition newspapers in Yemen faced prosecution or extrajudicial harassment over the course of the year. Prominent editors and journalists, such as the late Dr. Abdul Aziz al-Saqqaf of the Yemen Times , Hisham Bashraheel of Al-Ayyam , No'aman Qaid Seif of Al-Shoura and Abdel Latif al-Qutbi of Al-Haq were detained and interrogated. Other newspapers which faced prosecution and harassment included Al-Rai al-Aam, Al-Thawri, Al-Wahdawi, and Al-Balagh.

Reporting on high-level government corruption led to some prosecutions. For example, the Yemen Times was accused of slander and spreading lies after publishing articles in November 1998 accusing government officials of channeling international development funds into their own bank accounts. The prosecution was dropped in July following the death of editor Abdul-Aziz al-Saqqaf in a traffic accident. The weekly newspaper, Al-Shoura , the official mouthpiece of the opposition political party, the Union of Yemeni Popular Forces (UYPF), was a particular target of official harassment and restrictions because of its criticism of government policies. Qayed Numan Seif, the editor of Al-Shoura, was detained for two days in February 1999 following the publication of an article entitled, "The President is Asked to Fight Corruption." On February 25, the Ministry of Information issued a decree ordering Al-Shoura shutdown following the publication of a second version of the newspaper by a small group of former UYPF members. This constituted a violation of the press law which forbids the publication of two newspapers with the same title. Al-Shoura journalists and UYPF leaders claimed that the government had financed the publication of the "false" Al-Shoura in order to discredit them and accused the government of engaging in activities aimed at discrediting their opponents and creating a pretext for punitive legal action. From January 1998 Al-Shoura and its journalists were prosecuted on eleven separate occasions for articles which appeared in the newspaper alleging official corruption or criticizing government policies.

In early March editor of the Aden weekly Al-Ayyam , Hisham Bashraheel and journalist Haitham al-Ghareeb were taken into detention, and the publication of the newspaper was suspended. In May they were brought to trial on charges of "spreading ideas which harm national unity." They were convicted in August and given suspended prison terms after spending five months in detention.

Other sensitive subjects, coverage of which could lead to prosecution, included the deepening security relationship between the Yemeni and U.S. armed forces, and the role of Yemen in the conflict between Eritrea and Ethiopia in the horn of Africa. On March 2, 1999 armed members of the security forces in plainclothes detained sixty-eight-year -old Abdel Latif al-Qutbi, editor-in-chief of the opposition weekly Al-Haq. He had received a summons to appear before the Press and Publications Department of the Office of the Public Prosecutor in connection with an article that had appeared in the newspaper alleging that Yemen would permit U.S. forces to make use of its military facilities on the island of Socotra, in the Arabian Sea. He was detained for three days and criminal procedures were opened against him by the Press and Publications Prosecutor. Al-Qutbi is a leading member of the opposition political party, League of the Sons of Yemen (RAY).

In April, the government appeared to increase its influence over the Yemeni Journalists Syndicate by forcing it to admit hundreds of new members from the armed forces on the grounds that they were military journalists and war correspondents. The official armed services newspaper, 26 September regularly denounced independent journalists and editors as "traitors" and "foreign agents."

Harassment of the independent press was not limited to threats of legal action and prosecutions. Journalists and editors complained of being threatened and intimidated by members of the security forces and at least eight journalists have been beaten up by unidentified attackers alleged to be linked to the authorities. On May 10, four masked men attacked Saif al-Hadheri, the editor of Al-Shumu'a weekly newspaper at his Sana'a home. He was hospitalized as a result of his injuries.

Allegations of torture were at the center of controversy over the trial of eight Britons of Yemeni background and two Algerians on charges of conspiracy to commit acts of terrorism on behalf of extremist Islamist groups. The authorities claimed that the group of ten were associated with Islamist militants convicted of kidnapping sixteeen western tourists in December 1998, four of whom died when the Yemeni security forces tried to free them from their captors. Six of the ten were detained at the end of December and were brought to trial on January 27. Four more were brought to trial on February 13. The trial took place at hearings over the following six months. While the defendants and their supporters pointed to numerous irregularities in the trial procedures, their main complaint was that the statements made by the defendants to prosecutors had been extracted under torture. On April 5, British Prime Minister Tony Blair called on the Yemeni government to permit an independent doctor to examine the prisoners. A British Home Office pathologist had reported signs of "serious physical ill-treatment" when he met with some of the prisoners in February. On May 6, after carrying out an examination of four of the detainees, a three person medical team, including a Dutch doctor, reported that they "found no evidence of torture" in their examinations. A comprehensive, independentexamination of all the prisoners was never carried out and the defendants were convicted on August 9 and sentenced to prison terms ranging from seven months to seven years.

In contrast to this general trend of inaction in the face of torture, on June 1 Mawheet Primary Court convicted police officer Major Ali Shouaibi of torturing to death an eighteen-year-old criminal suspect, Mohammed Kowkabani. The testimony at the officer's trial brought to light a horrific series of coercive measures, including beating with cudgels and immersion in water, suffered by the prisoner. Major Shouaibi was sentenced to ten years' imprisonment and ordered to pay $19,000 compensation ( diyah ) to the victim's family. Two other police officers also received prison terms.

Yemen continued to be plagued by tribal and inter-communal violence, which the state seemed powerless to control. Some foreign visitors were kidnapped and held hostage in demand of payment or concessions from the government. For example, on August 20 a married couple employed by the French embassy was kidnapped by tribesmen and held for twelve days before being released. Earlier, in December 1998, four western hostages were killed in a shoot-out between kidnappers and the security forces. The conflict between the state and armed groups also resulted in political violence, including a bomb blast which killed at least three at a supermarket in the center of the capital, Sana'a, close to the British Embassy in late August.

Yemen continued to impose the death penalty for crimes of murder and rape. Amnesty International reported that a presidential decree in August 1998 extended the death penalty "to any person who heads a group which engages in kidnapping (or) theft of public or private property by use of force." Most executions were carried out in public and by a firing squad. The bodies of two men executed for murder and rape in San`a in August were strung up at the city's entrance as a deterrent.

The arbitrary detentions of women convicted of "moral" offenses for indefinite periods under the Yemeni penal code violated article 15(1) of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), to which Yemen was a party. The government continued to detain female prisoners beyond their sentences until they were collected by a male guardian.

Yemen showed leadership in the Middle East in the movement to ban antipersonnel landmines. It was one of three Middle Eastern countries to become a state party to the Mine Ban Treaty, along with Jordan and Qatar. According to the annual report of 1999 of the International Campaign To Ban Landmines, Yemen signed the treaty on December 4, 1997 and ratified it on September 1 1998. It attended Vienna and Brussels preparatory meetings, endorsed the pro-treaty Brussels Declaration in June 1997, was a full participant in treaty negotiations in Oslo in September 1997, and voted in favor of pro-ban U.N. General Assembly Resolutions in 1996, 1997, and 1998.

In November 1997, the Yemeni Mines Awareness Committee organized a Regional Seminar on Landmines with Radda Barnen (Swedish Save the Children), sponsored by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and hosted by the President's Office. In December 1998 the committee registered as a separate NGO under the name Yemen Mine Awareness Association, and dealt with mine awareness education in mine infested areas in the south of Yemen and advocacy work on banning landmines. Although Yemen had in past years imported significant numbers of landmines, primarily from the Soviet Union as well as Czechoslovia, Hungary, and Italy, according to the government Yemen has never manufactured or exported antipersonnel mines.

The government limited public access to the internet, using proxy servers to filter and block specified content between the end-user and the Internet.

Defending Human Rights

The Yemeni government permitted international human rights organizations to visit and local human rights groups functioned within the country. However, the freedom of local monitors was impaired by the restrictions on freedom of expression and a climate of intimidation surrounding criticism of government policy. Several groups reported on human rights conditions in Yemen from outside the country. The ICRC was able to conduct visits to official prisons throughout the country, but its inspections did not cover unofficial detention facilities. In March the Supreme Elections Committee (SEC), with the assistance of the International Foundation of Election Systems (IFES), organized a National Colloqium on the Development of Election Adminstration in Yemen, bringing together governmental and nongovernmental actors to discuss issues such as voter education, election day operations and candidate and ballot issues. In September IFES opened a field office in Sana`a. On June 28, Yemen hosted an eighteen-country international conference of government and opposition delegates from states deemed to be engaged in a transition to democracy.

The Role of the International Community

The highest level U.S. visitor to Yemen was General Anthony Zinni, commander of U.S. forces in the Middle East, whose visits on several occasions indicated the importance of U.S. - Yemeni military relations. Relations with the UK were strained by the kidnapping of British tourists and by irregularities in the trial of eight British nationals on terrorist charges. The trial brought to light links between Islamist opposition groups based in London and violent Islamist groups operating in Yemen. The British government was embarrassed by the charges against its nationals while faced with an obligation to uphold the rights of its citizens on trial.

In November 1998, the E.U. welcomed the acceptance of the first ruling by the London International Arbitration Committee on the territorial dispute by Yemen and Eritrea over islands in the Red sea in a declaration by the Presidency of the European Union on Yemen/Eritrea. In December the estimated E.U. aid to Yemen for 1998 according to Mr. Ahmed Sofan, Yemeni Minister of Planning and Development, was $38.1 million.

German Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer in a press conference in February commended Yemeni officials and other parties for their efforts to release German hostages and said the recent abductions of Germans in Yemen would not affect ties between the two countries. The E.U. is one of Yemen's major aid partners. One of the poorest Arab states, Yemen was implementing economic reforms agreed on with the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund as of February 1999, when the E.U. approved a $14 million aid package to help the state develop its strategic food reserves. In May, the E.U. agreed to provide Yemen with 6.7 million Euro (about $7 m) to support health sector reform. Inan aid project intended to improve treatment, prevention and awareness of malaria, and implement training of specialist staff, the E.U. cleared humanitarian aid worth Euro 800,000. Malaria was one of the country's biggest health problems, affecting up to 60 percent of the population, and particularly afflicting children, pregnant women, and the elderly. The European Community Humanitarian Office (ECHO) managed the project's funds.

In January 1999 the U.N. Committee on the Rights of the Child considered Yemen's second periodic report and in its concluding observations expressed concern at "the use of physical punishment, including flogging, and torture in detention centres."
UNITED STATES

On December 10, 1998, President Bill Clinton issued an executive order affirming the U.S. commitment to honor its obligations under the international human rights treaties to which it is a party. By doing so, the president raised expectations that the United States would begin to embrace international human rights standards at home, ending the country's longstanding failure to acknowledge human rights law as U.S. law. As 1999 ended, however, little progress stemming from the executive order was apparent. Most public officials remained either ignorant of their human rights obligations or content to ignore them.

As in previous years, serious human rights violations continued to be committed by federal, state, and local officials. The courts, administrative agencies, and legislatures were often unable or unwilling to hold abusers accountable, to provide protection to victims, or to secure the changes needed to bring laws and practice in line with international standards. Among the results of these shortcomings were rampant impunity for brutal police and prison officers; discrimination against ethnic minorities and gay men and lesbians; and the curtailment of internationally-recognized rights of asylum-seekers and other immigrants. State-sponsored executions, even of juvenile offenders and the mentally ill, continued at a record pace, while many of the nation's prisons and jails-increasingly populated by racial minorities convicted for nonviolent property or drug crimes-continued to be overcrowded, violent places where inmates' basic rights to health, sanitary conditions, and productive activities were frequently ignored and where sexual abuse by male inmates and, in women's prisons, by male guards, was persistent and unchecked by disciplinary measures or prosecution.

Police Abuse

In May, New York City police officer Justin A. Volpe stunned observers when in mid-trial he pleaded guilty on charges that he tortured Abner Louima by forcing a stick into his rectum. The August 1997 incident took place in the bathroom at a police station house. A federal jury convicted another officer who allegedly assisted Volpe during the assault. Volpe's guilty plea followed the testimony of fellow officers who implicated him in the attack. The traditional code of silence among officers was weakened in this case, in part due to the gruesome details of the attack and in part due to pressure brought by prosecutors. Some officers face additional conspiracy and perjury charges related to the assault and its aftermath.

In February, West African Amadou Diallo was shot at forty-one times and struck by nineteen bullets fired by New York City Police Department (NYPD) officers. Diallo, who was unarmed, was shot by officers from the NYPD's Street Crime Unit. The shooting put the unit's practices, and the NYPD generally, under increased scrutiny, and the police commissioner and the mayor on the defensive. Investigations by the New York State Attorney General's office, the city's Public Advocate's office, the U.S. Justice Department, and the U.S. Civil Rights Commission proceeded, but few significant reforms appeared on the horizon.

These incidents crystallized concerns over the practices of the country's largest police force because of the viciousness of the attack reported by Abner Louima and the number of shots fired at Amadou Diallo-and the fact that neither were involved in criminal activities-but they were just the latest examples of a problem that has plagued the United States for decades. Unjustified shootings, severe beatings, fatal chokings, and unnecessarily rough treatment by police and sheriffs' officers occur in cities and towns throughout the country.

The Diallo shooting, and protests surrounding it, prompted Attorney General Janet Reno to give her first detailed statement regarding police brutality, six years into her term. She made several important recommendations for police departments to improve their accountability systems and to reduce incidents of abuse. She recommended: that complainants be allowed to file complaints without intimidation; that police and sheriffs' departments institute a vigorous system for investigating allegations thoroughly and fairly; that swift discipline be imposed when complaints are sustained; that early warning systems to identify "repeat offenders" on forces be created and utilized; that superior officers send a signal that abuses will not be tolerated; and that the rank and file make it unacceptable to remain silent about other officers' misconduct. She called for improved screening and training of recruits, and for empowered independent auditors or inspector generals to provide an external check on law enforcement practices and policies. These were all among recommendations made by Human Rights Watch in a report published in July 1998. But the attorney general's recommendations were just that-suggestions for police departments to accept or ignore. Thus far, the Justice Department has refused to consider conditioning the millions of dollars in grants to police departments on their taking steps toward curtailing abuses and holding brutal officers accountable.

In June, the attorney general convened a conference focusing on police brutality and allegations of racial profiling-targeting of suspects on racial grounds-by police in vehicle stops. The conference, attended by civil rights leaders, police officials, Justice Department representatives, and briefly by the president, produced no tangible results on the brutality front. There was more progress on the issue of racial profiling as the president ordered all federal law enforcement agencies to collect data relating to the race of drivers whose vehicles are stopped and searched. The purpose of the data collection was to identify and end the discriminatory practice of racial profiling.

The Justice Department began using its powers to initiate more frequent investigations into whether a police department exhibited a "pattern or practice" of unchecked abuse. In addition to the investigation of the NYPD, the police departments in Washington, D.C., Los Angeles and Riverside, California, Columbus, Ohio, and New Orleans, Louisiana were among those already under review. The purpose of the investigations was to determine whether there was a pattern or practice of unaddressed abuse, and to compel departments to make reforms to address poor training, supervision, or other failures. Investigations into racial profiling in New Jersey, Michigan, and Florida were also initiated.

Overincarceration, Drugs, and Race

Despite the continuing drop in crime rates, the world's largest prison population continued to grow because of punitive criminal justice policies that mandated prison terms for increasing numbers of offenses, increased the length of sentences, and reduced the availability of parole. In 1999, the U.S. Department of Justice revealed that the number of men and women behind bars in the United States reached 1.8 million atthe end of 1998. The rate of incarceration rose to 668 inmates for every 100,000 residents. One in every 149 residents was a sentenced prisoner. The number of women in prison reached 84,427-double the number in 1990.

Prison was not reserved for notably dangerous or violent offenders: 53 percent of inmates sentenced by state courts were convicted of nonviolent drug, property, or public order offenses. National drug control policies continued to emphasize a criminal justice response to drug abuse. In 1998, nearly 1.6 million arrests were made for drug law violations, three-quarters of them for possession offenses. At the end of 1997, the most recent year for which such data was available, some 227,400 men and women were in state prisons for drug felonies; 150,000 more drug felons were sentenced to jail. Available research indicated most were nonviolent, low-level offenders. Offenders convicted in state courts received a mean sentence of fifty-one months; in federal courts the mean was eighty-nine months. Indeed, federal courts sentenced convicted drug offenders almost as severely as violent offenders-average prison sentences were only a year and a half longer for violent offenders.

Current criminal justice policies continued to have a disproportionate impact on African Americans. Although they comprised about 12 percent of the national adult population, they comprised 49.4 percent of the prison population. On average, black men were at least six times more likely than whites to be in prison, with an incarceration rate of 3,253 per 100,000 residents compared to a white male rate of 491. Twelve states and the District of Columbia incarcerated blacks at a rate more than ten times that of whites. The Department of Justice calculated that 8.6 percent of black non-Hispanic males between the ages of twenty-five and twenty-nine were in prison, compared to 0.9 percent of white males in the same age group. Black non-Hispanic females were eight times more likely than white to be in prison.

The extraordinary disparity between black and white incarceration rates reflected in part the fact that black men constituted a disproportionate share-44 percent-of all felons convicted of the violent crimes that receive long sentences. But it also reflected the impact of the country's war on drugs. Although drug use and selling cut across all racial, socio-economic, and geographic lines, law enforcement strategies targeted street-level drug dealers and users from low-income, predominantly minority, urban areas. As a result, the arrest rates for drug offenses were six times higher for blacks than for whites. Although blacks constituted an estimated fifteen percent of all drug users, they constituted 36 percent of arrests for drug possession and 49 percent of state felony convictions for possession. Fifty-six percent of all drug offenders in state prison were black.

After years of public endorsement of the incarceration binge, increasingly prominent voices joined numerous federal judges and activist groups to decry mandatory minimum sentences and the overincarceration of drug and other nonviolent offenders. General Barry R. McCaffrey, the retired general who directed the White House's drug control policy, warned of prisons becoming a "drug gulag" and pointed out that harsh sentencing laws "have caused thousands of low-level and first-time offenders to be incarcerated at high cost for long sentences that are disproportionate to their crimes." While the use of drug courts and a preference for treatment over incarceration was gaining momentum in some states, legislative reform of mandatory sentencing laws proved elusive. In New York, for example, the legislature adjourned once again without succeeding in rewriting twenty-five year old drug law legislation that had been roundly condemned as draconian, ineffective and counterproductive. In California, the legislature failed to reform the state's "three strikes" law that required a life sentence for individuals convicted of three felonies. The law had led to life sentences for such petty offenses as stealing a $20 bottle of vitamins, or breaking into a church to steal food.

Conditions in Custody

Prisons remained overcrowded, with thirty-seven states, the District of Columbia, and the federal prison system operating at 100 percent or more of capacity; the largest prison system in the country, California, was operating at over twice its reported capacity. Most inmates had scant opportunities for meaningful work, training, education, treatment, or counseling because of taxpayer resistance to increasing the already astonishing $20 billion spent annually on prison operating expenses and the prevailing punitive ideology that applauded harsh prison conditions.

Idle inmates with long sentences jammed into overcrowded, poorly equipped facilities could become violent: in 1998 seventy-nine inmates were killed; assaults, fights, and rapes left thousands injured seriously enough to require medical attention; extortion and intimidation were commonplace.

Although most correctional officers did not physically abuse inmates, too many did. News stories and court records documented inmates being maliciously beaten with fists and batons, fired at unnecessarily with shotguns or stunned with electronic devices, slammed face first onto concrete floors and even raped by officers whose jobs were to protect them. Inmates ended up with broken jaws, bruised faces, smashed ribs, perforated eardrums, missing teeth, and damaged vision. A federal district court concluded in March that Texas prisons were pervaded by a "culture of sadistic and malicious violence." In July, a federal corrections officer in Colorado pleaded guilty to being part of a group of officers who beat inmates to punish them for being "troublemakers," falsified records, and intimidated other officers into not reporting their activities.

Staff violence and abuse in Florida prisons led to widely publicized inmate injuries and death. During a trial in January, three Florida prison guards testified that a group of officers in 1997 had terrorized and brutalized an inmate in retaliation for his having bitten another guard, and then conspired to cover it up. After three days of abuse, the inmate slashed his wrists and then, while in restraints in a prison medical wing, was further abused and subsequently bled to death. In July, Frank Valdez, an inmate on death row at Florida State Prison who had been convicted of murdering a prison guard, was beaten to death during a violent confrontation with correctional officers who were attempting to remove him from his cell. Valdez's autopsy revealed he died from "multiple blunt force trauma from the result of a severe beating," and nine officers were suspended pending final results of the official investigation. The Federal Bureau of Investigation also announced it would conduct its own investigation into the inmate's death as well as numerous complaints by prisoners there that they were routinely abused and beaten. Another inmate at the Florida State Prison filed a lawsuit in July against several officers, including two implicated in the Valdez case, claiming they beat him severely the previous year, causing multiple rib fractures, a collapsed lung and spinal injuries. At the end of 1998, two female inmates committed suicide in Florida while held in solitary confinement at the Jefferson Correctional Institution. One, Florence Krell, had repeatedly complained of abuse by guards and said she had been left naked, handcuffed, and without water in her cell.

Although some instances of guard abuse resulted in criminal indictments and civil lawsuits, and a few even resulted in verdicts against the guards and awards to injured inmates, impunity remained prevalent. Internal investigators conducted superficial investigations, if any, and state district attorneys lacked the resources and political will to bring charges against abusive officers. In California, not one district attorney in the state had ever prosecuted a guard for any of the shooting deaths of thirty-nine inmates and the wounding of 200 more in the last decade, even though state investigations and trials had established pervasive brutality at certain prisons. In July, the California corrections officers union used its enormous political power to kill an important piece of reform legislation that would have removed prison brutality cases from the purview of local prosecutors and placed them with the state attorney general.

Violence, escapes, and sexual abuse also further darkened the record of private prison operators. Many of the prisons run by for-profit companies operated with uniformed staff that were insufficient in number, poorly trained, and inadequately supervised. Oversight from public correctional authorities was lax. At new facilities operated in New Mexico by Wackenhut Corrections Corporation, inmates killed four other prisoners in a nine month period, culminating in August with a riot involving nearly three hundred prisoners during which a Wackenhut guard was stabbed to death. The violence prompted renewed criticism of the state's decision to place one-third of its prison population in private hands and concern that corporate profits were achieved by sacrificing appropriate security and safety measures. In Texas, state corrections authorities canceled a contract with Wackenhut in response to allegations of staff sexual assault of inmates, cover-ups, and mismanagement.

In the aftermath of the violence in New Mexico, the state precipitously shipped over a hundred inmates from the Wackenhut facility to Red Onion State Prison, a super-maximum security prison in Virginia. That facility was the focus of a Human Rights Watch report released in April that documented excessive and dangerous use of force by correctional officers, including use of electronic stun devices and shotguns filled with non-lethal munitions, as well as unnecessarily harsh and degrading conditions.

A January 1999 analysis of super-maximum security prisons prepared for the National Institute of Corrections of the U.S. Department of Justice endorsed their use to provide extended control of inmates known to be violent, major escape risks, or likely to promote disturbances in the general population, but criticized their use for problem inmates for whom lesser control would be satisfactory. Human Rights Watch documented just such inappropriate placement of inmates in Virginia, where the Department of Corrections sent men to its super-maximum security facilities simply because they had long prison sentences, regardless of their behavior while behind bars. Human Rights Watch charged the state with trying to fill prisons that exceeded the state's legitimate need for high security beds and that had, indeed, been built primarily to further a "tough on crime" political agenda.

In March, a federal judge ruled unconstitutional stark and severe conditions in Texas' administrative segregation units which deprived prisoners of "almost all human contact, mental stimulus, personal property and human dignity." Even within the harsh world of super-maximum security confinement, in which inmates usually spend at least twenty-three hours a day in their cells, conditions in Texas were notably extreme. Inmates were denied, for example, such items as books, other educational materials, soap, and deodorant, and out-of-cell time for many was limited to three hours a week. Inmates were barred from, or subject to highly restricted access to religious services, commissary, counseling, and library services.

A new survey by the Department of Justice reported that about 16 percent of inmates in prisons and jails were mentally ill. Many of them were homeless prior to incarceration and were convicted of petty crimes, for example, public intoxication, loitering, and other minor violations that often resulted from their mental condition and life on the street. Once in prison, the mentally ill were more likely to present discipline problems than other inmates because the nature of their illnesses made it harder for them to handle the stresses of prison life and because of inadequate mental health services and treatment.

Although mentally ill inmates should not be punished for actions arising from their illnesses or placed in the conditions of social isolation and extreme security measures that prevail in super-maximum facilities, in too many states they were. In Illinois, mentally ill inmates filed a lawsuit challenging their placement in the state's new supermax prison. The inmates alleged that the conditions of extreme social isolation, limited environmental stimulation, severely restricted movement, and harsh punishment for problematic behavior caused by their illness brought tormenting pain and possibly permanent psychological damage. In July, a class action suit was settled that had been brought by mentally ill inmates against the New Jersey Department of Corrections. The inmates complained that they were denied adequate mental health treatment and described a vicious circle of rule infractions caused by mental illness, with punishment in solitary confinement that aggravated mental disorders, leading to more infractions, leading to more time in solitary. In Texas, a federal district judge ruled that the confinement of mentally ill inmates in conditions of extreme isolation and reduced environmental stimulation that exacerbated their illness violated the U.S. constitution's ban on cruel and unusual punishment. Plaintiffs' experts in that case had provided harrowing descriptions of inmates smearing themselves with feces, engaging in self-mutilation, babbling, screaming, and banging their heads against their cell walls. As in New Jersey, mentally ill inmates placed in segregation in Texas suffered such psychological deprivations that their behavior became worse and they became even less able to conform to prison rules. At least three inmates were known to have committed suicide in super-maximum facilities in 1999, two in the Ohio State Penitentiary and one in the U.S. Penitentiary (Administrative Maximum) in Colorado.

The disproportionate impact of the criminal justice system on blacks was reflected in their rates of felony disenfranchisement. A 1998 report by Human Rights Watch and the Sentencing Project revealed that 13 percent of all black Americans were disenfranchised because of felony convictions, and that in ten states more than one in five black men were disenfranchised. The report's findings were widely publicized around the country and spurred several state legislative and litigation efforts; members of Congress also introduced legislation to restore the federal vote to felons upon release from incarceration.

The U.S. government has bungled its response to the sexual abuse women face in state prisons. During the year, the Justice Department reached negotiated settlements-court-enforced agreements with state officials-in only two cases under consideration that involved sexual abuse of incarcerated women in two states. The settlement reached in the Arizona case in March was flawed and weak. It allowed Arizona Department of Corrections officials to place women in solitary confinement after they file a complaint of sexual abuse, an act the women perceived to be punitive. The settlement failed both to set up a secure mechanism through which women could safely file complaints without fear of retaliation and to establish independent oversight of the system.

The settlement reached with the Michigan Department of Corrections was a travesty, with all of the flaws of the Arizona settlement, but also including elements that actually placed the women at increased risk of sexual abuse. One of its most disturbing aspect was the impositionof uniforms on the women. This sent a message to the women that they "provoked" sexual assaults and provided another means for corrections staff to punish them.

The U.S. government avoided addressing the substantive findings in the report of the U.N. special rapporteur on violence against women on human rights violations of women in detention in the U.S. Her report detailed extensive sexual misconduct and systematic violations ofthe women's right to privacy. The U.S. delegation to the U.N. Commission on Human Rights insisted that women incarcerated in the U.S. had protection from and recourse against human rights violations, even though passage of the Prison Litigation Reform Act of 1995 made it extremely difficult for women to bring legal claims against corrections departments, especially in cases of sexual assault and abuse.

Men in prison suffered from sexual abuse committed by fellow inmates. Prison staff often allowed or even tacitly encouraged sexual attacks by male prisoners. Despite the devastating psychological impact of such abuse, there were few if any preventative measures taken in most jurisdictions, while perpetrators were rarely punished adequately by prison officials.

Responding to a perceived outbreak in violent juvenile crime, many states across the country continued to incarcerate large numbers of children even though the number of juvenile offenders had consistently fallen in recent years. According to Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) data, juvenile arrests declined each year from 1994 to 1997, an overall decrease of nearly 4 percent for the period. Juvenile arrests for violent crimes were down by 6 percent during the same time period.

Many youth were charged in the adult criminal system under state statutes that made it easier for children to be tried as adults. Between 1992 and 1998, at least forty U.S. states adopted such legislation; in 1999, a similar measure was pending at the federal

level. Forty-two states detained children in adult jails while they awaited trial. As a result, whether or not they would ultimately be found innocent, many children faced the prospect of spending six months to one year or more behind bars in adult facilities.

In Maryland, Human Rights Watch found that youth held in adult jails were subjected to the risk of violence at the hands of other juveniles and, in some facilities, from adult detainees. These risks were particularly high in the Baltimore City Detention Center, where some 150 adolescents faced daily risks to their personal safety, at times from "square dances," fights that were condoned and even organized by corrections officers. Disciplinary measures in the city detention center often appeared to be arbitrary and excessive, with many youths receiving the maximum sanction of ninety days of restriction to their cells, with telephone calls, family visits, and religious services banned. Staff at the detention center frequently imposed such sanctions on the entire juvenile section for extended periods of time. Mental health services at the city detention center were minimal to nonexistent. With few exceptions, all of the jails we visited suffered from serious deficiencies in the amount of education provided, a dearth of age-appropriate recreational opportunities, and an apparent lack of specialized training programs for staff in adolescent development and behavior management. Finally, children in all facilities reported that they did not receive enough to eat.

Immigrants and Asylum Seekers

The human rights ramifications of the 1996 Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigration Responsibility Act (IIRIRA) became increasingly apparent during the year. Increasing numbers of INS detainees strained the ability of the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) to provide humane and safe conditions. Hunger strikes by detainees and their families, court orders to release long-term detainees, and continuing reports of abuse and poor living conditions signaled a detention crisis.

In response to court decisions and protests, the INS revised two of its policies guiding detention practices during the year. In July, it announced that case-by-case reviews would be conducted to decide whether detainees may be released pending hearings to determine whether they would be deported (removal hearings). Detainees would be released if they were able to show that they were not a danger to society, that they had family or community ties, and were likely to appear for future hearings. In April, the INS announced that it would perform mandatory reviews of detainees who had final orders of removal but could not be repatriated. The new policy would allow individuals to be released pending any political or other developments that would allow their deportation.

More than half of the INS's 17,400 detainees around the country were housed in state prisons and county and city jails designed for short-term detention of pre-trial and convicted criminals. After our September 1998 report on the conditions and treatment of INS detainees held in jails and pressure from immigrants' rights groups, the INS moved to create minimum standards for jails to meet before INS detainees were sent there. Human Rights Watch believed that the INS should end its use of jails to house immigration detainees, as their punitive and rehabilitative function was never appropriate for INS detainees who were simply awaiting immigration hearings, or deportation after already serving sentences for crimes in the past. Asylum seekers should be detained in only exceptional circumstances, and never held in jails. High-level United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) officials had criticized the U.S.'s detention practices in relation to asylum seekers.

INS officials acknowledged that, even if the jails claimed to meet the requirements, it would be difficult for the INS to monitor actual compliance in the hundreds of jails with which it contracts. The American Bar Association, which had been working closely with the INS on the jail standards, harshly criticized the INS's failure to create meaningful standards and ensure jails' compliance. INS representatives did report that they would receive funding during 2000 to hire ten inspectors to check on compliance at twenty-five of the largest jails the agency uses to house its detainees. At this writing, congressional proposals called for a number of changes that would affect INS detainees held in jails, including one recommending the transfer of detainees to federal Bureau of Prisons facilities.

The treatment of children held by the INS was also troubling. Investigations by Human Rights Watch in three states found that with few exceptions these children received little or no information about their right to be represented by an attorney in their immigration proceedings, in violation of international standards and in breach of a consent decree which bound the INS. Some unaccompanied minors were housed with juvenile offenders, locked up, and made to wear prison uniforms even though they were held for administrative reasons only.

The IIRIRA's expedited removal proceedings, intended to process and deport individuals who enter the United States without valid documents as quickly as possible, imperiled bona fide refugees and resulted in immigrants' being detained in increasing numbers. If an asylum seeker prevailed in initial summary procedures at the port of entry, he or she was detained pending a "credible fear" interview, i.e., an interview to determine whether there was a credible fear of endangerment in the country of origin, the grounds for granting asylum. Asylum seekers who had proven credible fear could have been released at the discretion of district directors of the INS, but usually they were detained throughoutthe process and until asylum hearings were completed. Asylum seekers could be held for years in detention, thus exacerbating overcrowding in the INS's facilities and in jails where most detainees were held.

The U.S. Border Patrol continued to grow at an alarming pace, doubling since 1993, when there were roughly 4,000 agents, to the current force of approximately 8,000 agents. The INS stated that a hiring freeze was necessary to consolidate the force, noting that nearly 40 percent of the force had less than two years of service. Human Rights Watch raised concerns about the growth rate and whether the agency was able to carefully recruit new agents and train supervisors properly. Human Rights Watch had longstanding concerns regarding the agency's capacity to investigate abuse complaints lodged against agents fairly and thoroughly, and whether disciplinary actions were taken against those found responsible for violations. The process remained excessively secretive, with the agency releasing little information about investigations into complaints.

Several fatal shootings by the Border Patrol from 1998 remained unexplained publicly a year later. Three individuals were shot dead by agents after allegedly throwing or holding rocks. The Justice Department's investigation into the shootings cleared the officers of criminal wrongdoing, but it was unclear whether any disciplinary action or policy changes had been taken within the Border Patrol. Human Rights Watch +urged the INS to outfit its agents along the border with protective gear so that rock-throwing incidents did not lead to shootings by agents fearful of injury.

Death Penalty

As of September 24, the United States set a new record by executing seventy-six persons in 1999, more than in any year since the death penalty's reinstatement in 1976. Nearly half of the 1999 executions through September were carried out in Texas and Virginia. Among those executed in 1999 were foreign nationals, a juvenile offender, and individuals who may have been mentally ill or retarded. Approximately 3,500 people were on death row.

Doubts about the death penalty were particularly acute in Illinois: three of the six persons exonerated on grounds of innocence and released from death row during 1999 had been tried and imprisoned there. Illinois' dramatic cases in 1999-one of the death row inmates had come within two days of execution five months before his exoneration-sparked a number of investigations into the state's use of the death penalty. Governor George Ryan also signed legislation devoting public funds for prosecution and defense in capital trials, including monies for attorneys, investigators, and forensic specialists.

The U.S. continued to be one of only six countries to execute persons who were younger than eighteen when the crimes for which they were sentenced were committed. The imposition of the death penalty on persons who were under eighteen years of age at the time of their offense violated the provisions of international and regional human rights treaties to which the United States is party. Despite nearly unanimous international condemnation of the use of the death penalty for juvenile offenders, six countries in the world-Iran, Nigeria, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, the United States, and Yemen-were known to have executed juvenile offenders in the 1990s. The United States led the list with ten such executions between 1990 and 1999. In 1999, the United States carried out the execution of one juvenile offender, Sean Sellers, marking the first time in forty years that the United States has executed someone for crimes committed as a sixteen-year-old. Seventy juvenile offenders were on death row in the United States as of July 1, 1999.

In positive developments, the highest court of the U.S. state of Florida ruled that the imposition of the death penalty on sixteen-year-old offenders was cruel and unusual punishment in violation of the state constitution; and effective October 1, 1999, the state of Montana abolished the death penalty for those under eighteen at the time of their crimes. As a result, of the forty states that retained the death penalty after October 1999, six allowed offenders sixteen years of age or older to be put to death. Nineteen states limited the death penalty to those seventeen or older at the time of their crimes, and fifteen states restricted capital punishment to adult offenders.

State authorities and U.S. courts continued to disregard violations of the rights of defendants who were not U.S. citizens. Under the Vienna Convention, these defendants were supposed to be advised, upon arrest, of their right to contact their embassies for assistance. In 1999, five foreign nationals were executed despite reports that their right to consular notification had been breached: Jaturun Siripongs of Thailand; Karl and Walter LaGrand, brothers from Germany; Alvaro Calambro of the Philippines; and Stanley Faulder of Canada. Pleas from their governments were ignored, as were appeals from the

International Court of Justice in the cases of the LaGrand brothers and Stanley Faulder. The U.S. State Department did show signs of increased concern about Vienna Convention violations: Secretary of State Madeleine Albright wrote to Texas Governor George Bush in an attempt to halt the execution of Stanley Faulder, and the department was reportedly publishing and distributing training materials for police regarding their obligations under the convention. In October, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights issued an advisory opinion regarding U.S. obligations under the Vienna Convention and opined that the failure to notify foreign nationals about their right to seek consular assistance was in all cases a violation of due process under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the American Convention on Human Rights.

Gay and Lesbian Rights

Gays and lesbians continued to confront discrimination in the workplace, hate crimes in communities around the country, and anti-gay rhetoric from legislators and some religious leaders. Legislation to address anti-gay employment discrimination was introduced but made little progress and remained pending in the U.S. Congress. The Clinton Administration called for an expansion of federal hate crime statutes to include anti-gay hate crimes, but Congress did not act on the legislation. Some hate crime monitors reported increases in violent crimes against gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgendered persons. Intolerance among legislators regarding homosexuals was evident during the year as some members of Congress vigorously fought the appointment of a gay man to serve as an ambassador simply because of his sexual orientation.

Private First Class Barry Winchell was beaten to death in July 1999 in an apparent anti-gay hate crime committed by fellow soldiers. The attack focused attention again on the treatment of gays in military. Soldiers had harassed Winchell, a soldier based at Fort Campbell, Kentucky, for months before one apparently beat him to death with a baseball

bat at the base. The trials of two soldiers implicated in the killing continued as of this writing.

Gay men and lesbians serving in the U.S. military did so within the confines of the "don't ask, don't tell, don't pursue" policy. The policy required that military officials refrain from asking military personnel about their sexual orientation, required that service members not disclose that they were gay, lesbian, or bisexual, and prohibited harassment of allegedly gay service members by military personnel. Members of the military services were not allowed to make any statement that he or she was gay or bisexual and prohibited acts, including hugging and holding hands, among service members of the same sex.

After the implementation of the policy began, discharges increased dramatically, with 1,145 discharges in 1998, up from 617 in 1994 when the policy took effect, calling into question whether the stated intention of the policy-to allow gay and lesbian service members to serve if they did not disclose their sexual orientation-was being implemented properly or whether the policy was workable at all.

In addition to the direct effects of the policy, incidents of anti-gay hate crimes against service members, on and off bases, went unreported because the victims feared their sexual orientation would be disclosed in the course of any investigation-information that would end their careers. The policy also undermined efforts at curtailing sexual harassment. Women reported that male service members harassed them and then threatened to "out" them as lesbians. In those cases, the victims could be investigated and discharged, while the harasser escaped punishment.

In August, the Pentagon announced that it would issue new guidelines to curtail abuses of the "don't ask, don't tell" policy. Personnel at all levels would receive training to end anti-gay harassment and investigations would be handled by senior officers only. Nevertheless, critics of the policy and its implementation noted that training about the policy and tolerance thus far had been limited to a few minutes during long briefings, raising concerns that superficial training at all levels would mean little.

Harassment of gay adults in the military paralleled the harassment of students perceived to be gay, lesbian, bisexual, or transgendered in public schools. Instead of providing a safe learning environment, school was experienced by many of these students as a place that accepted intolerance, hatred, ostracization, and violence against youth who were perceived as different. For the most part, school officials refused to intervene to protect these students, and what began as harassment escalated in many cases to physical violence. Studies conducted by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and the states of Massachusetts and Vermont had concluded, gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgendered youth were two to three times more likely to attempt suicide than their heterosexual counterparts.

In a welcome development, California Gov. Gray Davis signed legislation in October 1999 to ban harassment and discrimination against students and teachers on the basis of their sexual orientation. Three other U.S. states-Connecticut, Massachusetts, and Wisconsin-had similar nondiscrimination provisions.

Labor Rights

Trade unions, international organizations, academic researchers, and numerous press reports detailed widespread violations of workers' freedom of association in the United States. Prompted by these accounts, Human Rights Watch undertook a U.S. labor rights research project with a report due for publication in 2000.

Preliminary interviews with workers, trade unionists, employers, and enforcement officials throughout the country confirmed grounds for serious concern. Indications of flawed labor laws, recurring violations by employers, and ineffective enforcement by labor law authorities and courts suggested that the United States was failing its duty to protect freedom of association for workers under international human rights standards.

Human Rights Watch's preliminary research found cases where local government officials apparently joined employers in making threats of plant closing and job losses if workers formed unions. In other instances, it appeared that local police officials and gun-wielding security guards intimidated workers seeking to form unions.

The most vulnerable workers in the U.S. labor force were frequent victims of abusive interference with their freedom of association-migrant workers, welfare-to-work employees, part-time, temporary, and subcontracted employees, low-wage service sector workers, and others in precarious employment relationships. But many full-time workers in well-established firms also could face harassment, threats, discrimination, and discharge when they sought to exercise rights of association by organizing and bargaining collectively.

International Human Rights Scrutiny

In 1999, the U.S. continued to exempt itself from many of its international human rights obligations, particularly where international human rights law granted protections or redress not available under U.S. law. In ratifying international human rights treaties it typically carved away added protections for those in the U.S. by adding reservations, declarations, and understandings. Even years after ratifying key human rights treaties, the U.S. still failed to acknowledge international human rights law as U.S. law. Moreover, the U.S. was behind the rest of the developed world by failing to ratify the key international instruments on women's rights and workers' rights, and virtually alone in the world in failing to ratify the Convention on the Rights of the Child (the only other nation that had not ratified the treaty was Somalia, which had no functioning government).

In response to the president's December 1998 executive order to implement human rights treaties, an Interagency Working Group on Human Rights Treaties (IWG) started to examine relevant issues such as the application of the death penalty and treatment of refugees in the United States. According to the executive order, the IWG was required to institute training and guidance for local and state governments so that they honor the U.S.'s human rights obligations; to review reservations, declarations, and understandings that the U.S. attached to ratified treaties to ensure that they were warranted; to review proposed legislation to ensure that it was in conformity with human rights obligations; to facilitate the production of treaty compliance reports; and to promote the ratification of human rights treaties. To its credit, the IWG-which included representatives from the National Security Council, Justice Department, Labor Department, and from other agencies-consulted with human rights groups, but the working group's plan of action was unclear and as of October there had been no measurable improvement in U.S. compliance with key treaties.

Four years after it was due, the U.S. submitted its first compliance report on the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in October 1999. The report acknowledged the existence of treaty violations in the U.S., but insistedthat they were "aberrational" and unauthorized. Unfortunately, the report failed to confront adequately the limitations of legal protections for victims of abuse, ignored the widespread impunity enjoyed by abusive officials, exagerrated officials' commitment to implement human rights obligations, and failed to delineate steps it would take to address violations it acknowledged. The U.S.'s compliance report on the Convention on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination was four years overdue and a second International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights compliance report became due.

The U.S. disregard for international human rights standards was not limited to domestic matters. During the year, it continued to oppose human rights initiatives on issues of broad international interest, including antipersonnel landmines, child soldiers, and the International Criminal Court (ICC). The U.S. refused to sign a comprehensive anti-landmine treaty, signed by 135 other nations, while announcing that it would sign the treaty in 2006 if it is able to come up with alternative weapons before that date. It continued to block international efforts to end the use of child soldiers, arguing against a proposed optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child that would raise the minimum age for military recruitment and participation to eighteen. It also opposed a broad prohibition on the use of child soldiers as part of an ILO convention on the worst forms of child labor. And contrary to the principle of equal treatment under the law, the U.S. continued to oppose the ICC treaty and insisted upon special exemptions for United States citizens.

Relevant Human Rights Watch reports:

Losing the Vote: The Impact of Felony Disenfranchisement Laws in the United States ,

10/98.

Detained and Deprived of Rights: Children in the Custody of the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service , 12/98.

Red Onion State Prison: Super-Maximum Security Confinement in Virginia , 5/99.
ARMS

Human Rights Developments

The year 1999 saw a heightened international sensitivity to the harm done to civilians by organized gun-toting killers-be they government troops, paramilitary thugs, or guerrilla fighters. Facing a proliferation of both internal and international armed conflicts-in Afghanistan, Angola, Chechnya, Colombia, the two Congos, East Timor, Eritrea/Ethiopia, Kashmir, Kosovo, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, Sudan, and elsewhere-governments, international organizations, and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) launched a series of initiatives to tackle a problem that appeared to be spinning out of control.

Whereas military-style weapons were traditionally seen as mere implements of war, a new realization emerged that such weapons, while not by themselves causing violence, contributed to the spread of violence by offering what was often perceived as a swift and effective way to address grievances or settle differences. Easier access to arms translated into quicker resort to them in situations in which alternative modes of redress might otherwise have been attempted. As a result, the widespread availability of military weapons, especially small arms and light weapons, made armed conflicts both more protracted and intractable, while snaring previously unarmed members of the population, including children, into the fighting.

The human rights of ever growing numbers of civilians thus came under threat. First, the steady stream of small arms, light weapons, ammunition, and explosives into areas of armed conflict sent a powerful signal to the buyers that they were receiving more than just shipments of lethal equipment: They interpreted the international community's failure to curb the trade in arms as a wink and a nod at their conduct in warfare, however brutal and however much in violation of international standards of human rights and humanitarian law. Abusive forces were thus encouraged in carrying out further abuses and, confident they could prevail, resisting calls for a nonviolent resolution of their conflict.

Furthermore, the widespread availability of light weapons also meant that ever larger sectors of the population could be drawn into a conflict. As a result, arms devolved into the hands of civilians who, in the absence of a clear military command structure, were often poorly trained and undisciplined, accountable to no one but local commanders who themselves were responsible for committing the worst atrocities. Conflicts previously marked by the use of spears, bows and arrows, and machetes increasingly witnessed greater destruction as these traditional implements were replaced by assault rifles and rocket-propelled grenades against which rural communities had no protection.

If the spread of armed conflicts inflated the demand for weapons, changes in the countries of the former East Bloc fueled the supply. Downsizing their military forces and converting their arsenals to NATO standards, these countries continued to dump large amounts of surplus weaponry on the international arms market. This had the effect of driving down prices of infantry weapons (but also of tanks and helicopters), making these affordable even to some of the poorest nations on earth, as well as to nonstate actors.

Vivid images of atrocities in 1999 helped stir public pressure for military intervention in Kosovo and East Timor. These same images also began to galvanize the international community to devise mechanisms to restrict the trade in arms and other lethal equipment, as well as the provision of military training. At the millennium's end, NGOs like Human Rights Watch worked to parlay the heightened attention to the proliferation of arms and its impact on civilians into concerted state action. These NGOs joined forces with so-called like-minded states to advocate a broad array of measures: responsible and ethical arms export policies, a crack-down on illicit arms trafficking, a reform of arms embargo regimes, greater transparency in the arms trade, and others (see below). Confronted by the daily devastation of armed violence, and encouraged by the historic success of a broadbased effort to ban antipersonnel landmines, these states and NGOs thus took on the important challenge of securing a safer future for civilians across the globe by tackling the uncontrolled proliferation of other weapons as well.

Antipersonnel Landmines

In 1999 the global movement to eradicate antipersonnel (AP) landmines continued to make tremendous progress, though there were several high profile instances of continued use of AP mines. The 1997 Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Antipersonnel Mines, and On Their Destruction (the Mine Ban Treaty) formally entered into force on March 1, 1999, thereby becoming binding international law more quickly than any major treaty in history. Between November 1998 and October 1999, the number of nations ratifying the treaty grew from forty-nine to eighty-seven. Two new countries signed the treaty-Ukraine, with the world's fourth largest stockpile of AP mines, and Lithuania, the first Baltic nation-bringing the total to 135 signatories at this writing. The treaty imposed a comprehensive ban on AP mines, destruction of stockpiled mines within four years, and destruction of mines already in the ground within ten years.

The First Meeting of States Parties to the treaty was held in Mozambique in May 1999 in order to review progress and problems in the treaty's implementation. This was the first of the annual meetings called for by the treaty, and the fact that it occurred so quickly was an indication of the commitment of many governments on this issue. At the meeting, governments agreed to establish a program of "intersessional" work, aimed at ensuring rapid and effective implementation. Five new Standing Committees of Experts (Mine Clearance, Victim Assistance, Stockpile Destruction, Technologies, and General Status of the Convention) were set to meet several times a year, with extensive NGO participation in the process.

For the third straight year, governments were unsuccessful in placing antipersonnel landmines on the agenda of the Conference on Disarmament, an arms control forum in Geneva. The United States was a major proponent, pushing for talks on a global mine transfer ban. Among those in opposition were pro-ban governments that viewed the effort as a distraction from the Mine Ban Treaty, and governments in the developing world that saw it as an attempt to avoid discussions on nuclear disarmament.

Parties to the 1980 Convention on Conventional Weapons (CCW) met in May and December to review progress on implementation of the 1996 Revised Protocol II on landmines. The protocol entered into force in December 1998 with its twentieth ratification. The U.S. Senate ratified it on May 20, 1999. The Revised Protocol, a set of complicated restrictions on certain types of use of certain types of antipersonnel mines, was criticized by the International Campaign to Ban Landmines (ICBL), the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), and others as weak and ineffective. A formal review conference of the entire CCW was scheduled for 2001, with preparatory meetings in 2000.

The ICBL, recipient of the 1997 Nobel Peace Prize, continued to grow-encompassing over 1,400 NGOs in more than ninety countries-and expand its activities. Perhaps most notable was the development of the ICBL's Landmine Monitor program. This unprecedented initiative marked the first time that civil society groups sought in a systematic and coordinated way to monitor a disarmamentor humanitarian law treaty. The objective was to collect information on, and evaluate the progress of, the international community in implementing the ban treaty and alleviating the global mine crisis. In late 1998 and 1999 the Landmine Monitor established a reporting network of local researchers in more than eighty countries, began setting up a central database, and researched and produced its first annual report. At the First Meeting of States Parties the ICBL released the 1,100-page Landmine Monitor Report 1999: Toward a Mine-Free World , with information on every country of the world with respect to mine use, production, stockpiling, trade, demining, and aid to victims.

The report found that since the December 1997 signing of the Mine Ban Treaty great progress had been made in eradicating the antipersonnel mine: use appeared to be on the wane, trade had stopped nearly completely, production was very significantly reduced, more than twelve million stockpiled mines had been destroyed, funding for demining and victim assistance programs had increased, and the number of mine victims in some of the most affected nations had fallen. However, it also noted that three treaty signatories had used mines after signing-Angola, Guinea-Bissau, and Senegal. In addition, during 1999 Yugoslav and Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) forces used mines extensively in their conflict, Russia dropped mines on opposition forces in Dagestan, and mine use was also alleged in the India-Pakistan conflict, among others.

In 1999 the ICBL decided to target especially the United States, the former Soviet republics, and the Middle East/North Africa region. As part of its effort to get all governments to sign and ratify the Mine Ban Treaty, the ICBL hosted or co-hosted with governments a number of regional conferences (in Mexico, Tunisia, Lebanon, South Africa, Indonesia, Kenya, Croatia, and Georgia), as well as national conferences or workshops (in India, South Korea, Nigeria, Belarus, and elsewhere). In addition, the ICBL undertook advocacy missions to Georgia, Egypt, Nicaragua, Honduras, Kosovo, and elsewhere, and participated extensively in the Hague Appeal for Peace in May.

Chemical Weapons

As of October 1999, 126 states had ratified the 1993 Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons, and on Their Destruction (the Chemical Weapons Convention, CWC). Forty-four states that had signed the treaty still had not ratified. Nine states parties to the CWC (China, France, India, Iran, Japan, Russia, South Korea, the United Kingdom, and the United States) had declared past or present chemical weapon production facilities, which were scheduled to be destroyed or converted to civilian use. As of October, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), the organ that monitored compliance with the CWC, had conducted 536 inspections at 278 sites in twenty-nine states parties.

Two years after the CWC's entry into force, thirty-two states parties had yet to submit their initial declarations, while the declarations of a significant number of other states parties remained incomplete. The United States also remained technically noncompliant, as it had failed to submit its initial chemical industry declaration.

Another CWC requirement, the start of the destruction of a state party's chemical weapon stockpile within two years after the treaty's entry into force, had also met with varied success by October 1999. By the end of 1999, the United States was scheduled to have destroyed an estimated 22 percent of its chemical weapons stockpile. Russia, on the other hand, with a reported stockpile of 40,000 tons of chemical agent, was hampered by a lack of funds and had not begun the destruction process.

Despite continued progress in international efforts to prohibit and eliminate chemical and biological weapons, there was at least one notable setback. In December 1998, following a five-day bombing campaign by the United States and United Kingdom against Iraq ostensibly to force the latter's compliance with United Nations weapons inspections, the United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) charged with dismantling Iraq's weapons of mass destruction program was expelled from the country. By October 1999, the commission still had not been allowed to return, even with an amended mandate. The year also saw reports of alleged chemical agent use in Kosovo, Sudan, and Turkey. None was formally investigated.

Conventional Weapons

Worldwide military spending continued to decline from an all-time high in 1987. In 1998-the most recent year for which figures were available in October 1999-worldwide spending on military forces was U.S.$745 billion ($700 billion in constant 1995 U.S. dollars), according to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI). Much of this long-term decline could be attributed to reduced military spending by the members of the two major cold war alliances, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the former Warsaw Pact.

Following the end of the cold war and the tenuous equilibrium it represented, the West grabbed the lion's share of the international arms market. In 1998 the United States ranked as the world's largest supplier of arms for the eighth consecutive year. According to the Congressional Research Service, the United States delivered more than $10.5 billion in arms that year, or 35 percent of worldwide arms deliveries. France ranked second and the United Kingdom third, with $6.5 billion and $5.3 billion in arms deliveries respectively. Combined, these three states supplied 74.9 percent of all arms delivered worldwide.

While a total of $29.8 billion in arms were delivered in 1998, another $22.98 billion worth of agreements for future arms deliveries were negotiated. Again the United States ranked first, negotiating $7.1 billion in new arms transfer agreements. Germany ranked second with $5.5 billion (up from $600 million in 1997), and France third with $3 billion. Many of these weapons went to volatile regions in the Middle East and Asia.

The Dumping of Weapons, War, and Violations of Human Rights

The sale of weapons continued to fuel armed conflicts around the globe. As of this writing, in 1999 there were twenty-eight major armed confrontations. Of these, twenty-five were internal, pitting the government against organized groups from among its population. These conflicts caused untold hardship on civilians, siphoned off scarce social and economic resources for weapons purchases, and frequently resulted in massive violations of international humanitarian and human rights law. Some of these wars, most notably in Afghanistan, Angola, Colombia, Somalia, Sri Lanka, and Sudan, have dragged on for years, far removed from the public eye beyond their borders.

The year 1999 showed again that the proliferation of conventional weapons, financed by cash, precious stones and metals, and narcotics, further prolonged these wars and made them more lethal. This was especially true for small arms and light weapons (assault rifles, machine guns, pistols, rocket-propelled grenades, hand grenades, landmines, small mortars, etc.)-the class of weapons that can be carried by a person,sometimes even a child. The demand for hard cash resulting from the collapse of economies in eastern Europe led to a further hemorrhaging of arms inventories available for sale. The resulting flood of old Soviet-era weaponry and ammunition onto the world market continued to drive down prices, permitting even some of the poorest countries in the world, as well as some rebel forces, to arm themselves to the teeth-even if the quality of the military equipment thus obtained often left much to be desired.

Plagued by armed conflict, Africa in particular continued to be a primary customer to a global arms market glutted with surplus weapons and ammunition. Prices for arms plummeted to the extent that in some parts of Africa AK-47 (Kalashnikov) assault rifles were selling for as little as $6. Arms traffickers-dealing openly and legally or, just as often, slipping across borders and breaking laws-continued to amass huge profits from the trade.

Mechanisms of Arms Control

United Nations

In 1999 the United Nations Register of Conventional Weapons was in its seventh year of operation. Though voluntary, the register was an important international transparency and confidence-building mechanism. In 1998 a total of ninety-seven states submitted data on imports and exports of major conventional weapons for the previous year. This was a significant increase from ninety in 1997 and eighty-two when the registry was inaugurated in 1992. In general, the level of detail of the submissions improved, with most of the major arms exporters who participated in the registry providing information on the type and model of weapons exported and imported.

Efforts to expand the register made no headway in 1999, but a U.N. Group of Experts on the Register was expected to convene in the year 2000. This group was tasked to examine suggestions to expand the register by adding more categories of weapons and including annual submissions on holdings and procurement.

On small arms and light weapons-a category of weapons excluded from the register-a U.N. panel of twenty-three experts issued its second report in 1999, observing that virtually every part of the U.N. system had had to cope with the consequences of armed conflicts directly associated with the wide availability and use of these weapons. The report noted that about 500 million small arms and light weapons remained in circulation, and that an estimated 40 percent of the global trade in this class of weapons was illegal. In an important step forward from its first report in 1997, which was devoted almost entirely to the activities of non-state actors, the panel this time elaborated on the need for governments to exercise "utmost restraint" in the transfer of small arms and ammunition. It also reiterated its call for a conference in the year 2001 which, in the words of the U.N. undersecretary-general for disarmament affairs, should set out to produce either a politically-binding declaration or a legally-binding global convention.

In 1998 and 1999, the U.N. sought to coordinate the work of its various agencies concerning small arms by creating the Coordinating Action on Small Arms interagency group (CASA) in the office of the U.N. undersecretary-general for disarmament affairs, and the Reference Group on Small Arms (RGSA) in Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). In September 1999, under the presidency of the Netherlands, the U.N. Security Council held its first-ever ministerial meeting on small arms, noting that the "destabilizing accumulation of small arms has contributed to the intensity and duration of armed conflicts," and calling, inter alia, for "effective national regulations and controls on small arms transfers," the "highest degree of responsibility" on the part of governments of arms-exporting countries, the "effective implementation of arms embargoes," and "measures to discourage arms flows to countries or regions engaged in or emerging from armed conflicts."

European Union

Shortly after European Union members adopted a code of conduct for arms exports in June 1998, several non-E.U. countries associated with the E.U. declared their intent to adhere to the code's principles on a voluntary basis. By the end of 1998, thirteen states had made such a declaration, mostly members of the former Warsaw Pact. The code's reach did not remain limited to Europe. In December 1998 Canada, too, made a pledge to adhere to the code, and in May 1999 the United States expressed its intent to explore ways to associate itself with the code.

The code's adoption prompted the Netherlands and Germany to join Belgium, Italy, Sweden, and the U.K. in making public their annual reports on arms exports. The E.U. Council of Ministers appeared less concerned with the need for transparency, as it continued to resist calls by NGOs and parliamentarians to obtain information about the consolidated E.U. arms export report mandated by the code. A dent in this wall of confidentiality was made by Heidi Hautala, a Green Party member from Finland, when the European Court ruled in July she could see a document on the implementation of the E.U.'s eight criteria governing arms exports which form the basis for the code. Though limited to a single document, Hautala's success constituted a victory for the advocates of transparent arms transfers, setting an important precedent and introducing a useful method of compelling E.U. institutions to submit to the rigors of public scrutiny. Giving in to pressure for more transparency, in October the E.U. published its consolidated report on the code's annual review process. While the information on specific exports, licences issued, and notifications of denial was compiled in broad aggregates, the report did afford the opportunity to the public for the first time to identify areas in which the code needed to be strengthened.

Despite these positive developments, the code's main flaw, its nonbinding nature, remained unaddressed, even though some E.U. officials expressed the hope that the E.U.'s new Common Foreign and Security Policy under the 1997 Amsterdam Treaty would provide a legal framework for the code. E.U. officials and nongovernmental observers alike shared the view that, in the interim, the code was not a mere gentlemen's agreement and that E.U. members had largely abided by its provisions and sought ways to ameliorate these in the process. They pointed out, for example, that, even in its infancy, the implementation of the E.U. code of conduct had triggered two important developments. One, members' views began to converge on the need to attach a common control list of military, security, and police equipment to the code. And furthermore, by mid-1999, dozens of notifications of arms export denials had been circulated among member states in compliance with the code's requirement that a member state inform other members of any rejection of a request for a sale.

The precise obligations of E.U. associated countries vis-a-vis the code received scant attention in 1999. Excluded from the code's operative provisions of information sharing and reporting, the associated countries pledged, at a minimum, to respect the code's criteria. Chief among these was the denial of an arms transfer in the case of a clear risk that the weapons might be used in human rights abuses or to exacerbate regional conflicts, when the transaction would infringe an international agreement, such as an arms embargo, or when a shipment might be retransferred to an unauthorized third party. Flying in the face of these criteria was the decision of Poland in 1999 to sell fifty Soviet-era T54/55 tanks to Yemen, despite Yemen's reputation for not honoring its end-user commitments and U.S. warnings that the hardware was likely to be diverted to Sudan, a country under an E.U. arms embargo since 1994. Poland's action came under fire from the U.S. when it became clear that a first shipment of twenty tanks had disappeared en route to Yemen in April, and it was forced to cancel the sale. Given the risk the tanks might be diverted, Poland was in clear violation of its declared commitment to the E.U. code. In September, the Czech Republic, another E.U. associated country, confirmed the planned sale of ninety-seven T54/55 tanks "to Yemen."

North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)

In response to pressure from NGOs, NATO in 1998-1999 gave signs of waking up to the threat posed by small arms, particularly in the context of the Alliance's role in peacekeeping operations. In December 1998 NATO's Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC)-which combines NATO allies and members of the former Warsaw Pact-pledged to include measures pertaining to small arms and light weapons in its Action Plan for 1998-2000. When EAPC representatives subsequently met in Brussels in March to discuss small arms proliferation, Canada, with help from the U.S. and Norway, secured an agreement to create a working group on small arms along the lines of the EAPC's landmines working group. The new working group held its first meeting in June when it developed a planning document centered around issues such as security of weapons stockpiles (particularly in the former East Bloc) and tightening of export controls. NATO's tardy recognition of the problems posed by the proliferation and misuse of small arms was reflected in the absence of this topic in the discussion of NATO's new security concept that took place in connection with the April summit of the Alliance in Washington.

Other Regional Mechanisms

The Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods and Technologies had thirty-three members as of this writing in 1999. The non-binding arrangement was established to contribute to regional and international security and stability "by promoting transparency and greater responsibility among participating members in transfers of conventional arms and dual-use goods and technologies." In 1999 its main weakness continued to be its non-binding nature. Although participating states pledged, in a public statement on December 3, 1998, to exercise "maximum restraint when considering licenses for the export of arms-in particular to regions in conflict," some continued to allow deliveries of weapons to countries and regions at war, for example, Bulgaria to Eritrea, Romania to West Africa, and Russia to Angola.

The 1999 Inter-American Convention on Transparency in Conventional Weapons Acquisition was opened for signature on June 7. Nineteen countries in the Americas signed, and the convention was set to enter into force thirty days after the sixth instrument of ratification was deposited. By October 1999, no state had ratified the convention. The convention imposed two legal requirements on states parties. One, each state party was required to provide an annual report to the general secretariat of the Organization of American States (OAS) of imports and exports of conventional weapons covered by the U.N. register. (A proposal to include small arms and light weapons was not incorporated in the treaty.) Two, each state party was required to notify the OAS general secretariat of its acquisition of major arms covered by the U.N. register, whether through importation or national production, within ninety days of incorporating these weapons into the inventory of their armed forces. States parties not acquiring any weapons covered in the treaty were required to file a "nil report." The treaty did not enjoin states parties to make these declarations public.

The treaty complemented the 1997 Inter-American Convention Against the Illicit Manufacture of and Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives, and Other Related Materials (known as the OAS Convention on Arms Trafficking). This convention, which entered into force on September 1, 1998, counted thirty-two signatures and nine ratifications in October 1999. Although the treaty was yet to be ratified by the majority of OAS member states and only a few states had modified their laws to comply with the convention, it already led to greater cooperation among law enforcement agencies in the Americas. The convention also served as a model for negotiations on an international convention on arms trafficking.

On November 1, 1998, at the initiative of the government of Mali, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) announced a three-year moratorium on the import, export, and manufacture of light weapons in the region. Member states included Benin, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, CLte d'Ivoire, the Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Senegal, Sierra Leone, and Togo. Although, it was recognized that without a strong monitoring and policing system the moratorium would be impossible to uphold, the move had great symbolic importance, as it marked the first moratorium of its kind, was initiated by the government of a small and poor country in Africa that had just emerged from an internal war in a region beset by similar armed conflicts, and included an effort to destroy weapons left over after the war.

Arms Embargoes

As of October 1999 the U.N. maintained mandatory arms embargoes against five states (Iraq, Liberia, Libya, Somalia, and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia) and three nongovernmental entities (rebel forces in Angola, Rwanda, and Sierra Leone). The international community's ever-increasing recourse to sanctions in the 1990s again became the focus of sharp criticism in 1999 for their lack of effectiveness. Not only were embargoes unaccompanied by implementation and monitoring mechanisms, but critics also pointed out that embargoes threatened to push underground a trade normally conducted in the open, and thereby give free rein to private actors accountable to no one. Against this background, a debate on the reform of sanctions regimes gathered pace, putting pressure on the U.N. to carry out a comprehensive review of sanctions, including arms embargoes.

One new mechanism that was seen as a possible model for ensuring the implementation of an arms embargo was the creation of ad hoc commissions to monitor arms flows in violation of such embargoes. The precedent was the International Commission of Inquiry (Rwanda), known generally as UNICOI. In September 1998 the Security Council had acknowledged the innovative role played by UNICOI indocumenting violations of the arms embargo on Rwandan rebels. The council cited the commission's work as an example of "a useful means for strengthening the effectiveness" of a U.N. ban. Originally created by the Security Council in September 1995, UNICOI was not specifically assigned the task of implementing the Rwanda arms embargo, but it was given greater investigative powers than the passive Rwanda sanctions committee. Making the best of its narrow terms of reference, limited powers of enforcement, and lack of resources and staff, UNICOI produced a series of useful reports that documented specific embargo violations. Its final report in November 1998 described the ongoing fund-raising efforts by Rwandan rebel leaders and financiers in Kenya, continued arms flows from southern and central Africa into the Great Lakes region, and the alarming military cooperation between the Rwandan g6nocidaires and the governments of the Democratic Republic of Congo, Angola, Zimbabwe, and Sudan, as well as Burundian rebels.

In January 1999, the president of the Security Council took a further step by issuing a "Note on the Work of the Sanctions Committees." It reaffirmed the commitment of all council members to a series of reforms aimed at improving the implementation of sanctions. Building on this development and at the suggestion of Canada, the president of the sanctions committee on Angola, the council established two expert panels to collect information on and investigate reports of sanctions violations, and identify parties responsible for such violations. The panels were given a six-month mandate during which visits to "countries concerned" were scheduled. Two of the persons chosen to serve on these panels were veterans of UNICOI whose expertise was expected to enhance the institutional memory of sanctions mechanisms.

Ending Arms Transfers to Abusive End-Users

The dangers of small-arms proliferation and misuse became more and more apparent in 1998 and 1999 when war returned to the Democratic Republic of Congo, East Timor, Sierra Leone, and Angola, and a new armed conflict broke out in Kosovo. In all of these wars outside parties were drawn in, while untrained and undisciplined fighters were enlisted. This threatened a regionalization of these conflicts and provoked massive population displacement and violations of international human rights and humanitarian law. And all of these wars were fed by a destabilizing influx of weapons.

Small Arms Campaign

Recognizing the role of arms imports in fanning the flames and encouraging abusive conduct, nongovernmental organizations renewed their energies to address the uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and light weapons. In May two hundred NGOs launched the International Action Network on Small Arms (IANSA) on the occasion of The Hague Appeal for Peace, an event that attracted thousands of participants from all over the world. IANSA saw its primary aim as curbing the proliferation and misuse of small arms. Organizers lit a bonfire of deactivated guns in the main square of The Hague to inaugurate the campaign, which was saluted, among others, by Mary Robinson, the U.N. high commissioner for human rights, Olara Otunno, the U.N. secretary-general's special representative for children in armed conflict, and Jos6 Ramos-Horta, the East-Timorese Nobel laureate. In less than a year since IANSA was conceived at an August 1998 meeting of thirty-three NGO representatives in Toronto, a flurry of initiatives had quickened the pace of international action. To build on this momentum, IANSA elected a facilitation committee to run the network, opened a secretariat in London, and set up a web site ( www.iansa.org). Declaring a concern for the human rights consequences of arms proliferation as one of the campaign's crucial underpinnings, IANSA identified policy vehicles to promote the campaign's objectives at local, national, and international fora, and worked on developing early-warning capabilities emanating from its regional nodes.

United States Policy

Antipersonnel Landmines

In 1999, the United States continued to be one of the problem countries with respect to banning antipersonnel mines, despite its ongoing rhetoric about its leadership on the issue. There was no change in the policy announced by the administration in May 1998 that the U.S. would join the Mine Ban Treaty only in 2006, and even then only if the Pentagon has been successful in its search for alternatives to mines. The U.S. and Turkey were the only NATO member states

not to have signed the treaty; the U.S. and Cuba were the only non-signatories in the western hemisphere. On the positive side, the U.S. continued to increase its funding for mine clearance and victim assistance programs, and remained the largest donor to such mine action activities globally. In addition to the U.S.'s refusal to sign the treaty immediately, other disturbing developments in 1999 included:

P The U.S. reserved the right to use antipersonnel mines in the Kosovo conflict (though it never did), even as it strongly criticized Serb forces for using them.

P The Pentagon requested $48 million for the new RADAM mine system that would contain not only legal antitank mines, but also antipersonnel mines banned under the treaty. Congress reduced the amount to $8 million.

P It became increasingly clear from officials' comments that the Pentagon would be unlikely to meet the 2006 deadline for developing alternatives to mines.

P The U.S. pressed its allies, including ban treaty signatories, to allow it to use antipersonnel mines in joint operations (such as Kosovo), to continue stockpiling U.S. mines on their territory, and to permit the U.S. to transport mines through their territory-all of which are against the spirit, and arguably the letter, of the Mine Ban Treaty.

P The U.S. refused to ban future production of antipersonnel mines. The U.S. was one of only sixteen past mine producers that had yet to prohibit manufacture.

P After completing destruction of more than 3 million mines in 1998, the U.S. continued to stockpile 11.3 million antipersonnel mines, the fourth largest such arsenal in the world. This included 1.2 million long-lasting "dumb" mines for use in case of conflict on the Korean peninsula. The U.S.

had antipersonnel mines stored in at least ten foreign countries, including seven treaty signatories.

Chemical and Biological Weapons

In 1999 the United States had still not fulfilled all its obligations under the 1993 Chemical Weapons Convention, including the required declaration of its chemical industry production. Implementing legislation, completed in October 1998, was held up first in Congress and then by bureaucratic jockeying between the Departments of State and Commerce over which agency would be responsible for implementing the CWC's provisions. On June 25 President Clinton finally signed an executive order designating the Department of State the agency responsible for implementing the convention.

In addition to failing to live up to its reporting commitments, the United States also continued to undermine the CWC by insisting that samples collected in the course of inspections in the U.S. could not be taken out of the country, and by granting the right of a presidential veto in case of a challenge inspection. Both these conditions, imposed by the U.S. Senate when it ratified the CWC in 1996, were in direct contravention of the convention.

The United States also failed to take a leading role in negotiations over a verification protocol to the 1972 Biological Weapons Convention. Progress on the protocol's "rolling text" was limited, and the U.S. negotiating team was unable to reach a detailed position from which to negotiate.

Conventional Weapons and Military Training

In 1999 U.S. law made a number of states and nonstate actors ineligible to import weapons from the U.S., either because of the existence of a U.N. arms embargo, protracted warfare, a state's sponsorship of what the U.S. terms "terrorist" activity, or another foreign policy consideration. But while the Clinton administration was quick to slap Poland's wrist when Poland sold tanks ostensibly to Yemen but in all likelihood to Sudan in April (see above), when it came to its own foreign policy objectives it resisted adopting principles by which it would itself be bound, such as those contained in the proposed international code of conduct on arms transfers. After 1993 Congress made various unsuccessful attempts to pass a U.S. code of conduct with strong human rights provisions. The year 1999 was no exception.

As of October two code of conduct initiatives were pending in the House of Representatives and one in the Senate. The House initiatives centered around the reintroduction by Representative Cynthia McKinney (the original code's champion) of a code of conduct bill which had received NGO support, and a separate piece of legislation offered as an amendment to the State Department Authorization Act. This latter version stemmed from a compromise between Representatives McKinney and Sam Gejdenson. The amendment accommodated McKinney's support for arms transfers to be authorized only to governments that promote democracy, respect human rights, are not engaged in armed aggression, and participate in the U.N. Register for Conventional Arms. It also absorbed Gejdenson's preference for a multilateral regime (as opposed to U.S. unilateral self-restraint) by requiring the U.S. to begin negotiations toward a code of conduct in the context of the Wassenaar Arrangement of arms-producing countries. An amendment similar to the McKinney-Gejdenson bill was offered by Senator John Kerry in the Senate.

But even the timid and effectively toothless nature of these amendments did not prevent the administration from dumping cold water on Congress. The administration reacted to the McKinney-Gejdenson amendment by stating that in its view this law would "significantly hinder" U.S. efforts to improve the Wassenaar Arrangement (see above) while challenging "the President's foreign affairs negotiating authority." At the same time, administration officials were exploring ways in which the U.S. could associate itself with the (non-binding) E.U. code.

In the U.S., a dialogue about how to control the spread of small arms continued between an interagency group of U.S. officials and a variety of U.S.-based NGOs. Although the U.S. administration's focus had been on illicit arms transfers, NGO pressure to take a broader view and also address government responsibilities yielded a new U.S. initiative on small arms. This initiative identified as U.S. foreign policy priorities a moratorium on small-arms sales to areas of violent conflict, the reform of arms embargo regimes, measures to enhance the responsible disposal of stockpiled weapons, and increased transparency in arms transfers. In a series of speeches, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright emphasized the U.S. commitment to tackling the problem of small-arms proliferation, for example by working with the United Nations and African leaders "to find ways to strengthen the enforcement of arms embargoes." In September, during the U.N. Security Council's historic debate on small arms, Albright declared that the U.S. would "refrain from selling arms to regions of conflict not already covered by arms embargoes."

The Leahy Amendment, a piece of legislation named after Senator Patrick Leahy, continued to have a positive impact on U.S. foreign policy. It prohibited the transfer of U.S. security assistance to foreign security units when there was credible evidence these units were involved in, or had committed, human rights violations. Thanks to this legislation, a transfer of armored personnel carriers to the Turkish Anti-Terror and Anti-Riot Police-widely implicated in human rights violations-was stopped in October 1998. In Colombia, Mexico, and other countries that received U.S. security assistance, U.S. embassy personnel were instructed to monitor and investigate units for compliance with the amendment.

In June the U.S. Departments of State and Defense published their respective sections of the third annual "Section 655" report, detailing more than $40 billion worth of U.S. arms shipments and export licenses approved to 165 countries in fiscal year 1998. That year the Pentagon delivered, under the Foreign Military Sales Program, $13.9 billion worth of arms and training. The U.S. State Department also approved licenses for $26.4 billion worth of arms exports licenses and manufacturing agreements. These licenses were for four years and, as is typical with such agreements, not all were expected to be fulfilled. According to the report, in fiscal year 1998 the U.S. government exported or authorized export licenses to a number of countries involved in internal armed conflicts, including $2.1 billion to Turkey, $185 million to Mexico, and $176 million to Colombia. The report constituted an important step forward in efforts to press for greater U.S. transparency inforeign policy. The Department of State, embracing this move to greater openness, made its portion of the Section 655 Report (concerning approved licenses) available to the public. The Department of Defense's portion (government to government sales) remained classified "For Official Use Only."

In related matters, the United States was a signatory to, and a key participant in the negotiation of, the 1999 Inter-American Convention on Transparency in Conventional Weapons Acquisition. The treaty was designed to greatly aid transparency and confidence building in the western hemisphere. Ratification of the treaty by the U.S. Senate was expected to take some time. In 1999 the United States had yet to ratify the 1997 Inter-American Convention Against the Illicit Manufacture of and Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives, and Other Related Materials. The treaty was held hostage by Senator Jesse Helms (Republican-North Carolina), chair of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, who refused to work on this and other treaties until his committee first voted on the 1997 amendments to the Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty and the Kyoto Protocol on climate change. Neither treaty had even been submitted to the Senate by the Clinton administration by October.

The Work of Human Rights Watch

Banning Landmines

Human Rights Watch continued to play a leadership role in the ICBL throughout 1999. As a co-founder of the ICBL, Human Rights Watch sat on the fourteen-member Coordination Committee, as well as the four-member Advisory Committee that oversaw daily activities, and chaired the ICBL Treaty Working Group, which was charged with promoting the universalization and ratification of the Mine Ban Treaty. It also headed the official ICBL delegation to the treaty's First Meeting of States Parties in Mozambique in May. In the United States, Human Rights Watch was an active member of the U.S. Campaign to Ban Landmines, and served as the co-chair of its Government Task Force.

Perhaps most notable, Human Rights Watch was the lead organization in developing, coordinating and implementing the ICBL's Landmine Monitor, the monitoring and reporting system for the treaty and the mine crisis more generally. Human Rights Watch was the overall coordinator for the production of the 1,100-page Landmine Monitor Report 1999 , edited the full report, and was also responsible for its formatting, printing, and distribution. In addition, Human Rights Watch was the regional research coordinator for Middle East/North Africa and Central Asia work, and the thematic coordinator for ban policy (use, production, trade, and stockpiling).

Human Rights Watch participated in all the major conferences on landmines in 1999 aimed at universalization, ratification, and monitoring of the treaty. We attended conferences or undertook advocacy missions in Nicaragua, Honduras, Mexico, and Tunisia in January, Lebanon in February, Norway and Switzerland in March, Mozambique and the Netherlands in May, Croatia in June, Nigeria and Switzerland in September, and the United Arab Emirates in October. Human Rights Watch also conducted a research mission in Kosovo in September to investigate the landmines situation. In addition, Human Rights Watch participated in many landmine meetings in the United States, spoke in a host of different fora, including the United Nations, the Organization of American States, the U.S. Department of Defense, universities, and research institutions, and released a continuing series of landmine publications in 1999 (see below).

Banning Other Weapons

In late 1998 Human Rights Watch concluded a two-year investigation of allegations that Serb forces had attacked Bosniaks fleeing the U.N. "safe area" of Srebrenica with a chemical agent during the war in Bosnia and Hercegovina in July 1995. Short of finding conclusive evidence that a chemical agent was used, Human Rights Watch called for a broader international investigation of the allegations in order to bring justice to the victims, strengthen international controls over the proliferation of chemical weapons, and prevent a dangerous arms race in the Balkans. The media attention accorded to the release of the findings in November 1998 set the stage for a vigorous advocacy campaign, including meetings with officials of governments of the Netherlands and Bosnia and Hercegovina, the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), among others.

Human Rights Watch organized a panel on chemical and biological weapons as part of the Hague Appeal for Peace in the Netherlands. The panel was hosted by the OPCW and addressed the threat posed by states' nonadherence to the Chemical Weapons Convention (especially the U.S.), new allegations of chemical weapons use, and the need for governments, the OPCW, and NGOs like Human Rights Watch to cooperate in universalizing the treaty and ensuring its implementation and enforcement.

In March, April, and May, Human Rights Watch monitored the conduct of NATO forces during their air bombardment of targets in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. In May we called on NATO to halt the use of cluster bombs, arguing that the high failure rate of U.S. and U.K. cluster munitions during the war (5 percent was a conservative estimate) caused large target areas to be littered with unexploded submunitions which in effect became antipersonnel landmines-indiscriminate killers unable to distinguish between combatants and civilians and a lingering threat to the population. Following a couple of well-publicized incidents in which cluster bombs hit civilian areas in Yugoslav towns, the White House restricted the further use of these weapons during the war, which ended shortly afterwards. Human Rights Watch estimated, using the conservative 5-percent failure rate, that the 1,100 cluster bombs dropped by U.S. and U.K. aircraft had left 11,000 unexploded bomblets in Yugoslavia. The results of a broader investigation of the conduct of the air war, carried out in July and August, were still being analyzed in late October.

Curbing Arms Transfers to Abusive End-Users

In April Human Rights Watch completed research on Bulgaria, lambasting the government for having earned a reputation as an anything-goes weapons bazaar where Kalashnikov assault rifles, mortars, antitank mines, ammunition, and other items were available for a price-no matter who the buyers were or how they might use the deadly wares. Despite some positive steps in 1999, Bulgaria's arms business continued to be characterized by weak arms export laws, poor regulatory enforcement, and a glaring lack of accountability. Bulgaria had failed to introduce human rights considerations into arms trade law, to ensure that arms approved for export or transport out of Bulgaria were not diverted to unauthorized end users, and to prosecute anyone for violating arms trade laws. In ongoing advocacy Human Rights Watch calledon the Bulgarian government to cease transfers of weapons to military forces in Africa and elsewhere that were guilty of gross violations of human rights, and pressed multilateral institutions such as NATO and the European Union to make membership conditional on the enactment and enforcement of adequate arms trade controls.

In December 1998, Human Rights Watch took up NATO Secretary General Javier Solana's suggestion to write to NATO allies and partners in order to solicit information about their export control regimes and measures regarding the security of their stockpiles. A number of interesting answers were received, and research and advocacy on this issue continued throughout the year, with further communications with governments. In March the ambassadors of NATO's Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council agreed on the creation of a working group on small arms. In its first meeting in June the group addressed some of the concerns expressed by Human Rights Watch with NATO delegations, notably regarding the security of surplus weapons stockpiles, the lack of transparency in the inventories of these stockpiles, and wide variations in NATO allies' and partners' arms export controls. Ahead of the NATO summit in April, Human Rights Watch supplied information to NATO delegations, E.U. officials, and the attending press showing that former Warsaw Pact conventional weaponry, particularly small arms, continued to end up in the hands of human rights abusers around the world. Human Rights Watch expressed concern that the arms trade was bound to increase as the modernization of the arsenals of NATO's new allies and partners continued to free up huge amounts of newly obsolete arms and ammunition.

In 1999 Human Rights Watch was advocating vigorously for a thorough reform of arms embargo regimes. After a coalition of U.S.-based NGOs included proposals for such a reform in a list of ten policy points on small arms presented to the Clinton administration in September 1998, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright addressed the need for arms embargo reform in speeches dealing with small arms proliferation in Africa. In December 1998, Human Rights Watch presented its own ideas at a "Symposium on Targeted Sanctions" in New York, and reinforced the need for arms embargo reform at a press briefing organized by the Dutch foreign minister and IANSA following the first-ever U.N. Security Council ministerial meeting on small arms in September 1999.

Human Rights Watch played an important role in engaging the U.S. administration in consultations regarding the "U.S. Initiative on Small Arms." Regular meetings on this topic between NGOs and the U.S. administration were held throughout 1999. At the instigation of Human Rights Watch and other NGOs, the U.S. addressed the issue of small arms at its bilateral summit with the E.U. in May and started a review of the E.U. Code of Conduct on Arms Exports. Again following pressure from Human Rights Watch and others, the U.S. began pushing-at international fora and with its allies and partners-for a moratorium on arms sales to areas of violent conflict, a reform of arms embargo regimes, and ways to ensure the security of arms stockpiles. To this end, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright declared a U.S. commitment to working with the E.U. to develop principles of restraint and a joint action plan.

Relevan Human Rights Watch Reports:

Chemical Warfare in Bosnia? The Strange Experiences of the Srebrenica Survivors , 11/98.

Bulgaria-Money Talks: Arms Dealing with Human Rights Abusers , 4/99.

Arsenals on the Cheap: NATO Expansion and the Arms Cascade , 4/99.

Landmine Monitor Report 1999: Toward a Mine-Free World , and the Executive Summary: Landmine Monitor Report 1999 , 5/99.

Ticking Time Bombs: NATO's Use of Cluster Munitions in Yugoslavia , 5/99.
CHILDREN'S RIGHTS

Human Rights Developments

Every country in the world except for the United States and the collapsed state Somali has ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child and pledged to uphold its protections for children. In 1999, the convention stood as the single most widely ratified treaty in existence. Adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on November 20, 1989, the promises of this historic document included children's rights to life; to be free from discrimination; to be free from military recruitment and to be protected in armed conflicts; to be protected from torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment; to be free from arbitrary deprivation of liberty; to special treatment within the justice system; and the rights to education, health care, an adequate standard of living, and freedom from economic exploitation and other abuse.

The decade since the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the Child was marked by some significant advances on behalf of children. Many countries used the convention as the basis on which to revise domestic legislation and improve protections for children, or have appointed pecial ombudspersons or envoys for children. As the Committee on the Rights of the Child ealuated country reports under the convention, it developed new standards of protection and pressed overnments for specific reforms.

A 1996 United Nations report on the impact of armed conflict on children raised international concern about the plight of children in war, prompting varied initiatives to end the use of child soldiers and other wartime abuses. The number of children killed every year by antipersonnel landmines dropped in the wake of massive efforts to end the use of the weapon and the adoption of the1997 Mine Ban Treaty. The adoption of the statute for the International Criminal Court held out the hope of ending the impunity of those responsible for the recruitment of children under the age of fifteen in armed conflicts, as well as those who commit other war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide.

However, despite these advances, the promises of the Convention on the Rights of the Child were broken for countless children around the world. The armed conflicts that raged in all quarters of the world produced appalling abuses of children's rights. Hundreds of thousands of children were pressed into service as soldiers. Millions became refugees displaced from their homes, often separated from their families, their future and safety uncertain.

Children living outside war zones were also subjected to routine violence. Street children on every continent endured harassment and physical abuse by police. Even schools, intended to promote the healthy development of children, were the site of abuse. In some countries, the use of corporal punishment by teachers resulted in injury and even death. In others, gay and lesbian students endured harassment and violence by their peers while school authorities failed to intervene.

Millions of children had no access to education, worked long hours under hazardous conditions, or languished in orphanages or detention centers where they endured inhumane conditions and daily assaults on their dignity, in violation of the rights guaranteed to them under the convention. The issues selected for attention below represent those which were the focus of Human Rights Watch investigation and advocacy over the past half-decade.

The tenth anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the Child marked an important milestone. The rights of children were recognized as never before. But it also posed a challenge for governments and civil society to take stronger action to implement its provisions, strengthen protections, and fulfill the promises made to the children of the world.

The Use of Children as Soldiers

In dozens of countries around the world, children were direct participants in war. Denied a childhood and often subjected to horrific violence, some 300,000 children served as soldiers in current armed conflicts. These young combatants participated in all aspects of contemporary warfare. They wielded AK-47s and M-16s on the front lines of combat, served as human mine detectors, participated in suicide missions, carried supplies, and acted as spies, messengers, or lookouts.

Physically vulnerable and easily intimidated, children typically made obedient soldiers. Many were abducted or recruited by force and often compelled to follow orders under threat of death. Others joined armed groups out of desperation. As society broke down during conflict, leaving children with no access to school, driving them from their homes, or separating them from family members, many children perceived armed groups as their best chance for survival. Others sought escape from poverty or joined military forces to avenge family members who had been killed.

Child soldiers were used in more than thirty countries around the world. Human Rights Watch investigated the use of child soldiers in some of these conflicts, including in Angola, Colombia, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Lebanon, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, Sudan and Uganda. In Sierra Leone, thousands of children abducted by rebel forces witnessed and participated in horrible atrocities against civilians, including beheadings, amputations, rape, and burning people alive. Children forced to take part in atrocities were often given drugs to overcome their fear or reluctance to do so. In Colombia, tens of thousands of children were used as soldiers by all sides to the country's ongoing bloody conflict. In southern Lebanon, when boys fled to desert or avoid conscription by the South Lebanon Army, an Israeli auxiliary militia, their entire families were subject to expulsion from the occupied zone.

Girls were also used as soldiers in many parts of the world. In addition to combat duties, Human Rights Watch found that girls were subject to sexual abuse and taken as "wives" by armed groups in Angola, Sierra Leone, and Uganda. Girls who were impregnated by rebel commanders were sometimes forced to strap their babies on their backs shortly after giving birth and take up arms against opposing forces.

Some governments took positive steps. Colombia significantly reduced the number of under-eighteens in its national security forces after pledging to uphold a minimum recruitment age of eighteen. The Sierra Leonean government excluded under-eighteens from its newly-formed military, based on pledges made to Olara Otunnu, the special representative for the secretary-general on armed conflict and children. The U.K. government made a military aid agreement to the Sierra Leonean government contingent on nonrecruitment of children and the demobilization and rehabilitation of former child soldiers, although it continued to use sixteen-and seventeen-year-olds in its own military force. Other states, including the Czech Republic, Germany, Norway, Portugal, and South Africa, passed legislation or introduced measures to exclude under-eighteens from their military forces.

Under the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the general definition of a child is any person under the age of eighteen. However, Article 38, governing children and armed conflict, uses fifteen as the minimum age for recruitment and participation in hostilities. This low standard of protection remained a glaring and troubling anomaly among the convention's other strong provisions.

Several years after the convention's adoption, a U.N. working group was created to draft an optional protocol to the convention that would raise the minimum age for recruitment and participation in hostilities to eighteen. However, as the tenth anniversary of the convention's adoption arrived, agreement on the optional protocol still had not been reached, largely because of opposition by governments who continued to recruit minors, notably the United States.

Despite these obstacles, efforts to stop the use of child soldiers continued to grow. In 1998, the recruitment of children under the age of fifteen and their use in hostilities was identified as a war crime in the statute of the International Criminal Court. Once established, the court will have jurisdiction to prosecute those responsible for the use of child soldiers. The use of children as soldiers was also recognized as a child labor issue. A labor treaty banning the worst forms of child labor, adopted in June 1999, prohibited the forced recruitment of children for use in armed conflicts.

In 1998, the Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers formed in order to campaign for a strong optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child which would prohibit any recruitment of children under the age of eighteen or their use in armed conflict. Established by six international NGOs, the coalition worked with national campaigns in more than thirty countries around the world, mobilizing political will and public pressure to end the use of children as soldiers. In addition to media campaigns, the publication of new research, and advocacy within regional and international fora, its activities included a series of high profile regional conferences focused on the use of children as soldiers in Africa, Latin America, and Europe. (See Special Issues and Campaigns.)

Despite this growing momentum, efforts to stop the use of child soldier did not reach fruition. Recruitment of child soldiers continued around the world, those responsible for their recruitment escaped justice, and key governments continued to resist efforts to establish and enforce the prohibitions necessary to end the use of children as soldiers.

The International Criminal Court

On July 17, 1998, in Rome, delegates representing 160 countries voted by an overwhelming majority to establish a permanent International Criminal Court (ICC) to try persons charged with committing war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide. Upon its establishment, the court will provide a powerful deterrent to the conscription, enlistment, or use in hostilities of children under the age of fifteen years conduct defined as a war crime in the ICC statute. The statute also included other important measures to protect children in armed conflict: it recognized intentional attacks on educational institutions as a war crime, provided special arrangements for children as victims and witnesses, and exempted children below the age of eighteen from prosecution by the court.

Delegates reconvened at the United Nations headquarters for three weeks in July and August of 1999 to draft the rules of procedure and evidence for the court and the elements of the crimes covered by the statute. (See Special Issues and Campaigns). Two proposals introduced by the United States and by Costa Rica, Switzerland, and Hungary would have restricted the scope of the statute's provisions on the war crime of conscripting, enlisting, or using children in hostilities. The U.S. proposal would have required the prosecutor to prove that the accused knew the child in question was below the age of fifteen. The proposal by Costa Rica, Switzerland, and Hungary would have required a showing that the accused knew of or was "willfully blind" to the child's minority. In addition, both proposals would have required proof that the accused caused the child's conscription, enlistment, or use in hostilities.

Human Rights Watch said that the court should have jurisdiction over cases in which the accused recklessly failed to take steps to ascertain the child's age. Such a position, we argued, would be consistent with Protocol I. Additional to the Geneva Conventions, which requires states to "take all feasible measures" to ensure that children under the age of fifteen do not take an active part in hostilities. Human Rights Watch also pointed out that encouragement, acceptance, or authorization of a child's enlistment or participation in hostilities should be sufficient conduct for the court to exercise jurisdiction.

A subsequent discussion paper, produced by the coordinator of the delegates' working group on the element of crimes, reflected these recommendations. It required prosecutors to show that the accused "knew or should have known" that the child in question was under the age of fifteen years phrasing that recognizes an obligation to attempt to determine the child's age. The discussion paper did not reflect a consensus among delegates, and was introduced to provide a basis for further discussion. It nevertheless reflected an awareness that the court must have adequate discretion to interpret the statute's language for the benefit of children in armed conflict.

Refugee Children

Refugee children were among the most vulnerable children in the world. Not only had they suffered from war or other forms of persecution in their countries of origin, but many refugee children continued to suffer human rights abuses in countries of asylum. Children made up more than half of all refugees around the world, yet their rights and special protection needs as children were frequently neglected.

The human rights abuses that drove children into flight were only the first chapter of hardship for many refugee children. Even after traveling across an international border to seek refuge, they remained vulnerable to hazardous labor exploitation, physical abuse, denial of education, sexual violence and exploitation, cross-border attacks, militarization of refugee camps, and recruitment as child soldiers.

Article 22 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child grants special protection to refugee children. Children who are not being cared for by their parents, known as "separated children," are entitled to special protections under Articles 20 and 22. Refugee children fleeing war are also entitled to special protection under Article 38 of the convention, as children affected by armed conflict. Refugee children, like all children, are entitled to all other rights granted under the convention including the rights to life, physical integrity, adequate food and medical care, education, and to be free from discrimination, exploitation, and abuse.

Separated and unaccompanied children were particularly vulnerable. In the United States, Human Rights Watch found that unaccompanied children were held by the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service in detention facilities where some were confined for lengthy periods of time before being released to family members or appropriate guardians. Rarely understanding what was happening to them, children wereoften denied information about their detention and their right to be represented by an attorney in immigration proceedings in a language they understood. In some cases they were housed with juvenile offenders and subjected to a rigid and punitive environment.

In 1999, Human Rights Watch conducted an in-depth investigation into the protection of Sierra Leonean refugee children in Guinea, where children made up 65 percent of the 300,000 Sierra Leonean refugees there. Most of the children interviewed by Human Rights Watch had been in refugee camps in Guinea just over a year, with little hope of returning home in the near future. Internally displaced children within Sierra Leone were thought to suffer many of the same problems on an even larger scale.

The plight of separated children and girls in the Guinean refugee camps was found to be particularly severe and warranted special attention. Separated children were taken in by families along the way, while fleeing, or in the camps. These families acted as care givers, or foster families. However, some children in such care were neglected, physically or sexually abused, denied food, denied education, or exploited for their labor. Social workers charged with protection of separated children in the refugee camps in Guinea had not even identified most children of concern, much less monitored their care and protection.

Human Rights Watch found that Sierra Leonean refugee girls as young as twelve felt they had no choice but to work as child prostitutes in order to support themselves and, in some cases, their families. These girls had little or no access to education or health care and little hope for their future. Better identification and monitoring systems were clearly needed to ensure effective interventions.

Refugee children who lived in camps close to the porous Sierra Leone-Guinea border were vulnerable to cross border armed raids which resulted in murder, mutilation, and abduction of dozens of refugees over the past year. According to international law and standards, as well as United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) policy, the refugees should not have been in camps located dangerously close to the border in the first place.

Refugee children were also at risk of being recruited and used as child soldiers. In Guinea, Sierra Leonean refugee children as young as seven risked being abducted by raiding rebel forces or being used by the government civil defense forces, known as Kamajors.

Despite the fact that these children suffered enormously and remained extremely vulnerable, their plight was largely ignored by the international community. UNHCR faced substantial political, financial, and logistical challenges in protecting the human rights of refugee children in Guinea. The focus of international attention on refugee crises in Europe, as well as "donor fatigue" with respect to African refugees, served to limit resources available for Guinea. One manifestation of this was a grossly insufficient number of staff present inside or near camps. UNHCR also faced severe logistical constraints in the Gueckedou area of Guinea, which housed more than sixty camps. One was the poor state of the unpaved roads, which were often impassable during Guinea's June to November rainy season. However, the failure to adequately protect the rights of refugee children was only partially attributable to a lack of resources.

Although UNHCR had used the Convention on the Rights of the Child as the basis for extensive policies and guidelines designed to protect the rights of refugee children, in many cases these policies were not implemented. For Sierra Leonean children in Guinea, the international community failed to identify vulnerable children; to monitor for abuse and labor exploitation; to protect girls from sexual abuse and exploitation; to move the refugees to safe locations away from the border; to preserve the humanitarian character of the refugee camps; and to prevent refugee children from serving as child soldiers.

Police Abuse and Arbitrary Detention of Street Children

Attention to street children focused largely on their pressing economic and social plight poverty, lack of shelter, denial of education, AIDS, prostitution, and substance abuse. With the exception of mass killings of street children in Brazil and Colombia, little attention was paid to the police violence and abuse inflicted on these children, or their treatment within the justice system through which they regularly passed. Civil and political rights violations against street children were largely overlooked, symptomatic of the larger failure to take seriously the full scope of children's rights enshrined in the Convention on the Rights of the Child.

Viewed as "anti-social" or criminal elements, or a scourge on a city's tourist-filled streets and business districts, many police and ordinary citizens simply wished street children would disappear, by whatever means. Street children throughout the world were subjected to routine harassment and physical abuse by police, government, and private security forces, out to wipe thestreets clean of a perceived social blight. Street children faced extortion, theft, severe beatings, mutilation, sexual abuse, and even death.

They were often arrested and jailed because of their homelessness (on vague grounds such as vagrancy or loitering) or their involvement in small businesses deemed to be illegal, such as unlicensed hawking, or were accused of petty theft, drug-related crimes, or prostitution. Some were arrested as scapegoats, or in order to finger or catch others. Many police believed street children had information about crimes committed on their beat, or attributed crimes in the area to them directly, imputing criminal associations and activities to the children generally.

They were held for excessive periods of time in police lockups, for days and even weeks, usually mixed with adults. In jails they were sometimes further beaten by police, or forced to pay bribes in order to be released. Girls were sometimes coerced into providing sexual services to police in exchange for release, or were raped. From jails, street children were transferred eventually to long-term penal institutions, sometimes euphemistically called "homes" or "schools" where they languished out of sight, for years.

Few advocates spoke up for these children, let alone lawyers or prosecutors, and street children rarely had family members or other concerned adults able to intervene on their behalf. Often, family members were not informed of their children's arrest and detention in the first place. Contrary to popular belief, many street children actually had family members and homes to which they returned periodically, and were not orphans.

Over the years, Human Rights Watch had attempted to highlight the serious nature of the human rights abuses committed against street children by law enforcement personnel in Brazil, Bulgaria, Colombia, Guatemala, India, Kenya, and Sudan, and on the gross lack of police accountability for abusive actions. Widespread impunity and the slowness of law enforcement bodies to investigate and prosecute cases of abuses against street children allowed violence against street children to continue unchecked.

Even in Guatemala, where the NGO Casa Alianza had been singularly active in seeking police accountability for the rape, torture, and killing of street children, only a handful of prosecutions resulted out of hundreds of criminal complaints filed. Frustrated with the failure of the national judicial system to address these cases, Casa Alianza and the Center for Justice and International Law brought a landmark case involving the police killings of five street youth in 1990 to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and subsequently to the Inter-AmericanCourt of Human Rights, where the case was pending at the time of this writing. Still, violence against street children in Guatemala continued and the government was as slow as ever in responding to the abuse.

The case of Guatemala demonstrated that even where there were strong advocates willing and able to assist street children in seeking justice, without the commitment of governments, the judiciary, and most importantly law enforcement itself, the abuses would continue.

Children in Conflict with the Law

In the ten years following the adoption and near-universal ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, a growing number of countries modified their juvenile justice laws to guarantee children the rights set forth in the convention and in other international instruments.

This trend was most evident in Latin America, where many countries enacted reforms to bring their legislation into compliance with the convention. Brazil, one of the first to reform its national laws comprehensively in response to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, adopted its Children's and Adolescent's Statute in 1990. Ecuador and Peru passed Juveniles Acts in 1992, Mexico adopted its Law on the Treatment of Juvenile Offenders in 1991, El Salvador enacted a new juvenile justice law in 1995, and Nicaragua adopted a Children's Legal Code in 1998 after a two-year delay Grounded in the principle that all children possessed rights which must be respected by the state, these reform efforts represented a significant departure from earlier legislation directed exclusively at "minors" in "irregular situations" and in need of protection.

In other countries, reforms were under consideration but had not yet been enacted into law. Efforts to reform Guatemala's juvenile justice system stalled in early 1998, when the government delayed for the second time the implementation of a new Minors' Code that would represent a vast improvement over current legislation. Among other protections, the code would guarantee the right to a lawyer at government expense to children accused of crimes, would forbid placing children in protective custody in juvenile detention centers, and would end the practice of imprisoning children for "status offenses" such as running away or being homeless. A similar proposal was pending in Venezuela.

Nevertheless, a large number of countries in the region and elsewhere in the world had not taken action to bring their legislation into compliance with the convention. In the Americas, Argentina and Paraguay, among others, retained outdated juvenile laws that did not adequately protect children's rights; in Colombia, the 1989 Juveniles Act was little more than a repackaging of earlier legislation.

Where legislative reforms had taken place, the practices in many countries fell far short of their new legal standards. In Mexico, as the U.N. Committee on the Rights of the Child observed in 1994, a large number of children complained of ill-treatment at the hands of police and military personnel. In Nicaragua, although the law provided that children should be housed separately from adults, children continued to be commingled with adults because of the lack of appropriate juvenile facilities. In the Dominican Republic, the government's near-complete failure to enforce the country's 1994 minor's code led to the confinement of hundreds of adolescents in adult prisons, where youth were not afforded sufficient protection, education, or rehabilitation.

Trial and Sentencing Practices

Far too often, children around the world were brought to trial and sentenced in ways that volated their rights. Human Rights Watch documented systemic failures to guarantee children legal rpresentation and otherwise provide them with fair hearings in Brazil, Bulgaria, Guatemala, India, Jamaica, Kenya, Pakistan, and Russia. Of particular concern were sentences that violated the International principle that deprivation of liberty should be a measure of last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of time and prohibiting measures that constituted torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment.

In many cases, children were detained arbitrarily or indefinitely on the basis of vague legalprovisions. In Kenya, Human Rights Watch's investigation found that street children were committed for years to juvenile correctional institutions after they were found to be "in need of protection or discipline" in summary proceedings without legal representation. Similarly, in Paraguay and other countries in the Americas that had not brought their laws into conformity with the Convention on the Rights of the Child, children were detained on the ill-defined basis that they were in a "state of danger."

In other instances, state authorities simply flouted laws intended to protect the due process rights of juveniles. Our 1996 investigation of Bulgaria found that children were often detained in police lockups far longer than the legally permissible periods, without being formally charged, and without any judicial review. In India, we found that police regularly detained street children without giving them any grounds for arrest and failed to bring them before magistrates in the time period required under India's Juvenile Justice Act. In a 1999 investigation of police practices in Russia, adolescents in various cities told Human Rights Watch that police routinely violated Russian law and international standards by interrogating them sometimes under torture in the absence of attorneys.

In Jamaica, Trinidad and Tobago, and elsewhere in the English-speaking Caribbean, juvenile court judges were authorized to impose sentences of flogging for certain crimes. In addition, children in detention in these countries were subjected to corporal punishment as a method of discipline. Similarly, Pakistan's Hudood Ordinances permitted judges to include whipping, usually between fifteen and thirty lashes, as part of children's sentences; in practice, however, that portion of the sentence appeared to be routinely overturned on appeal. In Kenya too, corporal punishment by cane or rod is authorized by law in sentencing children and as a disciplinary measure in correctional institutions for children. The imposition of corporal punishment is prohibited by international standards. Moreover, the U.N. bodies charged with monitoring states parties' compliance with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and the Convention on the Rights of the Child have all indicated that corporal punishment is incompatible with those human rights treaties.

Conditions of Confinement

Throughout the world, children were subjected to appalling conditions of confinement that violated international standards. Often held with adults and subjected to beatings at the hands of guards and other detainees, children in confinement were frequently denied adequate food, medical and mental health care, education, and access to basic sanitary facilities. All of these children would eventually return to society, meaning that the failure to prepare them for their return was shortsighted as well as cruel, carrying enormous social costs.

The practice of holding children in adult facilities, common in many parts of the world, exposed children to abusive conditions including physical and sexual abuse far worse than those they would have experienced in juvenile facilities. In Cambodia, for example, children were housed indiscriminately with adult detainees and reportedly sexually abused and subjected to other forms of physical and psychological violence at the hands of adults. In Guatemala, Human Rights Watch interviewed children commingled with adults who reported beatings and rapes by adults, and being forced to give up their clothing to adults, or to pay money to adults in order to get a place to sleep.

The United States continued to incarcerate large numbers of children in response to a perceived upsurge in violent juvenile crime. In fact, the number of juvenile offenders consistently fell from 1994 to 1997; according to U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation data, juvenile arrests declined each year, with an overall decrease of nearly 4 percent for the period. Juvenile arrests for violent crimes were down by 6 percent during the same time period.

Many youth in the United States were charged in the adult criminal system under state laws that made it easier for children to be tried as adults. Between 1992 and 1998, at least forty U.S. states adopted such legislation. A similar measure was pending at the federal level in 1999. Forty-two U.S. states detained youth in adult jails while they awaited trial. As a result, whether or not they would ultimately be found innocent, many children faced the prospect of spending six months to one year or more of their formative adolescent years behind bars pending trial.

In the U.S. state of Maryland, Human Rights Watch found that youth held in adult jails were subjected to the risk of violence at the hands of other juveniles and, in some facilities, from adult detainees. These risks were particularly high in the Baltimore City Detention Center, where some 150 adolescents faced daily risks to their personal safety, at times from fights condoned or even organized by corrections officers. Disciplinary measures there often appeared to be arbitrary and excessive, with many youth, and sometimes the entire juvenile section, receiving the maximum sanction of ninety days confinement to their cells. With few exceptions, the Maryland jails visited by Human Rights Watch suffered from serious deficiencies in the amount of education provided, a dearth of age-appropriate recreational activities, and an apparent lack of specialized training programs for staff in adolescent development and behavior management. In addition, children in all facilities reported that they did not receive enough to eat.

Commendably, some countries took positive steps to acknowledge and correct abusive conditions of confinement. The South African government initiated a program in November 1997 to keep children out of the country's prisons, although delays in implementing the program threatened its effectiveness. Another deficiency in the program was that children between the ages of fifteen and eighteen who were accused of the most serious crimes would remain in adult prisons. In Bangladesh, the government accepted the need for improvements in conditions of confinement for children in conflict with the law, in particular noting in its 1997 supplementary report to the Committee on the Rights of the Child that "Too many minors are held in jails and police stations alongside adult offenders." In Jamaica, following the July 1999 release of the findings of a Human Rights Watch investigation of the practice of detaining children in filthy and overcrowded police lockups, the government announced that it would move all detained children to juvenile facilities.

The Death Penalty and Juvenile Offenders

The Convention on the Rights of the Child unequivocally prohibits the use of the death penalty on juvenile offenders, those who were under the age of eighteen at the time of their crimes. Nevertheless, six countries-Iran, Nigeria, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, the United States, and Yemen are known to have executed juvenile offenders in the 1990s.

The ten executions of juvenile offenders in the United States during this period represented more than half the known worldwide total, making it the worldwide leader in executing juvenile offenders. Five executions took place in the U.S. state of Texas; the states of Georgia, Louisiana, Missouri, Oklahoma, and Virginia each executed one juvenile offender in the same period. Sean Sellers, executed in Oklahoma in February 1999, was the first sixteen-year-old offender to be put to death in the United States in forty years. Seventy juvenile offenders were on death row in the United States as of July 1, 1999.

In positive developments, the highest court of the U.S. state of Florida ruled that the imposition of the death penalty on sixteen-year-old offenders was cruel and unusual punishment in violation of the state constitution; and effective October 1, 1999, the state of Montana abolished the death penalty for those under eighteen at the time of their crimes. As a result, nineteen of the forty U.S. states that permit capital punishment now prohibit the execution of offenders who were sixteen years old and younger at the time of their crimes; fifteen of the remaining twenty-one states restrict that punishment to adult offenders.

Orphans and Abandoned Children

Throughout the world an unknown number of children, most likely in the hundreds of thousands, if not millions, were kept in orphanages and non-penal custodial institutions. Many were condemned to live a grim existence, and subjected to shocking and at times deadly levels of abuse and neglect.

Many children who ended up in orphanages had at least one living parent but had been abandoned because their families were poor, jobless, ill, or in trouble with the law. In countries that had restrictive population control policies, or where cultural traditions valued boys more highly than girls, babies and girls in particular were abandoned. In other cases, medical personnel pressured parents at birth to give up children born with disabilities, claiming that parents would be ostracized for raising a disabled child. For this reason, healthy children who were given up for financial or domestic reasons were often assumed to be "defective."

In Russia, children were abandoned to the state at a rate of more than 100,000 per year. In a 1998 report, Abandoned by the State: Cruelty and Neglect in Russian Orphanages , Human Rights Watch found that children in Russian orphanages were exposed to appalling levels of cruelty and neglect. They were beaten, locked in freezing rooms for days at a time, or sexually abused, and often subjected to degrading treatment by staff.

Russian babies classified as "disabled" were segregated into separate rooms where they were changed and fed, but were bereft of stimulation and without medical care. At age four, these and other children faced another grave violation of their rights: those labeled retarded or "oligophrenic" ("small-brained") were sent to locked and isolated "psycho-neurological internats," which were little better than prisons.Considered "ineducable," children in these facilities were restrained in cloth sacks, tethered to furniture, denied stimulation, and sometimes left to lie half-naked in their own filth. Orphans who survived to the age of eighteen moved on to an adult internat, removed from public view.

Russian orphans who were not categorized as disabled grow up in Dickensian-like institutions where they suffered ill-treatment at the hands of staff and older children within the institutions. In the orphanages, children were physically punished not only by school staff, but by older children who were encouraged to beat up, bully, and intimidate younger ones. The use of cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment and punishment, including corporal punishment, public shaming, and isolation in freezing rooms was not uncommon. Children had no means of redress or complaint to protest ill-treatment and abuse at the hands of staff and older children.

Shocking abuses were also documented in Chinese orphanages, where infants suffered staggering mortality rates. Deprived of adequate food and basic medical care, orphans admitted into welfare institutions in 1989 faced less than a 50 percent chance of surviving for more than one year. Many institutions appeared to operate as little more than assembly lines for the elimination of unwanted orphans (especially girls), with an annual turnover of admissions and deaths far exceeding the number of beds available. At some facilities, the rate of death reached 90 percent.

In Romania, Human Rights Watch found in 1990 that doctors who were forbidden to acquire medical information from outside the country carried out blood transfusions in a misguided attempt to improve the health of institutionalized orphans. Large numbers of children contracted HIV as a result. Children also suffered from inadequate food, housing, clothing, medical care, lack of stimulation or education, and neglect.

As these conditions came to light, the international community responded. In the past decade, the European Union provided more than (U.S.) $75 million to improve the plight of abandoned Romanian children. Funds were directed not only towards emergency food, clothing, and medical care but also toward creating and implementing policies to prevent child abandonment. In 1999, the United States Agency for International Development developed a program to channel (U.S.) $6 million to Russian organizations working to keep families together and further develop foster care and alternatives to institutional care for orphans and abandoned children. In China, staffing and medical care in orphanages improved, and the government worked to encourage adoption of abandoned children. Despite these encouraging developments, orphans and abandoned children continued to be institutionalized at alarming rates and too often failed to receive adequate care and protection.

Finally, while numerous international standards exist which protected the rights of children confined in penal or correctional institutions and settings, no comparable international standards exist to protect the rights of abandoned or orphaned children. Human Rights Watch advocated the use of alternatives to institutionalization of children wherever possible, including support for families or extended families, and foster care, with placement in small residential care facilities as a measure of last resort.

Child Labor

The International Labor Organization (ILO) estimated that 250 million children between the ages of five and fourteen were working in developing countries at least 120 million full time. Sixty-one percent of these were in Asia, 32 percent in Africa, and 7 percent in Latin America. Most working children in rural areas were found in agriculture; urban children worked in trade and services, with fewer in manufacturing, construction and domestic service. Only an estimated 5 percent of child laborers worked in export industries.

Despite the attention devoted to child labor in recent years, those addressing the issue were divided on how to proceed and considered a range of different approaches. Some urged that child labor be eliminated quickly and aggressively, including through the use of trade sanctions when countries or industries failed to act decisively. Others called for reforming the conditions in which children worked with a view toward gradual elimination. Some believed that work plays an important and positive role in children's lives and in their relations with their families, and sought reform, but not an end to child labor.

In tackling the issue of child labor, consideration of the immediate and direct consequences for children and their families could not be underestimated. The removal of children from the workforce had devastating results for some children when not accompanied with nuanced adjustment programs for their rehabilitation and education, and direct assistance. Children discharged from work found themselves on the street in prostitution or crime, or working in even worse conditions and for less pay.

The trade sanction approach seeking boycotts of employers or governments who permitted the use of child labor, or banning the importation of goods made with child labor was extremely difficult to monitor. Employers' assurances that they did not use child labor in manufacturing workplaces around the world were meaningless without effective and independent monitoring mechanisms in place. And trade sanctions or boycotts narrowly targeted to particular export industries, even when effective, had small impact, as only a small portion of child laborers worked in these industries.

Child labor included a range of situations from the clearly hazardous and exploitative, as in the case of four-year-old children tied to rug looms to keep them from running away, to the benign or positive, seventeen-year-olds helping out on the family farm or working after school to earn some pocket money. In many cases, as in the latter examples, children's work was helpful to them and their families, and contributed positively to their development into responsible adults. This depended largely on the age of the child, the conditions in which the child worked, and whether work prevented the child from going to school.

What was clear, and what the international community agreed on, was that certain types of child labor were categorically hazardous to the health, safety, and morals of children and should be banned. The ILO Convention Concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor (ILO Convention 182), adopted unanimously by the 174 member states of the ILO in June 1999, committed states party to take immediate steps to prevent, prohibit, and eliminate "the worst forms of child labor." The term child referred to anyone under the age of eighteen. Under the convention, the worst forms of child labor included the sale and trafficking of children, debt bondage, forced or compulsory labor (including the forced recruitment of children for use in armed conflict), using children for prostitution or production of pornography, using children for illegal activities, particularly drug trafficking, and other work likely to "harm the health, safety or morals of children."

Cognizant of the dangers of banning child labor without also providing children with alternatives to labor, the convention obligates states parties to ensure that children removed from the worst forms of child labor be given direct assistance to ensure their removal, rehabilitation,and social reintegration. Most importantly, the convention mandated that children removed from labor e ensured access to free basic education, and wherever possible and appropriate, vocational training.

Human Rights Watch worked on the issue of child labor in areas where the rights abuses were clear and acute, and which fell within the new ILO Convention's definition of "worst forms of child labor." We worked on bonded child laborers in India; the use of children as soldiers in armed conflicts around the world; and the employment of live-in domestic child servants in Sri Lanka. Throughout, Human Rights Watch emphasized the importance of providing education and rehabilitation in assisting children removed from these worst forms of child labor to truly end the practice.

Violence Against Children in School

For many children around the world, violence was a regular part of the school experience. In some countries, school officials routinely used corporal punishment to maintain classroom discipline and to punish children for poor academic performance. In other countries, authorities failed to intervene to protect minority children from harassment and attacks by other students. The failure of school officials to protect children from violence in school denied them their right to be free from all forms of physical or mental violence and the full enjoyment of their right to education.

School Corporal Punishment

School corporal punishment remained widespread and an accepted part of the class room experience for millions of children around the world, where the human rights violations inherent in its use went unrecognized. In many countries, the use of corporal punishment by teachers against children was explicitly authorized by law, making it a legalized form of violence against children.

The U.N. Committee on the Rights of the Child, the U.N. Committee against Torture, the U.N. Human Rights Committee, and the European Court and Commission of Human Rights took a strong stand against corporal punishment in schools on the grounds that it may rise to the level of torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. The Committee on the Rights of the Child was particularly outspoken, stating that the use of corporal punishment against children was incompatible with the Convention on the Rights of the Child, and it frequently proposed the revision of existing legislation and the development of education campaigns to prevent the physical punishment of children. The use of corporal punishment violated the right of children to be free from violence, debased their dignity and physical integrity, interfered with the development of their physical and mental health, and infringed on their basic right to education. Human Rights Watch worked to highlight these abuses, undertaking a fact-finding mission to Kenya and issuing its findings in August 1999. Kenya's School Discipline Regulations authorized the use of corporal punishment in schools but failed effectively to regulate its use. Nominal restraints were routinely ignored by teachers and the regulations rarely enforced. Teachers caned children for "offenses" such as tardiness, talking in class, wearing torn or dirty uniforms, being unable to answer a question, or failing to achieve target marks set on exams. These measures often resulted in bruising, swelling, and small cuts; at times, however, children suffered more serious injuries such as sprained or broken fingers or wrists, knocked-out teeth, internal injuries, and even death.

Unsurprisingly, school corporal punishment did little to further its supposed educative purpose and had far-reaching and harmful consequences for children. Aside from the common physical injuries and the extreme cases of death which resulted, the practice produced psychological scars that stayed with children for the rest of their lives. Research in Kenya found that the use of corporal punishment instilled a fear of the classroom for some children that impaired learning and at times led children to drop out of school altogether. Other research showed that corporal punishment could be a significant factor in the development of violent attitudes and actions in childhood and later life.

Violence Based on Sexual Orientation

In the United States and in other countries around the world, gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgendered students too often experienced school as a place that accepted intolerance, ostracization, and violence against those perceived to be different. For the most part, school officials refused to intervene to protect these students, allowing what began as harassment to escalate to physical violence. Studies by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the states of Massachusetts and Vermont, and the Seattle, Washington school district found that students who were subjected to harassment and violence at the hands of their peers frequently suffered from depression, low self-esteem, and an inability to focus on schoolwork; most alarmingly, the studies concluded that gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgendered students were two to three times more likely to attempt suicide than their heterosexual counterparts.

Relevant Human Rights Watch reports:

Detained and Deprived of Rights: Children in the Custody of the U.S. Immigration and

Naturalization Service, 12/98

Abandoned to the State: Cruelty and Neglect in Russian Orphanages, 12/98

Nobody's Children: Jamaican Children in Police Detention and Government Institutions, 7/99

Forgotten Children of War: Sierra Leonean Refugee Children in Guinea, 7/99

Spare the Child: Corporal Punishment in Kenyan Schools, 9/99

No Minor Matter: Children in Maryland's Jails, 11/99

Prison Bound: The Denial of Juvenile Justice in Pakistan, 11/99
WOMEN'S HUMAN RIGHTS

Events in 1999 provided clear evidence that, with the rise of civil conflicts in which civilians are often the primary targets, women's rights are ever more at risk. Despite significant gains in securing international condemnation of the horrors typically visited on women in conflict zones, assaults on women were used as a weapon of war in every conflict waged in 1999. In Kosovo, Serbian paramilitaries sexually assaulted dozens of women, driving Kosovar Albanians from their homes. With Bosnia still a fresh memory, often the mere threat of rape was enough to send people across the border into Albania or Macedonia. Reports from Algeria, East Timor, Sierra Leone, and Bosnia indicated that where fighting raged, women were raped; where conflicts subsided, women looked fruitlessly for protection, help, and justice; and where conflicts ended, women's hopes for improved rights met with disinterest and denial.

For women coping with conflict and its aftermath, 1999 was a crossroads. On the one hand, women's human rights activists made real progress in securing mechanisms for vindicating women's human rights. Building on the gains of the International Criminal Court with its strong prohibitions against gender-specific violence, activists won states' agreement in March to create a means for women to report specific human rights violations to the United Nations, with the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW). Following the first conviction for rape at the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), prosecutors brought additional rape charges against senior Rwandan political and military figures. Overall, sexual violence against female civilians in conflict was perhaps the most widely reviled abuse of women's human rights, acknowledged and denounced by governments and U.N. officials alike.

At the same time, improvements in the standards for protecting women's human rights made no difference for women in many countries, perhaps in part because the gains were new, but also because protecting women from abuses was rarely a priority. As conflicts raged around the globe, violence against women remained a weapon of combatants. In Sierra Leone rebel forces dragged women into sexual slavery, raping them repeatedly and compelling them to cook and clean for their abusers. U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson reported evidence of well-planned attacks, including rape, on civilians in East Timor. In various conflicts, women were raped, then killed. Others faced permanent injuries and long-term health risks, especially the threat of HIV/AIDS.

The violence that drove women into flight across borders or within their own countries plagued them as they sought refuge-a fact that the international community addressed only in fits and starts in 1999. From refugee camps around the world, women reported both sexual and domestic violence. Refugee women were often doubly vulnerable, confronting both their own dislocation and lack of support as well as host country policies that downplayed violence against women, regardless of the victim's nationality. In March 1999, the office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) took a stronger stand in promoting gender equality in its work. Its announced strategy included consulting refugee women about their immediate needs, implementing programs to prevent and respond to violence against women, and recognizing gender-based persecution as grounds for asylum.
Neglect of women's rights continued after conflicts ceased and refugees returned home. Reconstruction efforts in Bosnia and Rwanda, for example, included discrete-and underfunded-programs for women, while failing utterly to address women's human rights in their overall programs. Despite years of decrying the exclusion of women from security and reconstruction efforts, women's rights activists saw their concerns downplayed in the agenda of world leaders attempting to forge a Balkans stability pact.

The abuse of women in conflict was rooted in the persistent human rights violations that pushed women into a lower status with limited rights in all spheres of their lives, from home to work. Many countries continued to deny women's equality as a matter of law or policy in 1999. In South Africa, women married under customary laws remained minors, unable to enter into any legal contract without the consent of their husbands or guardians. In Peru, government health programs sterilized tens of thousands of poor women under coercive or deceitful circumstances. After an August visit to Afghanistan, the U.N. special rapporteur on violence against women criticized the Taliban's active, although inconsistently enforced, policies that denied women basic rights and put their health and physical security at risk.

Domestic violence remained a critical issue for women worldwide. The World Health Organization asserted that violence against women causes more death and disability among women aged fifteen to forty-four than cancer, malaria, traffic accidents, and war. In particular, sexual violence, including marital rape, was denounced as a major cause of the rapid spread of HIV/AIDS among women. In Kenya, for example, the U.N. estimated that 42 percent of women were battered by husbands or partners. Kenyan laws do not specifically criminalize domestic violence, and offenders were seldom punished. In Pakistan, estimates of spousal abuse ranged as high as 90 percent of all married women. Despite occasional signs of progress-Egypt this year repealed a law allowing rapists to go free if they married their victims, and Peru passed legislation requiring prosecutors to pursue rape cases-everyday violence and discrimination against women remained among the most flagrant and overlooked of human rights abuses.

Where women organized against such injustice, they often did so under threat. In Pakistan, government officials denounced women's rights organizations as purveyors of immorality as part of a broad attack on nongovernmental organizations. In Egypt, the government used a new law regulating NGOs to halt the creation of the Egyptian Women's Union and denied that working on women's issues was a legitimate pursuit.

The following section provides an overview of key developments, positive and negative, for women's human rights in 1999. Our investigations and monitoring throughout the year showed that violence and discrimination against women as committed and tolerated by states remained the norm in the countries in which we worked. Reports from activists and press in other countries confirmed the pattern of abuse of women's rights and underscored the need for urgent attention to the problem.

Human Rights Developments

Violence against Women in Conflict

Women's rights were in particular jeopardy during times of armed conflict. During these periods, judicial structures that, according to the law, should both prevent violence against women and respond to it were in disarray, could not be relied on and, in some cases, were controlled by the very people who were instigating or participating in rapes. In every civil conflict in recent memory-including East Timor, Afghanistan, Angola, Indonesia, Sierra Leone, Kosovo, the Mexican state of Chiapas, Algeria, Bosnia, the Democratic Republic of Congo-women were targeted for sexual violence. One of the most promising developments of 1999 was that important international actors such as the United Nations successfully identified gender-specific abuses committed against women at the start of conflicts, rather than not at all or only once those conflict were long over, as had been the pattern in the past. This early recognition, however, was still not matched by vigorous investigation and prosecution of perpetrators of rape, tasks that were often left to post-conflict national authorities.

Only in the last decade-as illustrated most clearly by the internal conflicts in Bosnia and Rwanda-was the argument that rape is merely an unavoidable excess of war discredited. Still, the international community was able to do very little to prevent sexual violence in conflict. In fact, combatants defied international standards prohibiting rape and, in some cases, made sexual assault a deliberate weapon. As a consequence, in 1999 many women were treated as reward for soldiers, targeted for forced marriage and domestic labor, and attacked as substitutes for their male relatives or as symbols of communities' honor and reproductive capacity.

For example, in Sierra Leone women faced severe sexual abuse in that country's eight-year civil war, mainly at the hands of Revolutionary United Front (RUF) rebel forces. In January 1999, ruf rebels launched an offensive against the capital, Freetown, temporarily capturing it from government troops and the soldiers of the Nigerian-led peacekeeping force. During this attack, RUF rebels detained women at base camps, raped them daily for weeks, and forced them to cook and clean for rebel leaders. Some rebels claimed individual women as their "wives," thereby gaining exclusive sexual access to them.

In Serbia's attack on Kosovo, paramilitaries entered the homes of ethnic Albanians and raped women and girls in front of their families or outside in their gardens. Some paramilitaries told women that they were expected to commit rapes as part of the campaign of ethnic cleansing. An unknown number of women and girls died after these attacks. In other instances, Serbian paramilitaries, many of them volunteer irregular soldiers bussed in from Serbia, demanded money from fleeing Kosovar Albanians, threatening to rape, kill, or torture those who did not comply. Dragging women from the road or from shelters, Serb paramilitaries subjected an unknown number of women to gang rapes in forests, in trucks, or along the road. They held women captive for periods ranging from twenty minutes to several days. In some cases, paramilitaries forced women to undress and subjected them to physical searches and interrogations. Many women found these searches terrifying, fearing that they were a precursor to rape. Women reported that the men committing the rapes generally wore camouflage uniforms and black masks covering their faces. While it appears that paramilitaries committed most of the rapes, Human Rights Watch also documented at least two cases in which regular Serb soldiers committed rape.

In Algeria, although women were not being targeted for sexual violence because they belonged to a certain ethnic group, they were targeted for their beliefs, those beliefs imputed to them, or those held by their male family members. Algerian women were in danger of sexual assault and other violence by militant Islamist groups. This ongoing threat was grounded in years of efforts by these extremist groups to circumscribe women's freedom in order to demonstrate their power in society. Ever since 1992 when elections were canceled, these groups had intimidated, threatened, and assaulted women for inappropriate dress or behavior. They also slaughtered, kidnapped, raped, and enslaved them. Incidents were also reported in which the security forces, in their efforts to quash these militant Islamist groups, tortured and raped women to coerce male alleged members of these groups to turn themselves in or to extract information from the women about male family members' whereabouts.

Although the level of violence in Algeria's civil conflict dropped dramatically in 1999, violence against women remained a constant feature of the conflict. President Bouteflika introduced a partial amnesty law for militants (the Civil Harmony law) in June, which was adopted by parliament and then endorsed in a national referendum in September. To President Bouteflika's credit, the proposed law exempted from the amnesty those responsible for rape. Aside from this positive step, however, President Bouteflika had yet to address more systematically the specific needs of women victims of sexual violence during the conflict by ordering the investigation of all cases of abduction, rape, and killing of women and girls to ensure that perpetrators would be prosecuted and by establishing centers for the provision of social and psychological services for women victims of the armed conflict.

Part of the reason that rape against women in conflict situations remained so persistent was that governments consistently failed to hold perpetrators accountable post-conflict. For example, the fragile July peace agreement crafted between the government of Sierra Leone and the RUF merely recognized the violence that women suffered and called for special attention to integrating women into post-conflict reconstruction and development, while, at the same time, granting a blanket amnesty to combatants. Another example was the August 1999 peace agreement in the Democratic Republic of Congo, which offered the possibility of a cessation of the conflict in that country but did not address the sexual violence perpetrated against women during the war.

Women raped in conflict had to contend not only with post-conflict impunity for what happened to them, but also with the dire health consequences of rape. In addition to psychological trauma, physical injuries, and sexually transmitted diseases, sexually abused women faced hiv infection, a potential death sentence, especially in countries in which health care and medicine were scant. In the Democratic Republic of Congo, where violence flared up again in August 1998, and in Sierra Leone's civil war, armed groups raped women and girls, in some cases infecting them with hiv. Some of these women died of aids in 1999. Others discovered their infection with little hope of treatment.

Women Refugees, IDPs, and Asylum Seekers

The ranks of refugees, internally displaced persons (IDPs), and asylum seekers continued to swell in 1999, as large numbers of people fled conflict and persecution at home and sought refuge elsewhere. The number of refugees and internally displaced persons assisted by UNHCR in 1998 exceeded 21 million people. The populations of refugees and displaced persons around the world remained predominantly made up of women and their dependent children. In many situations women faced particular protection and security risks in refugee camps, as well as the challenges of heading households while suffering from their disadvantaged status as women. Refugee women were subjected to rape, sexual assault, and other forms of sexual violence. Levels of domestic violence were also reported to be very high in many refugeecommunities, perhaps because in the refugee setting, pressures regarding housing, food, security, and resources further strained domestic situations and erupted in violence. Moreover, extended networks of family, neighbors, and community leaders that may have acted as a deterrent to abuse no longer existed in the unfamiliar territory of refugee camps. In general, women refugees had limited or no legal recourse for sexual and domestic violence, partly as a result of their unfamiliarity with and wariness of local police and judicial authorities and partly because of the lack of proactive, systematic, and sensitive responses by the relevant international and local authorities.

1999 witnessed one of the largest refugee exoduses in Europe since the Second World War. "Ethnic cleansing" and atrocities in Kosovo forced at least 750,000 refugees to flee to neighboring countries. A further 600,000 to 700,000 people remained displaced within Kosovo, forced to travel in circles from village to village for months, often on foot. People hiding in forests inside Kosovo lacked health care. Internally displaced women interviewed after the intervention by North Atlantic Treaty Organisation's peacekeepers in Kosovo, KFOR, described a stark example of the difficulties women suffered during flight: pregnant women delivered outdoors without medical assistance. The overwhelming majority of Kosovar Albanian refugees were women, children, and elderly persons. In the initial weeks of the crisis, those who attempted to flee to neighboring states stumbled into chaos. For women, the international community's lack of preparation was particularly problematic. According to UNHCR, sanitary napkins were made available for women in the camps in Albania or Macedonia, although not until several weeks after the refugee crisis began. On a more positive note,

UNHCR and the U.N. Population Fund (UNFPA) did include reproductive health kits in the supplies sent to camps.

In 1998 Human Rights Watch and other rights groups found that Burundian refugee women in Tanzanian camps suffered high levels of rape and domestic violence. In the latter half of 1998 and the first half of 1999, these groups urged UNHCR to adopt and implement policies and procedures that would afford refugee women greater protection from and recourse for sexual and domestic violence. Our research in 1998 found that women were regularly attacked while carrying out routine daily tasks such as gathering firewood, collecting vegetables, or searching for employment from local Tanzanian villagers. In a particularly serious May 1999 incident that received international press attention, a group of approximately fifty refugee women collecting firewood were reportedly raped by a large group of Tanzanian men. Many of the women were repeatedly raped by multiple assailants, in what was said to be an act of revenge for the death of a local schoolteacher that local villagers blamed on refugees. More than one hundred local villagers were believed to have taken part in the rapes, but only seven men were arrested for the brutal attack. Statistics on rape and domestic violence in the Tanzanian camps in 1999 remained scattered and unreliable, in part because of the high number of unreported cases and the lack of comprehensive reporting mechanisms.

In 1999, UNHCR and its implementing partners began to put into place programs to address the problem of violence against women in the Tanzanian camps. Although UNHCR budget cuts and dwindling support from the international community limited the resources available for implementing programs to protect refugee women in Tanzania, UNHCR received a U.S. $1.65 million grant from the U.N. Foundation in October 1998, specifically to fund projects to prevent sexual violence against refugee women in several African countries, including Tanzania. From March 1999 onwards, UNHCR began to use this grant to finance a projects to prevent and respond to sexual and gender violence in the Tanzanian camps. At this writing, it was too early to evaluate the impact of these programs on the lives of refugee women.

The year 1999 was also marked by uncertainty and setbacks for women seeking political asylum. For example, Bosnian women temporarily residing in Germany while awaiting an opportunity to testify before the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in rape cases, remained vulnerable to deportation to Bosnia. The looming threat of involuntary repatriation forced many potential witnesses to weigh the dangers of testifying against alleged war criminals-some with powerful connections-without a guarantee of resettlement outside Bosnia. Before a witness testified, the ICTY encouraged authorities in her country of temporary residence to extend the validity of her temporary residence permit. However, the ICTY did little or nothing to protect Bosnian women from future dangers stemming from their testimony, even though many women were witnesses in high profile cases and thus faced significant personal risk if they returned to Bosnia.

Women's rights activists decried a June 11, 1999 decision by the United States Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) that denied asylum to a domestic violence victim. In this case, a Guatemalan woman sought asylum to escape brutal spousal violence from which she claimed the Guatemalan government had failed to protect her. The BIA overturned a grant of asylum on the grounds that, despite her undisputed suffering, she did not establish that she was persecuted on account of her membership in a social group or her political opinion.

In reaching its decision, the bia refused to recognize a social group based on gender, relationship to an abusive partner, and the asylum seeker's opposition to domestic violence. The BIA also failed to credit her claim that her husband's abuse was at least in part in response to her political opinion that her husband had no right to beat her-reversing the immigration judge's finding that her husband's violence had escalated in response to her resistance and futile attempts to seek official aid.

Post-Conflict Discrimination

Women's reintegration into society post-conflict was often hampered by reconstruction and development programs that failed to address women's rights or expected women to return to traditional homemaker roles, regardless of their changed circumstances. Despite assurances made in 1995 at the U.N. Conference on Women in Beijing, many governments continued to discriminate against women directly or to allow others to do so unimpeded. When the opportunity arose to remedy this discrimination, particularly during post-conflict reconstruction and development periods, the international community passed it by, choosing instead to reinforce previously existing patterns of discrimination. As a consequence, women faced many barriers in their access to justice, services, and resources, with many governments refusing to recognize, let alone remedy, the laws and practices perpetuating women's inequality. While some countries took positive steps toward ensuring women's equality, in general, patterns of discrimination against women surfaced in the laws, policies, and practices of governments and nongovernmental bodies around the world.

As the reconstruction program entered its fourth year, post-conflict discrimination against women continued in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Donor governments and international agencies poured resources into reconstruction efforts, yet women were typically overlooked and in some cases deliberately excluded from the benefits of this assistance. Women throughout the country reported that preferences for demobilized soldiers significantly decreased women's employment opportunities. Despite criticism from women's organizations, training and jobs programs for women continued to focus on stereotypical "women's work" including hairdressing, knitting, and sewing.

On a more positive note, women's political representation in the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Representatives jumped from a post-war low of 2 percent to 26 percent. The unprecedented increase came after the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) adopted a new election rule mandating that at least three of each party's top ten candidates be female. According to the OSCE, the rule was designed to "combat the systematic discrimination against women within political parties."

In Bosnia, women were not hired for the police department, making it more difficult for women to report rape and domestic violence. Having female police officers would provide a conducive atmosphere for investigating crimes against women, especially cases of domestic and sexual violence where victims often feel uncomfortable discussing their experience with male officers. In Kosovo, one development offered hope that some of the mistakes of Bosnia might be avoided: the first class of Kosovo police trainees included forty women.

In Afghanistan, the Taliban militia, having gained territorial control of 90 percent of the country, continued to enforce official gender-based discrimination unparalleled in its harshness. The discriminatory measures imposed by the Taliban not only completely marginalized Afghan women from the mainstream of political life, they placed women's very survival, and that of their families, at risk. The enforcement of the Taliban's strictures on women varied to some extent in different areas of the country, but this geographical variation in enforcement was largely a matter of degree rather than substance. The restrictions had a severely detrimental effect on women's health, security, and personal freedoms in all areas under Taliban control. In most parts of the country, the education of girls and the employment of women outside the health sector remained banned or severely restricted. In some areas, however, home- or mosque-based education for girls was reportedly permitted. In most areas, women could not appear in public without a burqa , a garment that cloaks the head, face, and body. Women's freedom of movement was severely curtailed as they were generally required to appear in public escorted by a male relative or mahram . Punishments for violations of these edicts were extremely harsh and frequently included whipping and beating by members of the Taliban.

In Rwanda, hopes for promoting women's rights to equality before the law in the area of property ownership and inheritance were raised and then dashed. In June 1999 the Rwandan parliament adopted an inheritance bill that guaranteed women the right to inherit property from their male relatives. But then Rwanda's supreme court, which by law must approve all new legislation before it becomes binding and enforceable, opposed the inheritance bill and referred it back to Parliament for further deliberations.

The supreme court's failure to approve the bill slowed down the legal reform process that Rwanda had initiated to address the inequality women faced in the area of property rights. Customary inheritance practice made it difficult for women to own or inherit property. These customary rules presented particular problems for widows whose husbands were killed during the 1994 genocide. Many widows were dispossessed of their houses and other property by their husbands' male relatives, who were considered the legitimate heirs under customary law. Efforts by Rwandan legal rights groups to assist women to reclaim their houses and other property often proved futile.

As the Rwandan example demonstrates, discrimination against women in post-conflict settings often reflected the discrimination women endured during times of peace, particularly discrimination within the family, either by law or by practice.

Women's Status in the Family

Guarantees of equal rights and protection under the law did not prevent discrimination against women in the family. Despite governments' promises to guarantee women's equality and full rights under the constitutions of their countries, governments denied women legal freedom to achieve such rights. In many countries statutory restrictions curtailed, among other things, women's ability to inherit property, contract marriage, and seek divorce. In South Africa, women married under customary law were still considered minors and could not enter into any legal contract without the consent of their husbands or guardians. In India, Syria, and Pakistan women were discriminated against in divorce and inheritance laws.

In a striking setback, Zimbabwe's highest court ruled in February in Magaya vs. Magaya that women were perpetual minors without the legal capacity to inherit property and that it was not contrary to the anti-discrimination clause of the Zimbabwean constitution to give preference to male heirs in inheritance rights. Venia Magaya, the eldest daughter of Shoniwa Lennon Magaya, who died intestate, was denied the right to inherit her father's home on the basis that customary law prohibits a woman from being the heir to her father's estate if there is a male heir, in this case a younger son from a polygamous second marriage.

The Zimbabwean constitution's anti-discrimination clause did not apply to customary law. This constitutional limitation effectively undercut women's rights and status in the family, especially in instances where customary law governed cases of marriage, divorce, inheritance, and other personal matters. The Magaya case was met with outrage by women's groups in Zimbabwe, who considered it a major setback in their efforts to achieve equal status for women under the law. The official response to this outrage consisted of a May letter from the assistant registrar of the supreme court, who characterized the reactions of women's rights groups as unfounded and emotional, and who threatened to charge Zimbabwean lawyers publicly protesting the decision with contempt of court.

In other settings, however, women were able to overturn similarly discriminatory laws. As a result of a case brought before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR), by Mara Eugenia Morales de Sierra, represented by the Center for Justice and International Law (CEJIL), in 1999 Guatemala amended or repealed twelve provisions of its Civil Code that discriminated against women in the family, including a statute that prevented a woman from working outside the home without her husband's permission. While these reforms were long overdue and much celebrated, they were exclusively directed at the statutes at issue in the Morales de Sierra case and did not address the majority of the reforms sought by women's rights groups in their 1998 and 1999 proposals to Congress. Moreover, women's rights groups and CEJIL criticized some of the reforms as not having gone far enough even in addressing the problems identified by the Morales de Sierra case, particularly with regard to ensuring that women could participate meaningfully in the administration of property and act as meaningful representatives of the marital union. At the time of this writing, CEJIL was urging the IACHR to issue a final report on Guatemala's compliance with the American Convention on Human Rights, and women's rights groups were continuing to call for broader reforms.

In Morocco, women's rights activists continued their struggle to reform the Family Code, which blatantly discriminated against women with respect to legal capacity, marriage, divorce, child custody, and inheritance. The Family Code granted different rights to women and men, and consistently rendered women's autonomy subject to male guardianship and authority.

Moroccan women's inequality in marriage began before their unions were finalized. While men over the age of eighteen were not required to seek permission to marry, women of any age had to obtain the permission of a male guardian in contracting marriage. The Moroccan Family Code required that a woman obey her husband and submit to his authority. Men could divorce their wives without cause or a court proceeding, while women had to have specific grounds and court approval.

Moroccan law classified rape as a crime of morality and not a crime against bodily integrity. Because rape was considered a crime against honor, the law allowed rapists to go unpunished when they married their victims. Moroccan family law did not grant women the same rights as men to make decisions about the upbringing of their children. The law denied divorced women legal guardianship of their children even when they acted as custodial guardians. Where the mother had a custodial guardianship of her children, she risked losing custody should she remarry or establish residence in another city.

Women were married without their consent, forced to undergo virginity exams, denied access to divorce and to child custody, and left virtually without recourse in situations of domestic violence. Moreover, although women's political rights and their access to education and employment were in theory protected by Moroccan law, discrimination in the family code limited women's autonomy and thus created obstacles to women's full enjoyment of these rights.

Two years after the victory of the opposition in the 1997 parliamentary elections, the socialist government's pledge to address the plight of Moroccan women had yet to materialize in significant steps to eliminate discrimination against women. In a July speech made shortly after King Mohammed VI succeeded his father, the king expressed his support for a draft bill to strengthen women's rights. The bill sought to outlaw polygamy, raise the legal age of marriage for girls, and give divorcees and widows the right to half of their husband's property. Women activists welcomed King Mohammed's speech, describing the draft bill proposed by the government as "long overdue."

State Response to Violence against Women

In 1999, Human Rights Watch continued to investigate the state response to sexual assault and domestic violence against women in Peru, Russia, South Africa, and Pakistan. We also monitored the state response to "honor killings" in Jordan and to the sexual abuse of female prisoners in the United States. Despite some positive efforts by state and non-state actors, abuses against women were carried out frequently and with virtual impunity, as states largely failed to fulfill their obligations to prevent and provide redress for such crimes. States were particularly negligent in addressing violence in the family. This problem received widespread international attention in recent years, but concrete action was slow in coming. Japan, for example, only began to consider specific legislation and support services to combat domestic violence in mid-1999. There were also disturbing indications that such violence was increasing. UNICEF reported in 1999 that violence against women was rising in post-communist countries as economic crises increased women's financial dependence upon men. In many of these states, domestic violence was not prohibited by law and marital rape was not recognized as a crime. Speaking on a more global level, in her 1999 report to the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, the special rapporteur on violence against women noted the "growing prevalence of violence against women generally and domestic violence specifically," and concluded that "[o]verwhelmingly, States are failing in their international obligations to prevent, investigate and prosecute violence against women in the family."

In a move that women's rights NGOs applauded as long overdue, Peru promulgated a rape law that made the prosecution of rape cases mandatory. Until the adoption of this law, the government was obligated to prosecute rape only when the victim was under fourteen years old or when the rape was aggravated. Women victims of sexual violence were thus often denied legal redress. The woman, rather than the state, was the named party in the suit against the perpetrator. Since women were frequently unfamiliar with the legal system, could not afford to hire a lawyer, and could not bear the emotional and financial cost of being the engine behind the prosecution of their case, rape prosecutions were frequently dropped. Peru's new law labeled rape a serious crime that harms not just the individual woman, but all of society. At this writing, however, it was too soon to judge the effectiveness of this new legislation. Peruvian NGOs were monitoring its implementation closely and cautioned against premature celebration, noting that, especially with regard to women's rights, the government has failed to enforce vigorously laws that protect women from domestic violence, laws that guarantee women access to free medical exams for the documentation of domestic or sexual violence, and laws that guarantee mothers child support during separation or divorce.

In Russia, where women continued to be subject to domestic violence, attempts to pass national legislation on the topic failed, and little was done to improve the state response to the abuse. The federal government did not make financial resources available for combating violence against women. Activists, expressing frustration with the lack of progress nationally, focused their attention on local level initiatives, establishing cooperative links with local law enforcement, city officials, and journalists. The number of nongovernmental crisis centers grew across the country, while the few existing government-sponsored centers and shelters closed due to budget cuts. Crisis center leaders traveled throughout Russia, training judges, police, and activists on rape and domestic violence issues. The Russian Association of Crisis Centers for Women officially registered in 1999 and held a national meeting in September to coordinate its activities. But according to crisis center workers, despite educational campaigns and continuing advocacy, police still failed to report cases of rape and domestic violence, and few such cases made it to court.

As South Africa celebrated its fifth year of democratic rule, it continued to face staggering levels of domestic and sexual violence against women. In a 1999 study by the South African Medical Council, 25 percent of the women interviewed in three rural provinces had been assaulted by an intimate partner. Victims of rape and domestic violence confronted significant obstacles to legal redress. Even at a handful of new one-stop rape crisis centers, women were often unable to receive adequate examinations by forensic doctors, whose reports were needed for a legal case. These doctors were criticized-by NGOs and the head of forensic medicine at a leading South African medical school-for being poorly trained and often biased against rape victims. Proposals for reform of the forensic medical service moved forward only slowly. On National Women's Day, President Mbeki tied judgment of the country's progress toward total liberation to advancement in combating violence against women. Still, to the dismay of women's groups, South Africa's ground-breaking 1998 Domestic Violence Act languished, its implementation delayed, according to the government, by the cost of drafting regulations and training personnel to implement the legislation in the courts. At this writing, the government was still using a flawed 1993 domestic violence law.

In Pakistan, it was estimated that eight women were raped every twenty-four hours and 70 to 95 percent of women had experienced domestic or familial violence. Extreme forms of familial violence included so-called honor killings and bride burnings, with both practicesclaiming the lives of hundreds of women every year. In April 1999, Samia Sarwar was gunned down in a much publicized honor killing at the behest of her parents for seeking a divorce. Other women were attacked, by or at the instigation of family members, for choosing their spouses. The government appeared uninterested in combating impunity for these acts. Women victims of violence who turned to the criminal justice system confronted a discriminatory legal regime, venal and abusive police, untrained doctors, incompetent prosecutors, and skeptical judges. As a result, few women reported crimes of violence, and fewer still saw their attackers punished. In the case of Sarwar's murder, a police report was registered, but as of October 1999 her killers remained free despite exceptionally strong and credible evidence against them. In August 1999, Pakistan's Senate refused even to consider a resolution sparked by Sarwar's murder condemning the practice of honor killing, sending a clear message of government acquiescence in the climate of impunity surrounding acts of violence against women.

Honor killings continued to plague women in Jordan, too, where seventeen women were killed in the name of "family honor" from January to mid-October 1999. According to Jordanian government statistics, since 1994 there were on average between twenty-five and thirty honor killings annually, constituting approximately one third of the country's homicides. Articles 340 and 98 of the Jordanian Penal Code exempted or reduced the punishment for murder when a woman was killed in the name of honor, and this legal bias was compounded by inadequate investigations and lenient sentences. In July 1999 a Ministry of Justice committee recommended to the Cabinet elimination of article 340 of the Penal Code, and in September 1999 the Cabinet approved the proposed amendment from the Ministry of Justice sending the proposal to Parliament for review. In addition official sources indicated that article 98 would be amended to eliminate the exemption from prosecution it offered to males who killed in the name of family honor.

While activists welcomed these legal reforms, they continued to organize to demand greater and more immediate accountability for these crimes. For example, in August 1999 Jordanian activists launched a national campaign in which they gathered over 8,000 signatures to call for the government to abolish laws protecting men who kill female family members in the name of honor. Activists also called for the government to adopt better means of protecting women from honor crimes. Official efforts to protect women threatened by their families consisted of placing them into the protective custody of prisons or other corrections facilities. Official statistics indicated that fifty to sixty women were placed in administrative detention each year for periods ranging from a few months to over three years. Treated as minors, these women were prohibited from leaving the facility. In 1998, the government established a family protection unit within the Public Security Directorate to handle crimes committed within the family, including crimes of honor. But more than one year later it operated only one office and remained largely unknown to the public.

In the United States, officials began to pay more attention to the problem of custodial sexual misconduct and, in some cases, to address it through legislative reforms and improved oversight. Human Rights Watch's research demonstrated that poorly-designed mechanisms within the prison system to detect, investigate, and remedy custodial sexual violence contributed to silence about and impunity for such abuses. In June 1999, a major U.S. government report on sexual misconduct by corrections staff in the federal Bureau of Prisons, the California Department of Corrections, the Texas Department of Criminal Justice, and the correctional system of the District of Columbia confirmed that the problem had not been eradicated. The report also found that the four corrections departments studied lacked reliable, comprehensive data to describe the number, nature, and outcomes of staff-on-inmate sexual misconduct allegations, rendering it impossible to know the full extent of the problem.

Human Rights Watch continued to receive reports of custodial sexual misconduct and sexual assaults in the United States, in both state and federal prisons, including at the Federal Correctional Institution in Dublin, California, where the Federal Bureau of Prisons agreed to re-evaluate the screening and training of guards to prevent sexual abuse as part of a civil settlement reached in 1998. In Florida, a woman who complained of sexual harassment and abuse by corrections staff committed suicide in October 1998 after being placed in solitary confinement, reportedly for being branded a "troublemaker" by guards. Gov. Jeb Bush named an independent investigator to the case in January. Laws in six states were either passed or put into effect in 1999 criminalizing custodial sexual misconduct in prisons, although the new West Virginia law was seriously flawed, permitting the prosecution of the inmate as well as the corrections officer. Eight states still did not have laws criminalizing custodial sexual misconduct, including Oregon, where a proposed bill on the topic was defeated in the state legislature.

Women Workers

The International Labour Organisation estimated that in ten years 80 percent of all women in industrialized countries and 70 percent globally would work outside the home. As the numbers of women in the labor market swelled, their disproportionate responsibility for uncompensated domestic labor did not diminish. On average, in a review of the issue in selected developing countries, the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) reported that women's work burden was 113 percent that of men. In industrialized countries, women's share was 105 percent that of men. Nonetheless, women's wages lagged behind male earnings worldwide.

In 1999 women continued to face discriminatory hiring practices, sexual harassment, and even violence in the workplace. The U.S. government, for example, reported that murder continued to be the leading cause of women's death in the workplace. In Mexico, the government sidestepped its duty to protect women in the export-processing (maquiladora) sector from corporate discrimination. Human Rights Watch's research in 1998 and 1999 demonstrated that corporations operating in this sector subjected virtually all women applicants to pregnancy exams or other methods of determining pregnancy status as a condition of work; denied employment to those who were pregnant; and put those who became pregnant after being hired at risk of being fired. These problems continued despite local, national, and international efforts to improve conditions in the maquiladoras.

In 1999, as a part of a Human Rights Watch-initiated review under the labor rights side agreement of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), the United States engaged Mexico in ministerial-level consultations on the issue of pregnancy-based sex discrimination against women. One component of the ministerial consultation agreement was a trilateral conference in Mrida, Yucatan, in March 1999. At that conference, Mexico continued to vacillate on the issue of women's right to equality in the labor force. Mexican officials avoided the issues under consideration, disseminated misinformation, and denied their labor law obligations. In one such episode, the Mexican government at long last admitted that pre-hire pregnancy testing violated its labor law, but then undermined the significance of its admission by justifying pregnancy testing as long as it was intended to protect the woman's reproductive health or the health of her fetus. In fact, no provision of Mexico's labor code allowed this exception. Despite excellent organization and planning by local women's NGOs, the NAFTA process in thiscase produced only slim results in 1999. In contrast to the slow progress of the NAFTA process, two days after being sworn in as Mexico City's first female mayor at the end of September 1999, Rosario Robles signed into force a new law that would punish Mexico City businesses that required women to take a pregnancy test before being hired. This addition to the penal code established prison sentences for those breaking the law.

Human rights violations continued for women trapped in forced labor throughout the world. Through coercion, deception, and debt bondage, traffickers held women in involuntary servitude and slavery-like conditions. Trafficking of women from Thailand to Japan remained a large-scale problem in 1999, as thousands of women from Thailand traveled to Japan to work. Although their initial decisions to migrate were voluntary, the vast majority found themselves trapped in debt bondage and forced into prostitution by the agents who facilitated their travel. Recruiters and agents regularly deceived women about the nature of the work, wages, debt amounts, and/or working conditions. Once in Japan, women were given no choice over their occupation or terms of employment. While in debt, women could not refuse clients or clients' demands and received no compensation for their labor. Agents and traffickers enforced the repayment of debts through abusive tactics such as passport deprivation, illegal confinement, physical violence, and threats of "resale" into renewed levels of debt.

The government of Japan, as in many other destination countries, approached trafficking as an immigration problem, summarily deporting women found working illegally. In rare cases, the Japanese government prosecuted abusive traffickers and agents for employing illegal aliens. But victims of trafficking did not have access to justice or compensation for the severe human rights violations they had suffered while in Japan. And while Thai government officials helped women return to Thailand, they made no effort to assist them in seeking redress for labor or other human rights violations.

U.S. government sources estimated that between 45,000 and 50,000 women and children were trafficked into the United States in 1999. In Atlanta, Georgia, U.S. federal law enforcement officials brought indictments against thirteen ringleaders of a nation-wide trafficking network. Federal prosecutors alleged that the traffickers had brought hundreds of young women and girls from Asia to work in forced prostitution in cities throughout the United States. According to press accounts, traffickers held the women in debt bondage, forcing them to perform approximately six hundred sex acts without salary before their debt was cleared. According to a reporter familiar with the case, most, if not all of the women and girl trafficking victims in the case were deported.

In many trafficking cases in the United States, women were arrested, detained, and deported without any opportunity to file charges or demand compensation from employers. In one unusual case in 1999, however, Rogerio Cadena, a trafficker who brought women from Mexico to Florida and placed them in forced prostitution, was ordered to pay U.S. $1 million in restitution to seventeen women victims.

Trafficking of women into Bosnia and Herzegovina for forced prostitution also surged in 1999. Hundreds of women from the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, some of them promised lucrative employment opportunities in West European countries, found themselves sold into slavery-like conditions and held as virtual prisoners in cafe-bars throughout the Federation and Republika Srpska. The women had no legal redress; instead, local law enforcement officials in Bosnia and Herzegovina often forced the women to stand trial, fined them, and deported them across county lines, allowing traffickers to pick them up and sell them to another bar owner.

The Role of the International Community

In 1999, the international community again confronted the challenges of protecting and promoting women's human rights in conflict and post-conflict situations. Although some significant steps were taken toward greater protection of women's rights, the conflict in Kosovo reminded human rights defenders yet again how sexual violence against women paradoxically can be used to rally support for military intervention and yet risk being ignored when holding perpetrators of human rights violations accountable.

United Nations

In a speech commemorating the twentieth anniversary of Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), Deputy Secretary-Gen -eral Louise Frchette recognized how violence and discrimination against women pushes them to society's margins: "Women are more commonly found in part-time work in the informal sector, among the unemployed and the underemployed. Women's work in subsistence farming and in family enterprises is ignored and there are no social security, health or old age benefits attached to such work." Aware of its role in ending the human rights violations that reduce women's status, the United Nations and its various programs and agencies continued their slow progress in integrating protection of women's rights into their work. For example, the U.N. Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) conducted an analysis of the impact of education of women on food production and determined that increasing women's primary schooling alone could increase agricultural output worldwide by 24 percent. After determining that information provided by agricultural extension agents to male heads of households is rarely conveyed to women in the same households, FAO implemented programs to ensure that women, particularly those cultivating subsistence crops, received information and services. In addition, UNESCO organized, in partnership with governmental and nongovernmental groups, a Pan African Women's Conference on a Culture of Peace in Zanzibar in May to design ways for women to influence the making of policy, particularly as the policies pertain to conflict prevention, conflict resolution, and peace building. The final Zanzibar Declaration and Women's Agenda for a Culture of Peace was to be submitted to the United Nations, the Organization for African Unity (OAU), and the World Bank for approval and financial support. At the same time, diminishing voluntary contributions from governments threatened to close the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women (INSTRAW), the only U.N. institute focusing exclusively on women. The U.N.'s ability to galvanize successfully government funding to save INSTRAW has to be a measure of its commitment to programs supporting women's rights.

The Commission on the Status of Women took a significant step toward protecting women from human rights violations by adopting, after four years of negotiations, an optional protocol to CEDAW at its forty-third session in March. The protocol, which was to enter into force after ratification by ten states, would enable women to submit claims of rights violations to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, and would create an inquiry procedure enabling the committee to initiate investigations into situations of grave or systematic violations of women's rights. On October 6, 1999, the U.N. General Assembly adopted without vote the optional protocol to CEDAW, thus opening the protocol for signatures by states immediately.

The work of the two ad hoc tribunals continued with mixed results for women. Judge Navanethen Pillay of South Africa, author of the landmark 1998 Akayesu decision, was elected president of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), bringing to the post her demonstrated commitment to women's issues. In the wake of the Akayesu decision, prosecutors amended two indictments to add charges of rape. In the Musema case, as in the Akayesu case, the indictment was amended after the trial began. These belated amendments raised serious concerns about the investigation into the admittedly pervasive sexual violence perpetrated during the genocide: did investigators fail to document sexual violence in a timely manner or did prosecutors, even with sufficient evidence, fail to indict suspects for sexual violence? Among those charged with rape and genocide was Pauline Nyiramasuhuko, former Minister for Women's Development and Family Welfare. Nyiramasuhuko, the first woman to be charged with rape by the ICTR, entered a plea of not guilty. The ICTR continued to struggle to establish an effective witness protection and assistance unit, with some witnesses reportedly refusing to testify once they realized how precarious protection measures were.

In contrast to the ICTR, the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) appeared to have increased its credibility among women reporting conflict-related violations. Women meeting at a July conference in Vienna on rape in the Kosovo conflict expressed hope that perpetrators of sexual violence in Kosovo would be brought before the ICTY. However, all participants agreed that the women victims and witnesses needed to be represented by their own counsel to protect their interests. Women victims of rape in Kosovo interviewed by Human Rights Watch indicated that they would be willing to meet with ICTYinvestigators and testify before the tribunal.

As with the ICTR, the ICTY still had not created a witness protection and assistance unit which women trusted. Bosnian women scheduled to testify before the ICTY on rape charges told Human Rights Watch that they had no luck seeking help with immigration claims and relocation issues. With the threat of forced repatriation hanging over their heads, witnesses temporarily residing in Germany and other third countries feared what they perceived as the potentially deadly consequences of testifying without a guarantee that they would not be forcibly returned to Bosnia. In interviews with women living in Germany, Human Rights Watch found that their immigration status was so uncertain that in at least one case, a witness moved to a third and distant country offering more permanent immigration status. In Germany, the policy was that once a witness had testified, she had to return home. Until she testified, the ICTY would send letters to the local bureau for aliens and the local police encouraging the extension of her temporary permit to remain in the country. But the ICTY did nothing to consider the long-term implications of testifying for these women.

The disparate response of the international community to crises-which varied according to geographic location and, in particular, the skin color of the victims-became glaringly apparent when the Kosovo conflict erupted, forcing hundreds of thousands of Kosovar Albanians to seek refuge across international borders. UNHCR was inundated with funds to provide for the refugees, and the media tracked it's every move. This contrasted sharply with the inattention of the international community and media to ongoing and larger refugee crises in Africa. Yet UNHCR demonstrated in Kosovo that, if adequately resourced, it could respond better to these crises and the specific protection needs of women refugees.

For Burundian women languishing in Tanzanian refugee camps, however, improved protection by UNHCR was slow in coming. UNHCR largely ignored sexual and domestic violence in the emergency phase of the camps and later responded to the problems in an ad hoc manner. Only in the first half of 1999 did UNHCR adopt a more comprehensive and coordinated response to violence against women in the camps. In February 1999, Human Rights Watch met with unhcr staff in Geneva to discuss UNHCR's response to sexual and domestic violence in the Tanzanian camps and to underscore the need to better implement UNHCR's policies on protecting refugee women in all refugee settings and to adopt policies addressing domestic violence. At that meeting, UNHCR officers acknowledged that domestic and sexual violence were a serious problem in Tanzanian camps.

UNHCR's new protection initiatives included providing firewood to vulnerable refugees, i.e., unaccompanied minors living alone, unaccompanied elderly men and women, elderly couples, handicapped and terminally ill persons, trauma victims, and some single female and male heads of household. UNHCR also reportedly initiated food distribution systems designed to improve women's access to food. UNHCR provided some victims of domestic violence with alternative shelter on a short-term basis, and strengthened ongoing community education on gender violence and counseling services to victims of sexual attacks. In late 1999 UNHCR also recruited two Tanzanian lawyers to assist refugee women victims of rape in pursuing their cases in court. Although at this writing it was still too early to evaluate the impact of UNHCR's programs in the Tanzanian camps, these efforts were evidence that, with staff training, institutional commitment and support, and sufficient funding and resources, UNHCR could design programs that could better respond to the needs of refugee women. Nevertheless, the contrast between UNHCR's response to Kosovar refugees and Burundian refugees highlighted the need for the international community and UNHCR to respond effectively to all crises.

In this context, the U.N. recognized with a May policy statement its failure to provide adequate protection for women in times of humanitarian crises, especially armed conflict. The U.N. Inter-Agency Standing Committee, the coordinating body for major humanitarian agencies, committed itself to improving the U.N.'s response to such crises, in part by including women in the decision making process.

European Union

The European Union focused increased attention on violence against women in 1999, declaring a campaign against violence against women in Western Europe. As part of the campaign, the European Commission supported a comprehensive study on the prevalence of domestic violence in the region. The commission also funded a meeting on rape as a war crime in Kosovo, which brought together activists and experts from the Balkans, other parts of Europe, and the United States.

Other developments, however, were not so positive. The Balkan Stability Pact Summit for South Eastern Europe, held in July in Sarajevo and attended by President Clinton and fifty other world leaders, was designed to develop a comprehensive strategy for political stability and economic reform in the Balkans. But women's groups in the region, and even in the Sarajevo office of the OSCE, protested that planners had left women off the agenda and excluded them from the meeting. An appeal signed by women's human rights activists throughout the region demanded "an equal and active role for women in the development and implementation" of the Pact.

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)

The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) made some moves to integrate women's human rights into its efforts to monitor human rights violations and develop policies to curtail such abuses. In December 1998, the Permanent Council allocated funds for gender issues and activities, such as "women in politics" trainings in Kazakhstan and Poland, and called on member states to provide voluntary contributions for staffing. The British and Swiss governments each seconded a staff member to serve as gender advisors to the OSCE, one in Warsaw and one in Vienna. A gender focal point person continued to work in the secretariat in Vienna. These gender advisers were an important force for change internally.

In the field, the picture was mixed. To some extent, human rights reporting and field activities increased their attention to women's human rights. In Tajikistan, a local OSCE staff member initiated a project working with traumatized women survivors of the civil war. During the crisis in Kosovo, female OSCE human rights officers successfully documented cases of rape and other violations against women. Their achievement was all the more noteworthy given that none of the OSCE monitors received instruction in the challenges of interviewing female rape victims and only 3 percent of the OSCE staff in Kosovo was female.

The OSCE's public commitment to women's rights did result in several positive developments. The OSCE held a supplementary Human Dimension Meeting on gender issues, where nongovernmental organizations were allowed to participate actively in creating recommendations for the institutions of the OSCE. Unfortunately, member states did not make funding available in a timely manner for the participation of Balkan women's rights activists, leaving Bosnia and Herzegovina completely unrepresented and hobbling the discussions on post-conflict issues. At this writing, it also remained unclear whether any of the conference recommendations would be implemented. A review of recommendations promulgated at the 1997 OSCE meeting on gender indicated that few of those recommendations had been put into effect.

United States

In 1999, the United States government's commitment to women's rights around the world was jeopardized by two competing foreign policy concerns: the desire to promote advantageous economic and strategic relations with other governments regardless of human rights considerations, and the desire to protect U.S. practices at home and abroad from scrutiny and criticism on human rights grounds. In this context of conflicting interests, the government's attention to women's human rights was often compromised.

The United States demonstrated leadership in the area of trafficking, an activity that traps hundreds of thousands of women in exploitative working conditions and debt bondage with little legal recourse. In 1999, the United States played a critical role in crafting a new, markedly improved international protocol on trafficking of persons. The protocol, proposed in the process of negotiating a new Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, would create a new international standard on trafficking to afford trafficked people greater rights and protections. During the negotiations, the U.S. advocated a broad, inclusive definition of trafficking. Despite this positive step, the U.S. stopped short of further advancing trafficked people's rights by failing to provide sufficient support for protocol provisions that would offer greater protections to victims of trafficking, such as psychological, medical, legal, and financial assistance.

The ICC stood as the single greatest hope at the turn of the millennium for stronger accountability for violence against women in conflict situations. However, preoccupied with keeping U.S. citizens outside the court's jurisdiction, the U.S. played an obstructionist role at the February and August Preparatory Committee meetings for drafting the rules of evidence and procedure and elements of crime for the ICC ; it seemed intent on either undermining the power of the court or negotiating a blanket agreement that would exempt any U.S. national from being tried before it. Moreover, the U.S. delegation remained a reactionary force in areas that directly affected women's rights. For example, the U.S. objected to adopting a definition of rape based on the Akayesu decision of the ICTR, insisting that any definition of rape had to include force and penetration as elements of the crime. The U.S. position disregarded the reality of rape in conflict, where, because general lawlessness prevails, physical force during the commission of rape may not be necessary. The U.S.'s insistence on penetration as an element of rape ignored the serious physical and other harm done to women by sexual acts that do not include penetration but are nevertheless against a woman's will.

The U.S. commitment to protecting women's rights in the refugee context was evidenced by its attention to Kosovar women refugees. In July 1999, the U.S. government pledged $10 million for the Kosovar Women's Initiative (KWI), which was being implemented by UNHCR. This initiative, which will continue through September 2000, addressed the immediate survival needs of Kosovar women refugees affected by rape and other gender violence by, among other things, providing psycho-social support and counseling, programs to reestablish women into their communities, and eventually programs for income-generation activities. While the KWI was criticized for being designed without sufficient local NGO input, it was in fact a swift response to a dire situation.
Failing to see the connection between its credibility abroad in condemning human rights abuses and its forthrightness in addressing human rights concerns at home, the U.S. government continued to founder in response to the violence that U.S. women faced in state prisons. In 1999, the U.S. Department of Justice settled its only two cases that involved sexual abuse of incarcerated women. The March settlement reached in the Arizona case was flawed and weak, allowing the Arizona Department of Corrections to place women in solitary confinement after they filed complaints of sexual abuse, an action the women inmates perceive as punitive. The settlement failed both to set up a secure mechanism through which women could safely file complaints without fear of retaliation and to establish independent oversight for the system. The settlement reached with the Michigan Department of Corrections was a travesty, with all the flaws of the Arizona settlement, but also including elements that threatened to increase the women's risk of abuse. One of its most disturbing aspects was the requirement that women inmates wear uniforms, which sent them the message that they "provoked" sexual assaults, and provided another means for corrections staff to punish them. Although the Department of Justice settled the Michigan suit, a private suit initiated by the women continued, as their legal representatives were excluded from the settlement negotiations.

Among the most salient measures of U.S. commitment to women's rights was how vigorously it embraced the application of international human rights conventions in the U.S. and how effectively it responded to international scrutiny of its human rights records. On these two fronts, the U.S. failed miserably. The U.S. government avoided addressing the substantive findings of the report of the U.N. special rapporteur on violence against women that detailed human rights violations of women in detention in the U.S., including extensive sexual misconduct andsystematic violations of women's right to privacy. The U.S. delegation to the U.N. Commission on Human Rights insisted that women incarcerated in the U.S. have protection from and recourse against human rights violations, even though passage of the Prison Litigation Reform Act of 1995 made it extremely difficult for women to bring legal claims against corrections departments, especially in cases of sexual assault and abuse.

Moreover, as of this writing, 1999 was expected to pass without U.S. ratification of the women's rights treaty, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, which languished in the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. While the Clinton Administration stepped up its efforts to promote ratification of this treaty, which included attempts to cultivate Senate leadership on this issue and the unveiling of a White House ratification strategy, those efforts were, as of late October, minimal, and had not yet resulted in the treaty being offered for a vote.

The Clinton administration was a steadfast critic of women's rights violations in areas where the sheer scale and severity of the physical violence could not be ignored. However, the U.S. government was much less critical about blatant sex discrimination practiced in places like Mexico, its second largest trading partner. Beginning in early 1999, the U.S. government was engaged in ministerial-level meetings with the Mexican government on this issue, in response to a poorly-conceived NAFTA-based agreement it entered into with Mexico in October 1998. One of the showcase components of this agreement was a March conference held in Mrida, Yucatn, a city with a few and only recently established maquiladoras. The U.S. government did not set any goals for the conference and provided for no substantive participation by the NGO community, except for brief question and answer periods. A public report reflecting the issues considered during the ministerial consultation process was due in July, but was expected in the first half of 2000.
ACADEMIC FREEDOM

University campuses worldwide proved a sensitive barometer of free expression in 1999. Universities played a central role in shaping the quality and flow of information and ideas by providing a space for free inquiry and open expression. In part for this very reason, academics were disproportionately represented among the world's political prisoners and universities were favored targets of repression. Researchers, scholars, teachers, and students in dozens of countries continued to be harassed, censored, dismissed, imprisoned, and, in the worst cases, tortured or killed for openly expressing their views or addressing controversial questions.

In a number of countries, universities were subjected to controls reminiscent of the Cold War era. In countries such as Belarus, political controls on campus life were systemic, covering everything from the curriculum to student clubs. While the immediate effect of government surveillance and control was to curb political dissent, such measures also cast a pall over academic inquiry and stifled independent research. In Iran and Malaysia, students publicly rallied for political reform despite laws banning student political activity and expression, leading to at times violent confrontations with security forces and mass arrests of student demonstrators.

Although university admissions policies in many countries were implemented to combat entrenched societal prejudices and discrimination, universities in several countries continued openly to discriminate against women and members of politically powerless minorities. Particularly blatant examples in 1999 included the continuing exclusion of girls and women from schools in Afghanistan and institutionalized discrimination against adherents of the Baha'i faith in Iran.

Reprisals against Dissenting Academics

In many countries, politically outspoken academics were imprisoned by intolerant authorities. Because of the high profile of the targeted academics, the arrests often had a broad impact, serving as a warning to individuals throughout society that dissent and political opposition would not be tolerated. Academic inquiry suffered under such a climate of censorship.

On March 4, prominent Vietnamese geologist and writer Nguyen Thanh Giang was arrested and detained for two months. The only reported reason for the arrest was his possession of documents said to be "against the interests of the communist party." Dr. Giang, one of the country's leading scientists and a major contributor to the geological survey of Vietnam, also had been an outspoken critic of the government and is author of works such as "Human Rights, the Thousand Year Aspiration" (1996), "Elections and the National Assembly" (1997), and "Let's Discuss the Vietnamese Workers Class" (1998).

On June 10, an Ethiopian court sentenced Dr. Taye Wolde Semayet, president of the Ethiopian Teachers' Association (ETA), to fifteen years in prison. Dr. Taye had been arrested more than three years earlier after the ETA had sharply criticized the government's embrace of ethnic federalism and division of the country along ethnic lines. Dr. Taye was convicted of conspiring against the state despite the fact that the evidence which formed the basis for his arrest had been extracted under torture and was withdrawn in court.

In the Congo, Professor Kambaj wa Kambaji, a lecturer in sociolinguistics at the University of Lubumbashi, was detained on July 29, reportedly for his critical analyses of the use of ethnic hate language in political discourse in the Katanga region. President Kabila is Katangese. Analysis of hate speech had been a major theme in Professor Kambaj's academic work and, at the time of the arrest, authorities also seized student essays on the subject from his home. Professor Kambaj reportedly was tortured in detention and was denied access to his doctor and family. He was still in detention at the time of writing.

In Colombia, three professors who had been actively trying to counter the endemic violence in the country were murdered by unknown gunmen in separate incidents. On May 4, anthropologist and University of Antioquia professor Hernn Henao was killed by three armed intruders who broke into a faculty meeting. Dr. Henao was the director of the Institute of Regional Studies, a university research center coordinating studies of political conflict and community development. He had been instrumental in the early 1990s in organizing scholars to work with community groups in some of the most violent districts of the city of Medellin. In September, Dario Betancourt, who had been seized by gunmen on April 30, was found dead. Betancourt, a historian, headed the social sciences department at the National University of Educational Sciences and was a well-known specialist on violence. On September 15, former presidential peace advisor Jesus Antonio Bejarano was shot to death as he prepared to teach a class at the National University in Bogota. None of the cases had been solved at the time of writing, but family members and colleagues of the victims believed that they were targeted for political reasons by either paramilitaries-which were often linked with the armed forces-or opposition guerrillas.

Censorship and Politically Motivated Dismissals

Because the great majority of universities around the world were public institutions or were dependent on public funds, governments had considerable power to influence what took place on campus and an incentive to wield that power. A wide range of governments abused their power in 1999, censoring research and publication on matters of public interest and dismissing researchers and academics based on partisan political considerations.

In Jordan, Dr. Mustafa Harmaneh was ousted as director of the Centre for Strategic Studies at the University of Jordan after seven years of service, reportedly at the urging of the prime minister and a high ranking intelligence official. Dr. Harmaneh submitted his resignation on July 14, 1999 after being told that if he did not resign the center would be closed and its activities, including support for a number of Jordanians studying abroad, would be terminated. Under his leadership, the center had attained regional and international recognition for its research on policy issues in the Arab world and for its use of scientific opinion polling and social survey research in Jordan. Several of the center's reports generated controversial findings, including a 1999 survey showing a decline in the popularity of the government of Prime Minister Rawabdeh; a 1997 report placing unemployment levels at 27 percent, ten points higher than the official estimate at the time; and a 1998 study on public perceptions of Jordanian-Palestinian relations. Colleagues believe that this research, as well as critical comments Harmaneh made to theinternational media-at least once misrepresented in local papers as insulting the dignity of King Abdallah-contributed to pressures for his removal.

In Egypt, authorities censored a wide variety of books on social and religious themes and instructed universities to remove such works from their curricula.

In Malaysia, Professor Chandra Muzaffar was dismissed as head of the Center for Civilizational Dialogue at the University Malaya in late February. Muzaffar, a vocal supporter of embattled opposition leader Anwar Ibrahim, had joined Anwar's wife Wan Azizah Wan Ismail in founding the Social Justice Movement in December 1998, and his dismissal came amidst a general tightening of controls on campus and arrests of students who joined protests in support of Anwar. The letter of dismissal reportedly set forth two reasons for the university's unexpected decision: economic factors and a government directive calling on the university to optimize existing human resources. According to published reports, however, the center had showed considerable economic promise in its first year of operation.

Ideological Controls

Academic freedom was gravely threatened when political leaders made affirmation of loyalty to the ruling party a precondition of academic promotion and punished deviations from state ideology. Although there were improvements over the past decade in countries on both sides of the former Cold War divide, systemic political controls over the universities remained in place from Serbia to China and from Myanmar to the Sudan. Conditions in Belarus under the authoritarian leadership of President Aleksandr Lukashenka were illustrative of the far reaching effects of such controls.

A pervasive state campaign of political control of the universities had severely limited academic freedom and given rise to a climate of fear and suspicion on Belarusian campuses since Lukashenka assumed power in 1994. Government constraints on academic freedom intersected with those imposed on nongovernmental organizations, the independent media, independent lawyers, and opposition political parties. Institutionally, there was increasing centralization of academic decision making, as well as a resuscitation of institutional forms characteristic of the Soviet era. Most notable in this regard was a flat ban on political activity on campus accompanied by the emergence of the ostensibly apolitical but manifestly pro-Lukashenka Belarusian Patriotic Union of Youth (BPSM) as an omnipresent feature of campus life. Formed on the initiative of the president, and with representative offices in every state university and institution of higher education, the BPSM represented a heavy-handed attempt to recruit students into the ranks of the president's supporters, to actively counter newly formed independent and opposition party youth groups, and to provide a presidential check on academic life at every level. BPSM representatives sat alongside the committees that administered oral examinations to all applicants for admission to state universities. Whereas BPSM members received privileges and discounts on campus and in stores, students who occupied prominent positions in the youth wings of opposition political organizations faced warnings, fines, imprisonment, and expulsion from their places of study because of their political activity.

As detailed in a 1999 Human Rights Watch report, students and faculty alike who peacefully exercised their legitimate right to freedom of assembly at opposition demonstrations, who joined opposition political parties, or who expressed their views freely on campus or off, were punished with warnings, reprimands, expulsion, demotion, or dismissal. In the field of history, there was a literal return to Soviet-era policies, with suppression of research into Belarusian independence movements, restrictions on the use of the Belarusian language, and pressures to present a sanitized account of historical relations with Russia.

Suppression of Campus Protest

Political turmoil inevitably found an important outlet on college campuses, particularly where other channels of expression were limited or closed. Although campus unrest at times was instigated by student groups who engaged in unilateral acts of violence that could not be condoned, the evidence in 1999 again demonstrated that a far more common source of the violence was government use of armed force and coercion to suppress student or faculty dissent.

In Indonesia, although the climate for free expression had improved substantially as a result of the 1998 student-led ouster of President Soeharto, security forces continued to respond with at times excessive and lethal force to student demonstrations. On September 23, three protesters and one policeman were killed in Jakarta following a clash between student-led demonstrators and security forces. In Serbia, students and faculty members once again played a leading role in protests demanding political reform and were among dozens of demonstrators injured during violent police crackdowns on rallies in Belgrade.

The most egregious case of suppression of campus protest in 1999, however, occurred in Iran. Political life there was increasingly volatile in 1999 and that volatility was directly reflected on campus. In July, the tensions erupted into violence at Tehran University shortly after the closure of Salam, one of the most popular pro-reform Iranian newspapers. The closure triggered a peaceful protest by students at Tehran University on July 8. During the early hours of July 9, members of an unidentified militia force entered the university dormitories, ransacked rooms, and attacked sleeping students, throwing some out of windows and taking others away to unknown locations. According to the witnesses, at least four students were killed in the assault on the dormitory, three hundred were wounded, and four hundred were taken into detention.

The next day, students took to the streets to protest the assault on the dormitories, to demand an inquiry, and to call for the release of their colleagues from detention. The demonstration was broken up by hard-line enforcers associated with conservative leaders within the government, the Ansar-e Hezbollahi (Partisans of the Party of God), wielding clubs and chains while members of the security forces stood by or joined in the assault on the demonstrators.

Discrimination

International human rights standards forbid discrimination in education. The importance of the principle was reflected in the fact that one of the first instruments to implement the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Convention against Discrimination in Education, was adopted by UNESCO in 1960, several years before the adoption of the major human rights treaties. The 1960 convention bans all forms of discrimination which have "the purpose or effect of nullifying or impairing equality of treatment in education."

The most blatant discriminatory barriers to education were present in Afghanistan, where girls and women continued to be formally barred from all educational institutions. Although in 1999 some home schooling of girls was tolerated by Taliban authorities and the ministry of religion indicated it would provide some education for girls in segregated settings, girls were still formally banned from the school system and women were kept out of institutions of higher education. Some Afghani women were able to attend classes in the border city of Peshawar, Pakistan.

In sharp contrast to Afghanistan, where women could not go outside their homes without full body and head coverings, in Turkey and Uzbekistan it was women wearing the full veil who were the object of restrictions. In Turkey, regulations barring such dress on government premises, including state university campuses, were made more restrictive in 1999 and applied more widely. In Uzbekistan, the government policy on religious attire was made explicit when parliament in 1998 enacted a law on freedom of conscience that expressly forbade "ritual dress" in public. This law was deemed to provide the legal justification for a series of dismissals of male students wearing beards and female students wearing the veil, part of a larger campaign against "orthodox" Islam, viewed as a source of political competition for the present government.

In Iran, adherents of the Baha'i faith, viewed as heretics by the clerical establishment, have continued to be effectively banned from teaching or studying at colleges and universities. Members of the religion have also been barred from public employment, including teaching positions at public schools. On April 19, the Islamic Revolutionary Court in Isfahan sentenced four Baha'i teachers to prison terms ranging from three to ten years, ruling that their participation in teaching religion to other Baha'is constituted crimes against national security. According to Baha'i representatives outside of Iran, the four were Sina Hakiman (ten years imprisonment), Farzad Khajeh Sharifabadi (seven years), Habibullah Ferdosian Najafabadi (seven years), and Ziaullah Mirzapanah (three years). All four taught for the Baha'i Institute of Higher Education (BIHE, also known as the Baha'i Open University), which operated out of the homes of members of the faith. The four were among thirty-six Baha'is who were arrested in late September and early October 1998 in a concerted government crackdown against Baha'i education in fourteen cities. Authorities reportedly raided over 500 homes, which served as classrooms for the institute, seizing files, equipment, and other property used by the BIHE. The other thirty-two people arrested were released.

Discrimination against Baha'i teachers and students was deliberate. The constitution of the Islamic Republic did not include Baha'ism among its list of recognized religions, and Baha'i assemblies were officially outlawed in 1983, making participation in any Baha'i activity a basis for possible criminal prosecution. An Iranian Supreme Revolutionary Cultural Council memorandum on "the Baha'i question," dated February 25, 1991, stated with reference to attendance at universities: "They should be expelled from the universities, either at the time of the admission procedure or during their studies, as soon as it becomes apparent that they are Baha'is." The Iranian deputy minister of education in December 1995 told Abdelfattah Amor, U.N. special rapporteur on the question of religious intolerance, that Baha'is were free to enter institutions of higher education as long as they did not "flaunt their beliefs." Thus even the government's defense of its policies provided further evidence that practicing Baha'is continued to be denied equal access to higher education.

Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:

As Fragile as a Crystal Glass: Press Freedom in Iran, 10/99

Uzbekistan; Class Dismissed: Discriminatory Expulsions of Muslim Students, 10/99

Spare the Child: Corporal Punishment in Kenyan Schools, 9/99

Republic of Belarus; Violations of Academic Freedom, 7/99

The Internet in the Middle East and North Africa: Free Expression and Censorship,

7/99

Cuba's Repressive Machinery: Human Rights Forty Years After the Revolution, 6/99
 FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION ON THE INTERNET

Even as governments around the world acknowledged the difficulties inherent in censoring the Internet, legislative proposals continued to threaten free speech. While human rights and civil liberties groups pointed out the global implications for the rights to privacy and free expression represented by such proposals, regulators around the world were quick to refine online monitoring, screening, and other controlling technologies.

Filtering and Blocking

Arguing that national regulatory frameworks are not appropriate to the global nature of the Internet, industry leaders joined forces to create an international Internet content rating system to "protect children and free speech" on the Web. In May they formed the Internet Content Rating Association (ICRA) to facilitate the development of an integrated self-regulatory approach to dealing with "harmful and illegal" content on the Internet.

Human Rights Watch, along with other members of the Global Internet Liberty Campaign (GILC), argued for more deliberate consideration of so-called self-regulatory approaches to Internet content control. The Global Internet Liberty Campaign Member Statement (submitted in September to the Internet Content Summit) further emphasized the danger that rating and filtering systems could, in fact, facilitate government censorship.

The wide-scale deployment of rating and blocking systems could be used by regulators to stifle expression and marginalize any Web sites that failed to adopt ratings. The existence of a standardized rating system for Internet content-with the accompanying technical changes to facilitate blocking-would allow governments to require Internet service providers (ISPs) and other content access providers (public libraries, schools, etc.) to employ such regimes.

Exemplifying this possibility, the Australian government on June 30, 1999 approved the Broadcasting Services Amendment (Online Services) Act (scheduled to go into effect in 2000), which would force Australian ISPs to remove objectionable material from Australian sites and to block access to similar sites overseas. Material suitable for blocking was to be identified based on existing national film and video classification standards. The new law placed sweeping restrictions on adults providing or gaining access to material deemed unsuitable for minors.

In Bahrain, Iran, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, and Yemen, ISPs-either under government orders or pressure-all blocked Web sites on the basis of their content. At least in the first four of these countries, blocking extended to cultural and/or political content. Proxy servers such as the ones in place in the U.A.E. and Saudi Arabia could be used by authorities to track which computer terminals were accessing which Web sites and for how long. While U.A.E. authorities denied monitoring individual Web use, Saudi Arabian users who requested blocked sites received a message on their screens warning that all access attempts were logged.

State-controlled or state-influenced ISPs in Tunisia, Iran and Bahrain blocked Web sites containing political or human rights criticism of their governments. Tunisia acknowledged blocking only those sites that offended moral values, but apparently this included the sites of various human rights organizations critical of the government.

Videsh Sanchar Nigam Ltd. (owned by the Indian government) was the nation's largest Internet service provider and controlled the international Internet gateways used by ISPs in India. During the last week of June, at the height of the Kashmir crisis, Internet users in India could not reach the online news site of the Pakistan daily Dawn, which was known for its independent coverage of the crisis. Fearing that VSNL gateways blocked access to the newspaper site, other Web sites began posting information explaining how surfers from India could break the blockade, and a number of mailing lists began circulating articles from Dawn in text format.

Radio B92, the leading independent radio station in Belgrade, Yugoslavia, was banned in March but continued to broadcast news on the Internet. Renamed B2-92, it re-launched its Web site < http://www.freeb92.net/> in August. Online users around the world were able to continue to access Radio B2-92's independent news via the Web as a daily digest with headline updates every hour.

In late 1998 the United States Congress passed the Child Online Protection Act (COPA), making it a crime to publish "any communication for commercial purposes that includes any material that is harmful to minors, without restricting access to such material by minors." In April the U.S. Department of Justice appealed a federal appeals court ruling declaring the law unconstitutional, the result of a lawsuit brought by opponents of the COPA.

Monitoring and Surveillance

Governments rarely admit to "eavesdropping" on e-mail, and it is extremely hard to ascertain whether government monitoring is occurring when most information about monitoring mechanisms is classified. But during 1998 official disclosures in Europe and Australia provided a glimpse into one such system, a monitoring process referred to as ECHELON. According to a January 1998 report published by the Scientific and Technological Option Assessment (STOA) unit of the European Parliament, ECHELON formed part of the UKUSA spy system and wasdesigned for primarily non-military targets: governments, organizations and businesses. The system operated in virtually every country and intercepted fax, e-mail and telephone messages routinely and indiscriminately.

In Britain, the Home Office announced a number of proposals in a June 1999 consultation paper on the interception of communications. Future laws based on these proposals would require "communications service providers" to integrate government interception facilities into their networks, including the Internet, at their own expense. These proposals followed the specifications secretly agreed by European police officials in ENFOPOL plans revealed the previous year. (ENFOPOL was a standard European Commission classification for documents concerned with law enforcement matters.) The British consultation paper also argued that the maintenance of an interception capability was a basic requirement for providers of communication services in countries such as France, Germany, the Netherlands, Sweden, Canada, the United States and Australia.

On April 2, the Second Chamber of the Dutch Parliament approved a new Telecommunications Act that included a chapter intended, among other things, to force ISPs to facilitate monitoring by the police and intelligence services.

In April, an Internet service provider, Singnet of Singapore, apologized to its subscribers after scanning their computers without their knowledge. Singnet had asked the Home Affairs Ministry to check the computers of its 200,000 subscribers during a computer virus scare.

In Russia rules requiring ISPs to provide the security service with complete access to users' e-mail were challenged by an ISP based in Volgograd. The rules, known as System of Efficient Research Measures 2 (SORM-2), were written by the Russian Federal Security Services and the State Communications Agency in 1998.

In the Middle East and North Africa, where many governments routinely tapped the phones of potential dissidents, Internet users in many countries, including Bahrain and Tunisia, suspected that the right to privacy of correspondence was being violated by government surveillance of e-mail communications. One Bahraini spent more than a year in jail on suspicion of e-mailing "political" information to dissidents abroad.

Under India's License Agreement Provision of Internet Service (provision 1.10.3), ISPs had to maintain logs of all Internet users and the service they were using. These logs, as well as copies of all the packets originating from the customer premises equipment (CPE) of the ISP, had to be available in real time to the government telecom authority (in other words, the telecom authority had access to live communications).

According to BBC News Online, a Sri Lankan government minister admitted in August that he had intercepted a personal e-mail sent to the leader of the country's opposition.

China continued its crackdown on Internet dissent by explicitly prohibiting the transmission or posting of what the government considered "anti-government propaganda." In January 1999, a computer technician, Lin Hai, was sentenced to two years' imprisonment by a Shanghai court for giving the e-mail addresses of 30,000 Chinese subscribers to a dissident site that published an online magazine from the United States.

In a worrying development, Internet providers and telecommunications companies in many countries could be forced to build special data taps into their Internet servers to allow government security agencies real-time monitoring of every e-mail message and Web page sent to or from their servers. This could allow government agencies to circumvent national privacy laws (such U.S. laws that bar the government from spying on its citizens), allowing them to rely on surveillance mechanisms in other countries. Citing national security concerns, governments continued to avoid releasing information on monitoring mechanisms.

Encryption

The promise that the Internet held for human rights was limited by the fact that electronic communications were highly vulnerable to interception, with potentially deadly consequences for those who would expose abuses of state power. The development of and freedom to use encryption software could provide substantial protection for the privacy of online users. Yet contrary to the spirit of international norms that recognize privacy as a fundamental human right, governments continued to use export controls or other national laws limiting the public's access to encryption technologies and inhibiting the development of new encryption products. In December 1998, the Wassenaar Arrangement (a group of thirty-three states) announced, largely due to United States pressure, new guidelines that would authorize restrictions on the export of most commercial cryptography products above a fifty-six or sixty-four bit strength.

But there were other, more encouraging developments in this area. In Germany, as of September 1, an export license was no longer required for the export of encryption products to third-country markets. Ireland, counter to the wishes of its E.U. neighbors, was willing to adopt policies that favored the use of strong encryption to encourage Internet trading. The French prime minister announced in January that due to the threat of electronic espionage and other dangers to privacy France would allow encryption strengths up to 128 bits, and would remove the compulsory or third-party escrow of encryption keys.

As should be evident, the field of Internet regulation and surveillance was still very much in flux in 1999. It was clear, however, that the privacy and free expression rights of users of this global medium would be shaped by a multiplicity of regulations and policies, including self-regulatory approaches promoted by Internet industry leaders as well as myriad national and international rules on surveillance and encryption.

HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH INTERNATIONAL FILM FESTIVAL

The Human Rights Watch International Film Festival was created in 1988 to advance public education on human rights issues and concerns using the unique medium of film. Each year, the festival exhibits the finest human rights films and videos in theaters and on cable television throughout the United States and elsewhere-a reflection of both the scope of the festival and its increasingly global appeal. The 1999 festival featured thirty-five films (seventeen of which were premieres), from fifteen countries. The festival included feature-length fiction films,documentaries, animation and experimental works. In 1999, selections of the festival were presented in four countries and within the U.S. selected films showcased in seven cities. Time Out magazine remains the principal sponsor of the festival in New York and London.

In selecting films for the festival, Human Rights Watch concentrates equally on artistic merit and human rights content. The festival encourages filmmakers around the world to address human rights subject matter in their work and presents films and videos from both new and established international filmmakers. Each year, the festival's programming committee screens more than 500 films and videos to create a program that represents a range of countries and issues. Once a film is nominated for a place in the program, staff of the relevant division of Human Rights Watch also view the work to confirm its accuracy in the portrayal of human rights concerns. Though the festival rules out films that contain unacceptable inaccuracies of fact, we do not bar any films on the basis of a particular point of view.

The 1999 festival was first presented over a two-week period in New York, as a collaborative venture with the Film Society of Lincoln Center, and then a selection of the festival was presented in Los Angeles at the Museum of Tolerance. The 1999 festival reached out to a broader audience by co-presenting selected films with four important New York festivals: the African Film Festival, the Margaret Mead Film Festival, the Urban World Film Festival, and The New Festival/New York Lesbian and Gay Film Festival. A majority of the screenings were followed by discussions with the filmmakers and Human Rights Watch staff on the issues represented in each work.

Two documentaries featured in this year's festival had dramatic effects on their protagonists. The Russian Supreme Court reviewed the case of Alexander Biryukov, the subject of Alexander Goutman's "Three Days and Never Again," following the international attention garnered by the film. The court then commuted Biryukov's sentence from life to fifteen years (of which he has already served nine). Filmmaker Maria Fuglevaag Warsinski successfully used her film, "Crime and Punishment," to lobby influential members of the U.S. government and the U.N. to bring pressure on the Serbian authorities concerning three men featured in her film who had been languishing without charges or trial in Serbian jails. At the festival's first screening of her film, Ms. Warsinski announced the release of all three men.

The 1999 opening night celebration and the entire festival were dedicated to film producer and director Alan J. Pakula. Mr. Pakula was a devoted friend of the festival and received the Irene Diamond Lifetime Achievement Award in 1997 for his continuing contribution to human rights and social justice through film. The festival's opening night featured Mr. Pakula's 1974 ground breaking thriller, "The Parallex View," a probing study of political manipulation in the United States starring Warren Beatty.

As part of the opening night program, the festival annually awards a prize in the name of cinematographer and director Nestor Almendros, who was also a cherished friend of the festival and Human Rights Watch. The award, which includes a cash prize of $5,000, goes to a deserving and courageous filmmaker in recognition of his or her contributions to human rights through film. In an unusual break with tradition, the 1999 festival awarded two Nestor Almendros Prizes to acknowledge the extraordinary work of two emerging filmmakers: David Riker, for his compassionate fictional film, "La Ciudad," about the plight of Hispanic immigrants living in New York City, and Barbara Sonneborn, for her provocative Academy Award nominated documentary, "Regret to Inform," about the lives of Vietnam war widows from both sides of the conflict.

In 1995, in honor of Irene Diamond, a longtime board member and supporter of Human Rights Watch, the festival launched the Irene Diamond Lifetime Achievement award, which is presented annually to a director whose life's work demonstrates an outstanding commitment to human rights and film. Previous recipients have included Costa Gavras, Ousmane Sembene, Barbara Kopple and Alan J. Pakula. This year, in honor of the festival tribute to Mr. Pakula the Lifetime Achievement award was not presented.

Highlights of the 1999 festival included a special screening of acclaimed Indian director Deepa Mehta's latest work, "Earth." Set in 1947, with India in the turmoil caused by independence, the film portrays a close group of friends caught on the dividing line between the new Pakistan and India. "Earth" is a powerful statement about the inherent fragility of social fabrics. Another highlight was "Odds Against Tomorrow," the 1959 film noir classic that featured the first black protagonist in a Hollywood film. A panel discussion following the screening included key artists involved in the making of this film: Harry Belafonte, John Lewis, and the film's blacklisted screenwriter, Abraham Polansky.

Each year the festival holds a series of special film screenings for high school students and their teachers in an effort to encourage dialogue about human rights in the classroom. Daytime screenings are followed by discussions among the students, their teachers, visiting filmmakers, and Human Rights Watch staff. In 1999 the program included a special collaborative screening of "Blind Faith" with The New Festival.

In 1996 the festival expanded to London. The 1999 London festival produced with its new partner, the Ritzy Theater in Brixton, was extremely successful. The timely screenings of two searing documentaries by acclaimed Chilean filmmaker Patricio Guzman, indicting General Augusto Pinochet's dictatorship, played to sold-out audiences and demanded additional showings. Mr. Guzman was on hand to answer questions about his film and to give his thoughts on the current situation in Chile. The next London festival will take place in early March 2000.

In a further effort to expand the festival's scope, the Global Showcase, a selected package of traveling films from the festival, was created in 1994. The Global Showcase is presented annually in a growing number of sites and cities around the world. The 1999 showcase traveled internationally to both Melbourne and Sidney, Australia; Moscow, Russia; Port au Prince, Haiti; and Edinburgh, Scotland. The Global Showcase was also featured as part of the first annual Human Rights Film Festival in Prague, Czechoslovakia and the third annual Human Rights Film Festival in Seoul, South Korea. The showcase was also presented in seven U.S. cities: Los Angeles, Houston, Norwalk, Hampshire, St. Louis, Columbia and Washington, D.C. In previous years, the showcase has been featured in festivals in Minsk, Belarus; Bogot, Colombia; San Jose, Costa Rica; and Gent, Belgium.

Human Rights Watch/Film Watch, an association of the film festival and a group of

internationally renowned filmmakers, was created to monitor and protect the human rights of filmmakers and film programmers who are threatened or censored or otherwise abused for their expression through film. In November 1997, Korean film festival organizer and human rights activist Suh Joon-sik was arrested in Seoul for publicly screening the documentary "Red Hunt" as part of the Korean Human Rights Film Festival. "Red Hunt" details government collusion in a 1948 massacre of suspected pro-communist sympathizers on Cheju island, off the coast of South Korea. Mr. Suh was arrested under the National Security Law, under which penalties may be imposed upon anyone who "benefits North Korea" by praising, encouraging, propagandizing for, or siding with the activities of an anti-state organization, or by importing or disseminating materials in support of such an organization. A strong international outcry was followed by a letter-writing campaign, organizedby Film Watch, from the international filmmaking and festival community. On February 5, 1998, Mr. Suh was released on bail, rarely an option for political prisoners. However, the charges against Mr. Suh were not dropped, and in mid- June 1999 Mr. Suh's trial was set for September 7, leading Film Watch to organize a new letter-writing campaign. At trial, Mr. Suh was found not guilty of violating the National Security Law, but guilty of violating the Security Surveillance law, and was placed on probation. Mr. Suh plans to appeal the guilty verdict to the high court of justice.
INTERNATIONAL CAMPAIGN TO BAN LANDMINES

The International Campaign to Ban Landmines (ICBL), launched in 1992 by Human Rights Watch and five other organizations, continued to expand its size and activities. It is now comprised of over 1,400 organizations in ninety countries worldwide. It brings together human rights, humanitarian demining and victim assistance, children's, peace, disability, veterans, medical, development, arms control, religious, environmental, and women's groups who work locally, nationally, regionally, and internationally to ban antipersonnel (AP) landmines. The ICBL is coordinated by a committee of fourteen organizations, including Human Rights Watch, which remained one of the most active campaign members. The ICBL and Human Rights Watch Arms Division advisory board member Jody Williams were co-recipients of the 1997 Nobel Peace Prize.

The ICBL continued its intense pace of global activity advocating for the complete eradication of antipersonnel mines, primarily through the universalization and effective implementation of the 1997 Mine Ban Treaty. The ICBL undertook new initiatives to monitor the treaty, and to enhance mine clearance and victim assistance programs. New campaigns were launched in more than a dozen countries, including in the problematic areas targeted by the ICBL in 1999: the Middle East/North Africa region and the former Soviet states. Regional or thematic conferences promoting a ban were held in Mexico, Tunisia, Lebanon, Norway, South Africa, Indonesia, Mozambique, Kenya, Germany, Croatia, Somaliland, Azerbaijan, and Georgia. ICBL members undertook special advocacy missions to Kosovo, Georgia, Egypt, United Arab Emirates, Nicaragua, Honduras, and elsewhere. The ICBL also put greater emphasis on its efforts to educate non-state actors and encourage them to commit to a comprehensive mine ban.

In a crowning achievement the Mine Ban Treaty entered into force on March 1, 1999 thereby becoming binding international law more quickly than any major treaty ever. Early entry into force had been a major objective of, and focus of activities for, the ICBL and pro-ban governments. In the first nine months of 1999, the number of governments ratifying the treaty, and thereby becoming full state parties, rose from fifty-eight to eighty-six. Among those were nations where mines had been extensively used, such as Cambodia, Uganda, and Tunisia, and nations which formerly produced and exported mines, such as Argentina and Spain. Two new countries signed the treaty: Ukraine, with the world's fourth largest stockpile of AP mines, and Lithuania, the first Baltic nation.

Some key countries continued to refuse to join the ban treaty, including the United States, Russia, and China. One Mine Ban Treaty signatory, Angola, used mines extensively, as did UNITA rebel forces there. There were highly disturbing allegations of new use of mines by Russia in Dagestan, and in the Pakistan-India and Eritrea-Ethiopia conflicts, as well as other locations.

During the First Meeting of States Parties to the ban treaty in May in Onlineuto, Mozambique, the ICBL launched the Landmine Monitor Report 1999: Toward a Mine-Free World. The 1,100-page report contained information on every country in the world with respect to mine use, production, trade, stockpiling, humanitarian demining, and mine survivor assistance. Landmine Monitor is an unprecedented initiative by the ICBL to monitor implementation of and compliance with the 1997 Mine Ban Treaty, and more generally to assess the efforts of the international community to resolve the landmines crisis. It is the first time that nongovernmental organizations are coming together in a coordinated, systematic, and sustained way to monitor a humanitarian law or disarmament treaty, and to regularly document progress and problems. The Landmine Monitor system is coordinated by five ICBL members, with Human Rights Watch serving as the lead agency.

In Onlineuto, governments, in close cooperation with the ICBL, established an "intersessional" work program to ensure that progress is made in implementing the treaty in between the annual meetings of States Parties. The ICBL Working Groups on the treaty (chaired by Human Rights Watch), mine clearance, and victim assistance worked closely with the five new Intersessional Standing Committees of Experts (SCEs). The partnership between pro-ban governments and nongovernmental organizations that resulted in the historic ban treaty continued to function so that the words on paper would become a reality.
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT

Developments in 1999 underscored the urgency of the early establishment of the International Criminal Court (ICC) as victims of conflicts from East Timor to Sierra Leone lacked access to an independent and effective international tribunal to investigate and try those accused of crimes against humanity and war crimes. Further propelled by the Pinochet case, international support grew for the ICC as a pillar of an emerging system of international justice.

Growing Political Support

As of this writing, eighty-seven states had committed themselves politically to the ICC's objectives and purposes by signing the Rome Treaty. Heads of state and foreign ministers from France, the United Kingdom, Germany, Argentina, Canada, and Uganda, among many others, cited the importance their governments attached to the ratification of the Rome Treaty at the September opening of the fifty-fourth General Assembly session at United Nations headquarters in New York. The number and content of statements delivered from this high profile podium represented a qualitative leap from years past. This support went beyond rhetorical posturing. On a bilateral level, several states, includingGermany, France, Spain and Italy, played particularly active roles in urging ratification. In addition, intergovernmental organizations and entities including the European Parliament, the Council of Europe's Parliamentary Assembly, the Commonwealth Law Ministers, and the Francophonie all adopted strongly worded resolutions expressing their commitment to the treaty's early entry into force. These statements of political support increasingly laid the foundation of meaningful technical assistance to facilitate state ratification. Simultaneously, nongovernmental organizations renewed their efforts to highlight the importance of ICC ratification among civil society worldwide.

Since the end of the Rome Conference, all fifteen member states of the European Union have voiced a strongly supportive common position on the court. At the February and August Preparatory Commission sessions in New York, the German and then the Finnish presidency of the E.U. issued statements on behalf of the European Union. In addition, at the June summit of European Union and Latin American and Caribbean states in Rio de Janeiro, the E.U. emphasized the importance of ratification, a position approved in the summit's final communique. During the July-August Preparatory Committee meetings, E.U. member states met with E.U. associate states to discuss technical assistance on ratification for the latter. Building on this initiative, at its September meeting the Public International Law Working Group of the European Commission further refined these plans.

On May 26, the Standing Committee of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe adopted Recommendation 1408 urging all member and observer states to ratify the Rome treaty as quickly as possible and adopt the legislation necessary to make national law consistent with the obligations of the treaty. Recommendation 1408 triggered consideration by Council of Europe expert bodies of technical assistance for member and observer states drafting national laws. As of this writing, the Council of Europe was planning a consultative meeting for early 2000 to discuss common problems arising from ratification.

At the Francophonie Summit in Moncton, New Brunswick, French President Jacques Chirac announced a commitment by the Francophonie to assist poorer Francophone states with ICC ratification. At the annual meeting of Commonwealth Law Ministers in Trinidad and Tobago, the ministers adopted a declaration putting priority on ratifying the treaty. At the OAS General Assembly Summit in Guatemala City in June the final communique included a reference to the ICC as part of a resolution on the enforcement of international humanitarian law. In an important show of support for the Rome Treaty, the 102nd Conference of the Inter-Parliamentary Union, as part of a larger focus on international humanitarian law, adopted a resolution in October calling on member parliaments to "ratify the treaty as soon as possible so that it may enter into force."

Ratification

These resolutions and declarations set a positive context for the complex task of ratification. During 1999 the foundations were laid for an accelerated round of ratifications during 2000. As of this writing four states - Senegal, Trinidad and Tobago, San Marino, and Italy - had ratified the treaty. While these four proceeded with ratification before passing the domestic legislation necessary to implement the treaty, many other states were grappling with the constitutional and legislative challenge of putting such laws into place before ratifying. Among other countries, Belgium, South Africa, and France were far advanced in this process.

For many states the process of completing an accurate and verified translation of the treaty was long and painstaking. States also weighed the necessity of making changes to harmonize their constitutional norms on extradition, the immunity of heads of state and other officials, and possible life imprisonment, with the requirements of the treaty.

As in the pre-Rome conference phase, important discussion occurred in regional and sub-regional fora. States used such meetings to coordinate ratification planning. In March, representatives of the member states of the Caribbean Community and Common Market (CARICOM) met in Trinidad and Tobago to discuss ratification at a conference jointly sponsored by the government of Trinidad and Tobago and the non-governmental organization No Peace Without Justice. In July, representatives of eleven Southern African Development Community (SADC) states met for four days in Pretoria, South Africa. They adopted a Model Enabling Act to guide SADC member states in drafting enabling legislation. In early October representatives of sixteen central and east European and former Soviet states met in Budapest for a two-day conference on ratification convened by the Constitutional and Legislative Policy Institute. The Nordic states met regularly to discuss and coordinate their ratification efforts.

The Work of the Preparatory Commission

The Final Act of the Rome Treaty mandated the establishment of a Preparatory Commission to complete work drafting the elements of crimes for the offenses within the ICC's jurisdiction and the court's rules of procedure and evidence by June 30, 2000. In addition, but without a specific time limit, the Preparatory Commission was charged with drafting the definition of the crime of aggression, the relationship agreement between the court and the United Nations, and the headquarters agreement between the ICC and the host country. At its fifty-third session in December 1998, the General Assembly approved a resolution convening the Preparatory Commission. The resolution included an added directive to the Preparatory Commission to "discuss ways to enhance the acceptance and the effectiveness of the Court." This expansion of the Preparatory Commission's mandate was a concession to the U.S. government aimed at signaling an openness to considering additional proposals consistent with the integrity of the statute.

The Preparatory Commission held two sessions in the first part of 1999. Delegates met for two weeks in February and convened again for three weeks at the end of July. Another three-week session was scheduled for November and December. Before the Preparatory Commission sessions, Human Rights Watch issued a commentary to assist delegates in drafting the elements of crimes and rules of procedure and evidence. Consistent with its mandate, the Preparatory Commision convened a Working Group on Elements of Crimes and a Working Group on Rules of Procedure and Evidence. Drawing on an initiative by the International Committee of the Red Cross, the Swiss and Hungarian delegations circulated valuable proposals. The degree of knowledge and the specificity of intent for proving culpability were the most controversial aspects of the debate on elements.

The Working Group on Rules of Procedure and Evidence benefitted from important intercessional work. The French government convened an important four day conference on the role and interests of victims before the ICC in April. The International Institute of Higher Studies in Criminal Sciences hosted a week-long session in Siracusa to draft a text covering the difficult procedural and evidentiary issues in parts 5 (investigation) and 6 (trial) of the court's statute. Through cooperation between the French and Australian delegations, which presented theprincipal proposals on these issues, significant progress was made in crafting procedural mechanisms that melded the best aspects of the world's different legal systems.

In response to strong concerns by Arab League states over the importance of progress in defining the crime of aggression, the bureau decided to convene a working group on aggression that would meet three times during the November-December session.

The like-minded group of states formed in the pre-Rome period, now numbering nearly seventy, continued to meet during 1999. At the February Preparatory Commission they adopted several principles of unity suited to the needs of the Preparatory Commission and ratification.

United States

As state signatories and expressions of political support for the court increased, some within the Clinton administration recognized the embarrassment the United States faced over its isolated opposition to the court. The U.S. had criticized the Rome treaty, claiming it contravened international law, and had vowed to oppose the court. In 1999, with the reality of an International Criminal Court growing, U.S. government officials indicated a shift in the U.S. position in order to allow President Clinton to sign the treaty. At both the February and July-August sessions of the Preparatory Commission, the U.S. delegation conducted extensive bilateral meetings with delegates. While not presenting any written proposals, U.S. officials floated various ideas to gauge the delegates' reactions. By the end of August it appeared that those most directly involved in the negotiatios understood that previous calls for a major substantive revision of the completed treaty by amendment or protocol were not viable.

At this writing, the specific content of the U.S. proposal expected for the November-December Preparatory Commission session was unknown. While many in the like-minded group sought to extend a cooperative hand to the Americans, this willingness was limited by the reality of a completed treaty and the stated commitment of the like-minded group and many other states to defend its integrity. At the July-August Preparatory Commission European Union states and the like-minded group resolved that a coordinated response to the expected U.S. proposal was an appropriate agenda item for their respective groupings. Whether the Clinton Administration would abandon its previous insistence on the Department of Defense requirement of an absolute, "100 percent guarantee" that no American would ever be investigated or tried by the court, and would advance reasonable proposals remained to be seen. The United States would risk a major diplomatic rebuff if it were to proceed without formulating a realistic bottom line.

The Role of the NGO Coalition (CICC)

The coalition of nongovernmental organizations (CICC) that came together in the years before the Rome Conference and played an important role in Rome adjusted to the demands of the new and greater challenges to press the initial sixty states to ratify the treaty. The CICC continued to circulate invaluable information on ICC developments and the CICC staff coordinated efforts to gather the information necessary to make an objective worldwide assessment of the possibilities for ratification.

The CICC launched a worldwide campaign for ratification at the Hague Appeal for Peace in mid-May. As the locus of ratification shifted to capitals, members of the CICC planned and participated in important regional conferences and the CICC became more active in South America. In particular, it coordinated a network of NGOs interested in promoting ICC ratification in Latin America, where it was organizing a series of six regional seminars. Those in Mexico and Chile were to take place in 1999. Those planned for Colombia, Costa Rica and Brazil were scheduled for the following year. These seminars were to bring together parliamentarians, ministry officials and NGOs. CICC staff and activists from regional member organizations attended the General Assembly session of the OAS to advocate on behalf of the ICC with delegations from the region's capitals.

The Work of Human Rights Watch

Human Rights Watch viewed an independent and effective International Criminal Court as a critical pillar of an emerging system of international justice, complementing more vigorous national prosecutions. Building on its commitment to the court, Human Rights Watch staff members sought to develop strategy and tactics appropriate for the demands of ratification. To this end, staff members traveled to capitals in Latin America, Europe, the Middle East and North Africa, southern Africa, and the South Pacific to meet with government officials and colleagues from nongovernmental organizations to be able to better assess ratification possibilities. From such meetings, Human Rights Watch decided to focus on obtaining both political support and technical assistance on a multilateral and bilateral basis as key levers to accelerate the treaty's early entry into force. In particular, Human Rights Watch worked with the Council of Europe, the European Union and the Organization of American States. Recognizing the importance of regional and subregional concentrations, Human Rights Watch identified those regions where the initial sixty ratifications were most likely and formulated a series of regional activities to facilitate coordinated discussion and planning. Human Rights Watch also assisted in planning and participated in the important ratification conferences that took place in Pretoria and Budapest, as well as attending other important conferences and events where the ICC was discussed. These included the Hague Appeal for Peace, the OAS General Assembly, and regional NGO meetings in Casablanca and Beirut.
INTERNATIONAL JUSTICE

The world is becoming a smaller place for people who commit crimes against humanity.

Until recently, it seemed that if you killed one person, you went to jail, but if you had the power to murder thousands, you also had the power to arrange or impose your immunity. The post-war Nuremberg trials of Nazi leaders, however, established the principle that there should be no immunity for perpetrators of the gravest outrages, no matter who they are or where their crimes were committed. That principle was recognized by the General Assembly of the United Nations as international law and repeated in the Genocide Convention, in the statutes establishing tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, and in the treaty for the new permanent international criminal court adopted in1998 in Rome. In addition, the 1984 Convention against Torture-ratified by 117 countries-requires that states try or extradite alleged torturers found in their territories. Yet few states have had the courage to put these lofty principles into practice.

Then in October 1998, Spanish lawyers pursuing charges of crimes against humanity by Southern Cone military leaders were tipped off that Gen. Augusto Pinochet was visiting England. Spanish judge Baltasar Garzn, who was conducting the investigation, quickly issued a request for Pinochet's arrest. When the London Metropolitan Police learned that Pinochet was planning to leave for Chile the next morning, officers obtained a provisional warrant from a magistrate at his home and placed Pinochet under arrest in a hospital room later that night.

General Pinochet challenged his arrest before the British courts and the case went up to the House of Lords, where Human Rights Watch was granted leave to intervene and present arguments. In two landmark rulings, the Lords held that General Pinochet had no immunity against the charges. In the first case, a three-two majority concluded, in the words of one judge, that "international law condemns genocide, torture, hostage taking and crimes against humanity," making it difficult, "to maintain that the commission of such high crimes may amount to acts performed in the functions of a Head of State."

When the case had to be re-argued before a new panel of seven Law Lords because of the appearance of bias in the first ruling, the Convention against Torture took center stage. Pinochet's lawyers sought to discount the convention's requirement that states parties prosecute or extradite suspects found in their territories. As pointed out by Human Rights Watch in terms adopted by the presiding judge, however, the very purpose of the convention was to introduce the principle aut dedere aut punire-either you extradite or you punish. Six of the seven judges agreed that Pinochet had no immunity. But a majority also ruled that he could not be extradited to Spain for acts committed before Britain enacted the Convention Against Torture in late 1988, thus eliminating most of the charges against him.

On October 8, following an extradition hearing, a London magistrate ruled in favor of the continued detention of General Pinochet, who was awaiting the final decision of the Secretary of State. The magistrate's ruling opened the door for a much wider examination by the Spanish courts of Pinochet's crimes than might have been thought possible after the Lords' second decision in the case. First, the magistrate held that Pinochet's conduct before 1988-which would include the creation of the secret police and the establishment of Operation Condor targeting Pinochet's opponents abroad-could be examined in proving the conspiracy. Second, he ruled that "the effect on the families of those who disappeared can amount to mental torture," and that Spanish prosecutors could seek to prove that this was Pinochet's intention. This ruling was not only a historic acknowledgment of the families' continuing anguish, it was also an invitation to Spain to show that Pinochet used this cruel practice as a form of terror.

Human Rights Watch described the Pinochet case as a "wake-up call for tyrants around the world," but it was also a wake-up call for victims. Almost immediately after the dictator's arrest, human rights groups began exploring avenues to bring other former despots to justice.

Seeking to take advantage of this momentum, Human Rights Watch adopted as its "strategic direction" for 1999-2000 the pursuit of international justice. The initiative aimed to reinforce the principle and support the practice of "universal jurisdiction" for the worst atrocities, by laying the intellectual groundwork for an extension of the "Pinochet precedent" and assisting, through research and advocacy, in bringing to justice other significant human rights criminals-the next "Pinochets."

"Universal jurisdiction" reflects the principle that some crimes so offend humankind (e.g., "crimes against humanity") that courts anywhere have jurisdiction to try them. International law thus authorizes the courts of a country to try cases of genocide, crimes against humanity, serious war crimes or torture, no matter where they were committed. Human Rights Watch, together with other nongovernmental organizations such as Amnesty International and Redress, campaigned for all countries to enact legislation allowing their courts to exercise this jurisdiction.

Human Rights Watch's work on universal jurisdiction complimented its efforts in favor of the International Criminal Court and in combating impunity at the national level. National justice was obviously the most important, because it was the most comprehensive, because crimes were far easier to prove in the country in which they were committed, and because justice delivered locally allowed victims the greatest role and was perhaps the most meaningful to the victims. But there was also an essential role for international justice when national authorities were unwilling or unable to proceed against an accused. For an international group such as Human Rights Watch, the comparative advantage lay in building this system of international and transnational justice as a complement to national jurisdictions to ensure that the worst crimes do not go unpunished and that there is no "safe haven" for their perpetrators.

In an April 1999 presentation to the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, Human Rights Watch called on all governments that provide shelter to major human rights violators to bring them to justice or to hand them over to countries where they could receive fair trials. Among those countries cited were:

P Saudi Arabia, where former Ugandan dictator Idi Amin took refuge. During his dictatorship in Uganda from 1971 to 1979, Amin expelled the entire Asian community. He is also blamed for the deaths of 100,000 to 300,000 people.

P Zimbabwe, which rejected Ethiopia's request for the extradition of Mengistu Haile Miriam, accused of genocide and crimes against humanity committed during his 1974 to 1991 rule of terror. Mengistu's forces are blamed for than 200,000 deaths.

P France, which took no steps toward bringing Jean-Claude "Baby Doc" Duvalier to trial. The 1971 to 1986 Duvalier dictatorship is accused of thousands of political assassinations and arbitrary arrests.

P Senegal, which gave shelter to Hissene Habre, president of Chad from 1982 to 1990, whose regime is alleged to be responsible for up to 40,000 killings.

P The United States, which turned down requests from Haiti for the extradition of Emmanuel "Toto" Constant, leader of the Haitian death squad FRAPH, financed by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). Prosecutors in Haiti want Constant to stand trial on charges of torture and murder.

P Panama, which turned down Haiti's request for the extradition of Raoul Cedras, who led the military coup that overthrew president Jean-Bertrand Aristide in 1991. During Cedras' de facto regime, some 3,000 people were killed and hundreds of thousands displaced.

P Brazil, which provided asylum to Alfredo Stroessner, who ruled Paraguay from 1954 to 1989. Under Stroessner, torture was systematically used against political opponents of the regime. Stroessner was also Pinochet's ally in "Operation Condor," an international network that used torture, disappearances and assassinations in the "dirty war" against opponents of Southern Cone military dictatorships.

While none of these men were disturbed in the year since Pinochet's arrest, a growing number of suspected human rights criminals found justice closing in on them. The New York Times labeled this phenomenon the "Pinochet syndrome":

P In France, two Mauritanian refugees, with the help of the International Federation of Human Rights (FIDH), persuaded prosecutors in Montpellier to use the Convention against Torture to arrest a Mauritanian colonel, Ely Ould Dah, in July 1999 for allegedly torturing suspects in his country in the early 1990s.

P When Ezzat Ibrahim al-Douri, a key aide to Iraqi President Saddam Hussein, visited Austria, a Vienna city councilman, Peter Pilz, filed a criminal complaint accusing Ibrahim of torture and genocide in the Anfal campaign against Iraqi Kurds. Austria, however, placed expediency above justice and politics above the law and allowed Ibrahim to return home.

P A team of Portuguese lawyers sought to try Indonesia's former ruler, Soeharto, for the murder of thousands of civilians during Indonesia's long occupation of East Timor. When Soeharto fell ill, he reportedly canceled a trip to Germany for treatment because of the case.

Human Rights Watch also explored, together with national groups, the possibility of assisting, through research, advocacy and networking, to bring the most appropriate cases. As the Pinochet case demonstrated, effective prosecutions in one country of crimes that took place in another country can be difficult and expensive. All the witnesses and documents may be in the state of the crimes. Foreign prosecutors may be reluctant to expend resources on crimes committed outside their country. The laws of the host country may not be adequate.

The Pinochet prosecution in Spain was made possible by the compilation of information over decades, first by Chilean human rights activists, then by the Chilean National Commission on Truth and Reconciliation, and finally by Spanish lawyers and judges. Unlike many other situations of mass killings, as in Central Africa, East Timor or Central America, every Chilean victim-even the "disappeared"-had a name and a story, and the chain-of-command leading up to General Pinochet was clear.

Another key hurdle expected in future prosecutions has to do with the political will of the countries involved. Britain's Home Secretary Jack Straw twice made the difficult and diplomatically costly decision to allow Spain's extradition bid for Pinochet to proceed. Other countries might have made a more expedient calculation, as Austria did with Ezzat Ibrahim al-Douri. When Abu Daoud, accused of the massacre of Israeli athletes in the 1972 Munich Olympics, was apprehended in France in 1976, Paris gave short shrift to extradition requests from West Germany and Israel, freeing him four days after his capture. Italy similarly dispatched Mohammed Abbas when he was arrested in 1985 for the hijacking and killing aboard the Achille Lauro. No European country was eager to try Kurdish rebel leader Abdullah Ocalan when he was apprehended in Italy in November 1998.

But the precedent was set. Augusto Pinochet was the first former head of state to be arrested by another country for human rights crimes. He was not to be the last. Future leaders were alerted: the next time they attempted to get away with atrocities, they could be brought to justice.

Recent Human RIghts Watch Reports:

Chile:When Tyrants Tremble:The Pinochet Case, 10/99
LESBIAN AND GAY RIGHTS

Gay men and lesbians were persecuted and discriminated against in many countries throughout the world in 1999 and were often the targets of hateful invective by prominent state officials. The few positive developments that occurred during the year were mainly in the area of legislation, rather than in practice.

According to the International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission (IGLHRC), in 1999, some eighty-five countries maintained laws that criminalize sexual activity between consenting adults of the same sex. In some countries the statutes regulated specific sexual acts regardless of the gender of the people involved, whereas other countries maintained laws that prohibit a wide range of same-sex practices. Many laws were broad in scope, dealing with "unnatural acts," "immoral acts," or acts causing "public scandal." In some countries, general laws against "loitering" or "hooliganism" were used to arrest or persecute homosexuals. Laws in other countries discriminated by imposing different standards for homosexuals, for example, with regard to the legal age of consent.

South Africa, which accorded constitutional protection for gay men and lesbians, continued to set a good example in 1999. In February, the Cape High Court ruled that the Aliens Control Act unfairly discriminated against gay and lesbian couples by denying foreign partners of South Africans the right to live and work in South Africa. The case was heard on appeal by the Constitutional Court in August, and judgment was pending at the time of this writing.

The Medical Schemes Act, approved in South Africa in 1999, included partners in the definition of dependent, enabling gay men and lesbians with health care coverage to include their partners in their coverage. The Promotion of Equality and Prevention of UnfairDiscrimination bill, introduced in the parliament in the fall of 1999, would create mechanisms, other than the Constitutional Court, to enforce the constitutional provision that prohibits discrimination based on sexual orientation. According to the constitution, it would have to be adopted by February 2000.

Edwin Cameron, a South African High Court judge who openly declared his homosexuality three years ago, declared that he had AIDS during an April 1999 hearing for a position on the Constitutional Court. He said he had done so to highlight the plight of millions of other AIDS sufferers less fortunate than he. In late December 1998, Gugu Dlamini, a volunteer AIDS worker, was beaten to death by neighbors in her township of KwaMashu for making her HIV status public.

A potentially positive development occurred in the Czech Republic in October where a bill that would legalize homosexual partnerships and afford such partners all the rights of conventional marriage was put before the parliament.

On September 27, the European Court of Human Rights declared unanimously that Britain's long-standing ban on homosexuals in the military was a violation of the basic human right to privacy. Homosexuality had been legal in Britain for some thirty years, but gays and lesbians had been forbidden to serve in the armed forces. According to local activists, at least 600 gay men and lesbians, and probably many more, had been discharged from the military because of their sexual orientation. Britain was party to the European Convention on Human Rights which required it to follow the court's rulings, even, if necessary, to change its domestic laws.

The British government introduced a bill to equalize the age of consent for gay men. It passed overwhelmingly in the House of Commons in March, but was defeated for a second time in the House of Lords on April 14.

On April 18, Swiss citizens approved a new constitution which prohibited discrimination on the basis of "way of life," a phrase generally acknowledged to cover sexual preference.

On May 20, the Supreme Court of Canada ruled that same-sex couples must be accorded the same recognition as heterosexual couples under Canada's Charter of Rights. Quebec was the first province to comply with the decision by changing its definition of "spouse" to include same-sex couples.

In October, the French parliament passed a law giving legal status to unmarried couples, including gay men and lesbians. Under the law, couples, whether of the same sex or not, could enter into a union and be accorded the same rights as married couples in areas such as income tax, inheritance, housing, and social welfare. The new form of legal coupling, known by the acronym PACS, required couples to register before a court clerk and could be dissolved by either party in writing, giving three months' notice. Couples were required to register and then live together for three years before they could file a joint income tax return.

In October in the United States, the state of California passed three new laws to protect gay rights. The first outlawed the harassment of gay and lesbian students and teachers in public schools and colleges; three other states-Connecticut, Massachusetts, and Wisconsin-had similar laws. The second established a state domestic partners registry for couples who are homosexual or over age 62, extending hospital visitation rights and allowing state and government workers to get health benefits for their partners. The third law blocked job and housing discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gave the State Fair Employment and Housing Department authority over such cases.

The Employment Non-Discrimination Act, a bill that would protect workers in every state from discrimination based on sexual orientation, was introduced but not acted upon by the U.S. Congress at the time of this writing.

Despite criminal prosecutions and public outrage over the October 1998 torture and killing of Matthew Shepard, a twenty-one-year-old openly gay student at the University of Wyoming, only eleven states in the U.S. had legislation that specifically prohibited anti-gay hate crimes, and eight states had no hate crime laws at all. The two men charged in the Shepard case were accused of kidnapping, aggravated robbery, and murder: one pleaded guilty and was given consecutive life sentences; the other faced the same charges and the death penalty at the time of this writing.

Gay men and lesbians in the U.S. military continued to face harassment within the confines of the "don't ask, don't tell, don't pursue" policy. The policy required that military officials refrain from asking military personnel about their sexual orientation, while also requiring that members of the armed forces not disclose that they are gay, lesbian, or bisexual, and prohibiting "witch hunts" by setting limits on investigations of allegedly gay servicemen and women by military personnel. Members of the armed forces were not allowed to make any statements indicating that they were gay or bisexual and were prohibited from any sexual acts, including hugging or holding hands, with others of the same sex.

Since the policy took effect in 1994, discharges increased dramatically, with 1,145 discharges in 1998, up from 617 in 1994. This called into question whether the policy is being implemented properly and whether the policy was workable at all. In August the Pentagon announced that it would issue guidelines to curtail abuses of the "don't ask, don't tell" policy by giving military personnel at all levels training to end anti-gay harassment and requiring that only senior officials handle investigations. However, training was limited and superficial, raising concerns that such training at all levels would mean little.

Blatant discrimination against homosexuals continued in Romania in 1999, and the government failed to provide protection to those who came under attack. The government did not fulfill its promises to the Council of Europe to repeal the articles of the penal code that criminalize homosexuality, nor did the council restart its monitoring procedure on Romania. President Constantinescu failed to fulfill the promise he made to Human Rights Watch representatives and others in January 1998 to pardon all persons jailed under these articles. The number of such imprisoned persons still remained unknown.

In June, Human Rights Watch sent an observer to Malaysia to attend the beginning of the second trial of former Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim. Together with Sukma Dermawan, his adopted brother, Anwar was charged with sodomizing Azizan Abu Bakar, the former driver of Anwar's wife. Sukma was charged with aiding and abetting Anwar. Malaysia's penal code prohibited "carnal intercourse against the order of nature." In April, Anwar had been convicted on four counts of misusing his office to cover up alleged sexual misconduct and had been sentenced to six years in prison. The first trial was marred by procedural and evidentiary irregularities and by the beating of Anwar in prison, prompting an international outcry. The second trial was still in progress as of this writing. Both trials were widely viewed as aspects of a politically motivated vendetta against Anwar, who had grown increasingly vocal in his criticism of corruption and cronyism in the government of Prime Minister Mahathir.

In July 1999, twenty-three Muslim men who took part in a May 1998 drag beauty contest in Alor Star, the capital of the Malaysian state of Kedan, were found guilty and fined by an Islamic court for wearing dresses and acting like women. The non-Muslim participants in the pageant were not tried.

In December 1998, the state of Tasmania in Australia passed new anti-discrimination protections that included sexual orientation, giving it the best protections in Australia, according to local activists The law prohibited both discrimination and incitement of hatred or severe ridicule on the basis of sexual orientation.

The recently approved constitution and Bill of Rights of Fiji, which received international acclaim for their democratic character, were under threat from a proposal to amend the Bill of Rights to make same-sex marriage and homosexual relationships illegal.

In 1999, sodomy laws were repealed in Ecuador and in Chile, although same- sex relationships in Chile were still not afforded the same status as heterosexual relationships. Ecuador's new constitution, passed in December 1998, explicitly guaranteed non-discrimination for gay men and lesbians.

Mexico's penal code was reformed to eliminate homosexual activity as an aggravating factor in corruption-of-minor cases, and Mexico City's penal code was reformed to criminalize discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation. Yet authorities in Mexico showed little inclination to investigate homophobic crimes. In July the mayor of Cordoba city in Veracruz state launched a cleanup campaign aimed at ridding the city of gays, lesbians, and prostitutes, among others.

Similar vilification of gay men and lesbians was heard in Africa during 1999, most distressingly from the presidents of Kenya, Uganda, and Zimbabwe. Homosexuality remained illegal in these countries. In October, Kenyan President Daniel Arap Moi denounced what he called the "scourge" of homosexuality; he said that homosexual behavior was "abnormal" and contradicted biblical teaching and African traditions. In Uganda, President Yoweri Museveni ordered the arrest of homosexuals for carrying out what he described as "abominable acts." In Uganda, homosexuals could be punished with life imprisonment under a penal code provision that barred gaining "carnal knowledge of another against the order of nature." Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe has been especially outspoken in recent years, vilifying homosexuals and blaming them for his country's ills. Yet despite Mugabe's virulent anti-gay campaign, the gay community in Zimbabwe was active and organized. Keith Goddard, a Zimbabwean gay activist with the organization Gays and Lesbians of Zimbabwe (GALZ), who was arraigned in June 1998 on sodomy charges after he complained to police about attempts to blackmail him, had the charges of sodomy dropped in March 1999, although further, similar charges were reinstated and pending.

Human Rights Watch worked with local groups in several African countries in 1999 to help them build a consensus around the need for political and legal reforms. In September a Human Rights Watch staff member participated in a week-long training session for human rights activists from seven African countries, organized in Johannesburg by the International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission (IGLHRC) and the Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality.

PRISONS

Prisoners around the world, a large proportion of whom had not been convicted of any crime, were frequently confined in cruel, inhuman, and degrading conditions. While conditions of detention varied greatly from country to country and facility to facility, standards almost everywhere were shockingly low. Prisons and jails in even the richest and most developed countries were plagued by severe overcrowding, decaying physical infrastructure, a lack of medical care, guard abuse and corruption, and prisoner-on-prisoner violence. With the public primarily concerned about keeping prisoners locked up rather than about the conditions in which prisoners were confined, little progress was made toward remedying these abuses. Indeed, prison populations in many countries continued to increase, exacerbating existing problems.

In some states, the public's tendency to ignore prison abuses was reinforced by high levels of official secrecy. By barring human rights groups, journalists, and other outside observers access to their penal facilities, prison officials sought to keep even egregious abuses hidden from public view. Several countries, moreover, refused to disclose the most basic facts about their prisons-to the extent of keeping inmate numbers secret-while prohibiting all outside scrutiny of conditions. In the most extreme cases, including China and Cuba, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) was barred from providing basic humanitarian relief to prisoners. Yet in 1999 there were encouraging developments in this regard. In Burma, most notably, the ICRC began conducting prison visits in May and by September ICRC delegates had inspected nine places of detention, visiting more than 18,000 detainees.

Abusive Treatment of Prisoners

Inmates in some facilities faced death at the hands of prison guards or other prisoners. Twenty-nine inmates in a Niger prison reportedly died of suffocation in late August after being crowded into a small windowless cell by guards. Inmates of the civil prison in Niamey had rioted the week before; those suspected of leading the riot were crammed into the airless security cell. Witnesses reportedly saw guards respond to the cries of suffocating prisoners by firing teargas into the cell.

Eleven prisoners were killed by gendarmes in late September at a prison in Ankara, Turkey, an incident that local human rights activists termed a massacre. The gendarmes stormed the cell block to put down a riot, reportedly beating one of the inmates so badly that his body could not be identified. In Azerbaijan in January, eleven inmates were reportedly killed at Gobustan prison when security forces forcibly quelled a prison mutiny. The previous month, in Venezuela, ten inmates were killed and 104 injured in a similar incident.

While mass killings such as these merited an occasional mention in the press, the vast majority of inmate deaths went unnoticed. In some countries-Venezuela being a particularly salient example-prison homicides were a routine occurrence, happening on an almost daily basis. Indeed, four inmates were killed during the first two days of 1999 in a single Venezuelan prison, one on January 1 and three on January 2. Other countries with chronically high levels of prison violence included Brazil, Kenya, and South Africa. Inmates were most frequently killed by other inmates rather than by guards, but inmate-on-inmate violence was usually the predictable result of official negligence. By neglecting to supervise and control the inmates within their facilities, by failing to respond to incidents of violence, by corruptly allowing the entry of weapons into the prisons, and by generally abetting the tyranny of the strongest prisoners over the weakest, prison authorities were directly responsible for the violence of their charges.

Prison death rates were often far higher than corresponding numbers from outside the prison context. While violence was a factor in some penal facilities, disease-often the predictable result of severe overcrowding, malnutrition, unhygienic conditions, and lack of medical care-remained the most common cause of death in prison. Food shortages in Zambian and Malawi prisons, for example, combined with terrible overcrowding, created ideal conditions for the spread of communicable diseases. One Malawi prisoner reportedly died of hunger in February, while thousands of other prisoners were said to be starving. Cases of severe malnutrition were also reported in prisons in Mongolia, Tajikistan, and Madagascar.

Fostered by poor conditions, cholera struck prisons in Zambia and Malawi, causing a reported eighteen deaths in February at Malawi's Chichiri prison, and at least two deaths in March at facilities in Lusaka. In Mozambique, the justice ministry confirmed in February that at least twenty-five inmates had died in 1998 for lack of medical care.

Tuberculosis continued to ravage prison populations around the world. The spread of TB was especially worrisome in Russia, in light of the country's enormous inmate population-over one million prisoners as of May 1999-and the increasing prevalence of multi-drug resistant (MDR) strains of the disease. One of out every hundred inmates was reported to have active tuberculosis, with more than 10 percent of sick inmates being affected by MDR strains, constituting a serious threat to public health. The epidemic of tuberculosis was not confined to Russia but instead swept through prisons all over the former Soviet Union. In March, the ICRC announced that among prisoners in the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) the incidence of this serious infectious disease was on average fifty times greater than in the general population.

The HIV/AIDS epidemic also rampaged through prison populations, with penal facilities around the world reporting grossly disproportionate rates of HIV infection and of confirmed AIDS cases. For example, the U.N. reported that by October 1998 some 18 percent of the total number of reported cases of HIV infection in Russia were found among the prison population. Because the onset of AIDS left prisoners more vulnerable to tuberculosis, the two diseases often occurred together.

Physical abuse by guards remained another chronic problem. Some countries continued to permit corporal punishment and the routine use of leg irons, fetters, shackles, and chains. The heavy bar fetters used in Pakistani prisons, for example, turned simple movements such as walking into painful ordeals. In many prison systems, unwarranted beatings were so common as to be an integral part of prison life.

Women prisoners were particularly vulnerable to custodial sexual abuse. In July, a warden of a German prison was convicted of forcing two women inmates to participate in a wide range of sexual activities. Custodial sexual misconduct was also widespread in the United States, where male guards outnumbered female guards in many women's prisons. The corrections department of the state of Arizona settled a lawsuit in March in which thirty-four cases of forced sexual contact between prisoners and prison staff were alleged; the department agreed to take effective steps to protect women inmates from future abuse.

In contravention of international standards, juvenile inmates were often held together with adults. Many of Pakistan's jails and police lockups mixed juvenile and adult prisoners, as did detention facilities in Honduras, Kenya, and Zambia. Children in such circumstances frequently fell victim to physical abuse, including rape, by adult inmates.

Extortion by prison staff, and its less aggressive corollary, guard corruption, was common in prisons around the world. Given the substantial power that guards exercised over inmates, these problems were predictable, but the low salaries that guards were generally paid severely aggravated the situation. Frequently, therefore, inmates resorted to bribes in exchange for contraband or special treatment. Powerful inmates in some facilities in Colombia, India, and Mexico, among others, enjoyed cellular phones, rich diets, and comfortable lodgings, while their less fortunate brethren lived in squalor. A teenage girl reportedly died in December 1998 while attending a lavish Christmas party-complete with champagne, whisky, cocaine, and live music-held in the cell of high-level Colombian drug trafficker.

Overcrowding-prevalent in almost every country for which information was available-was at the root of many of the worst abuses. In Madagascar, for example, more than 20,000 inmates were squeezed into prisons whose total capacity was reported to be 12,000. The problem was often most severe in smaller pretrial detention facilities, where, in many countries, inmates were packed together with no space to stretch or move around. In some Brazilian police lockups, where a large proportion of the country's approximately 180,000 detainees were held, overcrowding was so acute, and floor space was at such a premium, that inmates had to tie themselves to the cell bars to sleep. In Brazil, as in many other countries, inmates often suffered long stays in these dreadful conditions.

Another common problem was governments' continued reliance on old, antiquated, and physically decaying prison facilities. Nineteenth-century prisons needing constant upkeep remained in use in a number of countries, including the United States, Mexico, Russia, and the United Kingdom, although even many modern facilities were in severe disrepair due to lack of maintenance. Notably, some prisons lacked a functional system of plumbing, leaving prisoners to "slop out" their cells, that is, to defecate in buckets that they periodically emptied.

A different set of concerns was raised by the spread of ultra-modern "super-maximum" security prisons. Originally prevalent in the United States, where politicians and state corrections authorities persisted in their politically popular quest for more "austere" prison conditions, the supermax model was increasingly followed in other countries. Prisoners confined in such facilities spent an average of twenty-three hours a day in their cells, enduring extreme social isolation, enforced idleness, and extraordinarily limited recreational and educational opportunities. While prison authorities defended the use of super-maximum security facilities by asserting that they held only the most dangerous, disruptive, or escape-prone inmates, few safeguards existed to prevent other prisoners from being arbitrarily or discriminatorily transferred to such facilities.

Fiscal constraints and competing budget priorities were to blame for prison deficiencies in some countries, but, as the supermax example suggests, harsh prison conditions were sometimes purposefully imposed.

Conditions in many prisons were, in short, so deficient as to constitute cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment, violating article 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Their specific failings could also be enumerated under the more detailed provisions of the U.N. Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. A widely known set of prison standards, the Standard Minimum Rulesdescribe "the minimum conditions which are accepted as suitable by the United Nations." Although the Standard Minimum Rules have been integrated into the prison laws and regulations of many countries, few if any prison systems observed all of their prescriptions in practice.

Unsentenced Prisoners

Even those unsympathetic to convicted criminals and entirely skeptical of the idea of rehabilitation had reason to be concerned about the inhuman treatment of prisoners. Although comprehensive figures were impossible to obtain, the available statistics showed that a large proportion of the world's prisoners had not been convicted of any crime, but were instead being preventively detained at some stage of the trial process. In countries as varied as Bangladesh, Burundi, Chad, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, India, Mali, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Rwanda, Uganda, and Venezuela, unsentenced prisoners made up the majority of the prison population. Indeed, some 90 percent of Honduran, Paraguayan, and Uruguayan inmates were unsentenced.

Worse, such detainees were in many instances held for years before being judged not guilty of the crime with which they were charged. In Nigeria, where some 60 percent of prisoners were pretrial detainees, many unconvicted inmates were held over four years before being released. Prisoners also continued to be held after the expiration of their sentences in some countries. In Mozambique, for example, a local reporter visiting the Inhambane provincial jail in May discovered ten inmates who had allegedly completed their sentences, including some who should have been released six months earlier.

With few means to draw public attention to violations of their rights, prisoners around the world frequently resorted to hunger strikes, self-mutilation, rioting, and other forms of protest. The most dramatic such incidents in 1999 took place in Kazakhstan and Venezuela. In March, and again in May, dozens of inmates in Kazak prisons reportedly slashed open their own stomachs to protest abusive conditions of confinement. In April, 135 Venezuelan inmates held in a remote jungle facility took part in what they termed a "blood strike," slicing up their legs and arms to draw attention to their demand for transfers back to prisons located closer to their families. Other outbreaks of prison unrest were reported in Brazil, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Mexico, Niger, Turkey, and Venezuela.

Defending Prisoners' Human Rights

By struggling against the natural tendency toward secrecy and silence on prison abuses, the efforts of numerous local human rights groups around the world-who fought to obtain access to prisons, monitored prison conditions, and publicized the abuses they found-were critical in 1999, as in the past.

In some countries, moreover, government human rights ombudspersons, parliamentary commissions, and other official monitors helped call attention to abuses. In the United Kingdom, notably, the chief inspector of prisons continued his vigorous investigations of the country's penal facilities. The Commission on Human Rights of the Philippines similarly pressed the government to improve the country's deplorable prison and jail conditions.

At the regional level as well, prison monitoring mechanisms were active. The European Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) continued its important work, inspecting penal institutions in more than ten countries in 1999, including Latvia, Romania, Turkey, Portugal, Bulgaria, Ukraine, Russia, and the Netherlands. As of September 1999, forty-one countries were party to the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the treaty authorizing the CPT's monitoring.

In Africa, the special rapporteur on prisons and conditions of detention, an adjunct to the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights, completed his third year, inspecting prisons in Benin and the Gambia.

U.N. Monitoring Efforts

The vast scale and chronic nature of the human rights violations in the world's prisons have long been of concern to the United Nations, as demonstrated by the 1955 promulgation of the U.N. Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. Indeed, the international community's failure to adopt these standards in practice, even while it has embraced them in theory, has inspired the United Nations' most recent prisons effort.

For the past several years, a U.N. working group has been hammering out a draft treaty that would establish a U.N. subcommittee authorized to make regular and ad hoc visits to places of detention in states party to the treaty, including prisons, jails, and police lockups. The working group opened its seventh two-week session in October 1999. As described in the draft treaty-conceived as an optional protocol to the Convention Against Torture-the primary goal of the subcommittee would be to prevent torture and other ill-treatment. Accordingly, based on the information obtained during its periodic and ad hoc visits, the subcommittee would make detailed recommendations to state authorities regarding necessary improvements to their detention facilities, and the authorities would be expected to implement these recommendations.

Although the proposed monitoring mechanism had great promise, it also had serious potential flaws. Notable among them was the possibility that the subcommittee could be entirely barred from reporting publicly on abuses it discovers, pursuant to a strict rule of confidentiality that some countries have advocated. Although the draft treaty favored cooperation between governments and the subcommittee as a means of instituting remedial measures, it must, if it is to create an effective mechanism, leave open the possibility of public reporting, at least in situations where governments stubbornly refuse to cooperate with the subcommittee or to implement its recommendations.

Other U.N. bodies pressed countries to improve their prison conditions. In April, the U.N. Commission on Human Rights adopted resolutions in which it expressed concern over deficient prison conditions in Cambodia and Haiti. In June, U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson visited overcrowded pretrial detention facilities in Russia.

Relevant Human Rights Watch reports:

Behind Bars in Brazil, 12/98

Red Onion State Prison: Super-Maximum Security Confinement in Virginia, 4/99

Prison Bound: The Denial of Juvenile Justice in Pakistan, 10/99
REFUGEES, DISPLACED PERSONS, AND ASYLUM SEEKERS

The plight of refugees and displaced persons received much international attention throughout 1999. The mass exodus of hundreds of thousands of ethnic Albanian refugees fleeing the atrocities in Kosovo; the continuing displacement of hundreds of thousands of Sierra Leoneans as violent conflict gripped the country; the prolonged uprooting of 1.5 million Colombians; the panicked flight of nearly three-quarters of the population of East Timor in the violence following the pro-independence vote in September; the forced displacement of more than 155,000 Chechen civilians escaping the renewed bombardment of Chechnya by Russian troops in October, were vivid demonstrations of how violence, conflict, and human rights abuses can uproot innocent people leaving them displaced and dispossessed.

The ability of the global media and communications networks to instantaneously broadcast news of these and other crises to people across the world undoubtedly led to a greater awareness of the plight of refugees and the displaced. The Kosovo crisis, in particular, proved that the international community could still respond with solidarity and generosity to the plight of those uprooted by conflict and violence.

But, as Human Rights Watch found, a growing public consciousness of the problems faced by refugees from Kosovo did not result in better conditions for those in other countries who were forced to flee their homes and seek refuge elsewhere. Governments continued to violate the rights of refugees, asylum seekers, and displaced persons; countries continued to close their doors to them; displaced persons continued to suffer physical abuse and discrimination; and xenophobia and anti-refugee sentiments persisted in many countries around the world.

The challenge for the coming millennium was to harness the international concern generated by the Kosovo crisis, and translate it into political action to ensure the rights of those refugees and displaced persons who did not command the same strategic value as the Kosovar refugees and whose plight was not the focus of the international media spotlight.

Through our monitoring of the treatment of refugees and displaced persons over the past year, several important patterns and trends were identified in the international response to the problem of forced displacement.

Kosovo in Perspective

The crisis in Kosovo brought unprecedented international attention to the plight of refugees. Between March and July 1999, the world's eyes were focused on those forced to flee the atrocities in Kosovo. Not only was this one of the largest and most rapid refugee exoduses witnessed in Europe since the second World War, but it was also one of the fastest refugee returns ever witnessed. In a few weeks some 750,000 refugees were forced to flee into neighboring Albania, Macedonia, Montenegro, and Bosnia and Herzegovina; within ten weeks of the withdrawal of Serb forces from Kosovo, the majority of refugees and displaced persons had returned to their homes.

The international response to the crisis was also unprecedented. As well as the large amounts of international aid and assistance that flowed into the refugee camps in neighboring countries, governments also agreed to take quotas of refugees from the region. Reminiscent of the Comprehensive Plan of Action (CPA) instituted in 1979 to respond to the Indo-Chinese refugee crisis in Southeast Asia, the international community established a comprehensive burden-sharing mechanism to respond to the crisis.

The level of public concern for the Kosovar refugees and the willingness of western governments to share the burden with neighboring countries were a positive demonstration of how generously the international community can respond to a refugee crisis. At the same time, several worrying precedents and trends emerged from the Kosovo crisis.

Unwilling Hosts

The actions of the Macedonian government, which ultimately forced other countries to evacuate refugees out of Macedonia, set a very disturbing example for refugee hosting countries elsewhere in the world. Fearful that a mass influx of Kosovar Albanians would tip the fragile ethnic balance within Macedonia and permanently destabilize and impoverish the country, the government was very reluctant to admit the refugees.

Repeatedly, the Macedonian authorities violated the universally binding norm of non-refoulement by closing its borders, pushing refugees back into Kosovo, and obstructing and delaying access into Macedonia through unnecessarily bureaucratic border procedures. Once the refugees were in Macedonia, the government forcibly relocated them to third countries, separated families, and denied refugees access to humanitarian assistance.

At the same time, the international community failed to hold Macedonia accountable to its international obligations. Overriding political and strategic concerns to maintain stability within Macedonia, to protect its territorial integrity, and to prevent the conflict in Kosovo from spilling over, led the international community to turn a blind eye to Macedonia's treatment of the refugees.

Events in Macedonia reached a crisis point in early April, as the influx of refugees out of Kosovo steadily increased. By April 6, some 65,000 refugees were trapped, some of them for days, in terrible conditions in the "no-man's land" at the border with Kosovo, unable to enter the country. The Macedonian government declared that it was unable to cope with the influx and called for international help. The government's terms were clear: it would only allow refugees access into its territory if the international community would play its part and evacuate refugees out.

On April 6, the Macedonian authorities suddenly decided to clear the refugees stranded in the "no-man's land." In the middle of the night, police and soldiers forcibly rounded up the refugees and pushed them onto buses. Many refugees reported being badly beaten by the police as they were forced onto the buses. While the majority of people were taken to camps in Macedonia, thousands were taken, mostly againsttheir will, to third countries including Turkey and Albania. In the chaos that ensued, many refugees were separated from their families, and many children were separated from their parents.

Evacuation of Refugees

In order to prevent a repeat of these events, and to persuade the Macedonian government to keep its borders open and allow refugees into the camps, the international community rapidly established a humanitarian evacuation program. The program was an emergency response to a pending humanitarian disaster in Macedonia. It was also a political response designed to maintain stability in Macedonia and in the region-an overriding concern for western governments.

Unfortunately, the Macedonian government also used the humanitarian evacuation program as a means to hold the refugees to ransom until the international community met its demands to evacuate refugees. In effect the Macedonian government made access to asylum conditional upon international burden sharing, thus violating international refugee and human rights standards and endangering the lives of those refugees who were refused access and left stranded at the border.

The Threat to Asylum

Human Rights Watch recognizes and supports the need for the international community to share responsibility for refugee crises and to help host countries to cope with overwhelming and potentially destabilizing refugee influxes. The need for "burden sharing" does not, however, justify a government's failure to observe fundamental obligations under international refugee law. Governments throughout the world, regardless of their internal political, economic, or strategic circumstances, have an obligation not to return refugees to a country where they could face persecution or serious human rights violations.

Such actions send a worrying message to refugee hosting countries elsewhere. Most refugee crises occur in economically and politically unstable areas of the world, where host countries face similar problems to Macedonia and are equally ill-equipped to cope with the strains of a mass influx of refugees. If these countries refused to grant refugees access to their territory until the international community intervened, the consequences could be disastrous. Moreover, it is highly questionable whether under different political circumstances and in other parts of the world, the international community would be willing to intervene in the same way as it did during the Kosovo crisis.

The Role of the Military

There is no doubt that North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) troops and national military contingents played an invaluable role during the early days of the refugee crisis in providing urgently needed logistical support and in helping to establish the first refugee camps, particularly in Macedonia. Nevertheless, the continuing involvement of the military in the humanitarian operation led to concerns about the "mixing" of humanitarian, political, and military mandates. Some commentators argued that NATO's continuing and high profile involvement in the humanitarian assistance operation was part of a public image exercise. Moreover, the involvement of a party to the ongoing conflict in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in the humanitarian response could undermine the independence of humanitarian action and the impartial and non-political nature of refugee work, compromise the strictly civilian and humanitarian character of refugee camps and settlements, and jeopardize the security of refugee populations.

Bilateralism

The role of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) as "lead agency" during the Kosovo crisis was seriously compromised by donor governments' tendency to bypass the agency in funding arrangements, and to provide funding either directly to neighboring countries, or through national nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). At the same time some donor governments vocally criticized UNHCR for its weakness in coordinating the humanitarian response to the crisis. While UNHCR was ill-prepared for the crisis and its initial response was slow and uncoordinated, this situation was not helped by the abundance of bilateral funding arrangements and the plethora of NGOs and other actors involved in the humanitarian response. Coupled with the heavy engagement of the military in the humanitarian operation, a chaotic situation ensued in which it was very difficult for UNHCR to assert its leadership role and coordinating functions.

The move towards humanitarian bilateralism witnessed during the Kosovo crisis set a worrying trend for other major emergencies and posed a significant challenge to coordinated multilateral action.

Disparity in Response

The Kosovo emergency also demonstrated an extreme disparity in the international response to humanitarian crises. While international aid and assistance poured into Macedonia and Albania, and western countries opened their doors, refugees in Africa, Asia, and the Middle East continued to be neglected and forgotten. The reality of this disparity was most acute for those countries that had struggled to host thousands of refugees for decades with limited international attention or support.

Guinea, for example, was host to the largest refugee population in Africa in 1999: nearly half a million people. Of these, 300,000 refugees came from Sierra Leone, many of them having fled from horrific atrocities over the past two years. Sadly, the refugees in Guinea, and elsewhere in Africa, did not benefit from the same level of international assistance enjoyed by the Kosovar refugees. In February 1999, UNHCR requested U.S. $4 million to move Sierra Leonean refugees in Guinea away from the border with Sierra Leone where they were vulnerable to cross-border attacks and incursions. By July, UNHCR had not received any contributions toward this appeal. At the same time, UNHCR had a weekly budget of U.S.$10 million for the Kosovar refugees.

Not only were significant disparities evident in the level of international assistance provided to the Kosovar refugees in comparison to refugees elsewhere, but also in the level of political will exerted by the international community to find a solution to their plight. Indeed, NATO asserted that one of the primary objectives of its operation was the rapid return of the refugees.

Meanwhile, millions of refugees in other regions of the world had spent years in refugee camps with little hope of any solution. The 3.5 million Palestinian refugees dispersed throughout the Middle East remained one of the world's largest and oldest refugee populations, someof whom were living in exile for over fifty years. For the past twenty years Pakistan and Iran hosted the world's second largest refugee population-2.6 million Afghan refugees. 100,000 Bhutanese refugees, one sixth of the entire population of that country, were in exile in Nepal for nearly a decade. Millions of refugees in the Balkans, the Caucasus, South Asia, and the Horn of Africa were unable to return to their country because the conditions that caused their flight persisted. Whole generations of children and young people knew no other life but that of a refugee camp. The international community did little in 1999 to find durable and just solutions to the plight of these refugees.

Gaps in Protection for Internally Displaced Persons

Events in the South Balkans, Southeast Asia, South America, and the Northern Caucasus during 1999 demonstrated the serious gaps in protection for internally displaced persons and the lack of an effective international protection regime for those who were forcibly displaced within their own countries. In Kosovo, East Timor, Colombia, and Chechnya hundreds of thousands of civilians were internally displaced by violent conflicts and gross human rights abuses. Throughout 1998 and 1999, some 600,000 to 700,000 Kosovar Albanians were displaced from their homes by Serb forces and authorities. An estimated 308,000 Colombians were forced to flee their homes in 1998-an increase of 20 percent over the previous year-bringing the total number of internally displaced persons in Colombia to 1.5 million. Forced displacement intensified in some regions of Colombia in 1999, and in June, for the first time, 3,500 Colombians crossed the border and sought refuge in Venezuela. In the weeks following the September 4 announcement of the pro-independence vote in East Timor, virtually the entire pre-referendum population of East Timor was forcibly displaced, with hundreds of thousands expelled to West Timor. Meanwhile, more than 155,000 civilians were forced to flee the renewed Russian bombardments in Chechnya in October 1999, most of them into neighboring Ingushetia, some to Dagestan and other parts of Russia.

Lack of Humanitarian Access

In all these regions the violent and politically complex nature of the conflicts, the total absence of security, the strength of state sovereignty interests, and the lack of an internationally recognized and enforceable protection regime for the internally displaced severely hindered access by international humanitarian agencies and made it difficult to provide urgently needed protection and assistance to internally displaced populations.

Forced Displacement, Relocations, and Restrictions on Freedom of Movement

Moreover, in Kosovo, Chechnya, and East Timor, the ruling authorities forcibly displaced and "relocated" displaced persons, in some cases with the express intention of permanently altering the political and demographic profile of the area. In Kosovo, the objective of the Serb authorities was to ethnically "cleanse" Kosovo of its Albanian population. Not only were Kosovar Albanians expelled to neighboring countries, but many were stripped of their identity documents, and their property, land, and belongings destroyed in order to obstruct their return to Kosovo.

In East Timor, the Indonesian authorities and militia groups participated in the deliberate forced displacement of over 200,000 people from East Timor into West Timor. As in Kosovo, some of those displaced were stripped of their identity documents, and their homes and property were destroyed. Human Rights Watch urged the Indonesian government, UNHCR, and other international agencies to ensure that refugees were not moved against their will, that they were able to make free and informed decisions about where they would go, and above all that their right to return to East Timor was upheld.

In Chechnya, the Russian government announced in early October that it would set up a commission to assist displaced persons in districts of Chechnya under the control of Russian federal troops. This would involve moving displaced persons from the areas of Chechnya to which they had fled to conflict zones under the control of Russian troops, where their security could not be guaranteed. The Russian authorities also forbade displaced persons from leaving Ingushetia for other cities in Russia, where many had relatives who could care for them, unless they had residence permits for these cities. In mid-October, the Russian government closed one of its borders with Chechnya to ethnic Chechen civilians fleeing the bombing, while police posts at the administrative border between Chechnya and the republic of North Ossetia turned back ethnic Chechens fleeing the fighting, but allowed ethnic Russians to cross the border. All of these actions were in violation of Russian's obligations to protect displaced persons and to guarantee freedom of movement for its citizens, as stipulated under international and Russian law.

The Distinction between Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons

All of these crises provided vivid demonstrations of the somewhat artificial and arbitrary distinction between refugees and internally displaced persons. In Kosovo, Colombia, and East Timor, for example, refugees and internally displaced persons fled similar atrocities and situations of violent conflict. In the case of Kosovo, however, those who fled across the border to neighboring countries found higher levels of international protection and assistance than those displaced within their country, for whom humanitarian access and protection was severely limited, and nonexistent throughout the duration of the NATO bombing campaign. Colombians who fled into Venezuela, on the other hand, did not receive full refugee protection. Instead, the Venezuelan government referred to them as "displaced in transit" rather than refugees. Some refugees reported feeling intimidated into returning to Colombia despite well-founded fears of persecution from the paramilitaries.

There was virtually no protection for internally displaced persons in East Timor during the early days of the crisis. Militas, at times aided by government troops, deliberately targeted places of refuge, burnt buildings, and attacked and killed displaced persons. Humanitarian access to the displaced was severely restricted, particularly after the closure of all United Nations Mission to East Timor (UNAMET) field offices and the evacuation of U.N. staff. With the arrival of the International Force in East Timor (InterFET) in late September, however, access for humanitarian agencies to the displaced populations improved.

The more serious problem lay with providing assistance and protection to those displaced in West Timor and other parts of Indonesia. Despite some question as to whether the East Timorese there should be considered "displaced," because Indonesia maintained that they had only crossed a provincial border, or "refugees," because Indonesia's annexation of East Timor was never recognized by the United Nations, UNHCR declared them to be in a refugee-like situation, of concern to the organization, and therefore deserving of international protection and assistance.

Nevertheless, despite having a legal mandate to assist refugees in West Timor, the challenge for UNHCR and other humanitarian agencies was to negotiate with the Indonesian government for free, safe, and unimpeded access to the displaced with full security guarantees. Access to the refugees was severely restricted. In some cases, refugees in government-run camps were held in hostage-like conditions and camps were infiltrated by the same militia groups responsible for terrorizing the refugees in East Timor. The militas subjected refugees to physical attacks, intimidation, killings, and "disappearances," and both the militia and soldiers reportedly conducted "sweeps" of the camps to identify pro-independence supporters, some of whom were then taken away, detained, and physically assaulted. Meanwhile, the police and Indonesian authorities did little to control the militia or to provide refugees with adequate protection. At the time of writing, UNHCR was in the process of negotiating full and safe access to the refugees, and seeking assurances from the Indonesian government that it would guarantee the security of refugees and humanitarian workers, and ensure the civilian nature of the refugee camps and settlements.

Government Accountability

In all three of the above cases, the concerned governments violated their obligations under international human rights and humanitarian law to protect the rights, freedoms, and security of their citizens and to allow full, safe, and unimpeded access to displaced persons by international humanitarian agencies. Moreover, the actions of the Indonesian, Russian, and Yugoslav authorities were in violation of the fundamental principles outlined in the U.N. Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement. These include: principles of nondiscrimination; protection against forced displacement; rights of liberty of movement and freedom to choose one's place of residence; the right of free, safe, and unimpeded humanitarian access to displaced persons; protection against forcible return or resettlement to places where safety cannot be guaranteed; and the right to return voluntarily, in safety and with dignity, to homes or places of habitual residence. The failure of the above governments to abide by any of these principles accentuates the need for the Guiding Principles to be given a higher legal status and for governments to be held accountable for their treatment of internally displaced populations.

Groups with Special

Protection Needs

Throughout 1999 Human Rights Watch continued to focus on those refugees with special protection needs, with particular emphasis on the protection of refugee women and children. Despite the existence of comprehensive UNHCR guidelines on the protection of these groups, it was evident that in many countries these policies were not effectively implemented, UNHCR staff were not fully apprised of their content, and serious protection gaps remained.

Violence against Refugee Women

The subordinate status of women in many refugee communities-combined with problems of physical insecurity, lack of adequate food and housing, the breakdown of familial and social structures, and the loss of meaningful occupation for refugee men that accompanied many refugee situations-contributed to high rates of sexual and domestic violence against women and girls in refugee camps and settings. It was found that in countries ranging from Tanzania, Kenya, Guinea, and Pakistan, UNHCR staff and government authorities failed to actively prevent and appropriately respond to the high incidence of sexual and domestic violence in refugee camps, or to ensure that perpetrators were brought to justice. Impunity for these crimes and lack of legal recourse for women victims contributed to the persistence of sexual and domestic violence in refugee settlements.

Of particular concern was the prevalence of domestic violence in refugee settings - a problem that continued to be viewed by UNHCR and government staff as a "private issue" that did not warrant official intervention. Human Rights Watch advocated for greater recognition by UNHCR and governments of domestic violence as a serious protection problem in refugee situations. We urged UNHCR to adopt guidelines on the prevention of and response to domestic violence against women and girls and to incorporate them into existing guidelines on the protection of refugee women. We also called for more effective implementation of UNHCR policies on the protection of refugee women and on the prevention of and response to sexual violence. In addition, Human Rights Watch advocated for a greater recognition by states of gender-based persecution as a legitimate grounds for granting refugee status.

Protection for Refugee Children

Refugee children suffered disproportionately during these crises, often with little official attention to their particular vulnerability. Children made up 52 percent of the world's refugee population and 65 percent of the population of the 300,000 Sierra Leonean refugees in Guinea, where Human Rights Watch investigated the protection of refugee children in 1999. Large numbers of Sierra Leonean refugee children were separated from their families either in Sierra Leone or during flight, and lived with care givers in the refugee camps. Not only had these children experienced and witnessed horrific abuse in Sierra Leone, including sexual and physical abuse, mutilation, killing, forced recruitment, and forced labor, but they were also vulnerable to physical and sexual abuse and exploitation, hazardous labor, denial of education, and other ill-treatment in the refugee camps in Guinea.

Human Rights Watch found that refugee children in Guinea did not enjoy full protection from UNHCR staff, and that their needs were frequently ignored or forgotten. Many of the problems faced by children were related to a chronic lack of assistance and the unsafe location of the refugee camps close to the border with Sierra Leone, which left the refugees vulnerable to cross-border attacks, killings, abductions, "disappearances," and forced recruitment. A shortage of funds and severe logistical problems in the delivery of assistance meant that many camps in the Gueckedou region of Guinea were without food distribution for three months, from the end of 1998 to early 1999. At the sametime, failures to register "vulnerable" groups in the February 1999 census operation meant that large numbers of separated children, and other refugees who were entitled to special assistance were excluded from receiving assistance.

Lack of assistance was the root cause of many of the human rights abuses identified in the camps. Refugee girls felt they had no choice but to engage in prostitution in order to meet their daily needs, and children risked their lives crossing the border in search of food. Kamajor militia-Sierra Leonean government civil defense forces who fought in conjunction with the Economic Community of West African States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG)-were also present in the refugee camps and were known to use refugee children as soldiers.

UNHCR faced significant political, financial, and logistical challenges in providing assistance and protection to refugees in Guinea. Not least was the international community's shameful neglect of the Sierra Leonean refugee crisis and the chronic lack of funding seriously hampered the refugee program. Nevertheless, Human Rights Watch expressed concern that the problems identified in Guinea were symptomatic of a more general failure to provide effective protection to refugee children worldwide. UNHCR staff must be held accountable for the implementation of the guidelines on the protection of refugee children; separated and vulnerable children must be identified and provided with adequate protection; girls must be protected from sexual abuse and exploitation; the civilian nature of refugee camps must be preserved to protect refugee children from recruitment into armed forces; and the international community must provide sufficient funds to protect refugee children wherever they are.

Security and Asylum

In a continuing trend, governments across the world associated refugee movements with threats to national and regional security, as witnessed most recently in Macedonia. Consequently, refugee policies and responses to refugee influxes were designed to restrict and contain refugee populations and to minimize potential security threats, often with little respect for the rights of the refugees themselves.

The Great Lakes and East Africa

Nowhere was this more apparent than in the Great Lakes region of Africa, where continuing instability and conflict in Rwanda, Burundi, and the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) caused a persistent flow of refugees into neighboring countries, and at times created serious security problems. Tanzania, in particular, was a generous host to hundreds of thousands of refugees from the Great Lakes region since the start of the Rwanda crisis in 1994. In October 1999, the Tanzanian government stated that it was host to some 800,000 refugees. Of these, 473,700 Burundian refugees, 58,200 refugees from the DRC, and 4,700 refugees from Rwanda were assisted by UNHCR, while the others lived self-sufficiently.

There is no doubt that years of hosting such large numbers of refugees placed a considerable strain on Tanzania's scarce economic and environmental resources. Moreover, the general tendency for conflicts in the Great Lakes region to spill over national borders and the active presence of armed elements amongst the refugee populations posed serious threats to security in Tanzania. Of particular concern to the Tanzanian government was the border area between Burundi and Tanzania, where the majority of Burundian refugees were located. A series of cross-border incursions and military activity along the border between the two countries since 1997 led Tanzania to impose restrictive measures on the refugee population. In late 1997, the Tanzanian government forcibly rounded up tens of thousands of refugees living in the border area and relocated them to camps. Many of the refugees had lived in Tanzania since the 1970s, owned property, were self-sufficient and fully integrated into Tanzanian society. Nevertheless, these refugees, along with others who had arrived in Tanzania more recently, were forcibly uprooted with little or no notice. Families were separated and were forced to leave behind their property and belongings.

While measures were required to secure the border region, the indiscriminate roundup and confinement of all refugees, including those who had lived in Tanzania for over thirty years, on the grounds that they all posed a national security risk, was not a legitimate response to the problem. Human Rights Watch argued that strengthening security could not be achieved through indiscriminate crackdowns on refugees and a curtailment of their fundamental rights. We called on the international community to provide Tanzania with urgently needed resources to strengthen security in the border area, to improve law enforcement capacities through the recruitment and training of additional police, and to undertake judicial capacity building and reform.

Concern at the diminishing respect for refugees' rights in Tanzania was heightened by the introduction of the December 1998 Refugee Act, which superceded the 1965 Refugee Control Act. Of particular concern was the lack of transparecy which characterized the government's introduction of the Act. NGOs, including Human Rights Watch, were not given an opportunity to openly review or comment on the Bill as it passed through Parliament. Even UNHCR had only a minimal role during the drafting stages and was not involved in deliberations about the content of the bill, although such technical advisory functions fell within its mandate. Under Article 35(2)(c) of the 1951 Refugee Convention, Tanzania is obliged to provide UNHCR with information concerning "laws, regulations and decrees" relating to refugees. A number of provisions included in the Act could be detrimental to refugee protection, including granting greater powers to camp commanders, the lack of adequate due process protections in the appeals process for status determination interviews, and the greater powers devolved to local authorities.

Sadly, such trends were observed elsewhere in this region. Increasingly, governments sought to address security concerns through restrictions on refugees, migrants, and asylum seekers, resulting in a curtailment of their rights and freedoms. In the wake of the bombing of the U.S. Embassy in Nairobi in August 1998, for example, all foreigners, and especially migrants, refugees, and asylum seekers, were viewed as potential security threats by the Kenyan government.

Holding refugees responsible for the rising crime rate and insecurity in Kenya, the government declared that all refugees in Nairobi should be rounded up and sent to remote, rural camps in the north of the country. The conditions in these camps were harsh and their remote location condemned the refugees to virtual confinement. Moreover, security in the camps was poor and the safety of many refugees, especially political activists, could not be guaranteed.

Conclusion

The year 2000 marked the fiftieth anniversary of UNHCR-the international agency established to provide protection and assistance to refugees worldwide. Fifty years later, despite some improvements in refugee protection, governments' attitudes toward refugees and asylum seekers were dictated by domestic political interests and range from active hostility to indifference and neglect. Western governments, in particular, seemed willing to assist refugees and seek solutions to their plight only when it was politically and strategically expedient to do so. Although UNHCR made some advances in its response to the protection of certain groups, such as women, children, the elderly, and internally displaced persons, serious gaps remained, and policies designed to further their protection were not always universally or comprehensively applied.

As the Kosovo crisis so vividly demonstrated, asylum is the last resort when human rights have been violated and all other remedies have been exhausted. The right to asylum is a lifesaving mechanism that cannot be compromised. Human Rights Watch seeks to ensure that, regardless of governments' domestic economic, or strategic interests-or the nationality, race, or strategic importance of refugees-the right to asylum and refugee protection remains intact into the twenty-first century.

Relevant Human Rights Watch reports:

Democratic Republic of Congo: Casualties of War: Civilians, Rule of Law, and Democratic Freedoms, 3/99

Croatia: Second Class Citizens: The Serbs of Croatia, 3/99

Guinea: Forgotten Children of War: Sierra Leonean Refugee Children in Guinea, 7/99

Indonesia: The Violence in Ambon, 3/99

Tanzania: In the Name of Security: Forced Round-Ups of Refugees in Tanzania, 7/99

United States: Detained and Deprived of Rights: Children in the Custody of the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service,

12/98

Federal Republic of Yugoslavia: Abuses against Serbs and Roma in the New Kosovo, 8/99
STAFF AND COMMITTEES

Human Rights Watch Staff

Executive:Kenneth Roth, executive director; Susan Osnos, associate director; Jennifer Gaboury, executive assistant; Justine Hanson, associate.

Advocacy: Reed Brody, advocacy director; Lotte Leicht, Brussels office director; Joanna Weschler, U.N. representative; Francisco Cox, international justice counsel; Bessie Skoures, Brussels office administrator; Leon Peijnenburg, E.U. coordinator; Christina Portillo, associate; Justine Hanson, associate; Julien Reinhard, consultant.

Communications: Carroll Bogert, communications director; Jean-Paul Marthoz, Brussels press director; Minky Worden, electronic media director; Patrick Minges, publications director; Jagdish Parikh, on-line researcher; Urmi Shah, press information officer; Sobeira Genao, publications manager; Fitzroy Hepkins, mail manager; Skye Donald, associate; Doris Joe, associate; Jos6 Martinez, associate.

Development: Michele Alexander, development director; Rachel Weintraub, special events and council outreach director; Eileen Kelly, foundation relations director; Rona Peligal, foundation relations director; Charles Urquhart, foundation relations associate director; Michele Demers, New York Committee director; Pamela Bruns, California Committee director; Susan Bradforth, California Committee associate director; Marianne Law, special events manager; Veronica Matushaj, creative services and direct response manager; Amy Poueymirou, foundation relations coordinator; Michelle Leisure, coordinator; Robert Peterson, Los Angeles office administrator; Adam Greenfield, Los Angeles office administrator; Adele Waugaman, associate; Matthew Lieber, assistant; Ray Happy, consultant; David Alan Harris, consultant; Marie-Ange Kalenga, consultant; Julie Rousseau, consultant; Esther Scott, consultant.

Finance: Barbara Guglielmo, finance director; Walid Ayoub, systems manager; Anderson Allen, Washington office manager; Iris Yang, accountant; Constance Thomas, accountant; Mei Tang, accounting assistant; Bessie Skoures, Brussels office administrator; Josh Sherwin, associate; Stephanie Lawrence, receptionist and office assistant; Miguel Morales, assistant; Denis Petrov, assistant; Tamar Satnet, assistant; Amin Khair, consultant; Ernest Ulrich, consultant; Edward Valentini, consultant.

General Counsel: Wilder Tayler, general counsel; Dinah PoKempner, deputy general counsel; Rachael Reilly, refugee policy director; Clare Mumford, coordinator; Rachael Noronha, London Office administrator

Human Resources: Maria Pignataro Nielsen, human resources director; Christian PeFa, coordinator; Gil Colon, assistant; Yanet EncarnaciJn, assistant; Miguel Morales, assistant, Ernest Ulrich, consultant.

Program: Cynthia Brown, program director; Michael McClintock, deputy program director; Jeri Laber, senior advisor; Allyson Collins, senior researcher and Washington associate director; Richard Dicker, associate counsel; Helen Duffy, associate counsel; Joseph Saunders, associate counsel; Joanne Mariner, associate counsel; Jamie Fellner, associate counsel; Arvind Ganesan, researcher; Indira Rosenthal, ICC advocate; Brigitte Suhr, ICC advocate; Christina Portillo, coordinator; Sam David, associate, Lauren Feldman, associate, Matthew McGowan, associate; Gail Yamauchi, associate; Lance Compa, consultant; Marcia Allina, consultant; Rachel Rosenbloom, consultant.

International Film Festival: Bruni Burres, director; Heather Harding, associate director; John Anderson, associate director, Fernanda Amorim Leventhal, community outreach coordinator.

Fellowship Recipients for 1999: Zama Coursen-Neff, Furman fellow; Erika George, Finberg fellow; Carol Pier, Schell fellow; Judith Sunderland, Sandler fellow; Cynthia Totten, Georgetown Women's Law and Public Policy fellow.

Board of Directors

Jonathan F. Fanton, chair; Robert L. Bernstein, founding chair; Lisa Anderson, David M. Brown, William D. Carmichael, Dorothy Cullman, Gina Despres, Irene Diamond, Fiona Druckenmiller, Edith Everett, Michael E. Gellert, Vartan Gregorian, Alice H. Henkin, James F. Hoge, Jr., Stephen L. Kass, Marina Pinto Kaufman, Bruce J. Klatsky, Joanne Leedom-Ackerman, Josh Mailman, Yolanda T. Moses, Samuel K. Murumba, Andrew Nathan, Jane Olson, Peter Osnos, Kathleen Peratis, Bruce Rabb, Sigrid Rausing, Orville Schell, Sid Sheinberg, Gary Sick, Malcolm B. Smith, Domna Stanton, Maya Wiley, Roland Algrant (board member emeritus) , Adrian W. DeWind (board member emeritus) .

Members of Board Committees and Sub-Committees: Helen Bernstein, special events; Martin Blumenthal, policy; Lori Damrosch, policy; Henry Everett, investment; Mike Farrell, policy; Barbara Finberg, campaign steering committee; Robert Menschel, investment; Minna Schrag, policy; Florence Teicher, policy.

Africa Division

Staff

Peter Takirambudde, executive director; Janet Fleischman, Washington director; Jemera Rone, counsel to Human Rights Watch; Suliman Ali Baldo, senior researcher; Bronwen Manby, counsel; Binaifer Nowrojee, counsel; Peter Bouckaert, researcher; Alex Vines, research associate; Zachary Freeman, associate; Tamar Satnet, associate; Juliet Wilson, associate; Scott Campbell, consultant; Alison DesForges, consultant;Corinne Dufka, consultant; Trish Hiddleston, consultant; Pascal Kambale, consultant; Sara Rakita, consultant; Peter Rosenblum, consultant; Guglielmo Verdirame, consultant.

Advisory Committee

William F. Carmichael, Chair; Roland Algrant, Carole Artigiani, Robert L. Bernstein, Julius L. Chambers, MichaelChege, Michael Clough, Roberta Cohen, Carol Corillon, Cheryl "Imani"Countess, Alison L. DesForges, Adrian W.DeWind, R. Harcourt Dodds, Stephen Ellmann, Aaron Etra, Thomas M. Franck, Gail M. Gerhart, Jack Greenberg, Arthur C. Helton, Alice H. Henkin, Robert Joffe, Jeh Johnson, Richard A. Joseph, Professor E. Kannyo, Thomas Karis, Stephen L. Kass, Vincent A. Mai, John A. Marcum, Gay McDougall, Toni Morrison, Samuel Murumba, Muna Ndulo, James C.N.Paul, Norman Redlich, Randall Robinson, Sidney S. Rosdeitcher, Dorothy Thomas, Dirk van Zyl Smit, Howard P. Venable, R. Keith Walton, Claude E. Welch, Jr., Maureen White, Aristide Zolberg.

Americas Division

Staff

Jos6 Miguel Vivanco, executive director; Anne Manuel, deputy director; Joel Solomon, research director; James Cavallaro, Brazil office director; Jennifer Bailey, researcher; Sebastian Brett, researcher; Sarah DeCosse, researcher; Robin Kirk, researcher; Monisha Bajaj, associate; Jessica Galeria, associate; Megan Himan, associate; Jill Hedges, consultant; Andy Kaufman, associate; Ignacio Cano, associate; Anne Fuller, consultant; David Holiday, consultant.

Advisory Committee

Stephen Kass, Chair; Marina Kaufman, Vice Chair; David E. Nachman, Vice Chair; Roland Algrant, Peter D. Bell, Robert L. Bernstein, Albert Bildner, Rabbi Marcelo Bronstein, Paul Chevigny, Roberto Cu6llar, Dorothy Cullman, Adrian DeWind, Dean Tom J. Farer, Dr. Alejandro Garro, Wendy Gimbel, John Gitlitz, Peter Hakim, Ronald G. Hellman, Bianca Jagger, Mark Kaplan, Margaret Lang, Kenneth Maxwell, Jocelyn McCalla, Theodor Meron, Charles Millard, John B. Oakes, Victor Penchaszadeh, Bruce Rabb, George Soros, Julien J. Studley, Rose Styron, Javier Timerman, Marta Varela, Horacio Verbitsky, Jos6 Zalaquett.

Asia Division

Staff

Sidney Jones, executive director; Mike Jendrezejczyk, Washington director; Patricia Gossman, senior researcher; Jeannine Guthrie, NGO liaison; Sara Colm, researcher; Smita Narula, researcher; Gary Risser, researcher; Adam Bassine, associate; Tom Kellogg, associate; Olga Nousias, associate; Liz Weiss, associate; Mickey Spiegel, consultant.

Advisory Committee

Andrew Nathan, Chair; Orville Schell, Vice Chair; Ko-Yung Tung, Vice Chair; Maureen Aung-Thwin, Edward J. Baker, Harry Barnes, Robert L. Bernstein, Jagdish Bhagwati, Jerome Cohen, Clarence Dias, Prof. Dolores A. Donovan, Frances Fitzgerald, Adrienne Germain, Prof. Merle Goldman, James C. Goodale, Prof. Deborah Greenberg, Jack Greenberg, Paul Hoffman, Sharon Hom, Rounaq Jahan, Virginia Leary, Prof. Daniel Lev, Perry Link, Bishop Paul Moore, Yuri Orlov, Victoria Riskin, Sheila Rothman, Barnett Rubin, Prof. James Scott, Steve Shapiro, Dr. Eric Stover, Maya Wiley.

Europe & Central Asia Division

Staff

Holly Cartner, executive director; Rachel Denber, deputy director; Elizabeth Andersen, advocacy director; Pamela Gomez, Caucausus office director; Marie Struthers, Tajikistan office director; Diederik Lohman, Moscow office director; Alexander Petrov, Moscow office deputy director; Fred Abrahams, researcher; Cassandra Cavanaugh, researcher; Pamela Gomez, researcher; Julia Hall, researcher; Malcolm Hawkes, researcher; Andr6 Lommen, researcher; Christopher Panico, researcher; Diane Paul, researcher; Acacia Shields, researcher; Jonathan Sugden, researcher; Benjamin Ward, researcher; Alexander Frangos, coordinator; Liudmila Belova, associate; Alexandra Perina, associate; Josh Sherwin, associate; Natasha Zaretsky, associate; Erika Dailey, consultant; Bogdan Ivanisevic, consultant; Mark Johnson, consultant; Scott Long, consultant; Alex Lupis, consultant; Shin Yasui, consultant; Natalia Ermolaev, assistant

Steering Committee

Peter Osnos, Chair; Alice Henkin, Vice Chair; Ruti Teitel, Ambassador Jack Matlock, Mort Abramowitz, Barbara Finberg, Frederica Friedman, Felice Gaer, Michael E. Gellert, Bill Green, Paul Goble, Stanley Hoffmann, Robert James, Kati Marton, Prema Mathai-Davis, Karl Meyer, Joel Motley, Ambassador Herbert Okun, Jane Olson, Barnett Rubin, Leon Sigal, Malcolm Smith, George Soros, Donald J. Sutherland, Adele Sweet, Mark Walton, Mark Von Hagen, William Zabel, Ambassador Warren Zimmermann.

Middle East & North Africa Division

Staff

Hanny Megally, executive director; Eric Goldstein, deputy director; Joe Stork, advocacy director; Virginia N. Sherry, associate director; Clarisa Bencomo, researcher; Elah6 Sharifpour-Hicks, researcher; Nejla Sammakia, researcher; Georgina Copty, associate; Sara Eggerling, associate; Elizabeth Mirarchi, associate; Gamal Eid, consultant; Alaa Kaoud, consultant; Shawqi Issa, consultant; Jennifer Moorehead, consultant; Catriona Vine, consultant.

Advisory Committee

Gary L. Sick, Co-Chair; Lisa Anderson, Co-Chair; Bruce Rabb, Vice Chair; Professor Shaul Bakhash, Professor Cherif Bassiouni, Martin Blumenthal, Professor Paul Chevigny, Helena Cobban, Edith Everett, Khaled Abou el Fadl, Dr. Mansour Farhang, Christopher George, Rita Hauser, Ulric Haynes, Jr., Rev. J. Bryan Hehir, Dr. Edy Kaufman, Marina Pinto Kaufman, Prof. Samir Khalaf, Judith Kipper, Ann Lesch, Professor Stephen P. Marks, Rabbi Rolando Matalon, Philip Mattar, Sheila Nemazee, Jean-Francois Seznec, Charles Shamas, David K. Shipler, Sanford Solender, Mary Ann Stein, Shibley Telhami, Napoleon B. Williams, Andrew Whitley, Dr. James Zogby.

Arms Division

Staff

Joost R. Hiltermann, executive director; Stephen D. Goose, program director; Loretta Bondi, advocacy coordinator; Mary Wareham, senior advocate for landmine ban; Ernst Jan Hogendoorn, researcher; Lisa Misol, researcher; Alex Vines, researcher; Jasmine Juteau, associate; Sharda Sekaran, associate; William M. Arkin, consultant; Robin Bhatty, consultant; Kathleen Bleakley, consultant; David Hoffman, consultant; Monica Schurtman, consultant; Cindy Shiner, consultant; Frank Smyth, consultant; Henry Thompson, consultant.

Advisory Committee

Dr. Torsten N. Wiesel, Chair; Nicole Ball, Vice Chair; Vincent McGee, Vice Chair; Amb. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Ken Anderson, Frank Blackaby, David Brown, Dr. Ahmed H. Esa, Dr. Alastair Hay, Dr. Lao Mong Hay, Patricia Irvin, Dr. Michael Klare, Frederick J. Knecht, Dr. Edward Laurance, Gra2a Machel, Laurie Nathan, Dr. Janne E. Nolan, Josephine Odera, Dr. Julian P. Perry Robinson, Andrew J. Pierre, Eug6nia Piza-Lopez, David Rieff, Dr. Kumar Rupesinghe, John Ryle, Archbishop Emeritus Desmond Tutu, Keith Walton, Jody Williams,

Thomas Winship.

Children's Rights Division

Staff

Lois Whitman, executive director; Jo Becker, advocacy coordinator; Yodon Thonden, counsel; Michael Bochenek, researcher; Vikram Parekh, researcher; Shalu Rozario, associate; Kathleen Hunt, consultant; Lee Tucker, consultant; Ramani Muttettuwegama, consultant; Rosa Ehrenreich, consultant; Clovene Hanchard, consultant; Glenn McGrory, consultant; Rob Sloane, consultant; Amy Marx, consultant; Mark Templeton, consultant; Marco Simons, consultant.

Advisory Committee

Dr. Jane Green Schaller, Chair; Roland Algrant, Vice Chair; Goldie Alfasi-Siffert, Michelle India Baird, Judge Phyllis W. Beck, James Bell, Rachel Brett, Bernardine Dohrn, Father Robert F. Drinan, Albina duBoisrouvray, Barbara Finberg, Professor Sanford J. Fox, Gail Furman, Lisa Hedley, Anita Howe-Waxman, Eugene M. Isenberg, Sheila B.Kamerman, Kela Leon, Alan Levine, Miriam Lyons, Dr. Hadassah Brooks Morgan, Prexy Nesbitt, Dr. Elena Nightingale, Martha J. Olson, Marta Santos Pais, Susan Rappaport, Jack Rendler, Robert G. Schwartz, Mark I. Soler, Lisa Sullivan, William Taggart, William L. Taylor, Prof. Geraldine Van Bueren, Peter Volmink, James D. Weill, Derrick Wong.

Women's Rights Division

Staff

Regan E. Ralph, executive director; LaShawn Jefferson, deputy director; Widney Brown, advocacy coordinator; Samya Burney, researcher; Chirumbidzo Mabuwa, researcher; Isis Nusair, researcher; Martina Vandenberg, researcher; Kerry McArthur, associate; Laura Rusu, associate; Roya Boroumand, consultant.

Advisory Committee

Kathleen Peratis, Chair; Nahid Toubia, Vice Chair; Mahnaz Afkhami, Roland Algrant, Abdullahi An-Na'im, Helen Bernstein, Charlotte Bunch, Holly Burkhalter, Rhonda Copelon, Lisa Crooms, Gina H. Despres, Joan Dunlop, Claire Flom, Adrienne Germain, Zhu Hong, Marina Pinto Kaufman, Gara LaMarche, Joyce Mends-Cole, Marysa Navarro-Aranguren, Susan J. Petersen, Cathy Powell, Celina Romany, Margaret Schuler, Domna C. Stanton.

Human Rights Watch Council

California Committee

Mike Farrell, co-chair; Jane Olson, co-chair and co-founder; Stanley Sheinbaum, co-founder and honorary chair; Vicki Riskin, vice co-chair; Zazi Pope, vice co-chair; Aileen Adams, Elaine Attias, Joan Willens Beerman, Rabbi Leonard Beerman, Emma Cherniavsky, Justin Connolly, Geoffrey Cowan, Nancy Cushing-Jones, Peggy Davis, Stephen Davis, Chiara Di Geronimo, Mary Estrin, Jonathan Feldman, Danny Glover, Beth Greenfield, Thomas Higgins, Paul Hoffman, Barry Kemp, Maggie Kemp, Emily Levine, Roberto Lovato, Stephen A. Mansfield, Kristin Olson McKissick,Thomas R. Parker, Marina Pisklakova, Alison Dundes Renteln, Tracy Rice, Carol Richards, David W. Rintels, Lawrence D. Rose, Pippa Scott, Perry Simpson, William D. Temko, Andrea Van de Kamp, Diane O. Wittenberg, Stanley Wolpert.

New York Committee

Robert Joffe, Chair; Allen R. Adler, Robert Bernstein, Martin Blumenthal, Adrian DeWind, Irene Diamond, Strachan Donnelley, Michael Eisner, Jonathan Fanton, Barbara finberg, Gail Furman, Jay Furman, David S. Hirsch, Joseph Hofheimer, Yves-Andre Istel, Robert James, Nancy Kamel, Steve Kass, Vincent Mai, Vincent McGee, Joel Motley, David Nachman, Peter Osnos, James H. Ottaway, Jr., Bruce Rabb, Michael Rauenhorst, Nina Rosenwald, Alice Sandler, Jeffrey Scheuer, Malcolm Smith, Domna Stanton, Eva and Javier Timerman, Ko-Yung Tung, Maya Wiley.

San Francisco Committee

Orville Schell, co-chair; Nancy Parrish, co-chair; Jeff Bleisch, Rebecca Brackman, Dorothy Edelman, Jack Edelman, Walter Link.

Council members-at-large

Greg Carr, Gina Despres, John Kaneb, Robin and Stuart Ray, Sigrid Rausing, Maria-Michaela Barilits.
MISSIONS


Africa Division
Belgium: Sudan advocacy with NGO and government officials (April-May).

Benin: Research on Human Rights Commissions (April).

Burundi: Networking with NGOs and African Commission (March-April).
Networking with NGOs (October).

Cameroon: Research on Human Rights Commissions (October).

Denmark: Advocacy on Rwanda (April).

Eritrea: Research on deportations (April).

Ethiopia: Participation in U.N. conference (June).

France: Advocacy on Rwanda (April)

Germany: Advocacy on Rwanda (April); on Sudan (April-May); and on Angola for report release (September).

Kenya: Research on urban refugees (April); with Arms Division on the role of the government in political violence (May); and on forced deportations in the Horn of Africa war (May). Advocacy on political rights in Uganda (October).

Netherlands: Advocacy on Rwanda (April); on Sudan (April-May); and on Rwanda (July).

Nigeria: Report release and research on Niger Delta situation (February). Research on Human Rights Commissions (March).

Rwanda: Advocacy on Rwanda study (April). Networking with NGOs (April). Research (May). Participation in conference sponsored by genocide survivors (July). Research and advocacy (September-October).

South Africa: Research into violence against farmworkers (August).

Senegal: Research on Human Rights Commissions (April).

Sudan: Research on human rights and conflict resolution (February-March); on slavery and internal displacement (July-August).

Switzerland: Advocacy on Rwanda (April). Provided expert testimony in genocide trial (April).

Tanzania: Advocacy on Burundian refugees (June-July).

Togo: Research on Human Rights Commissions (April).

Uganda: Networking with exiled Sudanese (February-March); and with local NGOs (April). Release of report on political freedom (October).

United Kingdom: Advocacy on Rwanda (April); and on Sudan (April-May). Participation in conference on good governance in Africa (September).

United States: Advocacy on Rwanda with State Department, National Security Council, Department of Defense, and members of Congress (April). State Department meeting on refugees in Tanzania (July). Testimony to House Subcommittee on Africa on Nigeria (August). Presentations on Angola at United Nations (September); and at State Department Conference (October). Advocacy on Nigeria (October).

Zambia: Research on freedom of expression and association (May).

Americas Division
Brazil: Mission to Natal, Rio Grande do Norte State to testify (and assist in the investigation and prosecution) in the case of Gilson Nogueira, human rights lawyer killed in October 1996 (April). Investigations in So Paulo on the racial component of police violence and discrimination in the criminal justice system (May, July and August). Advocacy in Recife, Pernamubuco state, conference on prison conditions (May). Investigation in Paran state on allegations of torture and severe beatings of rural laborers during land conflicts (June). Advocacy in Curitiba, Parana, conference on international covenants (June); and in So Paulo, conference on the Inter-American human rights system (July).

Canada: Advocacy on human rights concerns in the region (June).

Chile: Release of Pinochet report, When Tyrants Tremble (October).

Colombia: Research on displacement and attacks on human rights defenders (September).

England: Advocacy on Colombia, conference at Oxford University (July).

Guatemala: Advocacy, OAS General Assembly (June).

Germany: Advocacy, overview of human rights in the Americas at the International Academy Conference (October 1998).

Mexico: Release of report Systemic Injustice: Torture, "Disappearance" and Extrajudicial Execution in Mexico (January). Research and advocacy in Jalisco state and Mexico City, forum on Mexican human rights NGOs (August- September).

Netherlands: Advocacy on Pinochet and related issues of justice and accountability in the Americas for the International Human Rights Law conference (November 1998).

Panam: Advocacy on justice and accountability in the region, as well as the ICC (August).

Per: Meeting in Lima organized by the OAS for American Ministers of Justice (March).

Asia Division
Bangladesh: Investigated the ongoing repatriation of Burmese Rohingya refugees (August).

Belgium and Germany: Advocacy in Brussels and Bonn to discuss China, Indonesia, and other issues with the European Union and German foreign ministry (in the E.U. presidency) (January).

China: Research on the Three Gorges project with a focus on resettlement issues as they relate to human rights abuses (October).

India: Research on attacks against Christians in the western state of Gujarat (April-May). Attended national meeting of the National Campaign for Dalit Human Rights; helped facilitate the campaign internationally. Continued research on caste violence (May).

Indonesia: Advocacy with diplomats, NGOs, and others to discuss East Timor and upcoming elections (April).

Japan: Advocacy with the Japanese government, members of parliament, NGOs, and others to discuss human rights and Japanese foreign policy (April).

Malaysia and Thailand: Advocacy to discuss the APEC meeting and Anwar trial; meetings with NGOs (November 1998).

Sri Lanka: Research to investigate abuses against internally displaced persons (March-April).

Thailand: Research of the issue of Burmese internally displaced persons (March). See also Malaysia and Thailand.

United Kingdom: Advocacy in London to work with other international NGOs on caste issues in India (October).

Europe and Central Asia Division
Albania: Research in northern Albania to interview refugees from Kosovo regarding war crimes and other abuses (April). Interviewing refugees from Kosovo (April-June).

Armenia: Research on human rights in the Armenian army (November-December 1998). Research on legal reform issues (April).

Austria: Meetings with Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) ambassadors regarding Turkmenistan (February). Mission to Vienna for OSCE NGO consultation meeting on Central Asia (March). Participation in OSCE review conference, presenting interventions on religious freedom and freedom of association in the OSCE region; met with government and OSCE representatives, especially on Central Asia (September).

Belarus:Release of Russian translation of Turning Back the Clock; academic freedom research (October-November 1998). Academic freedom research (February and June). Release of academic freedom report, press conference, government meetings, together with Jonathan Fanton (July). Research into police brutality following October 17 demonstration and "disappearance" of political opponents of the president (October).

Belgium: Advocacy on Kosovo with European Commission, ECHO, European Parliament, U.S., U.K. Missions to E.U. (July). Advocacy meetings in Brussels with E.U. officials regarding E.U. expansion process and recently ratified Partnership and Cooperation Agreements with six Caucasus and Central Asian states (November).

Croatia: Release of Second Class Citizens: the Serbs of Croatia; advocacy on report with government, OSCE, UNHCR, UN OHCHR (March). Research on conditions prior to elections, meetings with local NGOs, OSCE, UN OHCHR, Constitutional Court, broadcast and print media (October).

Finland: International Helsinki Federation General Assembly (October).

France: Advocacy with Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly in Strasbourg; meetings with representatives of the Committee for the Prevention of Torture (January and September). Research and advocacy missions on women migrant domestic workers in West European countries (May). Advocacy with the Council of Europe regarding Bosnia's possible accession to the Council of Europe (June).

Kazakhstan: Research on violations of freedom of association and expression in the run-up to the presidential elections (December 1998). Research on armed insurgency in Batken and participation in human rights conference in Bishkek; follow-up advocacy on subsequent report (September and November).

Macedonia: Research in refugee camps, collective centers, and private homes on war crimes in Kosovo (March-June). Refugee interviews (May).

Northern Ireland: Research and advocacy on policing (February). Advocacy on lawyer Rosemary Nelson's murder (March). Monitoring security force operations during the annual "marching season" (July).

Norway: Meetings with the heads of mission regarding the work of the OSCE (February). Advocacy in Oslo with Foreign Minister Vollebaek regarding his upcoming trip to Central Asia (May). Meetings with Norwegian Ambassador to the OSCE Traavik regarding Central Asia and Kosovo (June).

Russia: Release of Russian orphanages report and related advocacy (December 1998). Press conference on Kosovo (May).

Spain: Research and advocacy on women migrant domestic workers in West European countries (January).

Switzerland: Advocacy with U.N. Human Rights Commission (April).

Tajikistan: Ongoing research and advocacy from Dushanbe office on freedom of association and expression, abuses by security forces, and refugee-related concerns. Advocacy with Tajik officials about pre-election conditions (October).

Turkey: Research on freedom of expression and from torture, observation of hearing in the trial of Abdullah Ocalan (May-June). Press work relating to the Ocalan trial and interviews on prison conditions (June). Attended OSCE Summit and parallel NGO events, advocacy on Kosovo, Chechnya, Central Asia, and Turkey (November).

Turkmenistan: Research on torture, freedom of association and expression, and on political prisoners (January).

Uzbekistan: Research on torture (December 1998 and May.) Meetings with Uzbek officials (October). Ongoing research by Tashkent office on fair trial, religious freedom, freedom of association, political prisoners, human rights defenders.

Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
Kosovo: Research on war crimes in Gornje Obrinje (September and November 1998); and on war crimes and destruction of civilian property (February). Interviewing Kosovar Albanians who remained during the armed conflict and ethnic Serbs subject to post-conflict human rights abuses (June). Research on post-war abuse against Serbs and Roma in Kosovo (June-July); on war crimes in Kosovo with focus on Lipljan/Lipjan, Glogovac/Gllogofc municipalities (June-August); on war crimes and new abuses against Serbs/Roma (July). Interviews on war crimes against Kosovo Albanians (August). Research on war crimes in Glogovac/Gllogofc and Srbica/Skenderaj municipalities (September)' and on war crimes and new abuses against Serbs/Roma (November).
Serbia: Research on restrictions of academic freedom in universities (December 1998). Research on NATO targeting and destruction of civilian property (August).

Middle East and North Africa Division
Bahrain: Research and advocacy (March- April).

Belgium: Advocacy on the Euro- Mediterranean Association Agreements (October).

Belgium and The Netherlands: Advocacy on Iraq, Egypt, and Tunisia (September).

Egypt: Research and advocacy on the draft NGO law and the charging of two human rights activists with criminal offenses (December 1998).

France: Advocacy on Internet access and control in the Middle East (October). Research on Algeria and Tunisia (October).

Germany: Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network advocacy (April).

Iran: Meetings in Tehran (February). Research in Tehran (July).

Israel and the Palestinian Authority Territories: Trial observations, research on Israeli land and housing policies in Jerusalem and Palestinian Authority due process abuses; advocacy on torture in Israel, consultations with Israeli and Palestinian NGOs (April-June). Release of report Persona Non Grata, on the expulsion of civilians from Israeli-occupied Lebanon. Consultations with Israeli and Palestinian NGOs and members of the Palestinian Legislative Council (July).

Jordan: Research on Jordan and Syria (April).

Lebanon: Research on expulsion of civilians from Israeli-occupied south Lebanon (March-April). Release of Persona Non Grata (July). Participated in the first Conference on International Justice in the Middle East in Beirut; ICC advocacy (June).

Morocco: Participated in first Conference of the Arab Human Rights Movement (April).

The Netherlands: Advocacy on Iraq, Egypt, and Tunisia (September).

Palestinian Authority Territories: see above Israel and the Palestinian Authority Territories.

Switzerland: Advocacy at the Human Rights Commission (April), and at the Fourth Geneva Convention HCP conference (July). Participated in workshop on "Holding Armed Groups Accountable," organized by the International Council on Human Rights Policy (September). Research on Algeria and Tunisia (October).

United Kingdom: Advocacy and research on Iraq and advocacy on Bahrain (January)

Arms Division
Afghanistan: Investigation of arms flows to both parties to the civil war in Afghanistan (June-July).

Bulgaria: Research and advocacy on Bulgaria's arms export policies and practices, especially with respect to arms transfers to areas of armed conflict in Africa (February). Release of report on Bulgaria's arms exports, and meetings with government officials and parliamentarians to discuss its findings (April).

Burundi: Ongoing investigation of arms flows to both parties to the civil war (December 1998).

Croatia: Participation in regional conference on landmines (June).

France: Participation in a Landmine Monitor meeting (September).

Honduras and Nicaragua: Meetings with government leaders on landmines, and assessment of the impact of Hurricane Mitch on the mines problem (January).

Kazakhstan: Investigation of arms flows to both parties to the civil war in Afghanistan (May-July).

Kenya: Investigation of the role of arms supplies in fanning the flames of politically-fomented "ethnic" violence (April-May).

Kyrgyzstan: Investigation of arms flows to both parties to the civil war in Afghanistan (July).

Lebanon: Participation in a regional conference on landmines (February).

Liberia: Investigation of arms flows to both parties to the civil war in Sierra Leone (September).

Mexico: Participation in a government/NGO regional conference on landmines (January)

Mozambique: Participation in the first meeting of States Parties to the Mine Ban Treaty, release of the Landmine Monitor report, and participation in an International Campaign to Ban Landmines (ICBL) general meeting (May).

The Netherlands: Release of report on allegations of chemical weapons use in Srebrenica during the war in Bosnia and Hercegovina; meetings with officials of the government of the Netherlands, the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (November 1998). Participation in The Hague Appeal for Peace. Participation in the launch of the International Action Network on Small Arms (IANSA) in The Hague (May).

Nicaragua: see above Honduras and Nicaragua.

Nigeria: Participation in a workshop on landmines (September).

Norway: Participation in a Landmine Monitor meeting, events related to the entry into force of the Mine Ban Treaty, and an ICBL Coordination Committee meeting (March)

Pakistan: Investigation of arms flows to both parties to the civil war in Afghanistan (June-July).

Rwanda: Investigation of arms flows to both parties to the civil war in Burundi (December 1998).

Sierra Leone: Investigation of arms flows to both parties to the civil war (September).

South Africa: Research and advocacy on South Africa's arms trade controls (February).

Sri Lanka: Participation in a workshop on security in South Asia (September).

Switzerland: Participation in a Swiss Government forum on the marking of small arms, and meeting with U.N. panel of experts (February); in a wound ballistics conference(March); in a government preparatory meeting for the first meeting of States Parties to the Mine Ban Treaty (March); in an ICBL/government meeting on Mine Ban Treaty intersessional work (August); and in an ICBL Coordination Committee Meeting (September).

Tanzania: Investigation of arms flows to both parties to the civil war in Burundi (May).

Tunisia: Participation in a NGO/government regional conference on landmines (January).

United Arab Emirates: Participation in a regional conference on global trends, with a focus on landmines (October).

Federal Republic of Yugoslavia: Investigation into NATO's conduct of its air war under applicable rules of international humanitarian law (July-August); and into the extent and impact of the use of antipersonnel landmines by Yugoslav and Kosovo Liberation Army forces in Kosovo (August-September).

Children's Rights Division
Argentina: Advocacy on child soldiers at the Directing Council for the Inter-American Children's Institute of the Organization of American States (September).

Costa Rica: Attended Latin American Conference on Children's Rights in San Jos (September).

Egypt: Investigation of child labor in the cotton industry (October).

Germany: Advocacy, participation in the European Conference on the Use of Children as Soldiers in Berlin (October).

Guinea: Investigated the situation of Sierra Leonean refugee children in Guinea (February/March).

Jamaica: Release of report on detention of children in police lockups (July).

Kenya: Investigated the use of corporal punishment in schools (May). Advocacy at the Third African Conference on Child Abuse and Neglect in Nairobi, which focused on "challenges of caring for and protecting children in Africa"; convened a workshop on corporal punishment in schools (September).

Mozambique: Participated in the African Conference on the Use of Children as Soldiers in Onlineuto (April).

Switzerland: Advocacy with the U.N. working group on an optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on children and armed conflict (January).

United States: Investigation into the detention and treatment of children held in adult facilities while awaiting trial in the adult criminal justice system in the state of Maryland (July 1998-May 1999). Investigation into the situation of migrant farm workers in the state of Arizona (June-August)

Uruguay: Participated in Latin American and the Caribbean Conference on the Use of Children as Soldiers in Montevideo (July).

Women's Rights Division
Albania: Research and training, Tirana (July).

Austria: Participation in the Conference on Rape as a War Crime, Vienna (June). Advocacy at the U.N. Crime Commission Ad Hoc Meeting, Vienna (July).

Belgium: Advocacy at the E.U. on the situation of women in Pakistan and Morocco and on the ICC (September).

Bosnia: Research on the trafficking of women (March).

France: Participation in seminar on drafting the Working Paper on Witness Participation and Protection Issues for the ICC (April).

Kosovo: Research on women in conflict (July).

Japan and Thailand: Research (with Asia Division) on the trafficking of women from Thailand to Japan (April-May).

Mexico: Advocacy regarding discrimination in maquiladoras in Merida, Yucatan (February-March).

South Africa: Research on lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transsexual youth (September).

Switzerland: Advocacy with UNHCR regarding women refugees (February and September); and with the Commission on Human Rights regarding women in U.S. prisons (April).

United States: Advocacy on women in U.S. prisons (June and October). Research on lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transsexual youth (June and October).

Thailand: see above Japan and Thailand.

Tanzania: Research mission on women in refugee camps (October-November).




























