The Day After
By Kenneth Roth
Two years into the Arab Spring, euphoria seems a thing of the past. The heady
days of protest and triumph have been replaced by outrage at the atrocities in
Syria, frustration that the region’s monarchs remain largely immune to pressure
for reform, fear that the uprisings’ biggest winners are Islamists who might limit
the rights of women, minorities, and dissidents, and disappointment that even
in countries that have experienced a change of regime, fundamental change has
been slow and unsteady. Difficult as it is to end abusive rule, the hardest part
may well be the day after.
It should be no surprise that building a rights-respecting democracy on a legacy
of repression is not easy. The transitions from communism in Eastern Europe
and the former Soviet Union yielded many democracies, but also many
dictatorships. Latin America’s democratic evolution over the past two decades
has been anything but linear. Progress in Asia and Africa has been uneven and
sporadic. Even the European Union, which has successfully made democratic
reform and respect for human rights conditions of membership, has had a
harder time curbing authoritarian impulses once countries—most recently
Hungary and Romania—became members.
Moreover, those who excelled at overthrowing the autocrat are often not best
placed to build a governing majority. The art of protest does not necessarily
match the skills needed for governing. And allies in ousting a despot are
sometimes not the best partners for replacing despotism.
But those who pine for the familiar days of dictatorship should remember that
the uncertainties of freedom are no reason to revert to the enforced
predictability of authoritarian rule. The path ahead may be treacherous, but the
unthinkable alternative is to consign entire peoples to a grim future of
oppression.
Building a rights-respecting state may not be as exhilarating as toppling an
abusive regime. It can be painstaking work to construct effective institutions of
governance, establish independent courts, create professional police units, and elements, including clear prohibitions on torture and arbitrary detention—
abuses that, perhaps not coincidentally, members of the governing Muslim
Brotherhood regularly suffered under the ousted government of former
President Hosni Mubarak. In article 2, it affirms the “principles” of Sharia, a
clause copied from Egypt’s prior constitution, which is broadly understood to
correspond with basic notions of justice, rather than the proposed alternative
“rulings” of Sharia, which would impose strict rules and leave no room for
progressive interpretation.
However, the new document contains dangerous loopholes that could cause
problems down the line. All rights are conditioned on the requirement that they
not undermine “ethics and morals and public order”—elastic caveats that are
found in rights treaties but are susceptible to interpretations that compromise
rights. The principles of Sharia are to be interpreted in consultation with
religious scholars and in accordance with a certain school of Islam, potentially
opening the door to interpretations that run afoul of international human rights
law. The right to freedom of expression is qualified by a proscription against
undefined “insults” to “the individual person” or the Prophet Muhammad.
Freedom of religion is limited to the Abrahamic religions, which would appear to
exclude those who practice other religions, such as the Baha’i, or no religion at
all. Military trials of civilians appear to be allowed for “crimes that harm the
armed forces,” which leaves intact the military’s broad discretion to try civilians.
Gender discrimination is not explicitly prohibited, and the state is asked to
“balance between a women’s obligations toward the family and public work”—a
possible invitation for future restrictions on women’s liberties. A proposed ban
on human trafficking was rejected because some drafters feared it would block
the shipment of Egyptian children to the Persian Gulf for early marriage. And
efforts to exert civilian control over the interests of the military, whether its
impunity, budget, or businesses, appear to have been abandoned.
So for the foreseeable future, rights in Egypt will remain precarious. That would
have been true even if even a less qualified document emerged, since every
constitution requires interpretation and implementation. But it is all the more
risky because of this constitution’s limits on many rights.
Despite these disappointments, it is essential that electoral losers not give up
on democracy. That is a dangerous tactic, premised on the view that Islamists,
once having taken power by electoral victory, can never be trusted to cede it by
electoral loss. When Algeria’s military acted on that rationale by halting
elections that Islamists were poised to win, the result was not democracy but a
decade of civil war with massive loss of life. It is a perspective that undervalues
the potent combination of domestic protest and international pressure that
would coalesce to challenge new attempts to monopolize power. Its proponents
have a high burden to meet before they can convincingly contend that the
prognosis for elected government under an Islamic party is so bleak that a
return to the dark days of the past is warranted.
By the same token, electoral victors must resist the temptation to impose
whatever restrictions on rights a majority of legislators will support. That is
important as a matter of principle: unbridled majority rule is not democracy. It is
important for reasons of pragmatism: today’s electoral victor can be tomorrow’s
loser. And it is important for reasons of compassion: even those unable to
conceive electoral loss should have sufficient empathy to recognize the
defeated as deserving of their own freedom and aspirations.
Defend Women’s Rights
As the Islamist-dominated governments of the Arab Spring take root, perhaps
no issue will define their records more than their treatment of women.
International human rights law prohibits the subordination of people on the
basis of not only race, ethnicity, religion, and political views, but also gender.
That is, it prohibits forcing women to assume a submissive, secondary status,
and similarly rejects a “complementary” role for women as a substitute for
gender equality. As noted, the Egyptian constitution contains troubling
language on this subject, and while Egypt’s Supreme Constitutional Court has
historically interpreted the “principles of Sharia” progressively, many fear that
more conservative interpretations may now prevail.
Some opponents of women’s rights portray them as a Western imposition, at
odds with Muslim religion or Arab culture. But rights do not prevent women from
leading a conservative lifestyle if they choose. Rather, the imposition involved is when national or local authorities—inevitably dominated by men—insist that
women who want equality and autonomy cannot have it. Calling such rights a
Western imposition does nothing to disguise the domestic oppression involved
when women are compelled to assume a subservient role.
The need for vigilance is highlighted by the Middle Eastern government that is
most notorious for subordinating women in the name of Islam: Saudi Arabia.
Once discrimination is entrenched in law, progress becomes extraordinarily
difficult, as demonstrated in 2012 by the kingdom’s grudging progress toward
recognizing women’s rights by allowing (under pressure) two women to compete
on its Olympic team, even though women and girls may not participate in most
sports at home. Saudi Arabia did announce that for the first time, it would allow
women to obtain licenses to practice law and represent clients in court, as well
as the right to work in four new industries, but it did so in the context of a male
guardianship system that forbids women from traveling abroad, studying at
university, seeking a job, operating a business, or undergoing certain medical
procedures without a male guardian’s consent. Strict gender segregation
prevails in all educational institutions and most offices, restaurants, and public
buildings, and women still may not drive.
A small group of Saudi women have made clear in social media that they see
these restrictions as unwelcome impositions by male authorities. The Saudi and
other governments should recognize that a desire for autonomy, fairness, and
equality is shared by many women in all parts of the world—including their own
countries—and that the invocation of culture, tradition, and religion cannot
justify denying them these rights.
Protect Freedom of Speech
Electoral majorities are also tempted to restrict others’ rights when speech is
seen to transgress certain bounds, such as by criticizing government leaders,
disparaging ethnic or racial groups, or offending religious sentiments. Some
restrictions on speech are, of course, justified: for example, speech that incites
violence should be suppressed through the justice system. Hate speech should
also be challenged through rebuttal and education. Politicians especially
should refrain from language that fosters intolerance.
The line between speech that incites violence and speech that is merely controversial
varies with local conditions, such as the degree of risk that speech will
lead people to violence and the ability of the police to prevent a violent turn.
But it is also important to distinguish between those who incite violence, and
those who oppose free speech and use violence to suppress or punish it. And
while international law permits restrictions on speech that incites hatred and
hostility, they must be enshrined in law, strictly necessary for reasons of
national security or public order, and proportionate.
Those who seek to suppress controversial speech typically claim the moral high
ground by suggesting they are guarding cherished values or preventing national
discord. But that is not how such restrictions tend to play out because it is
usually the strong who repress the speech of the weak. When Pakistani
authorities charged a 12-year-old Christian girl with a mental disability with
blasphemy, the values of the Quran that she was (falsely) accused of
desecrating were never in jeopardy, but the girl was a conveniently weak figure
for unscrupulous adherents of the dominant religion to exploit. When
Indonesian officials prosecuted members of the minority Ahmadiyah religious
community for blasphemy, the country’s dominant religion was never at risk, but
a Muslim sect that many Islamic countries declare to be deviant was
persecuted. The same could be said of the Saudi youth facing the death penalty
for apostasy because of a Tweet questioning his own faith.
Governments sometimes justify prosecuting a contentious speaker by arguing
that he or she “provoked” a violent reaction. That is a dangerous concept. It is
easy to imagine governments seeking to suppress dissenters by suggesting they
provoked a violent response from government forces or their allies. Security
forces in Bahrain, for example, attacked and rounded up peaceful activists on
the grounds that they were disturbing public order. Even the early Tahrir Square
demonstrations in Egypt might have been shut down under such a robust
concept of provocation. When people react violently to non-violent speech
because they object to its content, they—not the speaker–are the offender. The
state has a duty to stop their violence, not give them an effective veto over the
speech by censoring it.
Respect Minority Rights: The Case of Burma
The problem of unbridled majority rule is not limited to the Arab world. In the
past year, the most vivid demonstration of the problem could be found in
Burma, a long-entrenched military dictatorship that is giving way at a surprising
pace to at least signs of limited democracy. Many of the outstanding issues
concern the military: Will it give up its constitutionally guaranteed quarter of the
seats in parliament? Will it countenance civilian oversight of its conduct and
business interests? Will it release all political prisoners still languishing in
prison and permit unfettered competition in the 2015 elections? The leading
opposition political party, the National League for Democracy (NLD), headed by
Nobel laureate Aung San Suu Kyi, is understandably preoccupied with these
questions of power and political rights.
But the NLD has been disappointing in its reluctance to look beyond a quest for
power to secure the rights of less popular, more marginal ethnic groups. For
example, it has not pressed the military to curtail, let alone prosecute, war
crimes being committed against the ethnic Kachin population as part of
continuing counterinsurgency operations in the north. Most dramatically, the
NLD has refused to speak out against severe and violent persecution of the
Muslim Rohingya in the west, many of whom are stateless as a result of a
discriminatory nationality law, despite coming from families who have lived in
Burma for generations. Suu Kyi has disappointed an otherwise admiring global
audience by failing to stand up for a minority against whom many Burmese
harbor deep prejudice.
Western sanctions played a key role in convincing the Burmese military that,
without reform, it would never match the economic development of its
Association of Southeast Asian (ASEAN) neighbors (let alone escape economic
dependence on China). However, European nations and the United States
rushed to suspend sanctions and to undertake high-profile visits to Burma
before genuine reforms—including protections for persecuted minorities—were
implemented, losing considerable leverage in the process to protect minority
and other rights.
Bolster Weak States that Lack the Rule of Law:
The Case of Libya
As much as strong states can be dangerous when unrestrained by basic rights
protections, so are weak and disintegrating ones. Paradoxically, the state can
not only be a threat to human rights, but is also a necessity for their realization.
To avoid the plight of Afghanistan or Somalia, the alternative to a repressive
state should be a reformed, not a dismantled, one.
Among the Arab Spring states, Libya best illustrates the problem of a weak
state. No longer plagued by the dictatorship of Muammar Gaddafi and its
repressive grip, Libya suffers foremost from a lack of government—one that is
dedicated to respecting rights and incapable of enforcing them.
That void is partly Gaddafi’s design: he deliberately kept governmental
institutions weak to reduce threats to his reign. But it is also due in part to the
NATO powers’ eagerness, having overthrown Gaddafi, to declare victory and
move on, rather than commit serious effort and resources to the less dramatic
but essential work of institution building.
The problem is particularly acute with respect to the rule of law. The Libyan
government still does not have anywhere near a monopoly on the use of force.
Militias operating autonomously continue to dominate many parts of the
country and in some places commit serious abuses with impunity, such as
widespread torture, occasionally resulting in death. Thousands remain in
detention, including many accused Gaddafi supporters—held sometimes by the
government, sometimes by militias—with little immediate prospect of being
charged, let alone of confronting in court whatever evidence exists against
them. The problem is illustrated by the case of Saif al-Islam Gaddafi, the late
dictator’s son. Libya resists surrendering him to the International Criminal Court
(ICC), promising instead to provide a fair trial itself, but the government cannot
even secure custody of him from the militia that is holding him.
Address the Atrocities in Syria
Syrians do not yet have the luxury of erecting a rights-respecting democracy. At
this writing, opposition forces are fighting the brutal dictatorship of President
Bashar al-Assad, and the world has been at once preoccupied with stopping the
slaughter of civilians by Assad’s forces and ineffective at doing so. Tens of
thousands have been killed. The leading Western countries and several Arab
states imposed sanctions in an effort to curb the government’s atrocities, but
Russia and China have blocked a unified international response with their
multiple vetoes in the United Nations Security Council.
Russia and China deserve blame for their obstructionism, yet other governments
have not put enough pressure on them to make them end their indifference to
countless atrocities. For example, the United Kingdom and France allowed
Rosoboronexport, the principal Russian arms exporter that has been a major
supplier to Syria, to continue to display its wares at sales exhibitions outside
London and Paris. For much of 2012, the US continued to purchase helicopters
from Rosoboronexport for service in Afghanistan.
The UN Security Council’s referral of Syria to the ICC would have provided a
measure of justice for the victims and helped to deter further atrocities. But
even though many Western governments said they supported such action, they
have not exerted the kind of strong, sustained, public pressure that could have
moved Russia and China to allow the referral to go forward in the Security
Council. For example, only in December 2012 did the EU adopt a formal common
position on the matter; at this writing, it was unclear if that would yield a strong
diplomatic effort to build a global coalition in favor of referral. So far,
Switzerland has been left to spearhead such an effort.
The Arab League, for its part, announced various sanctions against Syria but
appeared unable to build a consensus among its member states to implement
them, or even to stop its member Iraq from enabling the transfer of weapons to
Syria from Iran.
The leading powers of the Global South were also disappointingly complacent.
Many have been preoccupied with their belief that NATO went beyond protecting
civilians in Libya to deliver regime change—a belief facilitated by NATO’s refusal to debate its actions. Seemingly determined to avoid this overreach in Syria,
leading members of the UN Security Council from the Global South, such as
Brazil, India, Pakistan, and South Africa, never used their positions to press for
an end to atrocities in that nation. All abstained on at least one of the key
Security Council votes, providing political cover for the Russian and Chinese
vetoes. Rather than also press the world to uphold its responsibility to protect
people facing crimes against humanity, Brazil devoted its energies to promoting
the important but distinct concept of “responsibility while protecting,” which
focuses on the actions and duties of forces assigned the task of protecting.
The experience of Libya shows that, even while armed conflict continues, it is
not too early to work toward a new government that upholds rights. The international
community can start by pressing the Syrian rebels to respect rights
now—to refrain from torturing or executing prisoners, or fomenting sectarian
strife. Yet the principal arms suppliers to the rebels—Qatar and Saudi Arabia—
handed out weapons without any apparent effort to exclude forces that violate
the laws of war.
The international community should be particularly attentive to atrocities and
actions that exacerbate sectarian tensions—the greatest threat of sustained
violence after the Assad government. Rebel groups should be urged to promote
a vision for their country that has a place for all Syrians and to subscribe to and
promote codes of conduct that reinforce their forces’ obligations under the laws
of armed conflict. And when ICC member states press to bring Syria’s atrocities
before the international court, they should remind rebel leaders that the court
would look at atrocities committed by both sides.
Prescriptions for the International Community
The transition from revolution to rights-respecting democracy is foremost a task
for the people of the country undergoing change. But the international
community can and should exert significant influence to ensure its success. Too
often, however, global powers sell their influence short—or settle for less than
they should—because of competing priorities. For example, the US and
European governments, as noted, in their eagerness to wrest Burma from
China’s influence have been tempted to embrace the new government before genuine reforms are adopted. A similar temptation exists for Washington to
downplay domestic threats to rights in Egypt so long as Cairo supports US
policy toward Israel. A more constructive international response would include
the following:
Be principled
Fortunately, we have come a long way since the Western powers abandoned
democracy promotion in the region once Islamists did unexpectedly well in
elections in Egypt and Gaza. This time around, the international reaction to the
victory of Islamic parties has been more principled: accepting their electoral
triumphs while encouraging them to uphold internationally recognized rights.
That is as it should be, since elections are an essential, if insufficient, part of
democracy.
However, Western support for human rights and democracy throughout the
region has been inconsistent. It was easy for the West to support popular
aspirations for reform in the case of governments that were traditionally
adversaries, such as Gaddafi’s Libya and Assad’s Syria. Western support for
protest movements in countries led by friendly autocrats, such as Egypt and
Tunisia, was belated but, in the end, principled. Yet Western support for
democratic change has fallen short when interests in oil, military bases, or
Israel are at stake.
For example, the West gave only lukewarm support to Bahraini protesters facing
killings, detention, and torture amid worries that the US Fifth Fleet naval base in
Bahrain was at risk, and Saudi fears about the emergence of a democracy so
close to its own shores, especially given the Shia majorities in Bahrain and in
Saudi Arabia’s own oil-producing Eastern Province. There has been virtually no
international pressure to reform the other monarchies of the region. At this
writing, the United Arab Emirates held more than 60 peaceful Islamist activists
in arbitrary detention with nary a peep of international protest. There is much
hand-wringing about the dangers to women and minorities from newly elected
Islamists in Egypt and Tunisia, but Saudi Arabia’s institutional oppression of
women and discrimination against religious minorities warrant at most a shrug.
Much is made of Morocco’s modest reforms rather than pressing its monarchy to do more. The message sent is that the West is willing to tolerate Arab
autocrats who support Western interests and will jump on the reform
bandwagon only when it is about to arrive at its destination.
That lack of principle is noticed. The Arab uprisings have created a new
solidarity among the people of the Middle East and North Africa that is more
genuine than the worn rhetoric of Arab nationalism sometimes invoked by the
Mubaraks and Gaddafis of the region. Double standards are sniffed out and
resented, more readily.
Don’t forget justice
New governments must subject officials to the rule of law if they are to break
from the impunity that fueled their predecessors’ abuses. Yet international
support for that effort has been uneven, fueling protests against selective
justice from many repressive governments. And by reducing the certainty of
justice being done, inconsistency undermines its deterrent value.
For example, the UN Security Council accepted an impunity deal for former
Yemeni president Ali Abdullah Saleh. It seemed to lose interest in justice in
Libya once Gaddafi fell, failing to condemn an amnesty for abuses committed by
Libyans in the course of toppling the dictatorship. As the UN General Assembly
prepared to grant Palestine observer-state status, the United Kingdom pressed
Palestinian leaders to promise not to access the ICC, evidently fearful that it
might be used against Israeli settlements on the West Bank or war crimes in
Gaza (even though it might also address Hamas’ rocket attacks on Israeli
civilians).
Elsewhere, the US and the EU provided financial and political backing to the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), a notable
success. But the UN Security Council still has not launched a commission of
inquiry to examine war crimes by Sri Lankan government forces and the
separatist Tamil Tigers that resulted in up to 40,000 civilian deaths in the final
months of the armed conflict in 2008 and 2009. There was little international
concern expressed about the ICC’s sole focus to date on atrocities committed by
forces allied with ousted Côte d’Ivoire President Laurent Gbagbo, which left the impression that the world was ignoring abuses of forces loyal to sitting
President Alassane Ouattara. The US went out of its way to prevent the UN
Security Council from naming Rwanda as the main military supporter of the
abusive M23 rebel movement in eastern Congo, let alone imposing sanctions
against Rwandan officials complicit in the rebel group’s war crimes or
encouraging their prosecution (the way former Liberian president Charles Taylor
was convicted for aiding and abetting rebels in neighboring Sierra Leone).
Western governments (particularly the US) backed President Hamid Karzai’s
efforts to suppress a report by Afghanistan’s independent human rights
commission on past atrocities by warlords, many of whom are now Karzai’s
allies or in his government.
Speak to the people
An important lesson of the Arab Spring is that a mobilized public can be an
agent of positive change. Yet many governments in their foreign policies still
frequently prefer quiet diplomacy and backroom dialogue to the exclusion of
public commentary that all can hear. Social media has proven a powerful new
tool, giving each individual the potential to report repression and mobilize
against it. To enlist this newly empowered public in reform efforts, the international
community must speak to it. Talking privately with governments about
reform has its place, but it is no substitute for engaging the public.
Respect rights yourself
It is difficult to preach what one does not practice, yet the rights records of the
major powers have fallen short in areas of relevance to Arab Spring states,
reducing their influence. The US, for example, remains handicapped in efforts to
bring torturers to justice—a major issue in Egypt, for example—because
President Barack Obama refuses to allow investigation of officials in former
president George W. Bush’s administration who are implicated in torture. The
US government’s failure to prosecute or release most detainees at Guantanamo
hamstrings its ability to oppose detention without trial. And US efforts to rein in
the arbitrary use of deadly force bump up against its deployment of aerial
drones to target individuals abroad without articulating clear limits to their use under the laws of war and law-enforcement standards, and a process beyond
the executive branch’s unilateral determinations to guard against misuse.
The problem is not only the US. No UK official has been held accountable for
helping to send Gaddafi’s opponents to endure torture in Libya, and the UK has
yet to convene a credible inquiry into wider allegations of its complicity in
overseas torture. Europe’s efforts to oppose sectarian tensions are hurt by its
own difficulties securing Roma, immigrant, and minority rights. Its laws on
insulting religion and Holocaust denial undermine its attempts to promote free
speech. Some European states’ restrictions on religious dress that target
women, and on building mosques and minarets impede their promotion of
religious freedom.
Turkey’s ability to serve as a model for blending democracy with an Islamic
governing party, as many people wish, is marred by its persecution of
journalists, continuing restrictions on its Kurdish minority, prolonged imprisonment
of Kurdish political activists, and serious concerns about unfair trials
and the lack of judicial independence.
Similarly, Indonesia, a country often cited as successfully blending democracy
and Islam, has a rights record plagued by discrimination against religious
minorities and impunity for military abuses. Its constitution protects freedom of
religion, but regulations against blasphemy and proselytizing are routinely used
to prosecute atheists, Baha’is, Christians, Shiites, and Ahmadiyah. Some 150
regulations restrict the rights of religious minorities. More than 500 Christian
churches have been closed since President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono took
office in 2004. The government has cracked down on Jemaah Islamiyah, the al
Qaeda affiliate that has bombed hotels, bars, and embassies, but because the
governing coalition includes intolerant Islamist political parties, the government
has not intervened to stop other Islamist militants who regularly commit less
publicized crimes against religious minorities. Meanwhile, there is no civilian
jurisdiction over soldiers who commit serious human rights abuses, leaving
only military tribunals that rarely convene, lack transparency, and often treat
major crimes as mere disciplinary measures.Help springtime wherever it takes root
Russia and China do not pretend to set a democratic example. Rather, they are
preoccupied with preventing the inspiration of the Arab Spring from catching on
at home. Despite their power, the international community should regularly
speak out against their repression, both for the sake of the Russian and Chinese
people, and because these highly visible examples of repression embolden
authoritarian leaders worldwide who seek to resist the same currents in their
own countries.
The Kremlin was clearly alarmed when large numbers of Russians began
protesting in late 2011 against alleged fraud in parliamentary elections and
Vladimir Putin’s decision to seek a new term as president. The protests at the
time sparked hope for change and greater space for free expression, but Putin’s
return to the presidency has sent the country into a steep authoritarian
backslide. The result is a spate of repressive laws and practices designed to
induce fear—to discourage public dissent and continuing protests. Participants
in protests face massive new fines; human rights groups that receive foreign
funding are now required to wear the demonizing label of “foreign agent;”
criminal penalties for defamation have been restored; and the crime of treason
has been amended so broadly that it now could easily be used to ensnare
human rights activists engaged in international advocacy.
As China underwent a highly controlled leadership transition to the presidency
of Xi Jinping, it responded to threats of a “Jasmine Spring” and a growing
dissident movement with its own crackdown. It has paid particular attention to
social media, to which the Chinese people have taken in enormous numbers—
an estimated 80 to 90 percent of China’s 500 million internet users. Beijing’s
notorious “Great Firewall” is of little use to this effort, because the source of
dissident ideas is not foreign websites, but the Chinese people’s own thoughts.
The government is devoting massive resources to preventing discussion of
issues that it deems sensitive, but many people in China have come to excel at
using circumlocutions to evade the censor. That social media users are winning
this cat-and-mouse game is suggested by the government’s need to climb down
from several controversial actions because they had become the subject of
mass critical commentary.
Even China, with its extensive resources, depends on private internet
companies to hold the frontline in censorship efforts. In the Arab world,
governments have used powerful internet surveillance technologies sold by
Western companies to target human rights defenders and suspected dissidents.
The absence of enforceable standards against corporate complicity in such
censorship and surveillance efforts makes them more likely to succeed,
undermining the potential of online technologies to facilitate political reform.
Conclusion
The Arab Spring continues to give rise to hope for an improved human rights
environment in one of the regions of the world that has been most resistant to
democratic change. Yet it also spotlights the tension between majority rule and
respect for rights. It is of enormous importance to the people of the region–and
the world–that this tension be resolved with respect for international standards.
A positive resolution will require acts of great statesmanship among the
region’s new leaders. But it will also require consistent, principled support from
the most influential outsiders. No one pretends it will be easy to get this right.
But no one can doubt the importance of doing so.
The Arab Spring has inspired people the world over, encouraging many to stand
up to their own autocratic rulers. As its leaders act at home, they also set an
example for the world. Much is riding on making this precedent positive—one
that succeeds in building elected governments that live by the constraints of
rights and the rule of law.
Kenneth Roth is the executive director of Human Rights Watch.
The Trouble With Tradition:
When “Values” Trample Over Rights
By Graeme Reid
“Tradition!” proclaims Tevye the milkman, in his foot-stomping opening to the
musical Fiddler on the Roof. “Tradition!”
Tevye’s invocation of the familiar as a buffer against the vagaries of his
hardscrabble life rings true—after all, what is more reassuring, more innocuous,
than the beliefs and practices of the past?
Which is why the resolution passed by the United Nations Human Rights Council
(HRC) in September 2012 seems, at first blush, to be so benign.
Spearheaded by Russia, it calls for “promoting human rights and fundamental
freedoms through a better understanding of traditional values of humankind.” It
warns that traditions cannot be invoked to contravene rights, and even
mentions such bedrock human rights instruments as the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and the 1993 Vienna Declaration, while calling for a survey of
“best practices”—all in the name of “promoting and protecting human rights
and upholding human dignity.”
By the sound of it, the resolution deserves a standing ovation.
But a close look at the context from which this resolution arose reveals that
traditional values are often deployed as an excuse to undermine human rights.
And in declaring that “all cultures and civilizations in their traditions, customs,
religions and beliefs share a common set of values,” the resolution invokes a
single, supposedly agreed-upon value system that steamrolls over diversity,
ignores the dynamic nature of traditional practice and customary laws, and
undermines decades of rights-respecting progress for women and members of
the lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) communities, among others.
In countries around the world, Human Rights Watch has documented how
discriminatory elements of traditions and customs have impeded, rather than
enhanced, people’s social, political, civil, cultural, and economic rights.
In Saudi Arabia, authorities cite cultural norms and religious teachings in
denying women and girls the right to participate in sporting activities—“steps of
the devil” on the path to immorality, as one religious leader called them (Steps
of the Devil, 2012). In the United States in the early 1990s, “traditional values”
was the rallying cry for evangelist Pat Robertson’s “Culture War”—code for
opposition to LGBT and women’s rights that he claimed undermined so-called
family values. Today, it is familiar rhetoric of the US religious right, which has
used the same language to oppose gay marriage and to accuse political
opponents of undermining tradition and “Western civilization.” And in Kenya,
the customary laws of some ethnic communities discriminate against women
when it comes to property ownership and inheritance; while some traditional
leaders have supported transforming these laws, many others defend them as
embodying “tradition” (Double Standards, 2003). As one woman told us, “They
talk about African traditions, but there is no tradition you can speak of—just
double standards.”
International human rights law—including the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women, and the Protocol to the African
Charter of Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa—calls
for customary and traditional practices that violate human rights to be
transformed to remove discriminatory elements.
United Nations treaty monitoring committees, such as the Committee on the
Rights of the Child (CRC) and the Committee Against Torture (CAT), have also
stated that customs and traditions cannot be put forward as a justification for
violating rights. UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in June 2012 told the New
York Human Rights Watch Film Festival, “In all regions of the world, LGBT people
suffer discrimination—at work, at home, at school, in all aspects of daily life….
No custom or tradition, no cultural values or religious beliefs, can justify
depriving a human being of his or her rights.”
But such authoritative statements have done little to dampen growing support
among UN member states for resolutions that support “traditional values.” Not
only did September’s HRC resolution pass easily—with 25 votes for, 15 against,
and 7 abstentions—it was the latest in a series of efforts that Russia has
championed in an effort to formalize an abstract set of universal moral values as a lodestar for human rights. In October 2009, for example, the HRC passed a
resolution calling for the UN high commissioner for human rights to convene an
expert workshop “on how a better understanding of traditional values of
humankind … can contribute to the promotion and protection of human rights.”
And in March 2011, the council adopted a second resolution requesting a study
of how “better understanding and appreciation of traditional values” can
promote and protect these rights.
Tradition need not be out of step with international human rights norms and
standards. For many people living in rural areas, such as parts of sub-Saharan
Africa, traditional values interpreted in customary law may be the only recourse
to any form of justice. Nor is the substance of the HRC resolution all bad. It does
not, for example, necessarily indicate a global consensus (many countries,
including some from the developing world, did not support it), and its text
specifically states that “traditions shall not be invoked to justify practices
contrary to human dignity and that violate international human rights law.”
But unfortunately, such language can seem out of touch with a reality in which
“tradition” is indeed often used to justify discrimination and crackdowns on
rights—especially those of women and members of the LGBT community, among
others—and is easily hijacked by nations determined to flout the rights of
particular groups and to quash broader social, political, and legal freedoms.
In such environments, “tradition” subordinates human rights. It should be the
other way around.
Rights Curtailed, Rights Ignored
There are potentially negative implications for many groups when traditional
values trample on human rights—but they are not always the same.
For women, upon whose shoulders the burden of upholding cultural norms and
values often falls, traditional values can be a tool that curtails their human
rights. Human Rights Watch has shown that such “values” are sometimes used
to justify forced marriages in Afghanistan, virginity testing in Indonesia, “honor
crimes” in Iraq, and marital rape in Kyrgyzstan. In Yemen, the abolition of the
minimum marriage age on religious grounds in 1999 means that girls as young
as eight are married off to much older men, some of whom rape their prepubescent girl brides without legal consequence (How Come You Allow Little
Girls to Get Married?, 2011). In Bangladesh, unlike in neighboring India, even
the most reasonable demands of Hindu women and women’s rights activists—
such as divorce on a few grounds that include cruelty and abandonment—have
been stalled for decades by critics of such moves, who cite “religion” (Will I Get
My Dues … Before I Die?, 2012).
While many representatives in Yemen’s parliament agree that a minimum
marriage age is vital to safeguarding young girls’ rights, they have been held
hostage by a small but powerful group of parliamentarians who oppose any
minimum age restriction on the grounds that it would lead to “spreading of
immorality” and undermine “family values.”
For LGBT people, the traditional values argument may not just be used to limit
human rights, it may be used to entirely negate them. That’s because the
language of traditional values tends to cast homosexuality as a moral issue, and
not a rights issue—as a social blight that must be contained and even
eradicated for the good of public morality.
Public morality narrowly invoked, as the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (ICCPR) recognizes, may provide a legitimate reason to
temporarily restrict some rights. But it should not be a smokescreen for
prejudice or conflated with majority opinion, and it may never be used as an
excuse to violate the covenant’s non-discrimination provisions.
It often is.
In 2008, for example, Human Rights Watch showed how vague and ill-defined
“offenses against public morality” laws are used in Turkey to censor or close
LGBT organizations and to harass and persecute LGBT people (We Need a Law
For Liberation). A year later, the Philippine Commission on Elections invoked
“morality,” “mores,” “good customs,” and “public morals” when it rejected an
LGBT group’s application to register as a political organization. The Supreme
Court of the Philippines rejected this argument in 2010, holding that the
country’s democracy precluded “using the religious or moral views of part of the
community to exclude from consideration the values of other members of the
community.”
Similarly, several former British colonies, including Nigeria and Malaysia, use
moral terms such as “gross indecency” and “carnal knowledge against the order
of nature” in rejecting homosexuality, citing so-called traditional values
embodied in laws that in fact only date to the relatively recent, and otherwise
derided, colonial era. In the 2008 report This Alien Legacy, for example, Human
Rights Watch highlighted the irony of foreign laws being exalted as “citadels of
nationhood and cultural authenticity.” “Homosexuality, they [judges, public
figures, and political leaders] now claim, comes from the colonizing West,” the
report states. “They forget the West brought in the first laws enabling
governments to forbid and repress it.”
In Uganda, Malaysia, Moldova, and Jamaica, where the state rejects LGBT rights,
claims that homosexuality is simply “not in our culture” are ubiquitous. “All
countries are ruled by principles,” Alexandru Corduneanu, the deputy mayor of
Chisinau, said in 2007, after the Moldovan capital city banned a demonstration
by LGBT activists for the third year running. “Moldova is ruled by Christian
principles, and that is why we cannot allow you to go against morality and
Christianity by permitting this parade.”
A Tool of Repression
Traditional values need not be at odds with human rights; indeed, they may
even bolster them.
In Iraqi Kurdistan, for example, where tradition, custom, morality, and Islam
have been invoked to justify continuing female genital mutilation (FGM) from
one generation to the next, the highest Muslim authority issued a fatwa in July
2012, signed by 33 imams and scholars, saying that Islam does not require FGM
(They Took Me and Told Me Nothing, June 2010). Disappointingly, implementation
of the Family Violence Law that went into effect on August 11, 2011, and
includes several provisions to eradicate FGM, has been lackluster.
There has also been some progress in adapting or banning “traditional”
practices that fail to respect human rights. The 2009 Elimination of Violence
Against Women Law in Afghanistan, for example, outlawed baad—the practice
by which disputes are settled in the community by giving up women or girls as
compensation for crimes—although implementation of the law has been poor.
Several countries have also amended their laws related to family—the conduit
of many traditions—to different degrees, illustrating the space for negotiation
and constant change to improve women’s rights rather than place them within a
static framework of unchanging “traditional values.”
Several recent legal cases, including in South Africa, Kenya, and Botswana
(which voted against the HRC resolution), also show that rights-limiting
traditional practices need not hold sway over inclusive, rights-respecting
national law.
In 2008, for example, South Africa’s Constitutional Court found in favor of a
daughter inheriting her father’s chieftaincy—in line with the country’s constitution
and against a male rival’s claim that the Valoyi people’s tradition of male
leadership meant he was the rightful hosi, or chief, of the 70,000-strong group.
In issuing its ruling, the court noted that tradition is never static, and should
adhere to human rights standards laid out in a rights-based constitution.
Kenyan courts ruled in 2005 and 2008 that, despite customary laws of
particular ethnic groups favoring sons for inheritance purposes, daughters must
have an equal right to inherit a father’s property. The courts noted that where
discrimination is at stake, human rights must prevail. Kenya has since amended
its constitution, enshrining women’s equal rights to land and property.
Meanwhile, Botswana’s High Court in October 2012 ruled in favor of four sisters
who had fought a five-year battle with a nephew who claimed rightful ownership
of the family home. The court ruled that the customary law upon which the
nephew based his case contravened constitutional guarantees of equality for
men and women. The attorney general had reportedly agreed that customary
law was discriminatory, but argued that Botswana was not ready to change it.
“Culture changes with time,” the court observed
But such examples are rare.
Too often, “traditional values” are corrupted, serving as a handy tool for
governments in the business of repression. For Russia, which spearheaded the
HRC resolution, the insertion of traditional values into the realm of human rights
comes amid intensifying government repression of civil society and the mediand is part of a concerted effort to roll back the gains made by women and LGBT
people in Russia.
In 2012, St. Petersburg became one of nine Russian regions to date to adopt socalled
homosexual propaganda laws that outlaw creating “distorted
perceptions” about the “social equality of traditional and non-traditional family
relationships.” Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov justified the laws—which
Russia’s Supreme Court upheld in restricted form in October—by arguing that
LGBT human rights were merely an “appendage” to universal values. There is
active debate about introducing similar legislation that cynically links homosexuality
and child abuse, in Moscow and on a federal level.
And in 2010, the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation upheld the
conviction of lesbian activist Irina Fedotova for an administrative offense under
provincial law after she displayed posters near a school in the city of Ryazan,
southeast of Moscow, declaring, “Homosexuality is normal” and “I am proud of
my homosexuality.” The court ruled that the “homosexual propaganda law,”
which the city adopted in 2006, did not interfere with Fedotova’s freedom of
expression, since “traditional understandings of family, motherhood and
childhood” were values necessitating “special protection from the State.”
The UN Human Rights Committee, the international expert body that monitors
implementation of the ICCPR, begged to differ, ruling in November 2012 that the
federation was in violation of the covenant’s freedom of expression provisions.
“[T]he purpose of protecting morals,” the committee stated, “must be based on
principles not deriving exclusively from a single tradition.”
A Comforting Ideal
It’s no coincidence that traditional values—and the related push against LGBT
rights—are finding an eager and broadening international audience at this time.
In some cases there’s a specific context, as in Russia with President Vladimir
Putin’s broader clampdown on civil society and Russia’s efforts to roll back the
mandates of the international human rights machinery while encouraging likeminded
allies to do the same. In sub-Saharan countries, such as Zimbabwe and
Uganda, the devastation of AIDS, economic crisis, and political instability have lawmakers scrambling to pass increasingly repressive legislation against
homosexuality on the grounds that doing so is necessary to protect African
culture and tradition in the face of encroaching foreign values.
More broadly, the current climate of political uncertainty, social upheaval, and
economic crisis in much of the world has enhanced the appeal of the timeless
universal essence that tradition is claimed to embody. In Uganda, as Human
Rights Watch showed in 2012 (Curtailing Criticism), the government’s
clampdown on civil society organizations is in part justified by an appeal to
homophobia, amid increased political tension, escalating public criticism, and
President Yoweri Museveni’s own political ambitions to serve another term after
the 2016 elections.
Blaming one group for the ills befalling society is easy and appealing in the face
of such instability. Gays and lesbians, who often live in secret due to laws and
social prohibitions against homosexuality, are particularly easy targets for the
moral panics that can erupt at a time of social crisis. In Jamaica, gay men in
particular are seen as harbingers of moral decay, leading to public vitriol which
often ends in violence, including a June 2004 mob attack on a man perceived to
be gay in Montego Bay. The mob chased and reportedly “chopped, stabbed and
stoned” him to death with the encouragement of the police (Hated to Death,
2004).
In Zimbabwe, where gays and lesbians frequently find themselves playing the
role of “folk devils,” gay-bashing follows the election cycle all too predictably,
with President Robert Mugabe raising the specter of homosexuality as a way to
deflect attention from the country’s more pressing social, political, and
economic problems. In 1995, as his regional stature was diminishing, Mugabe
unleashed a vitriolic attack on gays, whom he said “offend against the law of
nature and the morals of religious beliefs espoused by our society.” In 2012,
Mulikat Akande-Adeola, the majority leader of Nigeria’s House of
Representatives, was equally unequivocal when she supported a sweeping anti-
LGBT bill when it passed its second reading: “It is alien to our society and
culture and it must not be imported,” she said. “Religion abhors it and our
culture has no place for it.”
Transformation, Not Rejection
The human rights movement is not opposed to the existence of customary law,
religious law, and tradition; it is opposed to those aspects of them that violate
rights.
As a result, the task at hand is one of transformation, not rejection—as reflected
in international human rights law that calls for customary and traditional
practices that violate human rights to develop in order to remove discriminatory
elements. As the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women stipulates, states should “modify” the social and cultural
patterns of conduct of men and women to eliminate “prejudices and customary
and all other practices which are based on the idea of the inferiority or the
superiority of either of the sexes or on stereotyped roles for men and women.”
“Culture changes with time,” Botswana’s High Court stated in its October 2012
ruling in favor of the four sisters battling for their family home in the face of
customary law. And that is precisely the point. Culture does change with time.
Evoking a static and vague concept of “tradition” not only fails to account for
these shifts, it fossilizes society. The risk is that instead of advancing human
rights and basic freedoms, the HRC resolution and its call for a “better
understanding of traditional values” could be used as an excuse to bury rights
under a mound of cultural relativism—threatening to roll back women’s rights
and exclude LGBT people from a human rights framework in the process.
Graeme Reid is director of the LGBT Rights division at Human Rights Watch.
Without Rules:
A Failed Approach to Corporate Accountability
By Chris Albin-Lackey
Some of the most powerful and sophisticated actors on the world stage are
companies, not governments. In 2011 alone, oil and gas behemoth ExxonMobil
generated revenues of US$467 billion—the size of Norway’s entire economy.
Walmart, the world’s third-largest employer with more than 2 million workers,
has a workforce that trails only the militaries of the United States and China in
size.
Many global businesses are run with consideration for the well-being of the
people whose lives they touch. But others—whether through incompetence or
by design—seriously harm the communities around them, their workers, and
even the governments under which they work.
Much of the problem lies with companies themselves—even those that think of
themselves as ethical. Too many still deal with human rights problems on the
fly, without forethought and often in a de facto regulatory vacuum that they
lobby vigorously to maintain. In many parts of the world, company human rights
practices are shaped by self-created policies, voluntary initiatives, and
unenforceable “commitments”—not by binding laws and regulations. History’s
long and growing catalogue of corporate human rights disasters shows how
badly companies can go astray without proper regulation. Yet many companies
fight to keep themselves free of oversight, as though it were an existential
threat.
But the lion’s share of the responsibility to prevent and address company-driven
human rights abuse lies with governments. As companies continue to extend
their global reach, their actions affect the human rights of more and more
people in profoundly important ways. Governments have failed to keep pace.
Most, if not all, countries have laws on the books requiring that companies
adhere to basic human rights standards. Some governments take these responsibilities
more seriously than others, while others are so weak that the task of regulating multinational corporations running vast and highly complex
operations on their soil is hopelessly beyond them.
Governments of countries that are home to the world’s biggest and most
powerful corporations—including the US, European nations, and emerging
powers like Brazil and China—have consistently and inexcusably failed to
scrutinize the actions of their companies when they go abroad. Most
governments fall somewhere in between the extremes; few, if any, do all that
they should.
These combined failures cause real and lasting harm to vulnerable people in
communities all over the world. In 2012, Human Rights Watch showed how
government regulators in India stand idle while out-of-control mining operations
fuel corruption and harm entire communities (Out of Control, 2012). Farmers in
Goa, initially hopeful that mining would improve the local economy, instead
watched as pollution poisoned groundwater and withered their crops. We also
investigated how government regulators in Bangladesh avert their eyes as the
country’s $650 million tannery industry runs roughshod over environmental,
health, and safety laws—poisoning and maiming its workers and spewing
pollutants into nearby communities (Toxic Tanneries, 2012). And in Qatar, we
documented concerns that, unless reforms are undertaken now, the country’s
hugely expensive preparations to host the 2022 World Cup could be marred by
abuses against migrant laborers doing much of the construction on state-of-theart
stadiums, sleek new hotels, and other cup-related projects (Building a Better
World Cup, 2012).
We have nearly reached the paltry limits of what can be achieved with the
current enforcement-free approach to the human rights problems of global
companies. It is time for governments to pull their heads out of the sand, look
the problem they face in the eye, and accept their responsibility to oversee and
regulate company human rights practices.
The Guiding Principles
As year one of the UN-backed Guiding Principles on Business and Human
Rights, 2012 was supposed to mark a huge step forward for efforts to address these problems. But while the Guiding Principles do mark progress in some
areas, they also underscore the failures of the current approach to business and
human rights issues—one that is driven by weak government action and undue
deference to the prerogatives of businesses.
The Guiding Principles were supposed to “operationalize” the UN’s “Protect,
Respect, Remedy” framework, which stresses the responsibility of governments
to protect individuals from human rights abuses tied to business operations,
the responsibility of companies to respect human rights, and the need for
abuse victims to be able to access effective remedies.
The principles mark a real step forward in some ways, not least because they
have secured remarkably strong buy-in from companies that just a decade ago
would have disputed the idea they even have human rights responsibilities. A
potentially useful and practical guide to companies that want to behave
responsibly, they bring us closer than we have ever been to a shared
understanding of how businesses should think about at least some of their core
human rights responsibilities.
The principles also emphasize a crucial point that could prevent many realworld
human rights problems if companies take it up effectively and in good
faith: the importance of human rights due diligence. This is the idea that
companies should design and implement effective policies and procedures to
identify any risk of causing human rights abuse, act to avoid that harm, and
position themselves to respond appropriately to abuses that occur in spite of
those safeguards.
Last year, for example, Human Rights Watch found evidence that Nevsun
Resources, a Canadian mining firm, might be implicated in the use of forced
labor—absolutely prohibited under international law—via a local contractor in
Eritrea (Hear No Evil: Forced Labor and Corporate Responsibility in Eritrea’s
Mining Industry, January 2013). It was a foreseeable problem: Eritrea’s
government mobilizes and exploits forced labor on a massive scale and assigns
some of its conscripts to work for state-affiliated companies, including the one
Nevsun hired. Conscripts are often subjected to appalling conditions—and to
imprisonment and torture if they try to flee from their “jobs.” In this case, Nevsun initially failed to take adequate steps to prevent its contractor from
using forced labor at its project site, and the company’s belated efforts to
investigate and address the allegations have floundered. Other companies
developing mines in Eritrea now seem in danger of falling into the same trap.
This is precisely the sort of situation that human rights due diligence is meant
to help companies avoid.
But the Guiding Principles are no panacea. Human Rights Watch and others
have criticized the principles for setting a lower bar than international human
rights standards in some areas, like ensuring a victim’s right to redress and
accountability. This is especially problematic because many companies now see
the principles—incorrectly—as the world’s definitive, one-stop standard for
good human rights practice. There is a risk that many companies will simply
ignore standards the Guiding Principles do not echo.
Most important, while the principles provide some useful guidance to
businesses interested in behaving responsibly they also represent a woefully
inadequate approach to business and human rights issues. That is because
without any mechanism to ensure compliance or to measure implementation,
they cannot actually require companies to do anything at all. Companies can
reject the principles altogether without consequence—or publicly embrace them
while doing absolutely nothing to put them into practice. The principles do not
explicitly insist that governments regulate companies with the requisite scope
and rigor; they also fail to push governments hard enough to ensure that
companies respect human rights.
For all the progress they represent in some areas, the Guiding Principles may
actually help entrench a dominant paradigm among companies and many
governments, which derides the rules and regulations that companies need in
favor of voluntary and largely unenforceable commitments that simply don’t do
nearly enough to protect human rights.
Voluntary Initiatives and their Shortcomings
The last decade has seen a proliferation of voluntary initiatives that bring
together multinational corporations, civil society actors, and governments to address the human rights concerns of particular global industries. They aim to
provide crucial guidance to companies that want to operate responsibly, while
allowing member companies to cast themselves as responsible and ethical.
For example, the Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights brings
together major oil, mining, and gas companies around standards requiring them
to prevent and address abuses by security forces that protect their operations.
The Global Network Initiative includes companies in the information and
communications technology sector that have pledged to avoid complicity in
censorship or surveillance by repressive governments. There are many others of
varying strength and effectiveness.
These voluntary initiatives have a useful role to play. Human Rights Watch
helped found the two described above, and we regularly work through those
and other voluntary initiatives to try and secure better human rights practice by
companies.
But they are not enough.
Voluntary initiatives all face the same crucial limitations: they are only as strong
as their corporate members choose to make them, and they don’t apply to
companies that don’t want to join. They often do a good job of helping to define
good company human rights practice, but enforceable rules are the only way of
ensuring real, systematic change.
The world’s dearth of binding human rights rules for companies has
consequences. When companies stand in for absentee governments, in
whatever role, things tend to end badly. Decades of failed development efforts
led by oil companies in Nigeria’s oil-rich Niger Delta have proven that point with
brutal eloquence, and it holds equally true in other contexts.
In 2010, we interviewed women who described being gang-raped at the hands
of private security guards employed by Canadian-owned Barrick Gold at a Papua
New Guinea mine (Gold’s Costly Dividend, 2011). Crucial lapses in oversight
meant that Barrick—the world’s largest gold company—did not take the
allegations seriously or do anything to address them until we went into the field
to get the evidence ourselves.
That should have been the government’s job, not ours. But Papua New Guinea’s
government is hobbled by corruption, poverty, and remarkably low institutional
capacity. Instead of overseeing Barrick’s activities, it effectively left the
company to do the job itself. Barrick has since pursued reforms aimed at
preventing future abuse and has promised to compensate victims. But that
doesn’t change the fact that even a sophisticated and well-resourced company
proved unable to bridge the gap left by missing government oversight.
It wasn’t only the government of Papua New Guinea that left Barrick to its own
devices, but also the government of Canada, where Barrick—and indeed most of
the world’s mining and exploration companies—are based. Canada’s
government probably has as much experience overseeing complex mining
operations as any other on earth. Allegations of human rights abuse by
Canadian firms surface regularly in countries around the globe, but authorities
in Ottawa do not know how many of these are credible. In fact, they have
steadfastly refused to give themselves a mandate to find out.
This failure of high-capacity governments to scrutinize the human rights
practices of their own corporate citizens when they operate abroad is a problem
that urgently needs solving.
Need for Extraterritorial Oversight and Regulation
Governments worldwide have consistently failed to oversee or regulate the
extraterritorial human rights practices of their companies. The only way forward
is to change this.
Multinational companies operate all around the world in countries that cannot
or will not provide enough oversight or regulation of their human rights
practices. The trend is only increasing. Weakly governed developing countries
like Papua New Guinea, Bangladesh, Mozambique, and Guinea continue to
welcome massive new foreign investment in industries with an immense
potential for environmental destruction and human rights abuse.
If companies are not going to get meaningful human rights oversight from the
governments of the countries in which they operate, they need to get it
somewhere else. At a minimum, governments should take it upon themselves to proactively monitor the conduct of their companies when they work in other
countries and to investigate credible allegations of human rights abuse linked
to those operations.
Doing so would still leave hard questions on the table—like how governments
should articulate and enforce extraterritorial human rights obligations for
companies. But it would at least end an indefensible status quo where
governments refuse to find out whether their corporate citizens are credibly
implicated in serious human rights abuses abroad.
Beyond this, Human Rights Watch and others have argued that governments
should regulate the human rights practices of their businesses, including by
requiring them to carry out human rights due diligence activity and fulfill their
human rights responsibilities under international law. Not only is this
responsible policy, but it is supported by emerging norms of international law.
In 2011, a meeting of international and human rights law experts adopted the
Maastricht Principles on Extraterritorial Obligations of States in the area of
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. Among other things the Maastricht
Principles describe the obligation of states to regulate non-state actors such as
transnational corporations and other business enterprises that are domiciled or
closely linked in other ways to their territories.
The path from here to there is reasonably clear. The real question is whether
governments will find the courage to take steps in the right direction, and
whether businesses will stand in their way or act as partners. So far, both have
disappointed, and vulnerable people have suffered as a result.
Red Herrings
Companies have their reasons for opposing extraterritorial human rights
oversight or regulation by home governments, but they don’t stand up well to
scrutiny.
One of the most common arguments is that such oversight would put them at a
competitive disadvantage against unscrupulous firms from countries with less
progressive governments. But frankly, companies should not invest in markets where they cannot effectively compete without being complicit in serious
human rights abuses that they need to hide from their own governments and
shareholders.
Plus, there is ample reason to think these concerns are overblown. In recent
years, governments around the world have passed increasingly tough laws that
criminalize overseas corruption by their citizens and companies. Corruption is
far trickier for businesses to stay clear of than complicity in serious human
rights abuses. Yet while tougher anti-corruption laws may have made
companies more honest, there is no real evidence they have made them less
competitive.
The only legitimate fear companies have about responsible, measured steps in
the direction of extraterritorial oversight and regulation is that “responsible”
and “measured” might in some cases be code for “extreme” and “antibusiness.”
Some worry that opening the door even a crack would lead to stifling
overregulation and the criminalization of honest, understandable mistakes.
Compounding this is suspicion among some business leaders that nongovernmental
advocates of oversight and regulation are inherently hostile toward their
industries. And those fears are somewhat understandable—while many
nongovernmental organizations are pushing for reasonable rules, there are also
activists who probably would like nothing better than to see the mining
industry, for instance, crushed by excessive regulation.
But those voices shouldn’t dictate the terms of this discussion or be used as an
excuse to avoid having it.
Companies may never end up liking the kind of oversight and regulation that
they need, and they may be correct in calculating that it is not in their narrow
self-interest to see it come about. But extraterritorial oversight and regulation of
company human rights practices can be done in a way that businesses can live
with and profit under. Government action need not be unduly burdensome in
order to be effective, and there is far too much avoidable human suffering on
the other side of the scale to justify inaction.
First Steps and Useful Models
We already have at least some useful models that show us what responsible,
measured government action on these issues ought to look like.
Under section 1504 of the Dodd-Frank financial overhaul bill, all US-listed oil,
mining, and gas companies will be required to publish the payments they make
to foreign governments. This essentially makes mandatory the core requirement
of a multi-stakeholder initiative called the Extractive Industry Transparency
Initiative (EITI).
EITI was born of an understanding that the vast revenues extractive industries
produce have often fueled corruption and abuse rather than development and
progress. EITI tries to combat this by promoting greater transparency. Section
1504 is a modest but potentially transformative step in the right direction.
Incredibly a powerful coalition of industry groups led by the American Petroleum
Institute has sued to gut the rules that would put the law into force. They are
effectively demanding the right to keep the public and even their own
shareholders in the dark about their payments to foreign governments. Industry
groups have also sued to obstruct implementation of another key component of
Dodd-Frank—a provision that would require companies to ensure that their
mineral supply chains do not fuel conflict and abuse in the Democratic Republic
of Congo.
In spite of all the acrimony (or perhaps underlying it), Dodd-Frank’s
transparency requirement speaks to a controversial but important truth: most of
what has been achieved through the hodgepodge of voluntary initiatives that
dominate the global business and human rights landscape could be done more
effectively and even-handedly via binding laws and regulations.
The core requirements of many voluntary initiatives could be translated into
relatively straightforward regulatory mandates. As models for regulation, those
standards have the advantage of having already been accepted as legitimate
benchmarks for corporate behavior by leading global companies. Their
implementation has also been proved feasible and useful for the many
companies who have taken them up voluntarily. Of course, most companies fiercely oppose the idea that their voluntary human rights commitments should
be transformed into the basis for binding human rights regulation.
But that doesn’t mean it wouldn’t work.
Similarly, as Human Rights Watch has argued, human rights due diligence
would be a stronger tool if governments make it mandatory. The US government
recently took a narrow but positive step in this direction, requiring companies
that invest in Burma to publicly report any due diligence activities they
undertake on a variety of issues including human rights and to report to it any
human rights risks, impacts, and mitigation efforts the company identifies.
Yet another useful model for government action in this area lies in international
efforts to combat corruption. A steadily growing number of governments have
moved to criminalize bribery of foreign public officials, no matter where in the
world it occurs. In fact, the UN Convention against Corruption and the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s (OECD) Anti-Bribery
Convention both require this. Companies have responded to tough anti-bribery
laws by implementing rigorous due diligence programs that are not altogether
different from the human rights due diligence activity that the Guiding
Principles promote.
Governments should also look at how they can push companies towards better
human rights practices through existing multilateral institutions, which should
in turn examine how they can better help the governments they lend to address
these issues. For instance, governments could work through the World Bank’s
International Finance Corporation (IFC) to better tie the international financing
that private companies receive to robust human rights safeguards and require
independent monitoring of company compliance.
This would not only help push IFC-funded projects towards better human rights
performance, it would likely influence other lenders too. In 2012, the IFC began
implementing new performance standards that go some way toward considering
human rights in international financing—a small but important step.
Other existing institutions could also be made stronger and more useful. The
OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises set out baseline standards for corporate performance in human rights, environmental protection, and a range
of other issues. They also call on member countries to establish “contact
points”—forums that are able to hear complaints regarding the overseas
activities of companies. However, these contact points are generally quite weak
and strictly non-adjudicatory. In 2012, Denmark revamped its contact point to
allow it to undertake proactive, independent investigations of companies—a
real step forward.
Finally, governments should examine the positive precedents that international
labor standards set regarding private, transnational employment agencies. As
our research in countries such as Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates has
documented, many migrant workers suffer serious abuses after being placed in
overseas employment by these agencies and many are deliberately misled
about the conditions they can expect in their new jobs.
Governments that have ratified International Labour Organization (ILO)
Convention 181 must take measures to protect and prevent abuse of migrant
workers recruited for work abroad by private employment agencies based on
their own soil. That convention also calls for penalties for agencies that engage
in abuses or fraudulent practices. ILO Convention 189 on Domestic Workers sets
out similar obligations for private employment agencies recruiting domestic
workers, including those migrating for overseas employment.
***
Ultimately what’s needed is a workable balance that reduces serious human
rights abuses while acknowledging the reality of a complex world where
companies do not always have full control over the local environments in which
they operate.
Getting there will require something from all sides.
Governments need to find the courage to make respect for human rights by
powerful corporations mandatory wherever they operate, rather than treating it
as just a nice idea. Human rights activists should help design workable
regulatory frameworks that are fair to companies. And businesses should
welcome, rather than reject, efforts to provide them with the kind of rules and oversight they need to be responsible actors who respect the fundamental
human rights of the people they impact.
Chris Albin-Lackey is a senior researcher in the Business and Human Rights
division at Human Rights Watch.
Lives in the Balance:
The Human Cost of Environmental Neglect
By Juliane Kippenberg and Jane Cohen
Every year, environmental crises affect millions of people around the world
causing sickness and decimating lives and livelihoods.
When environmental degradation garners international attention its impact is
often framed in terms of harm to nature. But another, often overlooked, way to
understand a toxic spill or a mining disaster is in terms of its impact on human
rights—not least the right to life, to health, and to safe food and water.
In 2011, in Henan province, eastern China, for example, rivers ran blood-red
from pollution, and thick smoke choked the air around the lead smelters and
battery factories that power the local economy—a deeply worrying situation in
terms of environmental pollution. But as the Human Rights Watch 2011 report
My Children Have Been Poisoned showed, Henan’s health and environmental
crisis has also led to human rights violations that have robbed citizens of a host
of internationally recognized rights—such as those to health and to protest
peacefully—and have jeopardized the physical and intellectual development of
thousands of children.
Unfortunately, in practice, governments and international agencies do not often
enough analyze environmental issues through the prism of human rights or
address them together in laws or institutions. But they should, and they should
do so without fear that doing so will compromise efforts to achieve sustainability
and environmental protection.
Indeed, rather than undermine these important goals, a human rights
perspective brings an important and complementary principle to the fore—
namely that governments must be accountable for their actions. And it provides
advocacy tools for those affected by environmental degradation to carve out
space to be heard, meaningfully participate in public debate on environmental
problems, and where necessary, use independent courts to achieve accountability
and redress. As the old legal maxim goes, there can be no right without a
remedy.
Regional human rights instruments—such as the Additional Protocol to the
American Convention on Human Rights in the Area of Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights, and its
Additional Protocol on the Rights of Women—recognize a right to a healthy
environment (or a “general satisfactory” environment in the case of the African
Charter, adopted in 1981). And it has been over two decades since the United
Nations General Assembly in a resolution recognized that all individuals are
entitled to live in an environment adequate for their health and well-being.
In a 2001 groundbreaking ruling, the African Commission on Human and
Peoples’ Rights demonstrated that regional accountability for violations of
human rights, including the right to a healthy environment, was possible. The
commission found that, through a consortium with Shell Petroleum
Development Corporation, the former military government in Nigeria had caused
environmental damage to the Ogoni People in the Niger Delta region, in
violation of the right protected by African Charter. The commission found that
the government had not taken the necessary steps to protect the Ogoni
population from harms done by the oil production and had not “provided nor
permitted studies of potential or actual environmental and health risks caused
by oil operations in Ogoni Communities.” Strikingly, the commission also found
that the right to life had been violated by the level of “humanly unacceptable”
pollution and environmental degradation that had destroyed the lands and
farms upon which the Ogonis‘ survival depended.
Yet despite such decisions, there is still insufficient human rights accountability
for environmental issues, as illustrated by the scope of environmental harm that
occurs globally without apparent redress. The international human rights
community needs to help strengthen both the content and framework for the
right to a healthy environment, and to institutionalize the link between human
rights and the environment. Such steps would include developing accountability
mechanisms that could offer an effective remedy for the millions of people
impacted by environmental crises.
The Right to Life and to Health
Under international human rights law, governments have numerous obligations
to protect their citizens’ right to life and to health. The Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, the International Covenant on Economic and Social and Cultural
Rights (ICESCR), and the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) all
establish the right to the highest attainable standard of health. Under the
ICESCR, the right to health includes an obligation to improve environmental
health, to protect citizens from environmental health hazards, to guarantee
healthy working conditions, and to protect the right to safe food and safe water.
Yet, many governments regularly fail to protect and uphold these commitments.
Human Rights Watch has documented the devastating impact of such neglect by
authorities in many parts of the world.In the state of Zamfara, northern Nigeria,
for example, over 400 children have died of lead poisoning since 2010—one of
the worst recorded outbreaks in history—due to exposure to lead-contaminated
dust produced during small-scale gold mining. Nigeria’s government has
dragged its feet in the face of this unprecedented disaster, despite many signs
of an impending crisis. In the short film A Heavy Price (2012), Human Rights
Watch documented how children continue to live and play in contaminated
homes and face exposure to lead at life-threatening levels that can cause lifelong
disabilities, if not death.
Unfortunately, Nigeria is not a unique case: governments often respond to
environmental problems with denial, or offer weak and disjointed responses
that fail to clean up environmental damage, impose or enforce regulations, or
prevent and treat resulting health conditions.
The Right to Know, Protest, and Seek Justice
International law also obligates governments to guarantee people’s right to
know, participate in political processes, peacefully protest, and seek justice.
These rights, enshrined in the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights (ICCPR), ensure that citizens can actively and meaningfully participate in
decisions that affect their lives.
In practice, governments frequently fail to inform citizens about the most basic
facts regarding environmental health, violating their right to information. In
Japan, for example, the government failed to provide residents of Fukushima
with basic information about the level of radiation in their food and
environment after the prefecture’s March 2011 nuclear disaster, leaving local
newspapers, as one local doctor told Human Rights Watch, “to accept whatever
the prefecture says on faith.”
Even in countries that have elaborate safeguards to ensure transparency and
participation of affected populations, the reality is often bleak. In many
countries, governments not only fail to provide information to their citizens,
they also clamp down on those who demand transparency and official
remedies. Human Rights Watch has documented a range of government actions
against those who protest—and even those who merely seek information—
including threats, arrests, imprisonment, and even murder.
Our 2010 research in four Chinese provinces, for example, found that the
government detained people protesting lead pollution from factories, and even
parents seeking medical treatment for their poisoned children (My Children
Have Been Poisoned). In the Philippines, Human Rights Watch has documented
the murder of three environmental activists since October 2011: the men had
vocally opposed mining and energy operations that they said threatened the
environment and would displace local communities in Bukidnon and North
Cotabato provinces from their land. No one has been punished, and evidence
points to the involvement of paramilitary forces under military control. And in
Kenya—which in 2010 included the right to a healthy environment in its constitution—
Human Rights Watch has been working with an environmental activist
who has repeatedly faced threats and arrest for seeking information and redress
from a local factory that has polluted the air and water near the city of
Mombasa.
Regulating Business
Businesses are at the heart of environmental problems today. Whether multinational
corporations or small, local operations, they have a responsibility to
ensure that their operations do not cause or contribute to human rights violations, as reflected in the United Nations Guiding Principles on Business
and Human Rights. It is a responsibility they frequently fail to fulfill (see also
“Without Rules: A Failed Approach to Corporate Accountability” in this volume).
For example, the Porgera mine of Barrick Gold in Papua New Guinea dumps
14,000 tons of liquid mining waste daily into a nearby river, causing potential
environmental and ill-health to local communities (Gold’s Costly Dividend,
2011). In Bangladesh’s capital Dhaka, around 150 tanneries expose local
residents to untreated effluent that contains chromium, sulphur, ammonium,
and other chemicals that cause skin diseases, rashes, and diarrhea, among
other health problems (Toxic Tanneries, 2012).
Companies, including foreign investors, international buyers, and retailers, have
a responsibility to ensure that they are not contributing to human rights abuses,
either directly or indirectly. The store that sells a belt made from leather tanned
and cured in acid-filled pits in Dhaka should have due diligence procedures in
place to ensure it does not indirectly contribute to rights abuses; so should
international buyers to ensure their suppliers are not violating health and safety
laws or poisoning the environment. And governments should ensure they
adequately regulate the private sector—something they are often reluctant to do
because environmental regulations interfere with private sector interests and
are seen as burdening economic development and growth.
For example, in October 2010, Canada’s House of Commons voted down a bill
that would have allowed the government to monitor the environmental and
human rights impacts of Canadian extractive industries operating globally. In
doing so, an important opportunity was lost: Canada is home to most of the
world’s mining and exploration companies. The industry accounted for 21
percent of Canadian exports in 2010 and derived about US$36 billion dollars
from its mining practices that year.
In Bangladesh, where tanneries contaminate air, water, and soil, our research
found that the government has failed to enforce environmental or labor laws,
and for a decade has ignored a court ruling ordering the government to ensure
that the tanneries install adequate waste treatment systems. A government official told Human Rights Watch that the tannery sector is not properly
regulated because “tannery owners are very rich and politically powerful.”
And in India, for example, a 2012 Human Rights Watch investigation in the
southern states of Goa and Karnataka (Out of Control) found that the
supposedly independent and accurate environmental impact assessments of
potential mining projects are often flawed and commissioned by the same,
largely domestic, mining companies that seek permission from the Indian
government to operate.
Corruption also sometimes undermines environmental regulations and
safeguards. In Indonesia, Human Rights Watch has shown how blatant
corruption has undermined environmental policies on logging (Wild Money,
2009); as a result, much of Indonesian timber has been logged illegally,
violating policies intended to protect local communities and the environment.
The Hardest Hit
Environmental degradation often disproportionately impacts vulnerable and
discriminated against populations—including poor rural populations, displaced
people, women, ethnic minorities, and indigenous people—which rarely have
access or political clout to be able to critique governments or hold them to
account.
Indigenous peoples are particularly susceptible to serious rights violations
when governments or multinational corporations clear their land and
ecosystems in the name of “economic development.” According to the UN
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, indigenous peoples can only
be relocated with their free, prior, and informed consent, after agreement on
just and fair compensation of land, property, and livelihood. Yet as Human
Rights Watch has shown, this is often not the case.
In Ethiopia, for example, Human Rights Watch research in 2011 found that
indigenous people are being forcibly removed from the Omo Valley, which
provides their primary source of livelihood, to make way for large-scale
commercial sugar plantations. The government has used harassment, violence,
and arbitrary arrests to impose its plans, leaving members of local indigenous groups, including one man from the Mursi tribe, to wonder, “[w]hat will happen
if hunger comes” when the river has dried and land has been seized? (What Will
Happen If Hunger Comes? 2012)
Another group vulnerable to the effects of environmental pollution is children—
even though protecting child health is a core obligation in international law.
Toxic chemicals have particularly harmful consequences for children, whose
developing bodies absorb them more easily than those of adults, leading in
some cases to irreversible long-term damage, disability, or even death.
Children from poor, disadvantaged, or marginalized backgrounds can be particularly
at risk as their communities lack political influence and information. For
example, Human Rights Watch research on child labor in artisanal gold mining
in Mail—an industry that involves an estimated 15 million artisanal gold miners
globally—has found that children’s exposure to mercury, a toxic metal, has
hardly been addressed on national or global levels (A Poisonous Mix, 2011).
Human Rights Watch has also documented how children and adults from the
marginalized Roma minority, who were displaced after the 1999 war in Kosovo,
were housed for years in a lead-contaminated displaced camps in northern
Kosovo (Kosovo: Poisoned by Lead, 2009). Children were particularly vulnerable
to lead poisoning. The UN—the effective civil authority at the time—knew about
the contamination, but failed to move them to a safer location for over five
years. It lacked a comprehensive health plan and stopped treatment for children
without any medical reason.
Children in wealthy countries are also not immune to the impacts of a toxic
environment. In the United States agriculture industry, child laborers—many
from migrant families—work in or near fields that are regularly sprayed with
pesticides. Yet the US government has failed to outlaw hazardous child labor in
agriculture, prioritizing the interests of agribusiness over stricter regulations on
pesticide exposure for children (Fields of Peril, 2010).
Global Challenges and Opportunities
The government response to environmental degradation is often weak and
disconnected, and oblivious to the critical impact that climate change,
pollution, and other environmental problems have on human rights.
In June 2012, the Rio+20 Summit brought together more than 100 heads of state
or government and 45,000 people in the biggest UN conference to date.
However, the scale of the gathering far exceeded its efficacy. World leaders
missed the chance to bridge the false divide between development and environmental
protection and almost completely whittled down rights language in the
final document, “The Future We Want.”
International laws and regulations are important tools for protecting the
environment, but they tend to focus on technical aspects of regulation,
emissions, and processes, and—like the 2004 Stockholm Convention on
Persistent Organic Pollutants—often fail to comprehensively address the health
and human rights impact of environmental degradation, if they address them at
all.
And while international financial institutions aim to promote development, their
actions sometimes violate human rights and result in further environmental
degradation. The World Bank’s safeguard policies, which are designed to
prevent social and environmental harm in its projects, require governments to
analyze the environmental impact of certain projects but do not require a
comprehensive analysis of human rights impacts. The bank’s review and update
of these policies is an important opportunity to remedy this major shortfall.
But the news is not all bad.
Environmental NGOs, other civil society groups, and affected communities have
scored some notable successes in their efforts to push for accountability. In
Burma, open protest by civil society groups against the potentially devastating
consequences of the Myitsone Dam project on the Irawaddy River prompted the
Burmese government in 2011 to suspend its plans for what would have been the
one of the world’s largest hydroelectric power stations.
And in 2012, the UN Human Rights Council (HRC) appointed its first
independent expert on human rights obligations relating to the enjoyment of a
safe, clean, healthy, and sustainable environment. One of the expert’s most
important tasks will be to help define the content of the human right to a
healthy environment, and to seek broad buy-in and support for ensuring full
respect, protection, and fulfillment of this right.
Another positive move is the November 2012 road map by Latin American
governments towards a regional treaty on rights of access to environmental
information, participation, and justice. Such an instrument already exists in
Europe: many European and Central Asian governments have ratified the 2001
Aarhus Convention on access to information, public participation, and access to
justice in environmental matters, which is the first of its kind to codify these
civil rights in relation to the environment.
There are also some future opportunities for pressing a human rights approach
when it comes to environmental issues—including negotiations for the global
mercury treaty.
Human Rights Watch has participated in these negotiations, in Kenya in 2011
and Uruguay in 2012, as well in regional meetings in Latin America and Africa.
Throughout our advocacy we have urged a stronger focus on human rights, in
particular the right to health and protection from hazardous child labor. During
negotiations in Uruguay, governments agreed to include special measures in the
treaty for children affected by mercury in artisanal gold mining. It was also
agreed that governments must devise health strategies on mercury for affected
artisanal mining communities. While the treaty still lacks references to human
rights and a strong overall health strategy on mercury, the specific measures on
gold mining are a step in the right direction.
What Next?
Even when governments do enforce environmental regulations and safeguards,
they often disregard the harmful impact of environmental problems on human
rights, and the disproportionate impact on vulnerable and marginalized
populations.
What is lacking is a broader framework that analyzes human rights impacts and
protects the right to health, food, water, and livelihoods—core economic
rights—as well as civil and political rights, such as the rights to information,
participation, free expression, and remedy for all citizens. When governments
are not held accountable, they are less likely to remediate contaminated sites
and ensure full access to justice to those whose rights have been violated.
Strong systems of accountability—in which governments, international financial
institutions, businesses, and other private actors must account for their actions
using the principles of transparency and full information, participation, and free
expression—are needed to address the human rights impact of environmental
damage. And there needs to be rigorous regulation processes, including
government oversight, to prevent environmentally damaging projects from
operating in the first place. When harm is done, those responsible must account
for their actions, remediate the situation, and face justice.
The HRC, and those governments which have not done so yet, should recognize
the right to a healthy environment as a freestanding right, which would help to
strengthen accountability and understanding of the consequences for human
rights of environmental damage. International treaties on the environment and
universally agreed development goals should be grounded in international
human rights law and monitored on the international and national level.
Cooperation between the environmental and the human rights movements will
be crucial to help advance these goals. For it is only by working together—
locally and globally—that true progress can be made in standing up to those
who damage the environment, cause harm to others, and violate fundamental
human rights.
Juliane Kippenberg is a senior researcher in the Children’s Rights division;
and Jane Cohen is a researcher in the Health and Human Rights division at
Human Rights Watch.
PHOTO ESSAYS
The photo essays that follow focus on the experiences of
what appear to be three very different groups of people—
migrants and asylum seekers in Greece, people with
disabilities in Russia, and adults and children living in, and
working around, gold mines in Nigeria’s Zamfara State. Yet all
suffer from lack of legal protections and from a range of
abuses that impact their health, their full participation in
society, and other fundamental human rights.
A HEAVY PRICE
LEAD POISONING
AND GOLD MINING
IN NIGERIA’S
ZAMFARA STATE
BY MARCUS BLEASDALE/VII
FOR HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
Since 2010, ongoing, widespread, acute lead
poisoning has killed at least 400 children in
Nigeria’s Zamfara State. The lead poisoning is a
result of artisanal gold mining: small scale mining
with rudimentary tools. It is considered the worst
outbreak of lead poisoning in modern history, with
more than 3,500 children requiring urgent, lifesaving
treatment. Fewer than half are receiving it.
Zamfara has significant gold deposits of gold.
Miners crush and grind ore to extract gold, and in
the process release dust that is highly contaminated
with lead. Children in affected areas are exposed to
this dust when they work in the processing site,
when their relatives return home covered with the
dust, and when the processing occurs at home.
Children are also exposed to toxic lead in contaminated
water and food sources.
A child works in the processing site at a gold mine in
Bagega, Nigeria. Seven villages in the Zamfara region have
been cleaned, but Bagega is still highly contaminated.
Amina Murtala, a Bagega resident, told
Human Rights Watch that three of her six
children died from lead poisoning. Lead
levels were measured at 23,000 parts per
million in Amina’s family compound. A safe
level is under 400 parts per million.
A mine worker crushes rocks in a flour
grinder in the process of extracting
gold. The dust is highly toxic and many
adults suffer the effects of lead
poisoning, ranging from swelling,
dizziness and vomiting to organ failure,
infertility, and death.
Children work in the processing site at a gold mine
in Bagega.
A man holds a piece of gold mined
and processed in Zamfara State.
BREAKING BARRIERS
THE DISABILITY RIGHTS
MOVEMENT IN RUSSIA
BY PLATON FOR HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
Although people with disabilities in Russia have seen improvements
since the end of the Soviet era, they remain largely cut-off from
society. Public attitudes and a lack of legal protections create barriers
to equality that prevent them from fully participating in public life.
Human rights advocates hope that Russia’s ratification of the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) in May
2012 will hasten the end of widespread discrimination against 13
million Russian citizens with mental and physical disabilities. The
2014 Sochi Olympics will certainly be a major test, as Russia will host a
large number of people with disabilities as guests of the winter games
and the subsequent Paralympics.
Yulia Simonova
Yulia is a co-program director of the
inclusive education program at
Perspektiva, Russia's leading
disability capacity-building and
advocacy organization, holding
training sessions on disability
issues; inclusive education
workshops for teachers, parents
and activists; and disabilities
awareness classes for schoolchildren.
Yulia has taught 1,000
young people to be trainers on
disability issues for Russian
schools. She swims, rides
horseback, and loves driving.
Vanya (Ivan) Alexeev
Vanya’s mother is an active member of the Parents’ Group at
Perspektiva. Since early childhood, Vanya has taken part in many
public actions organized by Perspektiva to support people with
disabilities. Vanya has read all of the Harry Potter books and hopes
to write a sequel someday. He loves to play with his younger brother
and sister.
Yulia Averyanova
For two years, Yulia ran Perspektiva’s sports programs and now
remains a consultant with the organization. Yulia enjoys skiing,
ice-skating, and paragliding. She recently introduced a blind
friend of hers to the delight of downhill skiing.
Alexei Krykin
Alexei is an active participant in
Best Buddies Russia, a volunteer
movement that creates one-to-one
friendships for persons with
intellectual and developmental
disabilities. Together with his buddy
Ruslan, a university student, he
goes out to the movies, theater, and
soccer games. Alexei is active in the
“Theater of the Naïve,” an acting
program engaging people with
disabilities, and in an artisan
workshop making all sorts of arts
and crafts, including ceramics. He
plays the flute, enjoys listening to
music, and likes table tennis.
Vera Kocheshkova
and her mother Tatiana
In 2011, Vera graduated from a high
school for children with disabilities.
She is also active in Best Buddies
Russia. She enjoys helping her
mother around the house; they are
best friends. “A daughter’s smile
makes a happy mother,” says
Tatiana. “Nothing is more important
in life.”
GREECE
HATE ON
THE STREETS
BY ZALMAÏ
FOR HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
Greece prides itself on its hospitality.
But while tourists are welcome, the country
has become decidedly inhospitable for
many foreigners over the past decade.
Migrants and asylum seekers may be
subject to detention in inhuman and
degrading conditions, risk destitution, and
suffer xenophobic violence at the hands of
gangs of Greeks who attack them in central
Athens and elsewhere in the country with
frightening regularity. Human Rights Watch
found that despite clear patterns to the
violence, and evidence that it is increasing
amid deep economic crisis and after years
of mismanaged migration and asylum
policies, the police have failed to respond
effectively to protect victims and hold
perpetrators to account.
Dozens of migrants and asylum seekers line up for a meal at
a soup kitchen on Sofokleous Street in central Athens.
I went to the police station two days later.... The
only thing they asked me is where are you from,
what happened....They told me, ‘Ok if we find
[them], we will call you, we will try.’ They didn’t
give me anything.
Ali Mohammadi, a 25-year-old Afghan asylum seeker,
said a police officer asked him why he had not
fought back when he filed a complaint after a group
of men attacked him in March 2011 in Aghios
Panteleimonas square in Athens.
Every time they pass here this
happens. Three days ago, they
came and were hitting the door
with their legs.… Today they broke
the window and the door. At first
they threw bottles and then they
broke the glass with stones and
threw stones inside and then they
started kicking the door…. They
wear black clothes and … hoods.
Razia Sharife, an Afghan asylum
seeker, stands in front of her home,
located in the Aghios Panteleimonas
neighborhood of Athens. Sharife’s
home was attacked numerous times,
including four times in January 2012
and once in April 2012.
They asked me first, ‘Where are you
from?’ I said, ‘Somalia.’ When I
answered they tried to take my
daughter away.... They hit me on my
head with a wooden stick.... I fell down
bleeding. When I fell down and they
saw I was bleeding they ran away.
My daughter was crying. All the people
[around at the time of the attack] they
were watching but nobody helped me.
I didn’t go to the hospital.... It didn’t
matter if I was hurt. I just thought
about the baby and my daughter.
Mina Ahmad, a 20-year-old Somali
woman, was attacked by a group of men
near the Aghios Panteleimonas church
in Athens in October 2011. She was with
her infant daughter and was six-months
pregnant at the time.
Angola
Angola held general elections on August 31, 2012, reaffirming the ruling Popular
Movement for the Liberation of Angola (Movimento Popular de Libertação de
Angola, MPLA) party’s position in power and for the first time awarding incumbent
José Eduardo dos Santos, in power for 33 years, the presidency through a
vote.
The MPLA, which has ruled Angola since 1975, secured the two-thirds majority in
parliament—175 out of 220 seats—sufficient to amend the constitution without
opposition support. Forty percent of eligible voters did not vote. The constitutional
court rejected fraud complaints from three opposition parties for lack of
evidence. The main opposition party, National Union for the Total Independence
of Angola (União Nacional para a Independência Total de Angola, UNITA), filed
an additional complaint at the constitutional court challenging the constitutionality
of acts by the national electoral commission (NCE) during the preparations
of the elections. At this writing, the complaint remained pending.
The elections were generally peaceful during the campaign and on polling day,
yet fell short of international and regional standards. The playing field for political
parties was uneven, with unequal access to state resources; the media was
overwhelmingly dominated by the MPLA and the elections oversight body sided
with the ruling party by not taking any action when the ruling party violated
electoral laws. As during the last national elections in 2008, independent
observation of the elections was seriously hampered by massive delays and
restrictions in the accreditation of domestic and international observers and
international journalists.
The elections took place in a more restricted environment for the media, free
expression and peaceful assembly than in 2008. Numerous incidents of violence
by apparent police in plain clothes against peaceful protesters and
activists in the months before the elections contributed to a climate of fear.
Elections
The CNE, despite a more balanced composition than in 2008, was not able or
willing to fulfill its role as an impartial oversight body. The CNE failed to address
major violations of electoral laws, including unequal access of parties to the
public media and ruling party abuse of state resources and facilities. Moreover,
the CNE hampered independent observation through the massively delayed,
restrictive, and selective accreditation of domestic and international observers.
The CNE also obstructed the accreditation of opposition officials at the polling
stations, leaving up to half of opposition representatives without credentials on
polling day.
The police did not act impartially during the election campaign, on several occasions
arbitrarily arresting opposition activists. Most were released without
charges. On the eve of the elections, police arbitrarily detained at least 19 opposition
activists and others, including polling station officials and opposition representatives,
as well as passersby during two protests in front of the CNE’s
headquarters in Luanda, the capital. While five were released without charges,
fourteen people including activists of the opposition coalition Broad
Convergence for Angola’s Salvation–Electoral Coalition ( Convêrgencia Ampla de
Salvação de Angola- Coligação Eleitoral, CASA-CE), polling station officials, and
passersby at a protest were jailed for three days and may face charges for
allegedly having organized an illegal campaign rally.
Freedom of Media
The media face a broad range of restrictions that hamper the right to free
expression and encourage self-censorship. The state media and a number of
private media owned by senior officials are ruling party mouthpieces in which
censorship and self-censorship are common.
In addition, the 2006 press law and the criminal code provide criminal penalties
for defamation and similar offenses, such as “abuse against press freedom.” At
this writing, the necessary by-laws and other complementary laws to the 2006
press law that would at least partially lift excessive administrative restrictions on private radio and television stations and allow community radio broadcasting
were yet to be passed in parliament.
Journalists have been regularly arrested, detained, harassed and questioned by
the authorities while trying to cover protests in Luanda and elsewhere, and have
been targeted with both threats and official offers to cooperate with the ruling
party. Some journalists who have criticized the government are facing criminal
charges, some pending for years. In October 2011, a court imposed a one-year
suspended sentence and US$100,000 in damages on William Tonet, the director
of the private weekly newspaper Folha 8. Tonet’s appeal was pending at this
writing. On March 12, police raided Folha 8’s office and confiscated the paper’s
equipment, presenting a search warrant on charges of alleged “outrage against
the president,” an offense under the 2010 crimes against the law, Crimes
Against the Security of the State.
Freedom of Assembly
The 2010 constitution guarantees the rights to freedom of assembly and peaceful
demonstration, and Angolan laws explicitly allow public demonstrations
without government authorization. However, since 2009, the government has
banned a number of anti-government demonstrations and the police have prevented
the majority of peaceful demonstrations from taking place.
Since early 2011, a youth movement unconnected to any political party and
inspired by the pro-democracy Arab Spring movements, has organized a number
of demonstrations in Luanda and in the city of Benguela calling for freedom of
expression, social justice, and the president’s resignation. Since May 2012,
another set of protests has gained momentum, staged by former soldiers from
all the former armed movements in Angola. The protesters were protesting
unpaid pensions and other benefits.
The authorities have responded to protests, even small-scale protests, with
excessive force, arbitrary arrests, unfair trials and intimidation of journalists and
other observers. Since February 2011, the ruling party has spread fear among
the population by alleging that the protests could result in civil war. Such messages have an intimidating effect on the majority of the Angolan population, as
a result of a decade-long civil war that ended 10 years ago.
The main perpetrators of violence during demonstrations have been groups of
armed individuals who act in complete impunity and appear to be security
agents in civilian clothes. In the months preceding the elections campaign, the
threats and attacks against youth protest leaders and opposition activists by
these plainclothes security agents increased, appeared systematic, and included
attacks against protesters in their private homes, abductions, and forced disappearances.
In one of the most violent crackdowns on peaceful protests in 2012, on March
10, a dozen plainclothes security agents armed with wooden and metal clubs,
knives, and pistols, attacked a crowd of 40 demonstrators in Luanda’s Cazenga
neighborhood, severely injuring 3 protest organizers. On the same day, plainclothes
security agents attacked two senior politicians of the opposition party
Democratic Bloc (Bloco Democrático) in Luanda’s city center.
In another particularly serious case, two organizers of a May 27 protest for former
presidential guards who were claiming unpaid salaries, Isaias Cassule and
Antonio Alves Kamulingue, were both abducted by unidentified assailants. Their
whereabouts remain unknown. The police have rejected the requests of their
families to investigate the abductions. In September, the local lawyer’s organization
Maos Livres filed a complaint with the attorney-general’s office. Human
Rights Watch is not aware of the attorney-general taking any action since then.
Protesters who became victims of violence, threats and abductions have since
2011 filed numerous complaints with the police against their aggressors. At this
writing, Human Rights Watch was not aware of any credible police investigation
into any of those cases.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders have for many years been targets for threats, intimidation,
co-option attempts, censorship, and alleged defamation in state-owned or
ruling party-controlled media.
Officials have also used defamation laws to deter human rights reporting in the
country. In January 2012, Manuel Helder Vieira Dias “Kopelipa,” minister of state
and long-term head of the president’s Military Office (recently renamed Security
Office), and six other generals and senior officials, all shareholders of the private
security company Teleservice and the diamond company Sociedade
Mineira do Cuango, filed a defamation lawsuit in Portugal against anti-corruption
campaigner and human rights activist Rafael Marques.
The lawsuit was in response to a complaint filed by Marques in November 2011
at the Angolan attorney-general’s office in Luanda against 17 Angolan officials,
including nine generals of the Angolan Armed Forces, alleging they were responsible
for over 100 documented serious human rights abuses, including killings,
rape and torture, in the diamond-rich Lunda Norte province. A Luanda court only
heard four victims of abuses who testified on cases documented by Marques;
the court case against the officials remained pending at this writing.
Rafael Marques has been regularly threatened for documenting cases of highlevel
corruption in Angola involving the presidency and a broad range of senior
officials. His anti-corruption blog www.makaangola.org has suffered a series of
apparently targeted “denial of service” attacks in 2011, which effectively undermined
public access to the website, even if temporarily.
Mass Expulsions of Migrants
In a positive step, the government has undertaken efforts to build new transit
prisons with more humane conditions for migrants. However, Human Rights
Watch is not aware of any credible and thorough investigation and prosecution
of those security forces officials who were responsible for serious human rights
violations against Congolese migrants during expulsions from Angola.
Expulsions from the diamond-rich Lunda Norte province have been frequent,
but also from other areas bordering the Democratic Republic of the Congo, such
as the enclave of Cabinda. Corroborated abuses include targeting women and
girls for rape, sexual coercion, beatings, deprivation of food and water and—in
some cases—sexual abuse in the presence of children and other inmates.
Public Finances and Economic and Social Rights
Longstanding concerns about mismanagement of Angola’s oil revenues as a key
impediment to the realization of economic and social rights resurfaced in 2012.
Despite high oil revenues, Angola’s development indicators remain low, with
high poverty levels and limited access to social services. The International
Monetary Fund (IMF) revealed in December 2011 that Angolan government
spending, between 2007 and 2010, of US$32 billion in oil revenues bypassed
budget processes, audits, and other forms of public accountability. This
amount, equivalent to 25 percent of the country’s GDP, was spent largely by the
state oil company, Sonangol.
Key International Actors
Angola remains one of Africa’s largest oil producers and China’s second most
important source of oil and most important commercial partner in Africa. This oil
wealth, soaring economic growth, and Angola’s military power in Africa have
greatly limited leverage of other governments and regional and international
organizations pushing for good governance and human rights.
In March, the IMF issued the final payment under a 2009 emergency loan to
Angola. Civil society groups had urged the IMF to withhold the financing until
the government adequately explained the $32 billion in off-budget spending
from oil revenues during the loan period. They argued that making the final payment
may give the impression that the IMF was not concerned about the
Angolan government’s lack of accountability to its citizens.
Burundi
Human rights in Burundi in 2012 present both progress and serious concerns.
For example, the number of political killings decreased in 2012 after a sharp
escalation in 2011, but political space remains restricted. The Burundian government
failed to address widespread impunity, especially for members of the
security forces and the youth league of the ruling National Council for the
Defense of Democracy-Forces for the Defense of Democracy (CNDD-FDD). The
report of a commission of inquiry, set up by the prosecutor general to investigate
cases of extrajudicial executions and torture, acknowledged that killings
had occurred, but concluded that they did not constitute extrajudicial executions.
There were very few arrests or prosecutions for politically motivated killings,
and in the incident that claimed the largest number of victims in 2011—the
attack at Gatumba resulting in 39 deaths—the trial of the alleged perpetrators
was seriously flawed. Several leading opposition figures remained outside the
country, and the CNDD-FDD continued to dominate the political scene.
Civil society organizations and media continued to investigate and publicly
denounce human rights abuses; however, freedom of expression was constantly
under threat. State pressure on journalists and civil society activists continued,
as the government counted them among the political opposition. Draft legislation
placing new restrictions on media freedoms was tabled before parliament
in October.
The National Independent Human Rights Commission continued to work in an
independent manner, expanding its representation in several provinces and
investigating reports of human rights abuses.
Political Killings
Political killings diminished significantly in 2012, but there were sporadic
attacks by armed groups as well as killings of members or former members of
the opposition National Liberation Forces (FNL). Despite repeated promises to
deliver justice for these crimes, the government failed to take effective action to do so. In the vast majority of politically motivated killings, thorough investigations
were not carried out, and there were no arrests or prosecutions. Impunity
was particularly pronounced in cases where the perpetrators were suspected to
be state agents or members of the Imbonerakure, the youth league of the CNDDFDD.
The Gatumba attack, which claimed 39 lives in September 2011, was one of the
rare cases that resulted in prosecution. However, the trial of 21 people accused
of involvement in the attack, which concluded in December 2011, was seriously
flawed. Despite the complexity of the case, the trial only lasted a few days and
was marked by irregularities, with several aspects of proceedings casting doubt
on the fairness of the trial and the reliability of the judges’ ruling. In January, 16
of the 21 defendants were found guilty; seven were sentenced to life imprisonment.
At this writing, their appeal was pending. The report of a commission of
inquiry investigating the Gatumba attack, which was completed in October
2011, has still not been published.
In June, the prosecutor general set up a commission of inquiry into cases of torture
and extrajudicial killings, including cases reported by Human Rights Watch,
Amnesty International, and the Burundian human rights organization,
Association for the Protection of Human Rights and Detained Persons
(APRODH).
In August, the commission published its report, recognizing that killings had
occurred, but concluded that they did not constitute extrajudicial executions.
The report stated that casefiles had been opened on a number of these incidents
and that investigations were underway. It attempted to discredit the findings
of Human Rights Watch, APRODH, and the human rights section of the
United Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB). BNUB issued a press release challenging
the commission’s conclusions, and reiterated the state’s responsibility for
human rights abuses by its agents.
The commission’s work resulted in the arrest of about eight people, including
policemen, alleged to have been involved in cases of killings or torture. At this
writing, they were in preventive detention.
However, in the majority of other cases documented by Human Rights Watch,
even when prosecutors had opened a file, judicial authorities made little effort
to conduct in-depth investigations and rarely questioned witnesses or victims’
relatives. Many family members of victims were often too afraid to demand justice.
Several faced threats for speaking out about the deaths of their relatives.
Transitional Justice
In December 2011, the government published a draft law establishing a Truth
and Reconciliation Commission to cover crimes committed since 1962. While
long overdue and broadly welcomed by Burundian civil society, the law did not
provide for the establishment of a special tribunal to prosecute individuals
accused of committing the most serious offenses, including war crimes, crimes
against humanity, and genocide. The Truth and Reconciliation Commission is yet
to be established, despite promises by President Pierre Nkurunziza that it would
be set up by the end of 2012.
Pressure on Civil Society Activists and Journalists
State authorities repeatedly threatened human rights activists, journalists, and
other members of civil society. In February, Pierre Claver Mbonimpa, president
of APRODH, received a letter from the minister of interior accusing his organization
of launching a “campaign of disinformation” against the state after
APRODH alleged that state security forces were arming youth. The minister
threatened “severe sanctions” if Mbonimpa did not produce evidence of the
state arming youths within 10 days.
On February 7, Faustin Ndikumana, president of the nongovernmental organization,
Words and Action for Awakening Consciences and Changing Mentalities
(PARCEM), was arrested after denouncing alleged corruption in the ministry of
justice in relation to procedures for recruiting magistrates. He was detained for
two weeks, released on bail, tried by the Anti-Corruption Court, and sentenced
in July to five years’ imprisonment for making false statements. The court also
fined him and PARCEM for defaming the minister of justice. Ndikumana remains
free pending his appeal.
Minister of Interior Edouard Nduwimana ordered Human Rights Watch to cancel
a May 2 press conference and report launch in Bujumbura, and to stop distributing
copies of its report on political killings in Burundi. The government
spokesperson issued a public statement on May 7 describing the Human Rights
Watch report as a “declaration of war” against the people of Burundi.
After long delays, the trial of those accused of involvement in the murder of
anti-corruption campaigner Ernest Manirumva in 2009 concluded in May 2012.
Fourteen people were sentenced to prison terms ranging from 10 years to life
imprisonment. The Burundian government had established three successive
commissions of inquiry to investigate Manirumva’s death and had accepted
assistance from the FBI. However, the prosecution disregarded leads and recommendations
from the third commission and from the FBI, which might have
uncovered the possible involvement of Burundian officials in Manirumva’s
death. Appeal hearings began in November.
State agents, including high-ranking members of the intelligence services,
repeatedly threatened journalists, accusing them of siding with the opposition,
and warning them to stop criticizing the government.
The National Assembly was considering a new draft law on the press at this writing.
If adopted without being amended, this law would drastically curtail free
speech. The draft law contains several provisions that would restrict the ability
of journalists to operate independently. Journalists would not be able to protect
their sources in cases deemed to threaten state security or public order or cases
involving defense secrets, among others. The draft law requires journalists to
only broadcast or publish “balanced information from sources that have been
rigorously verified.” One improvement compared to the existing law is that
offenses would no longer be punishable by imprisonment; however, new heavy
fines would restrict the ability of media organizations to operate.
In June, Hassan Ruvakuki, of Radio France Internationale and Bonesha FM, was
sentenced to life imprisonment for alleged participation in terrorist acts after
interviewing a new rebel group in the eastern province of Cankuzo in late 2011.
Twenty-two co-accused persons were also found guilty. Ruvakuki maintained
that he was interviewing the group in his capacity as a journalist and that he was not a member of the group or spreading its propaganda. His lawyers walked
out of the trial, citing procedural irregularities and bias on the part of the
judges. Appeal hearings concluded in November.
Prisoner Releases
The Ministry of Justice launched an initiative to address overcrowding and irregular
detentions in Burundi’s prisons by reviewing prisoner case files and provisionally
releasing certain prisoners, including those who had served at least a
quarter of their sentence. In addition, a presidential decree in June announced
that several categories of prisoners, including those sentenced to five years’
imprisonment or less (except those convicted of rape, armed robbery, illegal
possession of weapons, and endangering state security), pregnant women, prisoners
suffering from incurable diseases, prisoners over the age of 60, and those
under the age of 18 would benefit from presidential grace; other prisoners’ sentences
would be halved. Several thousand prisoners could be released thanks
to these two initiatives, which began to be implemented during the year.
Key International Actors
Foreign diplomats in Bujumbura continued to follow high-profile trials, including
those of Ndikumana and Ruvakuki, the individuals accused of killing Ernest
Manirumva, and the Gatumba trial. The European Union issued two statements,
one in February expressing concern about flawed procedures in the Gatumba
trial and delay in delivering justice for the killing of Manirumva, and another in
August regretting the verdict in the trial of Ndikumana, and expressing concern
about difficulties facing Burundian civil society activists.
The Dutch government suspended part of its training program for the Burundian
police following the report of the prosecutor general’s commission of inquiry
into extrajudicial executions and the lack of progress in bringing perpetrators to
justice.
Côte d’Ivoire
Ongoing socio-political insecurity, failure to deliver impartial justice for past
crimes, and inadequate progress in addressing the root causes of recent political
and ethnic violence—notably the lack of an independent judiciary and
impunity for government forces—undermined Côte d’Ivoire’s emergence from a
decade of grave human rights abuses.
A wave of attacks on villages and military installations launched within Côte
d’Ivoire and from neighboring Liberia and Ghana—many, if not all, likely
planned and carried out by militant supporters of former President Laurent
Gbagbo—fostered insecurity, reversed trends of demilitarization, and led to
widespread rights abuses by the Ivorian military.
The first parliamentary elections in 11 years took place in December 2011. The
Ivorian government also made meaningful progress in rebuilding rule of law
institutions, particularly in the north, where state institutions were reestablished
after a decade-long absence. Longstanding deficiencies within the judiciary,
particularly corruption and the influence of political pressure, continued to
undermine rights.
Eighteen months after the end of the 2010-2011 post-election crisis, justice for
the grave crimes committed remained disturbingly one-sided. Ivorian authorities
and the International Criminal Court (ICC) have yet to arrest and prosecute any
member of President Alassane Ouattara’s camp for post-election crimes, reinforcing
dangerous communal divisions.
Côte d’Ivoire’s international partners supplied significant assistance for justice
and security sector reform, but remained reluctant to criticize the government
publicly for its lack of progress on ensuring impartial justice and an end to security
force abuses.
Insecurity and Lack of Disarmament Progress
Progress in restoring security was marred by attacks throughout the year that
Ouattara’s government blamed on pro-Gbagbo militants intent on destabilizing the country, a claim that an October report from the United Nations Panel of
Experts on Côte d’Ivoire generally supported. Attackers killed at least 25 civilians
during cross-border raids from Liberia between April and June, including a
June 8 attack in which seven UN peacekeepers were killed.
Insecurity intensified in August and September, when armed men launched nine
strikes, many of them seemingly coordinated and well-organized, against military
installations in Côte d’Ivoire. In the most daring raid, attackers killed six
soldiers on August 6 at the Akouédo military camp near Abidjan and absconded
with a substantial cache of weapons.
There was scant progress in disarming tens of thousands of youth who fought
on opposing sides during the armed conflict. In August, President Ouattara created
a single agency responsible for disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration
in an attempt to improve a previously uncoordinated and disorganized
disarmament effort. The new agency effectively started anew, beginning a census
of ex-combatants in late August.
Security Force Abuses
The Ivorian military, known as the Republican Forces, committed numerous
human rights violations when responding to security threats, particularly the
August attacks on the military. Soldiers rounded up hundreds of youth perceived
to be Gbagbo supporters in mass arbitrary arrests and detained and
interrogated them illegally at military camps. Cruel and inhuman treatment was
common, as soldiers regularly beat detainees, who were forced to stay in
extremely overcrowded cells and deprived of food and water.
In at least some cases in Abidjan and San Pedro, the mistreatment rose to the
level of torture—with military personnel inflicting extreme physical abuse in
pressuring detainees to sign confessions or divulge information. Several commanders
who oversaw these crimes were previously implicated in grave crimes
during the post-election crisis.
The security forces were also implicated in criminal acts, including theft and
extortion, perpetrated during neighborhood sweeps when some soldiers stole
cash and valuables from homes and people, and at detention sites where some soldiers demanded money to release people from illegal detention. The military
hierarchy made little effort to stop the abuses or to discipline the soldiers
involved.
National Accountability for Post-Election Crimes
While Ivorian authorities have charged more than 140 civilian and military leaders
linked to the Gbagbo camp with crimes related to the post-election crisis, no
member of the pro-Ouattara forces has been arrested, much less charged, for
such crimes. There was growing impatience among Ivorian civil society and
some diplomats to see tangible progress made toward impartial justice.
In August, a national commission of inquiry that President Ouattara established
in June 2011 published a report on crimes committed during the post-election
crisis. Although lacking in details on specific incidents, the report’s balance in
situating responsibility was noteworthy—documenting 1,009 summary executions
by pro-Gbagbo forces and 545 summary executions by the Republican
Forces. At this writing, the commission’s work had not prompted more serious
judicial investigations into crimes by pro-Ouattara forces.
The special investigative cell in the Ministry of Justice continued investigations
into crimes committed during the post-election crisis. The absence of a prosecutorial
strategy and lack of proactive efforts to reach pro-Gbagbo victims—many
of whom remain too afraid of reprisals to bring complaints—hampered progress
toward impartial justice. The government’s decision in September to assign
more judges and prosecutors to the special cell was positive, but the continued
lack of concrete action fuels concerns about the political will to prosecute pro-
Ouattara forces.
On October 2, the first trial for post-election crimes opened in a military court
against four officers from pro-Gbagbo forces, including the former head of the
Republican Guard, Brunot Dogbo Blé, who was sentenced to 15 years for kidnapping,
illegal detention, and murder. Ivorian justice officials indicated that trials
in civilian courts, including against high-level officials like former First Lady
Simone Gbagbo, would begin in late November.
International Criminal Court
On November 29, 2011, the Ivorian government surrendered Laurent Gbagbo to
the ICC, where he was charged as an indirect co-perpetrator with four counts of
crimes against humanity. On November 2, the court ruled that Gbagbo was fit to
stand trial, following a closed hearing in late September on the issue.
On November 22, the ICC unsealed an arrest warrant against Simone Gbagbo
and asked Ivorian authorities to surrender her to the court. Diplomats and civil
society had previously voiced concern over whether the Ivorian government
would cooperate with the ICC in executing additional arrest warrants, as the
government increasingly asserted that it could handle all cases going forward.
Many perceived this as an effort by the Ouattara government to protect its military
commanders from potential prosecution for their own serious crimes
between 2002 and 2011.
The office of the prosecutor continued to stress that additional investigations
were ongoing, including against pro-Ouattara forces. However, frustration grew
among Ivorian civil society and human rights groups over the ICC’s significant
delay in issuing an arrest warrant against someone from the Ouattara side, reinforcing
the problem of one-sided justice within Côte d’Ivoire.
Reestablishing Rule of Law
In December 2011, legislative elections took place for the first time in 11 years,
and the new National Assembly sat for its first session on April 24. For the first
time in nine years, state authority—including judges, customs officials, and
other civil servants—was restored throughout northern Côte d’Ivoire. The Ivorian
government also made significant progress in rehabilitating courthouses and
prisons, many of which were seriously damaged during the conflict. However,
the judiciary’s lack of independence remained a concern.
The police, gendarmerie, and judicial police remained poorly equipped and
marginalized. In early 2012, there was gradual progress in ensuring that these
forces, not the military, took the lead in day-to-day internal security. However,
after the August attacks, the military again hijacked responsibilities far outside its mandate, including by conducting neighborhood searches and arresting,
detaining, and interrogating people.
Key International Actors
Côte d’Ivoire’s international partners, including the European Union, France, the
United States, and the UN, supported justice and security sector reform initiatives
but were reluctant to pressure the government publicly on the lack of
accountability for past crimes and ongoing abuses by the military. However, several
made notable statements on press freedom after the national press council
suspended pro-Gbagbo newspapers from publishing in September. The press
council promptly lifted the suspensions.
During the first half of 2012, Liberian authorities failed to respond adequately to
pro-Gbagbo militants’ use of Liberia as a staging ground to recruit and launch
attacks into Côte d’Ivoire. Several Liberian mercenaries implicated in grave
crimes during the Ivorian crisis were quietly released on bail in February, and
authorities made no progress in these prosecutions during the year. However,
after the June 8 attack in which UN peacekeepers were killed, Liberian authorities
increased their border presence, arrested individuals involved in cross-border
attacks, and extradited 41 Ivorians allegedly involved in post-election
crimes.
Ghana appeared to serve as a base where pro-Gbagbo militants planned attacks
on Côte d’Ivoire, as Ghanaian authorities failed to extradite pro-Gbagbo leaders
who lived in Ghana and were subject to Ivorian and international arrest warrants.
Following the August attacks in Abidjan, Ghanaian authorities arrested
Justin Kone Katinan, Gbagbo’s former budget minister, but the extradition hearing
was repeatedly postponed.
In January, the UN Human Rights Council’s (HRC) independent expert on human
rights in Côte d’Ivoire published his first report, highlighting the state’s failure
to prevent human rights abuses and slow progress in security sector reform. In
May, the UN Security Council visited Côte d’Ivoire to assess rule of law, security,
and reconciliation challenges. In October, a panel of experts under the Security
Council’s authority reported that the government may have violated the council’s arms embargo, and that pro-Gbagbo militants had established a “strategic
command” in Ghana in their efforts to destabilize Côte d’Ivoire.
The UN Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) actively documented human rights
violations and visited detention sites, though it rarely published reports or publicly
criticized the Ivorian government, including on issues such as one-sided
justice. The Security Council has still not published the findings of the 2004
commission of inquiry that investigated serious human rights and international
humanitarian law violations during the 2002-2003 armed conflict.
Democratic Republic of Congo
State security forces and Congolese and foreign armed groups committed
numerous and widespread violations of the laws of war against civilians in eastern
and northern Democratic Republic of Congo (Congo).
In late 2011, opposition party members and supporters, human rights activists,
and journalists were threatened, arbitrarily arrested, and killed during presidential
and legislative election periods.
Gen. Bosco Ntaganda, sought on arrest warrants from the International Criminal
Court (ICC) for war crimes and crimes against humanity, defected from the army
in March and started a new rebellion with other former members of the National
Congress for the Defense of the People (CNDP), a rebel group integrated into the
army in early 2009. The new M23 rebel group received significant support from
Rwandan military officials. Its fighters were responsible for widespread war
crimes, including summary executions, rapes, and child recruitment.
As the government and military focused attention on defeating the M23, other
armed groups became more active in other parts of North and South Kivu,
attacking civilians.
Abuses during National Elections
Presidential and legislative elections in November 2011 were characterized by
targeted attacks by state security forces on opposition party members and supporters,
the use of force to quell political demonstrations, and threats or attacks
on journalists and human rights activists. President Joseph Kabila was declared
winner of the November 28, 2011 election, which international and national
election observers criticized as lacking credibility and transparency.
The worst election-related violence was in the capital, Kinshasa, where at least
57 opposition party supporters or suspected supporters were killed by security
forces—mostly Kabila’s Republican Guard—between November 26 and
December 31.
Human Rights Watch received credible reports of nearly 150 other people killed
in this period, their bodies reportedly dumped in the Congo River, in mass
graves on Kinshasa’s outskirts, or in morgues far from the city center. Scores of
people accused of opposing Kabila were arbitrarily detained by Republican
Guard soldiers and the police. Many were held in illegal detention centers
where they were mistreated and some were killed.
Abuses against opposition supporters also occurred in other areas, including
North and South Kivu, Katanga, and the Kasai provinces. In some areas, soldiers
and militia members backing Kabila used intimidation and force to compel voters
to vote for certain candidates.
War Crimes by M23 Rebels
In March, General Ntaganda, the former rebel who had become a general in the
Congolese army, defected from the army with several hundred former members
of the National Congress for the Defense of the People (CNDP) rebel group.
Ntaganda’s troops forcibly recruited at least 149 people, including at least 48
children, in Masisi, North Kivu, in April and May. The mutiny began soon after
the government indicated that it was planning to deploy ex-CNDP soldiers outside
of the Kivus. A parallel military structure had been established in the Kivus
with troops loyal to Ntaganda responsible for targeted killings, mass rapes,
abductions, robberies, and resource plundering.
Soon after Ntaganda’s mutiny was defeated by the Congolese army in April,
other former CNDP members led by Col. Sultani Makenga launched another
mutiny in Rutshuru territory, North Kivu. Ntaganda and troops loyal to him
joined this new rebellion, which called itself the M23 after the March 23, 2009
peace agreement between the Congolese government and the CNDP.
From its start, the M23 rebellion received significant support from Rwandan military
officials, including in the planning and command of military operations and
the supply of weapons and ammunition. At least 600 young men and boys were
recruited by force or under false pretenses in Rwanda to join the rebellion.
Demobilized fighters, Congolese refugees, and other men and boys were recruited
by neighborhood chiefs and Rwandan army officers. Rwandan soldiers then escorted them across the border to Congo, where they were trained to fight in
camps led by Rwandan military officers. Several hundred Rwandan soldiers were
deployed to Congo to support the M23 in their military offensives, helping the
rebels gain control of much of Rutshuru territory.
In mid-November, M23 rebels launched another offensive with support from the
Rwandan military and took control of Goma, the provincial capital, and the town
of Sake. On December 1, M23 withdrew most of its forces from Goma and Sake,
after the Congolese government said it would negotiate with them.
M23 fighters were responsible for widespread war crimes, including summary
executions, rapes, and child recruitment. At least 33 new recruits and other M23
fighters were executed when they attempted to flee. Journalists and human
rights activists who documented or spoke out against the M23’s abuses
received death threats. M23 fighters attempted to rape a human rights activist
in Rutshuru and told her they were targeting her because of her work. When she
tried to flee, they shot her in the leg.
Attacks on Civilians by Other Armed Groups
The Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda (FDLR), a predominately
Rwandan Hutu rebel group some of whose members took part in the 1994 genocide
in Rwanda, and other Congolese armed groups increased their military
activities, taking advantage of rising ethnic tensions and the security vacuum
created by the army’s focus on the M23.
Some of the most intense fighting was between the Congolese armed group
Raia Mutomboki (meaning “outraged citizens” in Swahili), the FDLR, and their
allies. Hundreds of civilians were killed in Masisi, Walikale, Kalehe, and
Shabunda territories in North and South Kivu, as each side accused the local
population of supporting its enemies.
The M23 sought to ally with some of the other armed groups, providing them
with periodic or sustained support, including weapons and ammunition, and on
occasion organizing coordinated attacks.
Abuses by the Lord’s Resistance Army
The Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), a Ugandan rebel group with a long record of
atrocities, continued to attack civilians in northern Congo and eastern Central
African Republic. Local activists reported 273 LRA attacks between October 2011
and October 2012, in which at least 52 civilians were killed and 741 others
abducted. About half of those abducted were released after three days. The
LRA’s three senior leaders sought on arrest warrants from the ICC—Joseph Kony,
Odhok Odhiambo, and Dominic Ongwen—remain at large.
Justice and Accountability
Appeal hearings began in the trial of those accused of the assassination of
human rights activist Floribert Chebeya and the disappearance of his driver
Fidèle Bazana in Kinshasa in June 2010. In June 2011, the deputy head of special
police services Colonel Daniel Mukalay, and three fugitive police officers
were sentenced to death. Another defendant was sentenced to life imprisonment.
General John Numbi, the former police chief who was implicated in the
murder, has not been arrested and apparently not seriously investigated.
On October 4, 2011, seven humanitarian workers of the Banyamulenge ethnic
group were killed near Fizi, South Kivu province, in an ethnically motivated
attack by Mai Mai Yakutumba fighters. Despite pledges from the authorities to
bring to justice those responsible, one year later no one had been arrested in
connection with the attack.
On December 2, 2011, judicial authorities opened an investigation into electionrelated
violence on November 26 and 28, 2011. One year later, the investigation
has made little progress. In late 2011 and early 2012, government officials and
security forces attempted to cover up evidence, denied access to hospitals and
morgues to human rights activists, and intimidated witnesses and family members
of the victims.
The ICC issued its first-ever conviction and sentenced, in July, Congolese armed
group leader Thomas Lubanga to 14 years in prison for recruiting and using child
soldiers in Ituri district in eastern Congo in 2002 and 2003. The evidence phase of the trial of Mathieu Ngudjolo and Germain Katanga, leaders of an armed
group that opposed Lubanga’s group in Ituri, was completed in May.
Ntaganda, Lubanga’s co-accused at the ICC, remained at large at this writing.
Ntaganda has been wanted by the ICC since 2006 for recruiting and using child
soldiers, crimes which he continued to commit in 2012. In July, the court issued
a second warrant against him for war crimes and crimes against humanity, also
in connection with his activities in Ituri.
In July, the ICC indicted Sylvestre Mudacumura, the FDLR’s military commander,
for war crimes; he remained at large at this writing. Two FDLR political leaders,
Ignace Murwanashyaka and Straton Musoni, were on trial in Germany on
charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity.
There was little progress on the government’s proposal to establish a specialized
mixed court with jurisdiction over war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed since 1990 and on the adoption of legislation implementing the ICC
statute. In September, the justice minister pledged to adopt the ICC implementing
legislation promptly. In October, she took initial steps to revive draft legislation
on the specialized mixed court.
Key International Actors
In late 2011, the United States deployed 100 special forces personnel to the
LRA-affected region as military advisers to regional armed forces carrying out
operations against the LRA. In March, the African Union announced a regional
cooperation initiative to strengthen efforts to combat the LRA, including deploying
a 5,000-member regional task force.
In August 2012, the US Security and Exchange Commission (SEC) adopted a rule
mandated by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act
requiring companies to publicly disclose their use of conflict minerals originating
from Congo or neighboring countries. On October 19, the US Chamber of
Commerce and National Association of Manufacturers sued to have the rule
modified or set aside in US federal court.
In September, US President Barack Obama announced that the US was withholding
foreign military financing from Congo for a second year because of the
army’s continued recruitment and use of child soldiers. The administration also
announced that the US would not train a second army battalion until Congo
signed a UN action plan to end its use of child soldiers. The Congolese government
signed the plan on October 4.
Several foreign governments and intergovernmental organizations, including
the UN Security Council, denounced M23 abuses and called for those responsible
to be brought to justice. In June, the UN high commissioner for human rights
identified five senior M23 leaders as “among the worst perpetrators of human
rights violations in the DRC, or in the world.”
A UN group of experts monitoring the arms embargo and sanctions violations in
Congo presented detailed evidence of Rwandan military support to the M23
rebels in an addendum to its interim report in June and in its final report in
November. Its final report also included evidence that Uganda’s security forces
were supporting M23.
Equatorial Guinea
Corruption, poverty, and repression continue to plague Equatorial Guinea under
President Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, who has been in power since
1979. Vast oil revenues fund lavish lifestyles for the small elite surrounding the
president, while most of the population lives in poverty. Those who question
this disparity are branded “enemies.” Despite some areas of relative progress,
human rights conditions remain very poor. Arbitrary detention and unfair trials
continue to take place, mistreatment of detainees remains commonplace, sometimes
rising to the level of torture.
While access to Equatorial Guinea improved somewhat for international journalists
attending major events in the country, several reported being harassed or
intimidated. Government repression of local journalists, civil society groups,
and members of the political opposition continues.
President Obiang seeks to enhance his international standing and reputation.
To that end, Equatorial Guinea hosted the Africa Cup of Nations and other
prominent events in 2012 to present a new image of both the president and the
country. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) issued a long-stalled prize sponsored by the president after earlier
dropping his name from the controversial award.
Obiang also continues to defend the reputation of Teodorín, his eldest son and
presumed successor, whom he elevated to be the country’s second vice president—
a position not contemplated in the new constitution. The government
strongly objected when France seized Teodorín’s Paris mansion and issued an
international arrest warrant against him on money-laundering charges, claiming
the son’s post granted him immunity from prosecution abroad. The government
also asked the International Court of Justice to order France to halt the case.
Economic and Social Rights
Fulfillment of key socio-economic rights, such as the right to education and
basic healthcare, remains poor, despite significant oil revenues and the country’s
small population, which make Equatorial Guinea’s per capita gross domestic product—at approximately US$30,000 according to UN figures—among the
highest in Africa and the world.
Government social spending has increased relative to prior years since the
adoption of the Horizon 2020 development plan in 2007, and was supplemented
by projects financed largely by foreign oil companies. However, such spending
remains low in relation to need and available resources. The country has
reduced alarmingly high maternal mortality rates by 81 percent over 20 years,
and the child mortality rate also fell from 1990 to 2010. Much of the population
lacks access to adequate sanitation, potable water, and reliable electricity.
The government continued a massive building spree, financed by oil revenues,
which raises questions about its spending priorities. Beyond infrastructure such
as roads and power plants, much of the construction is for the enjoyment of the
country’s tiny elite and foreign guests. Projects include a new city being built in
a remote rainforest and a planned $77 million presidential guesthouse.
Foreign investigations into high levels of corruption involving President Obiang
and his close associates gathered further momentum in France, Spain, and the
United States. In June, a legal filing in the US government’s asset seizure case
alleged extortion and embezzlement of public funds by Teodorín on a grand
scale. The complaint details more than $300 million in spending from 2000 to
2011, including on art by master painters and mansions on four continents,
allegedly with the use of illicitly obtained funds. In July, after a French judge
issued an arrest warrant against Teodorín, French authorities also seized his luxurious
Paris mansion, whose contents they had earlier claimed.
Freedom of Expression and Association
Equatorial Guinea remains notorious for its lack of press freedom. Journalists
from state-owned media outlets remain unable to criticize the government without
risk of censorship or reprisal. The few private media outlets that exist are
generally owned by persons close to President Obiang; self-censorship is common.
El Lector, a private, infrequently-published newspaper whose editor is
simultaneously a Ministry of Information official, has at times run articles featuring
members of the opposition.
The government remains intolerant of critical views from abroad. A greater number
of foreign journalists were permitted to travel to cover events in the country,
but several who attended the Cup of Nations in early 2012 reported being subjected
to surveillance and harassment while they worked.
Human Rights Defenders
The country has no legally registered independent human rights groups. The few
local activists who seek to address human rights related issues are vulnerable
to intimidation, harassment, and reprisals.
Fabián Nsue Nguema, a lawyer who has handled sensitive cases involving political
prisoners and those accused of coup plots, “disappeared” after visiting a
client in prison. He was illegally arrested and kept in secret and incommunicado
detention for several days before being allowed to see his family. He was
released without charge after eight days, following international pressure.
In another case, Dr. Wenceslao Mansogo Alo, a human rights defender and
opposition figure, was jailed in February and convicted in May for professional
negligence in a trial widely regarded as unjust. He was harassed in detention,
and there were restrictions on his visitors, contrary to a court order. Mansogo
and 21 other prisoners were pardoned on the president’s birthday in June. He
filed an appeal against court orders to close his private health clinic, pay
$13,000 in fines, and cease practicing medicine for five years.
The government inhibited the careers of other human rights defenders throughout
the year. In April, Ponciano Mbomio Nvó, one of Mansogo’s lawyers and a
frequent defender of jailed political opponents, was suspended from legal practice
for two years for arguing in Mansogo’s trial that the case was politically
motivated. In January, government officials allegedly pressured a private company
to rescind a job offer made to Alfredo Okenve, the head of a local NGO who
was sacked in 2010 by the National University after criticizing the government.
Political Parties and Opposition
The ruling Democratic Party of Equatorial Guinea (PDGE) maintains a monopoly
over the country’s political life. It orchestrated a constitutional referendum that
was approved in November 2011 with 97.7 percent approval in a vote marred by
irregularities. The opposition was deterred from observing the voting and
protested efforts to prevent some opposition members from monitoring the
polling places and from speaking out against voting fraud. A year later, none of
the “independent” oversight bodies created under the new constitution had
been established and the president declared that new presidential term limits
would not apply retroactively.
Most political parties are aligned with PDGE, which benefits from a virtual
monopoly on power, funding, and access to national media. Political opponents
are pressured through various means, including arbitrary arrest and harassment,
as well as inducements—such as employment opportunities—if they join
the PDGE. Breakaway factions of the two political parties that maintain independence—
the Convergence for Social Democracy (CPDS) and the People’s
Union (UP)—joined the ruling party.
Torture, Arbitrary Detention, and Unfair Trials
Due process rights continue to be flouted in Equatorial Guinea and prisoner
mistreatment remains common. Lawyers and others who have visited prisons
and jails indicate that serious abuses continue, including beatings in detention
that amount to torture. Fabián Nsue Nguema reported that the client he sought
to visit when he was himself arrested in October, Agustín Esono Nsogo, was tortured.
The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) visited some detention
centers but did not have full access to others in 2012.
President Obiang exercises inordinate control over the judiciary, which lacks
independence. Lawyers have reported that judges say they need to consult with
the office of the president regarding their decisions in sensitive cases. The president
is designated as the country’s “chief magistrate.” Among other powers, he
chairs the body that oversees judges and appoints the body’s remaining members.
Florentino Manguire, who spent over two years in prison on unsubstantiated
theft charges filed by his former business associate, Obiang’s son Teodorín,
received a presidential pardon in June. In August, he was again arbitrarily arrested
and held for 10 days, until his release without charge after receiving a stern
warning not to reveal information about Teodorín.
Key International Actors
Following a contentious split vote in May 2012, UNESCO’s governing board reinstated
a prize established in 2008 at Obiang’s request after renaming it the
UNESCO-Equatorial Guinea prize. It did not resolve continued questions surrounding
the source of the funding that was provided by Obiang. Neither
UNESCO’s director-general nor Obiang attended the award ceremony in July,
which coincided with French judicial actions against Teodorín.
The Obiang government filed a case against France at the International Court of
Justice in the Hague over its pursuit of Teodorín. Teodorín has railed against foreigners
in speeches broadcast on state media. He filed a defamation case
against the head of Transparency International (TI) France in March. The government
of Equatorial Guinea then filed a domestic criminal defamation complaint
against the head of TI France in September and requested that Interpol issue an
international arrest warrant against him.
Spain, the former colonial power, applied some pressure on Equatorial Guinea
to improve its human rights record. The Spanish government publicly opposed
the UNESCO prize and criticized the imprisonment of Dr. Mansogo.
The US is Equatorial Guinea’s main trading partner and source of investment in
the oil sector. The US government credited the Obiang government for making
some improvements in its human rights record, but expressed deep concern
over the prosecution of Mansogo and strongly opposed the Obiang prize at
UNESCO. It also co-organized an off-the-record June meeting between representatives
of civil society, including Human Rights Watch, and President Obiang.
The meeting was not followed by any decisive action to address the groups’
calls for meaningful reform.
Eritrea
Torture, arbitrary detention, and severe restrictions on freedom of expression,
association, and religious freedom remain routine in Eritrea. Elections have not
been held since Eritrea gained independence in 1993, the constitution has
never been implemented, and political parties are not allowed. There are no
institutional constraints on President Isaias Afewerki, now in his twentieth year
in power.
In addition to ongoing serious human rights abuses, forced labor and indefinite
military service prompt thousands of Eritreans to flee the country every year.
Access to the country for international humanitarian and human rights organizations
is almost impossible and the country has no independent media. In recognition
of the “continued widespread and systematic violation of human rights,”
the United Nations Human Rights Council (HRC) in 2012 appointed a special
rapporteur on Eritrea.
Forced Labor and Indefinite Military Service
National service keeps most young Eritreans in perpetual bondage. Although a
decree mandating compulsory national service limits service to 18 months, in
practice the government prolongs service indefinitely. National service conscripts
are poorly fed and receive inadequate medical care. Eritrean refugees
describe them as emaciated. Their pay (less than US$30 per month) is insufficient
to provide sustenance for a family. Female conscripts report sexual abuse
by commanding officers. In early 2012, President Isaias acknowledged that
national service members and government employees are so poorly paid that
they essentially “have been fulfilling their duties apparently without pay” for
the past 20 years.
Conscripts allegedly provided forced labor to construct infrastructure at the
Bisha gold mine, Eritrea’s only operating mine and a major source of revenue.
Although the Eritrean government had agreed with the mine’s principal international
owner that no national service conscripts would be allowed to work at
Bisha, it required use of a ruling party-controlled contractor, Segen Construction. Segen makes widespread use of conscript labor and there is evidence
that it did so at Bisha as well. Escapees told Human Rights Watch in 2012
that they worked 12-hour shifts and endured dangerously inadequate food and
housing conditions. They did not complain because, as one escapee told
Human Rights Watch, “we were afraid for our lives.”
Recent escapees report that conscripts are also involuntarily assigned to public
works projects, the ruling party’s commercial and agricultural enterprises, farms
owned by high-tanking military officers, and the civil service.
On average, over 1,500 Eritreans flee the country monthly despite shoot-to-kill
orders to border guards and immense dangers along escape routes.
Unaccompanied minors also flee; the office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) reported over 1,100 unaccompanied minors
living in one Ethiopian refugee camp in 2012. Not only are ordinary citizens
defecting, so are those the government had privileged with authority, foreign
travel, and publicity.
In October, two senior air force pilots defected to Saudi Arabia in the plane normally
used by Isaias. Earlier, Eritrea’s standard bearer at the 2012 Olympics
asked for asylum along with three teammates. Repression in Eritrea, he said,
“forces people to do things that may cost them their life, but at the end of the
day sometimes there isn’t a choice.” Two prominent musicians were also reported
to have fled abroad.
Torture, Death, and Prolonged Incarceration without Trial
Eritreans are routinely subject to imprisonment without explanation, trial, or any
form of due process. Incarceration often lasts indefinitely. Senior government
officials and journalists, arrested in 2001 after they raised questions about
President Isaias’ rule, remain jailed incommunicado. Defecting guards report
that most of these officials have died.
According to accounts from those who have fled, conditions in Eritrea’s detention
facilities are abysmal, with minimal food and medical care. Prisoners are
held in underground cells and shipping containers, subject to boiling and freezing
temperatures. Many prisoners die from the harsh conditions.
Torture and other abuses during detention are routine. Punishments include
mock drowning, being hung from trees by the arms, being tied up in the sun in
contorted positions for hours or days, being doubled up inside a rolling tire,
having handcuffs tightened to cut off circulation, as well as frequent beatings.
Restrictions on Freedoms of Expression and Association
The Isaias government closed the independent press in 2001 by revoking their
licenses and arrested its editors and publishers. Based on former guards’ testimony,
Reporters without Borders reported that four journalists died in prison in
2012, including two imprisoned since 2001. Journalists working for government
agencies, arrested since 2009 for allegedly providing information to Western
nongovernmental organizations and governments, remain incarcerated incommunicado.
All domestic media are controlled by the government. Two of four internet service
providers prohibit access to sites unapproved by the government and persons
using internet cafes are subject to surveillance. Eritrea periodically jams
satellite radio transmissions by opposition groups. For the sixth year, the
Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) in 2012 named Eritrea “one of the world’s
most censored countries.”
Defectors describe a climate of intense fear in the country. To question authority,
much less criticize it, can result in imprisonment and worse. Gatherings of
more than seven unrelated people are forbidden and formation of NGOs is prohibited.
Political organization is restricted to the ruling party, the Peoples Front
for Democracy and Justice (PFDJ). Unions are prohibited, except for PFDJ subsidiaries.
Interference with Religious Beliefs and Practices
The Isaias government controls all religious activity. The government acknowledges
a right to exist only for four “recognized” religious groups, the Orthodox
Church, Sunni Islam, Roman Catholicism, and the Evangelical (Lutheran)
Church. Other religious groups have applied for recognition since 2002 but the
government has never acted on their applications. It deposed the Eritrean Orthodox Church patriarch in 2005, after he protested government interference
in church affairs. He remains under house arrest in ill health. The government
selected his successor and also appointed the current Sunni mufti, the chief
Islamic legal authority.
Members of “unrecognized” religions are arrested, held in oppressive conditions,
and sometimes tortured to compel them to recant their faith. Jehovah’s
Witnesses are especially victimized. Twelve were arrested in 2012 while attending
a funeral, and one died in 2012 because of heat prostration in an underground
cell. Currently, 56 Jehovah’s Witnesses are incarcerated, including 11 in
their 70s and 80s and 3 conscientious objectors held since 1994.
Retaliation against Family Members
Since at least 1995, Eritrea has imposed a 2 percent income tax on Eritrean
expatriates (retroactive to 1992) to be eligible for consular services, such as
notarizing powers of attorney, certifying educational decrees, and issuance of
travel documents. Relatives in Eritrea of expatriates who refuse to pay the tax
have been threatened with loss of business licenses or have been prevented
from selling property because of a missing notarial. Canada and Germany prohibit
collection of the tax, while the Netherlands and others are considering a
ban.
Families of national service conscripts who abscond are fined 50,000 Nakfa
(US$3,333), a crushing sum for many in a country where annual per capita
income is 8,040 Nakfa (US$536).
Horn of Africa Relations
Eritrea is under UN sanctions for trying to destabilize neighboring states by arming
rebel groups and for having attacked Djibouti.
Relations with Ethiopia remain strained 12 years after the end of a border war
between the two countries. Ethiopia occupies territory that a Boundary
Commission, established by the parties’ armistice agreement, awarded to
Eritrea, a decision that Ethiopia has ignored. A United Nations Security Council (Security Council) Monitoring Group on Eritrea and Somalia reported in July 2012
that Eritrea continued to violate Security Council resolutions “by deploying
Ethiopian armed opposition groups via Somali territory.” Earlier in the year,
Ethiopia launched brief cross-border raids against rebel groups that Ethiopia
claimed Eritrea was training and arming. Eritrea mobilized but did not retaliate
militarily. In October, Ethiopia released 75 Eritrean prisoners of war (POWs) captured
in the raids; seven POWs asked for asylum.
Eritrea invaded Djibouti in 2008 but persistently denied it had done so until
2010 when, succumbing to international pressure, it pulled back its troops and
agreed to Qatari mediation of border issues. Even so, Eritrea refused to address
Djibouti’s claims that it was holding 19 POWs. In 2012, three escaped POWs told
the UN Monitoring Group they had been among eight POWs held by Eritrea. All
suffered from malnutrition and denial of medical treatment for wounds. As a
result, the other five prisoners were too weak to escape; two had gone blind,
one had lost use of an arm.
The UN Monitoring Group reported it had found no evidence of direct Eritrean
support for Al-Shabaab in Somalia in 2012.
Key International Actors
At the end of 2011, Eritrea expelled nearly all remaining foreign nongovernmental
aid groups (a small UN aid mission remains). Although President Isaias
asserts the expulsions promote his policy of self-reliance, they reinforce his policy
of isolating the Eritrean population from foreigners. Earlier in 2011, Isaias
accused international NGOs of having a “pathological compulsion for espionage.”
In late 2011, Eritrea cancelled a multi-year European Union assistance program.
No country that had previously provided loans or grants to Eritrea announced
new financial assistance in 2012. Isaias repeatedly accuses the CIA of conspiring
against Eritrea. The CIA, he said in 2012, “is preoccupied with targeting the
key aspects of the Eritrean economy.”
One source of foreign exchange comes from extensive smuggling of weapons
and Eritrean refugees to Sudan and Egypt by Eritrean security forces, according
to the UN Monitoring Group.
Ethiopia
The sudden death in August 2012 of Ethiopia’s long-serving and powerful prime
minister, Meles Zenawi, provoked uncertainty over the country’s political transition,
both domestically and among Ethiopia’s international partners. Ethiopia’s
human rights record has sharply deteriorated, especially over the past few
years, and although a new prime minister, Hailemariam Desalegn, took office in
September, it remains to be seen whether the government under his leadership
will undertake human rights reforms.
Ethiopian authorities continued to severely restrict basic rights of freedom of
expression, association, and assembly in 2012. Thirty journalists and opposition
members were convicted under the country’s vague Anti-Terrorism
Proclamation of 2009.The security forces responded to protests by the Muslim
community in Oromia and Addis Ababa, the capital, with arbitrary arrests,
detentions, and beatings.
The Ethiopian government continues to implement its “villagization” program:
the resettlement of 1.5 million rural villagers in five regions of Ethiopia ostensibly
to increase their access to basic services. Many villagers in Gambella region
have been forcibly displaced, causing considerable hardship. The government is
also forcibly displacing indigenous pastoral communities in Ethiopia’s Lower
Omo Valley to make way for state-run sugar plantations.
Freedom of Expression, Association, and Assembly
Since the promulgation in 2009 of the Charities and Societies Proclamation
(CSO Law), which regulates nongovernmental organizations, and the Anti-
Terrorism Proclamation, freedom of expression, assembly, and association have
been increasingly restricted in Ethiopia. The effect of these two laws, coupled
with the government’s widespread and persistent harassment, threats, and
intimidation of civil society activists, journalists, and others who comment on
sensitive issues or express views critical of government policy, has been severe.
Ethiopia’s most important human rights groups have been compelled to dramatically
scale-down operations or remove human rights activities from their mandates, and an unknown number of organizations have closed entirely. Several of
the country’s most experienced and reputable human rights activists have fled
the country due to threats. The environment is equally hostile for independent
media: more journalists have fled Ethiopia than any other country in the world
due to threats and intimidation in the last decade—at least 79, according to the
Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ).
The Anti-Terrorism Proclamation is being used to target perceived opponents,
stifle dissent, and silence journalists. In 2012, 30 political activists, opposition
party members, and journalists were convicted on vaguely defined terrorism
offenses. Eleven journalists have been convicted under the law since 2011.
On January 26, a court in Addis Ababa sentenced both deputy editor Woubshet
Taye and columnist Reeyot Alemu of the now-defunct weekly Awramaba Times to
14 years in prison. Reeyot’s sentence was later reduced to five years upon
appeal and most of the charges were dropped.
On July 13, veteran journalist and blogger Eskinder Nega, who won the prestigious
PEN America Freedom to Write Award in April, was sentenced to 18 years
in prison along with other journalists, opposition party members, and political
activists. Exiled journalists Abiye Teklemariam and Mesfin Negash were sentenced
to eight years each in absentia under a provision of the Anti-Terrorism
Law that has so far only been used against journalists. Andualem Arage, a member
of the registered opposition party Unity for Democracy and Justice (UDJ),
was sentenced to life for espionage, “disrupting the constitutional order,” and
recruitment and training to commit terrorist acts.
In September, the Ethiopian Federal High Court ordered the property of Eskinder
Nega, exiled journalist Abebe Belew, and opposition member Andualem Arage
to be confiscated.
On July 20, after the government claimed that reports by the newspaper Feteh
on Muslim protests and the prime minister’s health would endanger national
security, it seized the entire print run of the paper. On August 24, Feteh’s editor,
Temesghen Desalegn was arrested and denied bail. He was released on August
28, and all the charges were withdrawn pending further investigation.
Police on July 20 raided the home of journalist Yesuf Getachew, editor-in-chief of
the popular Muslim magazine Yemuslimoche Guday (Muslim Affairs), and arrested
him that night. The magazine has not been published since, and at this writing,
Yesuf remained in detention.
On December 27, 2011, two Swedish journalists, Martin Schibbye and Johan
Persson, were found guilty of supporting a terrorist organization after being
arrested while traveling in eastern Ethiopia with the Ogaden National Liberation
Front (ONLF), an outlawed armed insurgent group. They were also convicted of
entering the country illegally. The court sentenced them to 11 years in prison. On
September 10, they were pardoned and released along with more than 1,950
other prisoners as part of Ethiopia’s annual tradition of amnesty to celebrate
the Ethiopian New Year.
On several occasions in July, federal police used excessive force, including beatings,
to disperse largely Muslim protesters opposing the government’s interference
with the country’s Supreme Council of Islamic Affairs. On July 13, police
forcibly entered the Awalia mosque in Addis Ababa, smashing windows and firing
tear gas inside the mosque. On July 21, they forcibly broke up a sit-in at the
mosque. From July 19 to 21, dozens of people were rounded up and 17 prominent
leaders were held without charge for over a week. Many of the detainees
complained of mistreatment in detention.
Forced Displacement
The Ethiopian government plans to relocate up to 1.5 million people under its
“villagization” program, purportedly designed to improve access to basic services
by moving people to new villages in Ethiopia’s five lowland regions:
Gambella, Benishangul-Gumuz, Afar, Southern Nations Nationalities and
Peoples’ Region (SNNPR), and Somali Region.
In Gambella and in the South Omo Valley, forced displacement is taking place
without adequate consultation and compensation. In Gambella, Human Rights
Watch found that relocations were often forced and that villagers were being
moved from fertile to unfertile areas. People sent to the new villages frequently
have to clear the land and build their own huts under military supervision, while the promised services (schools, clinics, water pumps) often have not been put
in place.
In South Omo, around 200,000 indigenous peoples are being relocated and
their land expropriated to make way for state-run sugar plantations. Residents
reported being moved by force, seeing their grazing lands flooded or ploughed
up, and their access to the Omo River, essential for their survival and way of life,
curtailed.
Extrajudicial Executions, Torture and other Abuses in Detention
An Ethiopian government-backed paramilitary force known as the “Liyu Police”
executed at least 10 men who were in their custody and killed 9 other villagers
in Ethiopia’s Somali Region on March 16 and 17 following a confrontation over
an incident in Raqda village, Gashaamo district.
In April, unknown gunmen attacked a commercial farm owned by the Saudi Star
company in Gambella that was close to areas that had suffered a high proportion
of abuses during the villagization process. In responding to the attack,
Ethiopian soldiers went house to house looking for suspected perpetrators and
threatening villagers to disclose the whereabouts of the “rebels.” The military
arbitrarily arrested many young men and committed torture, rape, and other
abuses against scores of villagers while attempting to extract information.
Human Rights Watch continues to document torture at the federal police investigation
center known as Maekelawi in Addis Ababa, as well as at regional detention
centers and military barracks in Somali Region, Oromia, and Gambella.
There is erratic access to legal counsel and insufficient respect for other due
process guarantees during detention, pre-trial detention, and trial phases of
politically sensitive cases, placing detainees at risk of abuse.
Treatment of Ethiopian Migrant Domestic Workers
The videotaped beating and subsequent suicide on March 14 of Alem Dechasa-
Desisa, an Ethiopian domestic worker in Lebanon, brought increased scrutiny to
the plight of tens of thousands of Ethiopian women working in the Middle East.
Many migrant domestic workers incur heavy debts and face recruitment-related
abuses in Ethiopia prior to employment abroad, where they risk a wide range of
abuses from long hours of work to slavery-like conditions (see chapters on the
United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia, and Lebanon).
Key International Actors
Under Meles Zenawi’s leadership, Ethiopia played an important role in regional
affairs: deploying UN peacekeepers to Sudan’s disputed Abyei area, mediating
between Sudan and South Sudan, and sending troops into Somalia as part of
the international effort to combat al-Shabaab. Ethiopia’s relations with its
neighbor Eritrea remain poor following the costly border war of 1998-2000.
Eritrea accepted the ruling of an independent boundary commission that awarded
it disputed territory; Ethiopia did not.
Ethiopia is an important strategic and security ally for Western governments,
and the biggest recipient of development aid in Africa. It now receives approximately
US$3.5 billion in long-term development assistance each year. Donor
policies do not appear to have been significantly affected by the deteriorating
human rights situation in the country.
The World Bank approved a new Country Partnership Strategy in September that
takes little account of the human rights or good governance principles that it
and other development agencies say are essential for sustainable development.
It also approved a third phase of the Protection of Basic Services program (PBS
III) without triggering safeguards on involuntary resettlement and indigenous
peoples.
Guinea
The government of President Alpha Condé, elected in largely free and fair elections
in December 2010, took some steps to address the serious governance
and human rights problems that have characterized Guinea for more than five
decades. However, a full transition to democratic rule and greater respect for
the rule of law were undermined by continued delays in organizing parliamentary
elections, rising ethnic tension, endemic corruption, and inadequate gains
in strengthening the chronically neglected judiciary.
The government in 2012 prioritized reform and ensuring better discipline within
the security sector. There were fewer examples than in past years of excessive
use of force in responding to demonstrations, and the government made strides
in reducing the size of the 45,000-strong security sector, which has long been
hampered by lack of discipline and impunity.
Guinea made some progress in ensuring accountability for past atrocities, particularly
the 2009 massacre of unarmed demonstrators by security forces.
However, the establishment of a reconciliation commission and independent
human rights body made little progress. The year was marked by numerous arbitrary
arrests, breaches of the freedoms of assembly and association, and the
killing by men in military uniform of a high-level government official investigating
corruption allegations.
International actors—including France, the United States, the European Union,
the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and the African
Union exerted pressure on President Condé to organize parliamentary elections,
but rarely spoke out on the need for justice for past and recent crimes by state
actors.
Accountability for the September 28, 2009 Massacre and
Other Crimes
The government made some progress in holding accountable members of the
security forces implicated in the September 2009 massacre of some 150 people
and the rape of over 100 women during the military regime of Moussa DadisCamara. A 2009 report by the United Nations-led International Commission of
Inquiry concluded that the abuses committed by security forces very likely constituted
crimes against humanity. In 2010, the then-government committed to
bringing the perpetrators to justice, and a Guinean prosecutor appointed three
investigating judges to the case.
To date, the judges have interviewed over 200 victims and charged at least
seven suspects in connection with the crimes. Two high-level suspects and military
officers who have been charged are Col. Moussa Tiegboro Camara, Guinea’s
current minister in charge of fighting drug trafficking and organized crimes, and
Col. Abdoulaye Cherif Diaby, Guinea’s former health minister.
However, at this writing, the investigation had yet to be completed and some
suspects had been detained longer than the two year limit under Guinean law.
Meanwhile some 100 victims continued to wait to provide statements to the
judges. Also, potential mass graves with bodies of those allegedly disposed of
secretly by the security services have yet to be investigated, and the judges had
yet to question members of the security forces who might have knowledge of
the crimes.The government’s refusal for much of the year to provide adequate
financial support to the investigating judges, coupled with President Condé’s
failure to suspend men in his administration who are suspected of involvement
in the massacre, brought into question the government’s commitment to ensure
justice for the crimes.
The International Criminal Court (ICC), which in October 2009 confirmed that the
situation in Guinea was under preliminary examination, visited the country in
April to assess progress made in national investigations, bringing the number of
visits since 2010 to six.
Truth-Telling Mechanism and Independent Human Rights
Institution
The “Reflection Commission,” created by presidential decree in June 2011 to
promote reconciliation, made no visible progress in defining, much less fulfilling,
its mandate. Progress was undermined by inadequate consultation with victims
and civil society about the goals, composition, or powers of the commission, and inadequate financial support. The interim co-presidents appeared to
limit its mandate to promoting reconciliation largely through prayer, while local
human rights groups pushed for a commission that could meaningfully address
impunity. Rising ethnic tensions, as well as concerns about corruption, demonstrated
the urgent need for a truth-telling mechanism with the capacity to make
recommendations to address Guinea’s human rights challenges.
There has been no progress in setting up the independent human rights institution,
as mandated by Guinea’s 2010 constitution. However, during a cabinet
reshuffle in October, President Condé created a Ministry for Human Rights and
Civil Liberties.
Judiciary and Detention Conditions
Decades of neglect of the judiciary by successive regimes has led to striking
deficiencies in the sector, and allowed perpetrators of abuses to enjoy impunity
for crimes. The allocation for the judiciary, which for several years has stood at
around 0.5 percent of the national budget, decreased in 2012 to 0.29 percent.
As a result, there continued to be severe shortages of judicial personnel and
insufficient infrastructure and resources, which when coupled with unprofessional
conduct and poor record-keeping, contributed to widespread detentionrelated
abuses.
Prison and detention centers in Guinea are severely overcrowded, and inmates
and detainees lack adequate nutrition, sanitation, and medical care. Several
inmates died from inadequate medical attention in 2012. The largest detention
facility—designed for 300 detainees—accommodates over 1,000. An estimated
70 percent of prisoners in Guinea are held in prolonged pre-trial detention.
The government failed to establish the Superior Council of Judges, which is
tasked with discipline, selection, and promotion of judges; and reviewing the
outdated penal code.
But the justice sector did remove judges alleged to be unprofessional, created a
secretariat to coordinate reform of the justice system, and brought about a
slight reduction of those in pre-trial detention. International and Guinean legal aid groups helped ensure representation for the indigent, train paralegals, and
assist victims of security sector abuses.
Conduct of the Security Forces
The government and military hierarchy made some progress in ensuring that
their subordinates responded proportionately to civil unrest. The army largely
remained in their barracks during marches, and there were fewer instances of
the use of lethal fire than in past years by those mandated to address crowd
control.
There were nevertheless numerous allegations of unprofessional conduct and
several of excessive use of force: security forces killed at least three protesters
in often-violent demonstrations, and arbitrarily detained and beat others. There
were few attempts to investigate, discipline, or prosecute those implicated.
In August, alleged members of the security forces killed six men from the village
of Zoghota in southeastern Guinea after a nearby international mining company
had been vandalized. Also in August, security forces fired tear gas canisters and
allegedly a few live rounds of bullets at a vehicle carrying several opposition
leaders. The government denounced both incidents, and the Ministry of Justice
launched investigations; however, at this writing, there had been no arrests.
The security forces were implicated in numerous cases of robbery and extortion,
solicitation of bribes, mistreatment, torture, and in a few cases, deaths of
detainees. Police and gendarme leadership made no effort to investigate the
reported abuses.
Parliamentary Elections and Governance
Crucial parliamentary elections, which have not been held since 2002, were
delayed over demands by the opposition to address the lack of parity between
the ruling and opposition parties in the electoral commission, and because of
technical concerns about the revision of the electoral list. The delay undermined
the transition to democratic rule, deepened a concentration of power in the executive branch, and generated considerable frustration within Guinean civil
society and the country’s international partners.
Guinean authorities on several occasions undermined the right to freedom of
assembly by denying demonstrators permission to protest the cost of living,
labor conditions, and lack of progress on the legislative elections. On at least
three occasions, the security forces attacked opposition leaders or their party
headquarters. In August, the government closed a private radio station, allegedly
for its reporting on demonstrations. Security forces responding to violent
clashes between militants of opposing political parties appeared to disproportionately
crack down on those from the opposition.
Aside from the removal of several ministers implicated in corrupt practices,
there was little systematic effort to improve economic governance. The president
or one of his ministers signed several large contracts for resource extraction,
without competitive bidding and with virtually no oversight. There was little
effort to implement a 2011 mining code envisioned to improve management
of Guinea’s extensive natural resources. On November 9, 2012, unidentified
men in military uniform killed Aissatou Boiro, director of the Office of the
Treasury, in the capital, Conakry. Boiro was investigating a high-level corruption
case.
Key International Actors
Guinea’s key international partners, notably the EU, ECOWAS, the UN Office in
West Africa (UNOWA), France, and the US, remained largely focused on ensuring
progress in the long-delayed parliamentary elections. However, they remained
largely silent on the need for those responsible for the September 2009 violence
or more recent killings by members of the security forces to be held
accountable for their crimes.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR),
the EU, and the UN Development Programme (UNDP) took the lead in strengthening
Guinea’s judicial system. However, much of the EU’s support was conditioned
on the conduct of transparent legislative elections. UNOWA led the other international partners in advising the government how to reform the security
sector.
In January, President Condé asked for support from the UN Peace Building
Commission (PBC), which has funded programs supporting security sector
reform, reconciliation, and peacebuilding. In September, Guinea benefited from
$2.1 billion in debt relief under the World Bank and International Monetary Fund
(IMF) Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative, representing two-thirds
of its $3.2 billion total external debt.
Kenya
Kenya continues to face serious challenges with implementing its new constitution
and police reforms, as well as ending impunity for serious crimes by public
officials and security forces. Kenya will hold general elections in March 2013,
the first polls under the 2010 constitution. Four Kenyans, including three senior
public officials—two of whom are running for the presidency in 2013—are facing
charges of crimes against humanity at the International Criminal Court (ICC).
This followed the post-election violence of 2007, which left 1300 people dead.
There are concerns of further election-related violence around the 2013 elections.
Kenya’s October 2011 military incursion into Somalia sparked a string of retaliatory
attacks across the north of the country and in Mombasa and Nairobi in
2012. Dozens of civilians and security personnel were killed and injured in
shootings and grenade attacks, allegedly by supporters of the armed Somali
Islamist group al-Shabaab. Security forces often responded by arbitrarily arresting,
detaining and beating civilians in Wajir, Mandera, Garissa, and the Dadaab
refugee camps.
Election Campaigns, Ethnic Profiling, and Violence
Early campaigns around the country were characterized by mobilization along
ethnic lines, ethnic profiling and violence. Some politicians instructed members
of their communities to support certain presidential candidates, or face dire
consequences. Others launched national campaigns that appeared to demonize
specific candidates and their communities in advance of the 2013 elections,
heightening ethnic tensions and the risk of election related violence in Coast,
Central Kenya, Rift Valley and Nyanza regions. In July 2009, a new law prohibiting
hate speech was promulgated. Under this law, which has been largely ineffectual,
the National Cohesion and Integration Commission (NCIC) has taken
four politicians to court, with no convictions. This raises concerns about the
independence and capacity of the police, the NCIC and the office of the director
of public prosecutions (DPP) to deal with ethnic profiling and hate speech.
Politically instigated violence broke out in various parts of the country in 2012.
In Isiolo and Moyale counties, at least 21 people were killed and at least 20,000
displaced in inter-clan violence that persisted for weeks without decisive government
intervention. The government eventually arrested at least 26 people
and charged them with participating in the violence. Police initially suggested
that a member of parliament was implicated in the violence and would be
apprehended. No such arrest had been made at this writing.
Between April and August, in Mandera, over 30 people were killed and thousands
temporarily displaced over the border into Ethiopia in clashes between
different clans competing for control of districts and constituencies ahead of the
elections.
Ongoing tensions since January erupted in August in Tana River, when over 100
people were killed and 200,000 displaced following a series of retaliatory politically
motivated attacks. Dhadho Godhana, a member of parliament, was
charged with incitement, while other politicians were also believed to be
involved in this particular violence.
Kenya’s Incursion into Somalia
Since late 2011, unknown people believed to be sympathizers of al-Shabaab,
the armed Islamist group fighting the Somali government and allied forces in
Somalia, carried out terrorist attacks on civilian targets and security forces in
North Eastern Province bordering Somalia, and in Mombasa and the capital,
Nairobi.
In the most serious attack, gunmen opened fire and hurled grenades killing 17
and injuring 60 during services at two churches in Garissa on July 1. In
Mombasa, gunmen opened fire on a restaurant, a church, and a bar in three
separate attacks. Police posts, patrols, and vehicles belonging to government
agencies, including the army, were attacked with landmines and improvised
explosive devices across North Eastern province, in Wajir, Mandera, Dadaab
refugee camps, and at the Liboi border. Two refugees in Dadaab were assassinated
in separate attacks at the start of the year.
There were numerous cases where Kenyan security forces responded to the
attacks by abusing civilians. Documented abuses included rape and attempted
sexual assault; beatings; arbitrary detention; extortion; the looting and destruction
of property; and various forms of physical mistreatment, including forcing
victims to sit in water, to roll on the ground in baking temperatures, or to carry
heavy loads while standing on one spot or while walking around for extended
periods. Despite government promises to investigate, there have been no investigations
and no security official has faced disciplinary action in relation to the
abuses.
Extrajudicial Killings, Disappearances, and Police Reform
In August 2012, unknown gunmen shot dead Islamic preacher Sheikh Aboud
Rogo. At the time of his killing, Rogo, who had complained of police threats and
requested protection, was facing charges of illegal possession of weapons and
recruiting for al-Shabaab. On July 24, he had reported to the police, the Kenyan
National Commission on Human Rights, and the court in which he was being
tried that unknown assailants had attempted to abduct him and his co-accused,
Abubakar Shari Ahmed, when they arrived in Nairobi for the court hearing.
Rogo’s killing followed the abductions and deaths earlier in 2012 of several
other people charged with recruitment and other offenses related to al-
Shabaab. In March, Samir Khan, who was also charged with possessing illegal
firearms and recruiting for al-Shabaab, and his friend Mohammed Kassim, were
pulled from a public bus in Mombasa by men who stopped the vehicle and
identified themselves as police officers. Khan’s mutilated body was found a few
days later in Tsavo National Park. Kassim’s whereabouts remain unknown.
Four other suspected al-Shabaab members facing charges in court disappeared
in 2012 after being arrested by people who identified themselves as police,
according to local human rights groups.
In response to allegations of police involvement, the DPP, the police, and the
Kenya National Commission on Human Rights instituted a joint probe on to
investigate Rogo’s killing. The killing prompted renewed calls for police reforms
that have stalled. No inspector general has been appointed in the five years since reforms were promised following electoral violence in 2007-2008. A
National Police Service Commission that was supposed to vet all police officers
ahead of the 2013 elections is not yet operational.
The ICC and Other Post-Election Violence Cases
The International Criminal Court (ICC) set April 2013 trial dates in cases against
four prominent Kenyans charged with committing crimes against humanity during
the post-election violence of 2007-2008.The ICC prosecutor raised concerns
with the Kenyan government that the e-mail accounts of witnesses had been
hacked and correspondence accessed, and warned publicly against witness
tampering. In March, the Kenyan police arrested blogger Denis Itumbi on suspicion
of hacking into the ICC email system, although he was never charged.
The Kenyan government has pledged to cooperate with the ICC, and has committed
to national trials of additional perpetrators of the 2007-2008 violence.
However, it has failed to create a special mechanism for prosecutions to overcome
weaknesses in the existing judicial system. The DPP initially announced
that his office would review up to 5000 cases with the view to prosecuting them
ahead of the 2013 elections, but a committee appointed by the DPP to review
the cases said in August 2012 it was finding it difficult to obtain evidence and
the cases have not proceeded.
In April 2012, an extraordinary summit of East African heads of state attended
by Kenya’s President Mwai Kibaki, recommended that the mandate of the East
African Court of Justice be expanded to include trials for crimes against humanity.
The African Union Assembly in July 2012 deferred adoption of a protocol to
expand the jurisdiction of the African Court of Justice and Human Rights (ACJHR)
to include the prosecution of individuals for international crimes in order to
study further the financial and structural implications of any such expansion.
Kenya had supported these initiatives, apparently motivated by its interest in
creating competing jurisdictions in order to derail the ICC’s Kenyan investigations.
Migrant Domestic Workers
Thousands of Kenyan women have migrated to the Middle East as domestic
workers in recent years. Many face deception during the poorly regulated
recruitment process prior to employment abroad, where they risk a wide range
of abuses from long hours of work to slavery-like conditions (see chapter on
Saudi Arabia). After a number of high-profile abuse cases, Kenya banned further
migration of domestic workers to the Middle East in June 2012. Similar bans
enacted by other labor-sending countries have rarely been effective and have
increased the risk of irregular migration and trafficking.
Key International Actors
The East African Legislative Assembly (EALA) passed a resolution allowing the
expansion of the mandate of the East African Court of Justice (EACJ) to include
crimes against humanity. Kenya also supported the decision by the AU to establish
a committee to examine how to expand the mandate of the African Court on
Human and People’s Rights (AfCHPR) to include international crimes.
The United States and European governments have a growing relationship with
the Kenyan military as it has become more involved in Somalia.
Mali
The Tuareg rebellion, Islamist occupation of the north, and political upheaval
generated by a March military coup led to a drastic deterioration in respect for
human rights in Mali. The insecurity led to the displacement of some 400,000
northern residents. The worsening human rights, security, and humanitarian situation
country-wide generated considerable attention from the international
community.
Several armed groups—which began operations in January 2012 and by April
had consolidated control of the northern regions of Kidal, Gao and Timbuktu—
committed often-widespread abuses against civilians. These included sexual
abuse, looting and pillage, summary executions, child soldier recruitment, and
amputations and other inhumane treatment associated with the application of
Islamic law. Islamist groups destroyed numerous Muslim shrines and at least
one Dogon cultural site. In January, rebel groups allegedly summarily executed
at least 70 Malian soldiers in the town of Aguelhoc.
Malian soldiers arbitrarily detained and in many cases tortured and summarily
executed alleged rebel collaborators and members of rival military units. There
was no meaningful effort to investigate, much less hold accountable, members
of the security forces implicated in these incidents.
Fears that the occupation of the north by Islamist groups linked to al Qaeda
would destabilize West Africa and threaten international security led to considerable
diplomatic efforts to resolve the crisis as well as a plan supported by the
Economic Community of West Africa States (ECOWAS), African Union, United
Nations, European Union, France, and the United States to militarily oust the
Islamist groups from the north. While most of these actors widely criticized
abuses by groups in the north, there was inadequate consideration of the
potential for abuse by Malian security forces and pro-government militias, or the
issues, including endemic corruption and ethnic tension, that had given rise to
the crisis.
Political and Military Instability
On March 22, 2012, junior military officers led by Capt. Amadou Sanogo
launched a coup against then-President Amadou Toumani Touré in protest of
what they viewed as the government’s inadequate response to the rebellion of
the Tuareg National Movement for the Liberation of Azawad (MNLA), which
began in January. The MNLA and Islamist armed groups swiftly occupied the
north as they took advantage of the chaos created by the coup.
Following international pressure, notably from ECOWAS, Sanogo in April agreed
to hand over power to a transitional government that would organize elections
and return the country to democratic rule. However, with the backing of security
forces loyal to him, he continued to exert considerable influence, meddle in
political affairs, and undermine efforts by the transitional authorities and international
community to address the political and security crisis.
The groups occupying the north included the separatist Tuareg MNLA; a local
ethnic Arab militia, based in and around the city of Timbuktu; and three Islamist
groups—Ansar Dine, the Movement for Unity and Jihad in West Africa (MUJAO),
and Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM)—which seek to impose a strict
interpretation of Sharia or Islamic law throughout Mali. MUJAO and AQIM are
primarily made up of foreign fighters.
Abuses by Tuareg Separatist Rebels and Arab Militias
The majority of abuses committed during and immediately after the April offensive
against the north were committed by the MNLA and, in Timbuktu, Arab militiamen
allied to it. Abuses included the abduction and rape of women and girls;
pillaging of hospitals, schools, aid agencies, warehouses, banks, and government
buildings; and use of child soldiers. At least 30 women and girls were
raped; the majority of assaults, including numerous gang rapes, took place
within the Gao region.
Abuses by Islamist Groups
After largely driving the MNLA out of the north in June, the Islamist groups—
Ansar Dine, MUJAO and AQIM— committed serious abuses against the local
population while enforcing their interpretation of Sharia. These abuses included
beatings, floggings, and arbitrary arrests against those engaging in behavior
decreed as haraam (forbidden), including smoking or selling cigarettes; consuming
or selling alcoholic beverages; listening to music on portable audio
devices; and failing to attend daily prayers. They also punished women for failing
to adhere to their dress code and for having contact with men other than
family members.
Throughout the north, the punishments for these “infractions” as well as for
those accused of theft and banditry, were meted out by the Islamic Police, often
after a summary “trial” before a panel of judges handpicked by the Islamist
authorities. Many of the punishments were carried out in public squares after
the authorities had summoned the local population to attend. Islamist militants
in Timbuktu destroyed numerous structures—including mausoleums, cemeteries,
ritual masks, and shrines—which hold great religious, historical, and cultural
significance for Malians. Islamists on several occasions intimidated and arbitrarily
detained local journalists and in one case severely beat a local journalist;
they forced the closure of numerous local Malian radio stations.
Citing adultery, Islamist authorities on July 30 stoned to death a married man
and a woman to whom he was not married in Aguelhoc. Since April, the Islamist
groups amputated the limbs of at least nine men accused of theft and robbery.
On September 2, MUJAO claimed to have executed the Algerian vice-consul; the
group had earlier claimed responsibility for the April 5 kidnapping of seven
Algerian diplomats from their consulate in Gao; three of the diplomats were
freed in July.
Recruitment of Children and Child Labor
Northern-based rebel groups and pro-government militias recruited and used
child soldiers. The MNLA and Islamist groups recruited, trained, and used several
hundred children, some as young as 11. The children manned checkpoints, conducted foot patrols, guarded prisoners, and gathered intelligence. The
Ganda-Kio pro-government militia recruited and trained numerous children,
although at this writing they had yet to be used in a military operation. Armed
groups occupied and used numerous public and private schools in both the
rebel-controlled north and government-controlled south.
Child labor in agriculture, domestic service, mining and other sectors remains
common, and often includes dangerous work that Malian law prohibits for anyone
under the age of 18. Tens of thousands of children continue to work in artisanal
gold mining, facing risk of injury and of exposure to mercury. A government
action plan on child labor remained largely unimplemented.
Abuses by Malian Army Soldiers
Malian government soldiers arbitrarily detained and in several cases executed
men they accused of collaborating with the rebel groups in the north. The majority
of victims were of Tuareg or Arab ethnicity or Mauritanian nationality. In April,
four Tuareg members of the security services were detained and believed executed
by the military in Mopti.
On September 8, 16 Islamic preachers on their way to a religious conference in
the capital, Bamako, were detained and hours later executed within a military
camp in Diabaly, some 270 miles (430 kilometers) from Bamako, for their
alleged links with Islamist groups. Their driver, seen in military custody days
after the killings, has since disappeared. The Malian government, under pressure
from Mauritania, from which nine of the victims hailed, apologized for the
incident and promised an investigation, but has made no arrests. On October
21, soldiers executed at least eight Tuareg herders, also in Diabaly.
In May, members of the security forces loyal to Captain Sanogo forcibly disappeared
at least 21 soldiers allegedly linked to an April 30 counter-coup, and
committed torture and other abuses against dozens of others. The soldiers were
handcuffed and tied for days at a time; beaten with batons, sticks, and guns;
kicked in the back, head, ribs, and genitals; stabbed in their extremities, and
burned with cigarettes and lighters. Four men were forced at gunpoint to engage
in anal sex with one another. The detainees were also subjected to psychological abuse including death threats and mock executions. Several journalists critical
of the coup leadership were detained, questioned, and intimidated; in July,
armed and masked gunmen abducted two journalists, severely beat them, and
dumped them on the outskirts of Bamako after warning them to stop criticizing
the military.
Accountability
In July, the government of Mali, as a state party to the International Criminal
Court (ICC), referred “the situation in Mali since January 2012” to the ICC prosecutor
for investigation. The prosecutor’s office visited Mali in August, October,
and November and will determine at a future date whether it can take jurisdiction
of the situation. Meanwhile, there was no effort by the Malian government
to investigate or hold to account members of the security forces implicated in
serious abuses. Despite his direct implication in torture and enforced disappearances,
Sanogo was in August put in charge of security sector reform of the
Malian army.
Key International Actors
Mali’s international partners struggled to harmonize plans on how to address
the military and human rights crisis in the north. A plan by ECOWAS to send in
some 3,300 troops to oust the Islamists failed for much of the year to generate
support from either Mali or the international community. Meanwhile ECOWAS,
Algerian, and Malian efforts to negotiate with the northern groups made no
headway. On September 18, the Malian government formally requested a UN
Chapter VII mandate for an international military force to help it recover the
north.
France took the lead in pushing the plan and drafted UN Security Council
Resolution 2071, adopted on October 12, which tasked the UN Secretariat,
ECOWAS, and the AU to submit to the council “detailed and actionable recommendations”
in preparation for the deployment of an international military force
in Mali. On November 13, the AU’s Peace and Security Council endorsed an
ECOWAS plan for a military intervention to regain occupied areas in northern Mali. The Security Council will need to pass a second resolution to formally
authorize the deployment.
The EU, France, and the US offered to provide logistical and training assistance,
but the details of a military intervention, including who would provide troops,
remained unclear. On November 19, foreign ministers from the EU agreed to
send 250 military trainers to Mali to support African-led efforts to retake the
north.
The Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) issued several
statements denouncing the human rights situation in Mali, and in July, after
a request from the UN Human Rights Council (HRC), dispatched a human rights
officer to the country. In October, UN Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights Ivan Simonovic visited Mali and reported concerns back to the Security
Council. In November, an OHCHR team conducted a fact-finding mission to Mali;
it will present its findings during the HRC’s March 2013 session.
Nigeria
Attacks by the militant Islamist group Boko Haram and abuses by government
security forces led to spiraling violence across northern and central Nigeria. This
violence, which first erupted in 2009, has claimed more than 3,000 lives. The
group, which seeks to impose a strict form of Sharia, or Islamic law, in northern
Nigeria and end government corruption, launched hundreds of attacks in 2012
against police officers, Christians, and Muslims who cooperate with the government
or oppose the group.
In the name of ending Boko Haram’s threat to Nigeria’s citizens, government
security forces have responded with a heavy-hand. In 2012, security agents
killed hundreds of suspected members of the group or residents of communities
where attacks occurred. Nigerian authorities also arrested hundreds of people
during raids across the north. Many of those detained were held incommunicado
without charge or trial, in some cases in inhuman conditions. Some were
physically abused; others disappeared or died in detention. These abuses in
turn helped further fuel the group’s campaign of violence.
The failure of Nigeria’s government to address the widespread poverty, corruption,
police abuse, and longstanding impunity for a range of crimes has created
a fertile ground for violent militancy. Since the end of military rule in 1999, more
than 18,000 people have died in inter-communal, political, and sectarian violence.
Episodes of deadly inter-communal violence, including in Plateau and Kaduna
States, continued in 2012. Abuses by government security forces and the ruling
elite’s mismanagement and embezzlement of the country’s vast oil wealth also
continued largely unabated. Free speech and the independent media remained
robust. Nigeria’s judiciary continued to exercise a degree of independence, but
many of the corruption cases against senior political figures remained stalled in
the courts.
Boko Haram Violence
Suspected Boko Haram members have carried out hundreds of attacks, including
suicide bombings, across northern and central Nigerian since 2009, killing
more than 1,600 people. The group has primarily targeted police and other government
security agents, Christians, and Muslims working for or accused of
cooperating with the government.
At this writing, suspected Boko Haram members had gunned down or bombed
worshipers in at least 16 church services in 2012. The group also burned
schools, bombed newspaper offices, and assassinated Muslim clerics, politicians,
and traditional leaders. In the first 10 months of 2012 alone, more than
900 people died in suspected attacks by the group—more than in 2010 and
2011 combined.
Conduct of Security Forces
Government security forces have been implicated in serious human rights violations
in response to the Boko Haram violence. During raids in communities
where attacks have occurred in 2012, soldiers have allegedly burned homes and
executed Boko Haram suspects or residents with no apparent links to the group.
Nigerian authorities have rarely brought anyone to justice for these crimes.
Nigeria’s police force continues to be implicated in frequent human rights violations,
including extrajudicial killings, torture, arbitrary arrests, and extortionrelated
abuses. Despite promising public statements by the new inspector general
of police, corruption in the police force remains a serious problem. The
police routinely solicit bribes from victims to investigate crimes and from suspects
to drop investigations. Senior police officials embezzle or mismanage
police funds, often demanding monetary “returns” from money that their subordinates
extort from the public.
Meanwhile, the authorities have still not prosecuted members of the police and
military for the unlawful killing of more than 130 people during the 2008 sectarian
violence in Jos, Plateau state, the soldiers who massacred more than 200
people in Benue State in 2001, or soldiers involved in the complete destruction
of the town of Odi, Bayelsa State, in 1999.
Inter-Communal and Political Violence
Episodes of inter-communal violence continued in both Plateau and Kaduna
States, in central Nigeria. At this writing more than 360 people had died in 2012
in these two states. Victims, including children, were hacked to death, shot,
and burned alive—in many cases simply based on their ethnic or religious identity.
Inter-communal clashes in 2012 in Adamawa, Bauchi, Benue, Ebonyi,
Nasarawa, and Taraba States left more than 185 dead and hundreds more displaced.
Federal and state authorities failed to break the cycle of violence by
holding the perpetrators of these crimes accountable.
State and local government policies that discriminate against “non-indigenes”
people who cannot trace their ancestry to what are said to be the original inhabitants
of an area—also continue to exacerbate inter-communal tensions and perpetuate
ethnic-based divisions.
Government Corruption
President Goodluck Jonathan sacked the chairperson of the leading anti-corruption
agency, the Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC), in
November 2011, but the EFCC, under its new head, Ibrahim Lamorde, has also
made little progress in combating government corruption. At this writing, the
EFCC had filed corruption charges in 2012 against a former governor of Bayelsa
State, who had fallen out with President Jonathan, and oil marketers for their
alleged role in a fraudulent fuel subsidy scheme, but executive interference with
the EFCC, a weak and overburdened judiciary, and the agency’s own failings
have continued to undermine the effectiveness of its work.
The country’s other prominent anti-corruption agency, the Independent Corrupt
Practices and Other Related Offences Commission, filed charges in September
against a former inspector general of police, Sunday Ehindero, and a former
police commissioner for allegedly embezzling public funds. At this writing, not a
single senior political figure in Nigeria was serving prison time for corruption.
Violence and Poverty in the Oil-Producing Niger Delta
The federal government’s 2009 amnesty program—which saw some 26,000 militants,
youth, and gang members surrender weapons in exchange for amnesty
and monthly cash stipends— has reduced attacks on oil facilities in the Niger
Delta. The government has doled out these financial incentives—some US$400
million annually—from the additional oil revenue, but it has still not addressed
the underlying causes of violence and discontent in the region, such as poverty,
government corruption, environmental degradation from oil spills, and impunity
for politically sponsored violence. Meanwhile, others want part of the lucrative
rewards, and in September the government announced that an additional 3,642
“ex-militants” would be added to the program.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Nigeria’s criminal and penal codes punish consensual homosexual conduct with
up to 14 years in prison. Sharia penal codes in many northern Nigerian states
criminalize consensual homosexual conduct with caning, imprisonment, or
death by stoning. In March, a court in Nasarawa State sentenced two men to
two-year prison terms for having sexual intercourse, and in September an Abuja
court sentenced a man to three months in prison for sodomy.
In November 2011, the Senate passed sweepingly discriminatory legislation that
would criminalize anyone who enters into or assists a same-sex marriage, or
supports lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender groups or meetings. At this writing,
the House of Representatives had passed the second reading of the bill.
Similar legislation has stalled at least twice in the past amid opposition from
domestic and international human rights groups.
Health and Human Rights
Widespread lead poisoning from artisanal gold mining in Zamfara State has
killed at least 400 children since 2010. At this writing 1,500 children were being
treated for lead poisoning, but thousands of other affected children had not
received any medical care. Funds were pledged by the federal government in
May to clean up the environment but had not been released at this writing. The government has also failed to implement safer mining practices, which could
reduce the rate of lead poisoning.
Freedom of Expression and Media
Civil society and the independent media openly criticize the government and its
policies, allowing for robust public debate. Yet journalists are still subject to
arrest and intimidation when reporting on issues implicating Nigeria’s political
and economic elite. In October, a High Court judge in Abuja awarded Desmond
Utomwen, a journalist with the weekly The News magazine, more than $630,000
in damages after police officers in December 2009 severely assaulted him while
covering a protest outside a bank in Abuja, the capital.
Several journalists were also killed in 2012. In January, Nansok Sallah, news editor
for the federal government’s Highland FM, was found dead under a bridge in
Jos, and in April Ibrahim Mohammed, a film editor with Africa Independent
Television, a private station, was found dead in a pool of blood in Kaduna.
Chuks Ogu, a cameraman with a private television station in Edo State,
Independent Television, was gunned down in April in Benin City.
On January 20, Enenche Akogwu, a journalist with Channels Television—also a
private station—was killed during citywide attacks by Boko Haram on police
facilities in Kano. Boko Haram bombed the offices of a private newspaper
ThisDay in Abuja and Kaduna on April 26, killing at least seven people. The
group also threatened to attack other media establishments.
Key International Actors
Nigeria’s role as a regional power, Africa’s leading oil exporter, and a major contributor
of troops to United Nations peacekeeping missions, has led foreign governments
to be reluctant to exert meaningful pressure on Nigeria over its poor
human rights record.
The United States government in June designated three Boko Haram members
as “Specially Designated Global Terrorists,” and in August pledged to help
Nigeria develop an “intelligence fusion cell.” In November, the US State Department expressed serious concerns about Nigerian security force abuses in
combating the Boko Haram violence.
The United Kingdom continued to play a leading role in international efforts to
combat money laundering by corrupt Nigerian officials. A London court in April
sentenced powerful former Delta State governor James Ibori to a 13-year prison
term for money laundering. However, the UK continues to provide substantial
foreign aid to Nigeria, including security sector assistance, without demanding
accountability for government officials or members of the security forces implicated
in corruption or serious human rights abuses.
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay warned in January and June
that Boko Haram’s attacks may constitute crimes against humanity. The
International Criminal Court (ICC) continued its “preliminary examination” of the
situation in Nigeria. The ICC prosecutor, Fatou Bensouda, visited Abuja in July
and her office released a report in November stating that there is a reasonable
basis to believe that Boko Haram has committed acts constituting crimes
against humanity.
ing children. Rwandan troops crossed into Congo to assist the M23 in military
operations, including a November offensive in which the M23 took control of the
town of Goma. The Rwandan government denied any involvement in supporting
the M23.
Key International Actors
Several governments—including those of the United States, the United
Kingdom, Germany, Sweden, the Netherlands, Belgium, and the European
Union—suspended or delayed part of their assistance programs to Rwanda in
response to Rwandan military support to the M23. In September, the UK government
resumed half the aid it had suspended in July, despite continued Rwandan
military backing for the M23. Expressions of diplomatic concern intensified in
November as the M23 took control of Goma.
In October, Rwanda was elected to the United Nations Security Council, raising
concerns about a conflict of interest in view of Rwanda’s breaches of the UN
arms embargo and the involvement of its troops in Congo.
Somalia
Somalia’s long-running armed conflict continues to leave civilians dead, wounded,
and displaced in large numbers. Although the Islamist armed group al-
Shabaab lost ground in 2012, abandoning control of key towns such as
Beletweyne, Baidoa, and the strategic port city of Kismayo, it continues to carry
out attacks and targeted killings, including in the capital, Mogadishu.
Both al-Shabaab and the forces arrayed against it—a combination of Somali
government security forces, troops with the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), Ethiopian government forces, and allied militias—committed abuses,
including indiscriminate attacks harming civilians and arbitrary arrests and
detentions. In areas under its control, al-Shabaab administered arbitrary justice
and imposed harsh restrictions on basic rights. The transitional Somali government
largely failed to protect the basic rights of the population in areas under
its control; its forces and allied militia committed serious abuses against civilians.
In 2012, the situation in Mogadishu improved somewhat, with less open armed
conflict. The mandate of the transitional government of Somalia ended on
August 20 with the inauguration of a new administration with a new president,
prime minister, and speaker of parliament. However, improving security remains
a serious challenge for the new Somali National Government, highlighted by the
increase in targeted killings of journalists and infighting between government
forces and militias.
Abuses in Government Controlled Areas
Targeted killings of civilians, notably journalists, increased in areas controlled
by the Somali authorities. Fifteen journalists were killed in 2012, which the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) failed to investigate. TFG forces and allied
militias committed a range of abuses against internally displaced persons (IDPs)
in Mogadishu, including rape, looting of food aid from IDP camps, and arbitrary
arrests and detentions.
Civilians continue to be killed and wounded by crossfire, particularly during
infighting between TFG forces over control of roadblocks, and by improvised
explosive devices and grenade attacks primarily by al-Shabaab fighters. Al-
Shabaab carried out several high-profile suicide attacks in Mogadishu including
one on September 20 that killed at least 18 people, including three journalists.
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), between January and late
September, four hospitals in Mogadishu treated 5,219 casualties, with 118 dying
from weapon-related injuries.
Government-affiliated forces and allied militias committed targeted killings and
summary executions in towns recently vacated by al-Shabaab, and arbitrarily
detained civilians, particularly men, during security operations. Between mid-
January and mid-March in Beletweyne, the Shabelle Valley State (SVS) forces
that are allied to the TFG and other militias committed at least seven summary
executions. In late May, TFG forces including the National Security Agency (NSA)
arbitrarily arrested and detained hundreds of men and boys following the
takeover of Afgooye.
Civilians were killed and wounded as a result of indiscriminate fire by TFG forces
and allied militias. On March 21, following a hand grenade attack on TFG-allied
militia, the militia responded by opening fire on civilians in Baidoa, killing at
least six.
The TFG military court continued to sentence to death and execute TFG personnel;
at least six executions were carried out in 2012.
Abuses in Area Controlled by Al-Shabaab
Al-Shabaab committed serious abuses such as targeted killings, beheadings,
and executions, and forcibly recruited adults and children in areas under its
control. On July 22, 2012, in the coastal town of Merka, al-Shabaab publicly executed
three men it accused of being Western spies. Al-Shabaab continued to
apply an extreme form of Islamic law in areas under its control, restricting the
movement of people in need of humanitarian assistance or seeking to flee fighting
in Kismayo.
Recruitment of Children and Other Abuses
All of the Somali parties to the conflict have continued to commit serious abuses
against children, including recruiting children into their forces. Al-Shabaab
has targeted children for recruitment, forced marriage, and rape, and has
attacked teachers and schools.
In July 2012, the TFG signed a plan of action against child recruitment; yet the
same month, 15 children were identified among a group of new recruits sent to
a European Union-funded training in Uganda. The government has also detained
children formerly associated with al-Shabaab, and used them as informants.
Abuses by Foreign Forces
Foreign forces have committed grave abuses in south-central Somalia, including
indiscriminate shelling. Since October 2011, Kenyan air and naval forces have
indiscriminately bombed and shelled populated areas, killing and wounding
civilians and livestock. On August 11, a naval strike on Kismayo resulted in the
deaths of at least three civilians, including two boys.
Ethiopian forces arbitrarily arrested, detained, and mistreated persons in their
custody, notably in Beletweyne and Baidoa.
Restrictions on Humanitarian Assistance
In February 2012, the UN declared that the famine in Somalia was over, but
stressed that at least two million people were still in need of emergency humanitarian
assistance. Humanitarian access remains restricted due to ongoing conflict,
insecurity, restrictions imposed by parties to the conflict, and diversion of
aid.
Al-Shabaab maintains restrictions on humanitarian assistance and prohibits
more than 16 humanitarian organizations, including the UN’s Children Fund
(UNICEF) and Action Contre la Faim (ACF), from working in areas under its control.
On October 8, 2012, al-Shabaab banned one of the last remaining international
aid organizations, Islamic Relief, from working in areas under its control.
In towns recently vacated by al-Shabaab, insecurity, including infighting
between TFG-allied forces, has limited access by aid agencies. Targeted attacks
on humanitarian workers persist throughout the country. On August 27, 2012, a
Somali staff member working with the UN Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO) was killed in Merka.
The diversion of humanitarian aid within Mogadishu by government forces,
allied militia, officials and others, and insecurity at food distribution sites have
significantly limited the access that displaced persons have to assistance.
Somaliland
The Somaliland government frequently and arbitrarily arrested and detained
journalists—mainly those reporting on sensitive political issues such as the selfproclaimed
Khatumo State—and clamped down on opposition protests. In April
2012, the government responded to a series of protests that opposition party
members organized after being disqualified from local elections by temporarily
arresting and detaining supporters. On March 8, 2012, the police also arbitrarily
detained 71 people, including children, from Las Anod for peacefully protesting
in support of the Khatumo State. Due process violations, including lengthy
remand detention and the detention of children, remain a concern. On May 17,
2012, the military court sentenced 17 civilians to death.
On at least two occasions, the Somaliland authorities deported large numbers
of Ethiopians, including refugees and asylum seekers. On August 31,
Somaliland forcibly sent up to 100 Ethiopians, mostly women and children,
back to Ethiopia, including refugees and asylum-seekers. This followed police
raids on August 30 and 31, 2012, on an informal settlement in Hargeisa. Police
fired live ammunition during the raids, wounding at least six Ethiopians, and
then arrested and detained 56 Ethiopians.
Key International Actors
The TFG’s international partners, including the United States, United Kingdom,
EU, and Turkey, have sought to build the capacity of Somalia’s weak governmental
institutions and some regional administrations. The main focus of foreign partners and neighboring countries in 2012 was on implementing the roadmap
developed to guide the execution of priority transitional tasks, including the
adoption of a constitution and parliamentary reform, before the end of the transitional
period.
The other focus has been on military support to AMISOM and the TFG forces,
notably by the US and the EU. The US acknowledged for the first time in 2012
that it had authorized aerial drone strikes and special forces’ operations against
al-Shabaab inside Somalia. The UK deployed a military liaison unit to
Mogadishu.
On February 22, 2012, the UN Security Council authorized the African Union,
with inadequate provisions on accountability, to increase the number of peacekeepers
deployed in Somalia from 12,000 to 17,731.
In addition to their large military presence in Somalia, Kenya, and Ethiopia continue
to train and offer military support to TFG-affiliated militia. They have a particular
interest in the administrations in control of the areas that border their
countries: Lower Juba and Gedo, including Kismayo.
The UN is undertaking a review process to examine its presence in the country
and improve coordination in Somalia. The strengthening of UN human rights
mechanisms will be crucial to the review’s success.
While improving accountability at the national level is currently on the international
agenda, much needs to be done to ensure that this renewed commitment
leads to concrete improvements on the ground. Given the gravity of the crimes
committed in Somalia, accountability at the international level, notably through
establishing a UN commission of inquiry—or a comparable, appropriate mechanism—
is critical to document serious crimes and recommend appropriate measures.
South Africa
The killing of 34 miners at the Lonmin Platinum Mine in Marikana, North West
Province, on August 16, 2012, shocked South Africans and highlighted increasing
concerns over police brutality and underlying grievances over the government’s
failure to fulfill basic economic and social rights.
Despite South Africa’s strong constitutional protections for human rights and its
relative success at providing basic services, the government is struggling to
meet public demands for better realization of economic and social rights. In
addition, financial mismanagement, corruption, and concerns about the capacity
of leadership and administration—especially at the local government level—
have contributed to further delaying the progressive realization of economic and
social rights.
Concerns that the ruling African National Congress (ANC) is increasingly
encroaching on civil and political rights are exemplified by the Protection of
State Information Bill which the National Assembly passed in 2011, but has not
yet become law. Debates over its constitutionality regarding its impact on freedom
of expression continued in 2012. At this writing, the Traditional Courts Bill,
which parliament was considering, may have negative implications for vulnerable
groups such as women, children, and lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
(LGBT) persons to access justice and other rights.
The Killing of Mine Workers
The tragedy at Lonmin Platinum Mine, which resulted in the death of 34 miners
when police opened fire on illegal strikers, is one of the worst death tolls in violent
protests since 1994. The tragedy highlighted the poverty and the grievances
of many in the mining industry, the historical bastion of South Africa’s migrant
labor system.
The government acted swiftly to respond to public outcry and established a judicial
commission of inquiry to ascertain the facts and investigate the conduct of
the mining company, the trade unions, and the police. The inquiry will investigate
the nature, extent, and application of any standing orders by police that gave rise to the tragedy, as well as whether the use of force was reasonable and
justified in the circumstances.
Freedom of Expression
The controversial Protection of State Information Bill aims to regulate the classification,
protection, and dissemination of state information, weighing state
interests against the importance of freedom of expression. The National
Assembly passed the bill in November 2011 and amended it in 2012 in response
to criticism from civil society organizations and state institutions, such as the
South African Human Rights Commission (SAHRC). Following the amendment,
section 49 of the bill was expunged. It had criminalized the disclosure of information
relating to any state security matter, even if those responsible were
unaware that the information was a matter of state security. Section 43, which
pertains to the publication of classified information, was also amended to offer
whistleblowers more protection.
However, some concerns remain, such as the bill’s relation to the Promotion of
Access to Information Act (PAIA), which is based on the constitutional right of
access to information held by the state and private bodies. Early versions of the
new law gave it precedence over the PAIA. And while amendments in 2012
deleted the clause that pertained to the bill superseding the PAIA, it remains
unclear whether it trumps the right of access to information.
The amendments improved the balance in the law between the importance of
the right to freedom of expression and the state’s interest in classifying information.
Given the bill’s contentious nature, it is almost certain that the government
itself will itself take the bill to the constitutional court for certification before it
is signed into law. If it does not do so, civil society organizations will challenge
the bill before the constitutional court.
Women’s Rights
Section 9 of South Africa’s Constitution provides strong protection for women,
prohibiting discrimination on the grounds of gender, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation,
and marital status. In addition to legislation such as the Promotion of Equality and Prevention Unfair Discrimination Act of 2000 and the establishment
of the Commission for Gender Equality, the government in 2010 created
the Department of Women, Children and People with Disabilities. This illustrated
the government’s commitment to promote and protect the rights of women and
matters related to women’s equality and empowerment.
However, the reintroduction of the Traditional Courts Bill in 2012, after the government
withdrew it in 2008 following widespread criticism, may have dire consequences
for the rights of women.
The bill aims to affirm the traditional justice system based on restorative justice
and reconciliation. As such, it emphasizes the position of traditional leaders in
the administration of justice, and effectively centralizes their power as the
arbiters of customary law. As it stood at time of writing, the bill will give traditional
leaders the authority to enforce controversial versions of customary law
such as the practice of ukutwala (forced marriage), adjudicate compliance, and
enforce penalties. The penalties are of particular concern as section 10 of the
bill imposes sanctions including fines, forced labor, and the withdrawal of customary
benefits, such as the enjoyment of communal land.
Section 4 provides for the minister of justice to appoint traditional leaders who
are recognized in the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Act as
presiding officers of traditional courts. Most traditional leaders are men, and the
bill does not assign women any role in the courts. A significant concern with the
traditional justice system is its entrenchment of patriarchy, as well as discriminatory
social and economic practices, such as access to land, inheritance, and
forced marriage.
South Africa was a leading advocate for the adoption of International Labour
Organization (ILO) Convention on Decent Work for Domestic Workers in 2011, but
has not yet itself ratified it. Moreover, the enforcement of its legislation covering
the estimated 1 to 1.5 million domestic workers in South Africa remains weak.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
South Africa continues to play a leading role on sexual orientation and gender
identity at the United Nations Human Rights Council (HRC). A report by the Office of the UN High Commissioner on Human Rights (OHCHR), documenting violence
and discrimination against LGBT people worldwide and compiled in accordance
with a 2011 South Africa sponsored resolution on “Human Rights, Sexual
Orientation and Gender Identity,” was presented to the HRC in March 2012. This
is the first time that any UN body approved a resolution affirming the rights of
LGBT persons.
Farmworkers
Following the Human Rights Watch report on the living and working conditions
of farmworkers in 2011, the government has shown a commitment to strengthening
the rights of those in the farming community. As a result, during 2012, the
government engaged extensively with civil society, academia, farmer associations,
and trade unions about a draft document on land tenure security before it
is submitted to parliament as a bill. The consultations have indicated that the
document is vague on how the nature and content of rights of farmworkers and
farm dwellers will be strengthened and protected, and will need to be more
robust to protect the rights of workers.
Addressing the tenure insecurities of farmworkers is critical to South Africa’s
overall land reform agenda.
International Justice
South Africa continued to play a leadership role in affirming the need to uphold
obligations to the International Criminal Court (ICC), although it has yet to block
African Union decisions, which call for states not to cooperate with the court in
the arrest of suspect Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir. The first domestic criminal
case in South Africa for international crimes committed in Zimbabwe also
commenced, although it was initially challenged by South’s Africa’s police and
prosecuting authority.
Rights of Refugees
In defiance of court orders, the Department of Home Affairs closed three of its
seven Refugee Reception Offices, which caused a crisis for asylum-seekers’ and refugees’ access to asylum and refugee procedures. The closures are part of the
department’s plan to move asylum-processing to the country’s borders, which
has limited access to work, adequate shelter, and assistance for asylum seekers.
Key International Actors
South Africa’s role as a non-permanent member of the UN Security Council ended
in December. Its tenure on the Security Council was marked by erratic stances on
human rights concerns, particularly regarding UN engagement on Libya and Syria.
South Africa abstained from voting on a draft UN security resolution threatening
UN action in Syria in July 2012.
South Sudan
The first year of South Sudan’s independence, declared on July 9, 2011, was
marred by intense inter-communal fighting in Jonglei state, deteriorating relations
with Sudan amid ongoing conflicts along their shared border, and the economic
consequences of South Sudan’s decision to shut down oil production.
The government took steps to develop its legal and institutional structure but
has yet to ratify major human rights treaties, despite repeatedly saying it would
do so. South Sudan is struggling to protect civilians from violence and human
rights abuses—including abuses by its own security forces, especially while carrying
out disarmament operations. Across the country, lack of capacity and inadequate
training of police, prosecutors, and judges have resulted in numerous
human rights violations in law enforcement and administering justice.
Legislative Developments
The National Legislative Assembly enacted several new laws, including a
Political Parties Act and Elections Act, but has yet to pass laws governing the
media and the National Security Service, including defining the security service’s
powers of arrest and detention.
The assembly also passed an austerity budget—significantly cutting operating
costs and basic services—to mitigate the economic consequences of the
February oil shutdown, which included inflation, fuel shortages, and price
increases.
The National Constitutional Review Commission, appointed in November 2011,
stalled over disagreements about political party and civil society representation.
The transitional constitution, which entered into force on July 9, 2011, will
remain in effect until a permanent constitution is adopted following national
elections in 2015.
South Sudan has yet to formally ratify key international human rights treaties. In
June, the president signed a Refugee Provisional Order containing international standards on refugee rights, and in July, the country acceded to the 1949
Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols.
North-South Tensions, Border Conflicts
Tensions between Sudan and South Sudan over unresolved post-secession
issues increased steadily throughout 2011 and early 2012, exacerbated by South
Sudan’s decision to shut down oil production in February, followed by armed
clashes between the two countries’ armed forces at Heglig oil fields in April.
The African Union, Peace and Security Council, and the United Nations Security
Council responded by adopting a roadmap for the two governments to cease
hostilities, resume negotiations, and reach agreements by certain deadlines, or
face penalties. In September, the two governments agreed to resume oil production
and trade, among other things, but failed to agree on the final status of
Abyei, a disputed border area claimed by both countries.
Clashes between northern and southern forces in Abyei in May 2011 displaced
tens of thousands of civilians from the area, most of whom have yet to return.
The AU and UN roadmap also required Sudan and the Sudanese armed rebel
group, the Sudan People’s Liberation Army-North (SPLA-N), to stop fighting in
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states. The conflicts, which began in June
2011, have caused massive displacement of more than 170,000 civilians to
refugee camps in South Sudan’s Unity and Upper Nile states.
Inter-Communal Violence
Retaliatory attacks between Lou Nuer and Murle ethnic groups in Jonglei state
escalated into large-scale conflict in late December 2011, when more than 6,000
Lou Nuer armed youth attacked Murle communities. According to UN investigations,
more than 800 people of both ethnicities were killed between December
2011 and February 2012. Women and children were abducted and property was
looted and destroyed.
The South Sudanese military and UN peacekeepers stationed in the area had
only limited success in protecting civilians from the mass violence, and were unable to prevent the attacks from spreading. The government launched a
statewide peace process and a civilian disarmament campaign in March 2012.
Lack of accountability for the crimes is widely believed to contribute to the cycle
of retaliatory violence. President Salva Kiir established an Investigation
Committee with a mandate to investigate those responsible for the violence, but
at this writing, the government has not released funds for the committee or
sworn in its members.
Abuses by Security Forces
During the Jonglei disarmament operation, “Operation Restore Peace,” which
began in March 2012 and continued throughout the year, soldiers were responsible
for extrajudicial killings, severe beatings, tying people up with rope, and
submerging their heads in water to extract information about the location of
weapons. Soldiers were also implicated in sexual violence against women and
girls.
Although the military took some steps to address violations by soldiers, such as
distributing the code of conduct to those involved in disarmament and deploying
judge-advocates to bolster the military justice system, these steps were not
sufficient to curb the abuses or hold soldiers accountable for human rights violations.
The absence of civilian judicial personnel in Pibor also undermined
efforts to ensure accountability.
South Sudanese security forces also detained and intimidated perceived critics
and independent journalists. In February, security guards assaulted Mading
Ngor, a radio journalist, while he was visiting the National Assembly in Juba.
Police in Rumbek arrested and detained a radio host, Ayak Dhieu Apar, for two
days over a radio call-in show perceived as critical of the police, while in Bentiu,
the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) detained and questioned Sudan
Tribune journalist Bonifacio Taban Kuich for three days over an article he wrote
about the grievances of widows of SPLA soldiers.
The National Security Service also arrested and detained without charge numerous
individuals, including journalists, without legal basis to do so. In December
2011, national security officials in Juba detained the editor of The Destiny news paper for almost two weeks and did not allow him access to a lawyer or to his
family. In September, security officials in Juba arrested and detained for three
days without charge a Citizen newspaper reporter.
Media advocates say in the absence of laws that regulate the media, editors
and reporters are especially vulnerable to harassment, arbitrary arrest, and censorship
by security forces.
Rebel and Militia Activity
In December 2011, the SPLA killed George Athor, leader of the rebel South
Sudan Democratic Movement/Army (SSDM/A). In early 2012, the SPLA reappointed
Peter Gadet, a former leader of the South Sudan Liberation Army
(SSLA) who signed a ceasefire agreement in August, to a high ranking position
as General. Hundreds of the two groups’ former militia members have been integrated
into the SPLA pursuant to the president’s 2011 amnesty.
Other groups, however, have not accepted the amnesty, and have clashed with
SPLA in Upper Nile state in April and in Jonglei state from August onward, displacing
thousands of civilians. On multiple occasions since 2010, both rebel
groups and SPLA soldiers have been responsible for serious human rights abuses,
including unlawful killings, destruction of property, and mass civilian displacements.
High-profile opposition and rebel leaders remain in military detention. Former
militia leader Gabriel Tanginye, who had signed a peace agreement with the
government, and opposition politician Peter Sule, accused of recruiting militia
in Western Equatoria, have been in SPLA custody for more than a year without
being formally charged with crimes.
Administration of Justice
Weaknesses in the justice system give rise to serious human rights violations,
such as prolonged periods of pre-trial detention and poor detention conditions.
Children are often detained with adults, while persons with mental disabilities
languish in prison without any legal basis for their detention and do not receive treatment. Lack of legal aid, including for people accused of serious crimes punishable
by death, also contributes to due process violations. South Sudan
retains the death penalty and carried out two executions in August. More than
230 prisoners are on death row. In November, human rights groups called on
the government to place a moratorium on the death penalty.
Women and Children
Child marriage is widespread, and many women and girls are deprived of the
right to choose a spouse and do not enter into marriage with their full and free
consent. Almost half (48.1 percent) of girls aged 15 to 19 years are currently married,
out of which 17 percent were married before age 15. Women and girls are
subjected to other practices that violate human rights law—such as wife-inheritance
and the use of girls to pay debts—and also face the risk of domestic violence.
They have few rights in marriage; for example, they do not have the right
to own and inherit property. Domestic disputes are resolved by traditional
courts that often apply discriminatory customs against women.
South Sudan signed a new action plan with the UN in March 2012 to end its use
of child soldiers. It also issued military orders for the release of all children from
the SPLA and allowed UN verification visits to SPLA barracks and training centers.
In June, the UN reported that more than 150 children were found in SPLA
barracks.
Key International Actors
The UN Security Council renewed the mandate of the UN Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS), with peacekeepers and civilian staff deployed in all 10 states.
The mission continued to support the UN Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA),
established in June 2011 to monitor troop redeployments, facilitate humanitarian
aid, and protect civilians from imminent threat, among other tasks.
The AU’s High-Level Implementation Panel continued to play a key role in facilitating
negotiations between South Sudan and Sudan, particularly after conflict
between them in April. The outstanding post-secession issues, addressed in September, included oil production arrangements, the status of Abyei, demarcation
of the border, and citizenship.
The UN Human Rights Council (HRC) again requested that the UN high commissioner
for human rights present a report on the human rights situation in the
country. In October, South Sudan expelled, without warning or explanation, a
senior UN human rights staff. Both the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR) and the UN peacekeeping mission denounced the expulsion.
In October, United States President Barack Obama waived the application of the
Child Soldiers Prevention Act to South Sudan, citing US national interests. The
law prohibits several categories of US military assistance to governments using
child soldiers.
Sudan
Sudan’s relations with newly independent South Sudan deteriorated in early
2012, leading to clashes along the shared border in April. Although the two governments
signed an agreement in September, paving the way for resumption of
oil production, fighting between Sudanese government forces and rebel movements
continues in Darfur, as well as in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states
where Sudan’s indiscriminate bombardment and obstruction of humanitarian
assistance forced more than 170,000 to flee to refugee camps in South Sudan.
Student-led protests in Sudan’s university towns intensified in response to
wide-ranging austerity measures and political grievances. From June through
August, riot police and national security officials violently dispersed a wave of
protests, with hundreds arrested, at least 12 protesters shot dead, and scores of
others detained and subjected to harsh interrogations, ill-treatment, and torture.
Sudanese authorities also harassed, and arbitrarily arrested and detained other
perceived opponents of the government, including suspected members of the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/North—which was banned in September
2011—members of other opposition parties, civil society leaders, and journalists.
They also censored the press.
Protection Concerns on Border with South Sudan
Following South Sudan’s independence in July 2011, Sudan’s ruling National
Congress Party (NCP) and the South’s ruling Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement (SPLM) were deadlocked on a range of issues including oil production,
debt, the status of the nationals of one country in the other, border security,
resolution of border disputes, and the status of Abyei. Amid rising tensions,
both countries accused the other of supporting or harboring rebel groups. South
Sudan shut down oil production in February, seriously affecting the economies
of both countries.
In early 2012, cross-border attacks, including aerial bombardments by Sudan
into South Sudan, increased culminating in 10 days of armed conflict between the two nations in April at Heglig, an oil-producing area along the border. The
armed clashes and bombing in and around Bentiu, Unity state, resulted in civilian
casualties and displacement.
South Sudan withdrew under international pressure and both the African Union
and the United Nations endorsed a roadmap for resumption of negotiations
over post-secession issues. In the following months, though political tensions
eased, sporadic clashes and bombing continued and caused injuries, and displaced
civilians in Northern Bahr el Ghazal state, South Sudan.
In September, the two governments signed agreements on oil, borders, and citizenship
among other issues, but did not agree on the status of Abyei or address
the ongoing conflict in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile, which has forced more
than 200,000 people into refugee camps in South Sudan and Ethiopia.
Humanitarian Law Violations in the Southern Kordofan and
Blue Nile Conflict
Fighting continued in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states between Sudan
government forces and the armed opposition group, Sudan People’s Liberation
Army-North (SPLA-North), which grew out of the southern rebel SPLA’s wartime
presence in Sudan. In Southern Kordofan, ground clashes and government
bombing forced hundreds of thousands of civilians to flee their homes. Many
fled to caves and mountains where they lacked food, shelter, and hygiene. By
November, more than 65,000 had fled to a refugee camp in South Sudan.
The conflict spread to Blue Nile state in September 2011, with ground fighting
and government bombing forcing hundreds of thousands of people to flee their
homes. As of November, more than 145,000, many of them travelling on foot for
weeks or months, had fled to refugee camps in South Sudan and Ethiopia. The
Sudanese government has refused to allow aid groups to access needy populations
living in rebel-controlled areas in both states, effectively depriving civilians
of essential food, medicine, and other basic services.
Conflict in Darfur
The Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, signed in July 2011 by Sudan and a
Darfur rebel group, Liberation and Justice Movement (LJM), has had little impact
in improving security or human rights in Darfur. The parties set up the Darfur
Regional Authority, a body to implement the agreement, and appointed some
LJM members to government positions. Donors, particularly Qatar, promise to
fund early recovery and development activities.
Non-signatory rebel groups including Sudan Liberation Army (SLA) and Justice
and Equality Movement (JEM) have joined with SPLA-North in a national coalition,
known as the Sudan Revolutionary Front (SRF). Clashes between rebels
and government forces, and government bombing of rebel-held areas, continued
particularly in North Darfur and East Jebel Mara areas. In September, fighting
between government-aligned militia groups and rebels near Hashaba, North
Darfur led to the death of dozens of civilians. On November 2, government
forces attacked Sigili village in North Darfur, killing 13 civilians.
The Sudanese government continued to deny peacekeepers from the United
Nations-African Union Mission in Darfur (UNAMID) access to much of Darfur.
Despite such restrictions, UNAMID reported on the government’s arbitrary
arrests and detentions of real and perceived opponents, and on patterns of sexual
violence. A state of emergency, empowering governors to detain people
indefinitely without judicial review, remains in place throughout Darfur.
Lawlessness and insecurity hampered the work of the peacekeepers and aid
groups. Armed gunmen attacked and killed peacekeepers, including four
Nigerians in October, abducted UNAMID and humanitarian staff and carjacked
dozens of vehicles. The vast majority of Darfur’s displaced population, estimated
around 2.5 million people, remain in camps in Darfur and Chad.
Justice and Accountability
Seven years after the International Criminal Court (ICC) issued arrest warrants or
summons to appear against six individuals, Sudan continued to refuse to cooperate
with the ICC or to meaningfully prosecute the crimes in its own courts. The
UN Security Council had in 2005 referred the situation in Darfur to the ICC, which issued the warrants or summons to appear against President Omar al-
Bashir and five others, on charges of war crimes, crimes against humanity, and
genocide, although the charges were not confirmed against one of the suspects,
Bahar Idriss Abu Garda.
Despite the appointment of a fifth special prosecutor for Darfur in June, Sudan
has done little to promote accountability. It has made none of the justice
reforms recommended in the 2009 report from the AU’s High-level Panel on
Darfur, headed by former South African President Thabo Mbeki.
Crackdown on Protests
In late 2011 and early 2012, security forces violently dispersed peaceful protests
across the country, often at universities. Students protested against price
increases student elections, and in solidarity with the Manaseer community’s
demands for compensation for their forced displacement from land in Red Sea
state by the construction of the Merowe Dam in 2008.
In June and July, as the economic consequences of the oil-shut down surfaced,
student and youth-led protests increased in number and size. The protests were
larger than the Arab Spring-inspired protests in early 2011, despite the lack of
official backing from major opposition parties. Starting June 16 at Khartoum
University, protests were staged on a near daily basis in dozens of towns
against the government’s austerity measures and other policies.
Riot police and national security forces used batons, sticks, rubber bullets and
in some cases live ammunition to disperse the gatherings. Many protesters
were wounded and required medical care. In South Darfur, on July 31, the security
forces killed 12 protesters including several children under 18 years old.
National security forces, often in pick-up trucks, arrested hundreds of protesters
and people who did not participate directly in the protests, such as suspected
organizers, political activists and prominent members of the opposition.
While many were released within days, a large number remained in National
Security Service (NSS) custody for several weeks or months. Members of the
activist group Girifna (We are fed up) were particularly targeted for arrest and
detention. One Darfuri member, Rudwan Daoud, was charged with espionage and crimes against the state, punishable by death. Following international pressure,
charges were dropped and he was released. Most of the student protesters
were released in mid-August before the end of Ramadan.
Dozens of released detainees reported being subjected by national security officers
to severe beatings, sleep deprivation, and other forms of torture during
interrogations. Many were forced to provide their Facebook and email addresses
passwords, and to reveal the names and whereabouts of political activists.
Upon their release, detainees were made to renounce their political activism,
promise not to engage in political activity, or agree to work as informants for
NSS.
Political Repression and Media Restrictions
In addition to protest-related harassment, the NSS targeted opposition party
members, particularly SPLM-North, which was banned in September 2011.
Security officials also targeted human rights workers, civil society members, and
perceived opponents for harassment, arrest and detention, particularly during
the period that protests were being held. For example, in July, a group of more
than 13 women activists were held for more than a month in Omdurman
women’s prison, in poor conditions.
Many people were detained because of their real or perceived links to the SPLMNorth,
which was banned in September 2011 when war broke out in Blue Nile
state, or as a result of their human rights activism. Abdelmonim Rahama, a poet
and former adviser to the Blue Nile state government, spent 11 months in detention
in Sennar state. Nuba human rights activist, Bushra Gammar, was released
after more than one year in detention without charge, while Jalila Khamees, a
Nuba schoolteacher and human rights defender, was arrested from her home in
Khartoum in March 2012 by national security officials, and in July was charged
with crimes against the state that could carry the death sentence.
In the wake of fighting with South Sudan’s army at Heglig in April, Sudanese
authorities stepped up hostile rhetoric and political repression. NSS summoned
prominent Sudanese journalist and human rights defender, Faisal Mohamed
Salih, for several hours of questioning and ordered him to report back daily for nearly two weeks in connection with his comments critical of the government on
Al Jazeera Arabic television.
Authorities censored articles, confiscated newspaper editions, and blacklisted
more than 15 journalists for reporting on sensitive topics, including a churchburning
incident in April prompted by a radical imam’s hostile rhetoric. National
security officials also routinely instructed editors to refrain from publishing criticisms
of the president or the armed forces, the economic impact of the oil shutdown,
or the conflicts in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile.
In May, the Humanitarian Aid Commission (HAC) suspended or expelled seven
humanitarian organizations from working in Eastern Sudan. In September, HAC
began summoning local organizations that receive foreign funding, in an apparent
effort to cut off foreign funding of civil society groups.
Key International Actors
Following the armed hostilities at Heglig in April, the AU and UN, through
Security Council Resolution 2046, endorsed a roadmap for cessation of hostilities
and resumption of negotiations on post-secession issues. The AU’s High-
Level Implementation Panel continued to facilitate the negotiations. Ethiopia
remains an important actor in these negotiations despite the death of Prime
Minister Meles Zenawi in August.
In September, Sudan and South Sudan reached a deal on oil production
arrangements, border management and citizenship, but remained deadlocked
on the status of Abyei. Sudan and SPLM-North did not enter into direct negotiations.
While the parties did accept the tri-partite proposal submitted by the AU,
UN, and League of Arab States to permit humanitarian access to the affected
populations in the two states, Sudan has refused to implement it.
The UN extended the mandate of UNAMID for a fifth year, while adopting plans
to downsize its military and police components. Its Joint Special Representative,
Ibrahim Gambari, finished his term July 31 and has yet to be replaced. In the
contested territory of Abyei, the UN Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
continued to deploy and prepare for its role in wider border management, pursuant
to 2011 agreements.
Sudan did not grant the UN’s Independent Expert on the situation of human
rights in the Sudan access to Darfur and he was therefore only allowed to hold
meetings in Khartoum. In September, the UN Human Rights Council strengthened
the mandate and called on Sudan to allow the expert to access to the
entire country including conflict zones in Darfur, Southern Kordofan and Blue
Nile.
While al-Bashir was welcomed in Egypt and Libya this year, ICC member Malawi
indicated it would arrest al-Bashir if he entered that country to attend the AU
summit scheduled to take place there in June 2012. As a result, the summit was
moved to Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
Uganda
After 26 years of President Yoweri Museveni’s rule, increasing threats to freedom
of expression, assembly, and association raise serious concerns about
Uganda’s respect for the rule of law. The security forces continue to enjoy
impunity for torture, extrajudicial killings, and the deaths of at least 49 people
during protests in 2009 and 2011.
The government banned a political pressure group calling for peaceful change,
stopped opposition groups from holding rallies, and harassed and intimidated
journalists and civil society activists in 2012. Organizations monitoring governance,
accountability of public resources, land rights, oil revenue, and the
rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) people face increased
obstructions. The notorious draft Anti-Homosexuality Bill, which proposes the
death penalty for some consensual same-sex activities, remains tabled in parliament,
threatening the rights of Uganda’s LGBT people.
After an eight-year civil society campaign supporting the bill, parliament unanimously
passed a law defining and criminalizing torture that the president
signed, bringing it into force in July.
Freedom of Assembly and Expression
Police interference in, and unlawful obstruction of, public gatherings remains a
significant problem, often accompanied by arrests and detentions of organizers
and participants. In March, police stopped opposition leaders from touring a
public works project in Kampala, the capital. In the resulting melee, a policeman,
John Bosco Ariong, was hit by an object and died. Police closed off the
area, arrested over 50 people, and beat them in detention. One person was
charged with Ariong’s murder and is awaiting trial. The mayor of Kampala and
an opposition leader were charged with organizing an unlawful assembly with
the purpose of inciting members of the public against the police.
In April, the attorney general banned the political pressure group Activists for
Change, which orchestrated the April 2011 “Walk to Work” protests, labeling the
group an unlawful society under the penal code. The ban came a day before a planned rally to call attention to police abuse of opposition supporters. Police
placed opposition leader Kizza Besigye under house arrest without a court order
in April during the international assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU)
in Kampala, arguing that he would disrupt the meeting.
In October, as Uganda marked 50 years of independence, celebrations were
marred by protests and widespread arrests as the government stopped opposition
rallies, a “Walk to Freedom” protest organized by 4GC (For God and Country,
formerly Activists for Change), and house arrests of prominent political figures,
including Besigye and the mayor of Kampala.
Police restricted public debate and expression of concerns over governance
throughout 2012. For example, two authors of a book critical of President
Museveni—Doreen Nyanjura and Ibrahim Bagaya Kisubi—were arrested at the
Kampala book launch in April. Nyanjura was charged with participating in
unlawful society and inciting violence and detained for two weeks. In August,
Barbara Allimadi, a member of another pressure group, Concerned Citizens, was
arrested and briefly detained after staging a demonstration in parliament.
Police confiscated Allimadi’s t-shirts, which had anti-corruption slogans.
Journalists continue to be physically attacked and harassed by police in the
course of their work. Between January and June, a media watchdog organization
registered 50 attacks on journalists, despite multiple police pledges to respect
media freedom.
Restrictions on Nongovernmental Organizations
The government is deploying hostile rhetoric and an array of tactics to intimidate
and obstruct the work of nongovernmental organizations on sensitive
issues such as governance, human rights, land, oil, and the rights of LGBT people.
Tactics include closing meetings, forcing NGO representatives to issue
apologies, occasional physical violence, threats, harassment, and heavy-handed
bureaucratic interference in NGO registration and operations. NGOs are
required to register to work in Uganda, but due to government hostility, organizations
working on the rights of LGBT people cannot register to operate legally as is required under law. Senior government officials and police have unlawfully
tried to stifle discussion of LGBT rights.
In February, the minister of ethics and integrity closed down a meeting organized
by Sexual Minorities Uganda; in June, police broke up a meeting organized
by the East and Horn of Africa Human Rights Defenders; and in August, police
shut down a gay pride march in Entebbe. In September, a British producer was
arrested and charged for staging a play about homosexuality, though he was
later released, and on November 8, police blocked another local theatre production
about the rights of LGBT people.
Torture, Extrajudicial Killings, and Lack of Accountability
Police leadership disbanded the Police’s Rapid Response Unit (RRU) in
December 2011 explicitly because of its poor human rights record, renaming it
the Special Investigations Unit (SIU). However the police have failed to investigate
abuses committed by RRU officers or ad hoc operatives, some of whom
continue to work with the SIU. In September, four members of the opposition
Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) appeared before court charged with treason.
They complained of torture in detention after having been detained by the SIU
for 14 days.
The government failed to investigate the killing of over 40 people by security
forces during the September 2009 riots, and the deaths of nine people during
the “Walk to Work” demonstrations in April 2011.
No charges were filed against the police officer who in April assaulted Ingrid
Turinawe, head of the FDC’s Women’s League, as police prevented her from
attending a rally.
Electoral violence marred six of the nine parliamentary by-elections held
between February and September. In Bukoto South, armed paramilitary groups
travelling in unmarked cars beat supporters of the Democratic Party candidate
on election day, despite a heavy police presence. Incidents of election-related
violence also occurred in other parts of the country.
There have been no arrests for the killings of three Muslim leaders this year. On
April 20, prominent Muslim scholar Abdu Karim Senatmu was shot by unknown
assailants and on August 18, Sheikh Yunus Abubakari was shot and killed after
leading night prayers. President Museveni claimed Sentamu’s death was due to
his connections with the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), a rebel group operating
in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). In September, Imam Abdul Jowadi
Sentuga was also shot and killed. Police spokespeople said that the killings are
related to the ADF and promised to release a report, but it was not completed at
the time of writing.
The Lord’s Resistance Army
The Ugandan armed rebel group, the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), continued to
kill and abduct people across Central African Republic, southern Sudan, and
northern DRC though at a reduced scale from previous years (see DRC chapter).
Warrants issued by the International Criminal Court (ICC) for LRA leaders in 2005
remain outstanding. The War Crimes Division of the High Court did not begin its
first trial of the only defendant in custody, former LRA fighter Thomas Kwoyelo,
who has been charged with willful killing, taking hostages, and extensive
destruction of property. Kwoyelo had previously applied for amnesty. In January,
the High Court ordered the prosecutors to grant amnesty and release him, but
the state has appealed and the case was, at this writing, pending before the
Supreme Court.
Uganda’s parliament permitted key provisions of the amnesty law to lapse,
meaning that for the first time since 2000, LRA fighters who end up in custody
could face criminal trial.
Bills Violating Human Rights Law
The Anti-Homosexuality Bill, which proposes the death penalty for some consensual
same-sex activities, and the HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Act,
which criminalizes intentional or attempted transmission of HIV, are before parliamentary
committees and could still come up for debate and vote. The Public
Order Management Bill, which grants police overly broad discretionary powers in the management of all public meetings, was also presented in parliament
and was pending at this writing.
Key International Actors
On October 19, Uganda’s auditor general reported extensive fraud regarding
€22.9 million, prompting the governments of Denmark, Ireland, Norway,
Sweden, and the United Kingdom to suspend development aid. No one has
been held accountable for the loss of US$44 million which disappeared in the
lead-up to the 2007 Commonwealth meeting, despite multi-year donor efforts to
recover the funds. Three ministers who were to face prosecution returned to
office.
International bilateral donors continue to press the government to respect LGBT
rights. United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton presented the State
Department’s 2011 Human Rights Defenders Award to the Civil Society Coalition
on Human Rights and Constitutional Law, for its efforts to defeat the Anti-
Homosexuality Bill.
In contrast to donor pressure on LGBT rights, there has been minimal criticism of
security force conduct. US reliance on the Ugandan military for regional counterterrorism
operations may explain the diminished criticism of Uganda’s deteriorating
domestic human rights record. The army continues to receive logistical
support and training from the US for counterterrorism, its leading role in the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), and counter-LRA operations in the
Central African Republic (CAR). One hundred US military advisors are supporting
anti-LRA efforts. Accused by United Nations experts of backing the M23 rebels
in the DRC in October, Uganda claimed it could potentially suspend its involvement
in Somalia and LRA operations.
Zimbabwe
Human rights developments in Zimbabwe in 2012 were dominated by the drafting
of a new constitution and the implementation of the Global Political
Agreement (GPA), signed in 2008, which created the power-sharing coalition
between the former ruling party, the Zimbabwe African National Union-Patriotic
Front (ZANU-PF), and the opposition party Movement for Democratic Change
(MDC) following the 2008 elections. There has been little progress in implementing
key aspects of the GPA, notably the need for institutional and legal
reforms, ending political violence, and ensuring accountability for past human
rights abuses.
The Global Political Agreement and the Constitution
More than four years after ZANU-PF and the MDC signed the GPA, few of the
reforms outlined in the agreement have been fully implemented. Reforms needed
to improve the human rights environment and to create conditions for democratic
elections include: a parliament-led process to write a new constitution;
police training; prioritizing a legislative agenda to enshrine the agreement’s
provisions; renouncing the use of violence; and ensuring that the government
fully and impartially enforces domestic laws in bringing all perpetrators of politically
motivated violence to justice. The GPA also guarantees free political activity
whereby all political parties are able to propagate their views and canvass for
support, free of harassment and intimidation, and calls for respect for the rule
of law. It also commits the unity government to ensure the full implementation
and realization of the rights to freedom of association and assembly, and the
promotion of freedom of expression and communication.
After 36 months of discussions, the Constitutional Select Committee of
Parliament produced a final draft of the constitution on July 18, 2012. ZANU-PF
and the MDC engaged in long debates over key provisions. The MDC endorsed
the final draft, but ZANU-PF called for further amendments, including questioning
limits to presidential powers and references to devolution. After some pressure
from the regional body, the Southern African Development Community
(SADC), ZANU-PF backed down and a stakeholder’s conference to discuss the constitution was held from October 21 to October 23. A date for a referendum on
the new constitution has yet to be set and elections must be held by June 2013,
as prescribed by the GPA.
While legislation to establish an independent and credible human rights commission
and electoral commission has been passed, there are significant concerns
with the two commissions. The law establishing the human rights commission
states that it can only investigate alleged human rights abuses since
the formation of the power-sharing government in February 2009. This prevents
the commission from investigating other serious crimes, including electionrelated
violence in 2002, 2005 and 2008; the massacre of an estimated 20,000
people in Matabeleland North and South in the 1980s, as well as the government-
led mass demolitions of homes and business structures, and evictions of
several thousand people from their homes in 2005.
Concerns persist over the composition of the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission,
many of whose members are regarded as highly partisan supporters of ZANU-PF.
Freedom of Expression, Association, and Assembly
The power-sharing government has either failed to amend or come to agreement
on amending repressive laws such as the Access to Information and Protection
of Privacy Act (AIPPA), the Public Order and Security Act (POSA), and the
Criminal Law (Codification and Reform) Act, which severely curtail basic rights
through vague defamation clauses and draconian penalties. The failure to
amend or repeal these laws, and to develop mechanisms to address the partisan
conduct of the police, limits the rights to freedom of association and
assembly ahead of and during the coming elections.
Provisions in AIPPA and POSA that provide criminal penalties for defamation,
undermining the authority of, or insulting the president, have routinely been
used against journalists and human rights defenders. ZANU-PF has repeatedly
blocked attempts by the MDC to amend POSA and bring it in line with commitments
in the GPA. Police often deliberately interpret provisions of POSA to ban
lawful public meetings and gatherings. Prosecutors have often used section 121
of the Criminal Procedure and Evidence Act against opposition and civil society activists to overturn judicial rulings granting bail and extend detention by seven
days.
Activists continue to be wrongly prosecuted and charged under these laws. On
March 19, 2012, six civil society activists, arrested in 2011 for watching a video
of Arab Spring protests, were convicted under section 188 of the Criminal Law
(Codification and Reform Act) of conspiracy to commit violence. On March 21, a
Harare magistrate gave the activists two-year suspended sentences, US$500
fines, and 420 hours of community service. Lawyers representing the activists
appealed the verdict at the Harare High Court, and called for an investigation
into allegations by the activists that police and security agents tortured them in
efforts to extract confessions that they were planning an uprising against the
government.
On September 12, 2012, the minister of media, information and publicity,
Webster Shamu, threatened to use the AIPPA to revoke the operating licenses of
media organizations, accusing them of abusing their media freedoms by
denouncing the country and its leadership.
In February 2012, the ZANU-PF governor of Mazvingo province threatened to
deregister 29 nongovernmental organizations involved in providing various
social services—including providing food, clothing, and assisting people with
disabilities—for failing to register with his office. Although he had no legal
authority to deregister NGOs, fears that such threats might spread to other
provinces became a reality when on August 23, a similar threat was issued
against the director of Gays and Lesbians of Zimbabwe (GALZ) for operating an
“unregistered” organization, after he and other GALZ members were arrested.
Human Rights Defenders
Attacks on human rights defenders continued in 2012. Police repeatedly arrested
members of Women of Zimbabwe Arise (WOZA) as they conducted peaceful
protests related to human rights and the economic situation.
Police also regularly harassed the director of the Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO
Forum, Abel Chikomo. He was arrested and released on bail in 2011 after police
accused him of running an unregistered organization. Chikomo was required to report to the Harare police station on numerous occasions throughout the year
and was eventually summoned to stand trial on July 3, 2012. The state withdrew
the summons on July 25, but reiterated its intentions to serve fresh summons at
a future date. In the meantime, police have continued to harass Chikomo by
repeatedly visiting the offices of the NGO Forum.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
The government intensified its attacks against lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
(LGBT) rights activists despite statements by Prime Minister Morgan
Tsvangirai that LGBT rights should be enshrined in the new constitution.
On August 20, 2012, police occupied the Harare offices of GALZ for six hours.
They confiscated documents, advocacy materials, and computers. Earlier on
August 11, police raided the group’s offices without a warrant after the group
issued its 2011 LGBTI Rights Violations Report and a briefing on the draft constitution.
During the raid, police briefly detained 44 GALZ members, punching and
slapping them, and assaulting them with batons. Police took the names of all
44 members before releasing them without charge. The following week, police
went to some of the members’ homes and took them to police headquarters for
further questioning.
In July 2012, police summoned the director of GALZ and informed him that they
would prosecute him for continuing to display in GALZ’s offices a letter from the
mayor of San Francisco criticizing President Robert Mugabe for being homophobic.
Key International Actors
Led by the South African government, SADC continued to mediate efforts to
ensure the implementation of the GPA and a road map towards free, fair, and
peaceful elections in Zimbabwe. At an annual summit on August 18, 2012, SADC
leaders urged the power-sharing government to create conditions for free and
fair elections, and called for the implementation of reforms under the GPA.
Human rights activists and other critics have considered these statements to be
inadequate and have questioned SADC’s ability to robustly address the slow
pace of human rights reforms and ZANU-PF’s blocking of the rigorous implementation
of the GPA.
In February 2012, the European Union renewed restrictions on development
assistance to Zimbabwe for six months instead of one year, as it had done in the
past. The EU eased restrictions against ZANU-PF members and party allies by
removing 51 people and 20 companies from its sanctions list. Some human
rights activists expressed concerns that some of those removed from the list
had links to illicit diamond mining in Marange and should not have been taken
off it.
On July 23, 2012, in response to what it considered encouraging progress in
implementing the GPA, the EU announced an immediate suspension of restrictions
on development assistance and pledged that it would suspend the rest of
its restrictive measures if a credible and peaceful referendum was held on a new
constitution. This came after the UN high commissioner for human rights, Navi
Pillay, called for the suspension of sanctions in a visit to Zimbabwe in May.
Australia also took similar steps in 2012 to remove people and entities from its
list of restrictive measures.
The United States government was appropriately more cautious in lifting its own
restrictive measures against ZANU-PF. It held its position to continue such measures
until “substantial and irreversible progress” has been made towards implementation
of the GPA.
Argentina
Argentina continues to make significant progress in prosecuting military and
police personnel for enforced disappearances, killings, and torture during the
country’s “Dirty War” between 1976 and 1983, although trials have been subject
to delays.
Comprehensive legislation was adopted in 2009 to regulate broadcast media,
but a 2010 court injunction obtained by Argentina’s largest media company suspended
the implementation of provisions in the law that limit the ownership of
radio and television outlets. In November 2012, the director of the regulatory
body responsible for the law’s implementation indicated that a major media
company would lose some of its media licenses in December, when the court
injunction was set to expire.
In recent years, the Supreme Court has defended the right of pre-trial detainees
to be held in adequate conditions, the right of critical print media not to face
discrimination in allocating official advertising because of their editorial position,
and, in 2012, the right to legal abortions.
Significant ongoing human rights concerns in 2012 include poor prison conditions,
torture, and arbitrary restrictions on reproductive rights.
Confronting Past Abuses
Several important human rights cases from Argentina’s last military dictatorship
(1976-1983) were reopened in 2003 after Congress annulled the 1986 “Full
Stop” law, which had stopped prosecution of such cases, and the 1987 “Due
Obedience” law, which granted immunity to all members of the military, except
those in positions of command. In 2005, the Supreme Court upheld the unconstitutionality
of the amnesty laws, originally decided by a judge in 2001 in a
case brought by the Center for Legal and Social Studies (CELS)and Abuelas de
Plaza de Mayo. Starting in 2005, federal judges struck down pardons that then-
President Carlos Menem issued between 1989 and 1990 to former officials convicted
of, or facing trial for, human rights violations.
As of August 2012, the number of persons accused of crimes against humanity
had increased to 1,926, from 922 in 2007, according to CELS. There were 799
people facing charges for these crimes, and 262 who had been convicted and
sentenced.
Trials have been subject to delays at the appellate level, with appeals normally
taking more than two years to be heard after the sentence of the trial court. As
of August 2012, the Supreme Court had confirmed final sentences in only eight
of the cases reactivated after the annulment of the Full Stop and Due Obedience
laws.
In July 2012, a federal court sentenced Jorge Videla, de facto president from
1976 to 1981, to 50 years in prison for implementing a plan to steal babies from
women who gave birth while they were being held in torture centers before they
were killed, and to hand them over to military families for adoption. More than
400 babies are estimated to have been affected. Other officers, including the
head of the last military junta, Reynaldo Bignone (1982-1983), also received
prison sentences. The court concluded that the theft of babies was a “systematic
and generalized practice.” Videla had been convicted in 1985 for crimes
against humanity and was already serving a life sentence.
The “mega-trial” of state agents responsible for crimes committed at the Navy
Mechanics School (ESMA) continued in 2012. In October 2011, a federal court
sentenced 12 of the perpetrators to life imprisonment for the illegal arrest, torture,
and murder of detainees held at the center. A second trial commenced in
November 2012, in which 67 state agents faced similar charges. Seven of them
were being tried for their alleged participation in “flights of death,” in which
prisoners held at ESMA were drugged and dropped from planes into the
Atlantic.
The security of witnesses in human rights trials is a concern. After Jorge Julio
López, a former torture victim, disappeared from his home in September 2006—
a day before he was due to attend one of the final days of a trial—the government
implemented measures to protect witnesses. The fate or whereabouts of
López have still not been clarified.
Freedom of Expression
A law to regulate the broadcast media, which Congress approved in 2009, aims
to promote diversity of views by limiting the ability of corporations to own large
portions of the broadcasting frequency spectrum. The law contains vague definitions
of what “faults” could lead to sanctions, including the revocation of
broadcasting licenses. The Federal Authority for Audiovisual Communication
Services (AFCSA), the regulatory body responsible for implementing and enforcing
the law, issued repeated decisions in 2011 and 2012 against Cablevision,
the cable TV division of the Clarín Group—Argentina’s largest media corporation
and a prominent government critic—for failing to reorganize its channels according
to AFCSA regulations.
In October 2010, the Supreme Court upheld an injunction in favor of Clarín and
suspended application of an article of the law that would oblige the company to
sell within a year its outlets that exceed the new legal limits. In May 2012, the
court ruled that the suspension would finally be lifted on December 7, 2012,
even though a lower court was still considering the law’s constitutionality.
AFCSA’s director, Martín Sabbatella, stated in November that only one media
group had not agreed to present proposals to restructure its holdings before the
December 7 deadline—a clear reference to Clarín— and that AFCSA would begin
procedures for reassigning its excess licenses if it failed to do so.
In March 2011, the Supreme Court unanimously upheld an administrative court
ruling in favor of Perfíl publications, which had filed for an injunction against
the government of President Néstor Kirchner for refusing to allocate official
advertising to Noticias and Fortuna magazines, and to the Perfíl newspaper,
because of their critical editorial positions. The current administration of
President Cristina Fernández has failed to comply with the court’s ruling that it
must provide advertising to Perfíl’s publications in “reasonable balance” with
that provided to similar outlets without reference to their editorial positions. In
August 2012, an administrative appeals court ordered the government to comply
with the Supreme Court ruling within 15 days. Following a successful government
appeal against this order, the Supreme Court was expected to give a final
decision on the case.
Argentina does not have a national law ensuring public access to information
held by state bodies. A bill to this effect has been stalled in the Chamber of
Deputies since it received Senate approval in September 2010.
Prison Conditions
Overcrowding, inadequate physical conditions, and inmate violence continue to
be serious problems in prisons. In the province of Buenos Aires, inmates continue
to be confined in police lock ups not designed or equipped to hold
detainees for long periods, although their number has declined significantly
since 2010 when the provincial authorities began relocating detainees after
expressions of concern by national and international human rights bodies.
Detention cells in 138 police stations in the province were closed in 2011 and
detainees transferred to the already-overcrowded Buenos Aires prison system,
according to CELS. According to the Committee against Torture of the Provincial
Commission for Memory, 127 prisoners in Buenos Aires prisons died in attacks
by other inmates, suicides, and accidents in 2011, the last year for which figures
were available.
Torture and ill-treatment by prison guards are common problems. In its 2011
annual report, the National Register of Torture and Ill-Treatment reported 584
cases of physical violence by prison guards. The group is a monitoring organization
set up by the National Penitenciary Procurator (ProcuraciónPenitenciaria de
la Nación), an official body created by the legislature.
Counterterrorism Legislation
In December 2011, Congress approved additions to Argentina’s criminal code
that double the penalties for crimes committed with the aim of “terrorizing the
population,” or of obliging the authorities to take an action or refrain from doing
so. The broadness of this language—and its applicability to any crime in the
criminal code— raises concerns about possible misuse of the law against those
responsible for actions that fall short of terrorism, such as violence during public
protests.
Transnational Justice
At this writing, no one had been convicted for the 1994 bombing of the Jewish
Argentine Mutual Association (AMIA) in Buenos Aires in which 85 people died
and over 300 were injured. Judicial corruption and political cover-ups hindered
criminal investigations and prosecutions from the outset. Iran, which is suspected
of ordering the attack, has refused Argentina’s requests for the extradition of
former Iranian President Ali Akbar Hashemi-Rafsanjani and six Iranian officials.
In September 2012, in a joint statement following a meeting at the United
Nations, the Argentine and Iranian foreign ministers said they would continue to
search for “a legal mechanism that is not in contradiction with the legal systems
of Argentina and Iran” until a “mutually agreed” solution was found.
Reproductive Rights
Abortion is illegal in Argentina, with limited exceptions, and women and girls
face numerous obstacles to reproductive health products and services, such as
contraception, voluntary sterilization procedures, and abortion after rape (one
of the circumstances in which abortion is permitted). As a result of these barriers,
women and girls may face unwanted or unhealthy pregnancies.
In a landmark ruling in March 2012, the Supreme Court determined that prior
judicial authorization was unnecessary for abortion after rape. The court urged
provincial governments to adopt protocols to ensure access to legal abortions.
As of September, 10 out of Argentina’s 23 provinces had taken steps to do so,
and 5 had announced that they were in the process of doing so.
Also in September, the legislature for the city of Buenos Aires legislature passed
a law implementing the ruling in its jurisdiction. However, the city’s governor,
Mauricio Macri, vetoed the law, claiming that it went beyond what the court
required. The local ministry of health’s protocols implementing the court’s ruling—
which contained requirements that could serve as obstacles for access to
legal abortion—remained in effect. In October, after anti-choice groups won a
court order that would have prevented the victim of a sex trafficking ring from
obtaining an abortion, the Supreme Court intervened to allow the abortion to be
performed.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In May 2012, a law entered force establishing the right of individuals over the
age of 18 to choose their gender identity and their right to undergo sex-change
operations and hormonal treatment without need for administrative or legal
authorization.
Key International Actors
In his report on his November 2011 visit to Argentina, the UN special rapporteur
on the rights of indigenous peoples, James Anaya, expressed concern at the
large number of evictions of indigenous communities due to “the grave situation
of legal uncertainty over indigenous land.” The special rapporteur also
observedthat those who resist eviction or protest against it may be subject to a
“disproportionate use of force by police” and criminal prosecution.
At the Organization of American States (OAS) General Assembly in June 2012,
Argentina’s foreign minister publicly questionedthe role of the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights (IACHR), suggesting that it should not be critical
of the region’s “democracies” today in the same way it had been critical of “dictatorships”
in the past.
Bolivia
Judicial investigations and adjudication of human rights cases are subject to
long delays that continued to hinder accountability in 2012. The fate of scores
who “disappeared” before democracy was reestablished in 1982 has still not
been clarified, and most perpetrators of disappearances and extrajudicial executions
have escaped justice. The insistence of military courts on trying military
accused of abuses has continued to obstruct justice in the case of an army
recruit killed in suspicious circumstances during a training exercise in 2011.
In 2012, government officials used legislation that prohibits the expression of
racist ideas in the media to seek criminal charges against private media and
journalists because of reporting to which they objected.
Accountability for Abuses
Long delays in the conduct of trials continue to obstruct justice for human rights
violations under earlier governments. The only notable advance in recent years
was the sentencing in August 2011 of five generals to 10 to 15 years imprisonment
each for killing at least 60 people during anti-government protests in
September and October 2003, when the army used lethal force to quell violent
demonstrations in the highland city of El Alto. Two members of former President
Gonzalo Sánchez de Lozada’s cabinet received three-year suspended sentences
for their part in the events, often referred to as “Black October.”
The armed forces have failed to turn over files that might clarify the fate or
whereabouts of people who were killed or “disappeared” before democracy was
restored in 1982. In July 2012, in response to protestors who were demanding
that files from the government of Luis García Meza (1980-1981) be declassified,
Vice President Alvaro García stated that only one filing cabinet had been found
and the rest had been stolen “years ago.”
In April 2012, Congress approved a law reducing the compensation to be paid to
victims of political violence and their relatives that had been provided for under
legislation dating from 2004. Many alleged that they were denied access to
compensation because they had to produce documentary evidence to support their claims, such as medical proof of torture, death certificates, and other documents.
Trials of opposition leaders, local government officials, and others accused of
killings during violent clashes between supporters and opponents of President
Evo Morales in 2008 have been subject to long delays. For example, as of
September 2012, a La Paz court was still hearing evidence against eight defendants
in connection with a September 2008 massacre in Porvenir, Pando
department, in which 13 people were killed. The proceedings were subject to
numerous suspensions.
The former prefect of Pando department, Leopoldo Fernández, who was indicted
in October 2009 on charges of homicide, terrorism, and conspiracy in the
Porvenir case, had been held in pre-trial detention for four years in a maximum
security prison, a year more than the maximum that Bolivian law allows. Justice
officials, witnesses, and victims in the case have reported receiving threats or
“undue pressures,” according to the United Nations Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR).
Military Jurisdiction
The military justice system’s assertion of jurisdiction over human rights abuses
committed by armed forces members has been an obstacle to accountability for
many years. Such courts lack essential guarantees of independence and impartiality,
and their continuing jurisdiction in such cases is inconsistent with rulings
of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights (IACtHR). Competition between
civilian and military courts creates additional delays in judicial investigations.
There has been little progress in the investigation of the death in February 2011
of a 26-year-old conscript, Gróver Poma, following a hand-to-hand combat training
exercise—allegedly after instructors beat him on the head and chest. The
military disregarded the ombudsman’s requests to hand the case to a civilian
court, as well as a Senate resolution recommending it to do so.
In April 2012, an official from the human rights ombudsman’s office alleged that
the military had not cooperated in detaining three suspects who were fugitives
from justice. The civilian court submitted the jurisdictional dispute to the Constitutional Court, which by November had not issued a ruling. In another
case involving the torture of a military recruit in September 2009, the army
turned the suspects over to a civilian court only at President Morales’ insistence.
Freedom of Expression
Under a law against racism and other forms of discrimination passed in October
2010 (Law 045), media that “endorse or publish racist or discriminatory ideas”
can be fined and have their broadcasting licenses suspended. Journalists
“spreading ideas based on racial superiority or hatred” could face up to five
years in prison.
In August 2012, the government filed a criminal complaint under the anti-racism
law against the Fides News Agency (ANF) and the Página Siete and El Diario
newspapers, objecting to their coverage of a speech by Morales about food
shortages. Morales had remarked that in the east—the lowland part of Bolivia
that enjoys a warm climate favorable to agriculture—only “laziness” could
explain people going hungry.
His remarks provoked an angry reaction from authorities in the eastern city of
Santa Cruz, traditionally opponents of the Morales administration. The government
accused the three media outlets of disseminating and inciting racism by
asserting in their headlines that Morales had accused people from eastern
Bolivia of being lazy. As of November, a prosecutor continued to investigate the
charge, which could carry a penalty of up to four years’ imprisonment.
In July 2012, the mayor of Oruro, a highland city that hosts a popular religious
carnival, filed a criminal complaint of inciting racism against TV presenter
Milena Fernández for calling the city “fetid” in a program on tourism for the Red
PAT television network. Fernández was criticizing the sanitary facilities of the
city, which receives thousands of visitors every year. Although she publicly apologized,
a prosecutor was still investigating the complaint against her in
November.
In October 2012, the Constitutional Tribunal declared that Bolivia’s desacato
provisions–under which insulting state officials is a criminal offense punishable by up to three years imprisonment—violated freedom of expression guarantees
in the constitution. The court’s president stated that the ruling was binding and
that legislation to eliminate the provisions from the criminal code was therefore
unnecessary. Several public figures were facing desacato charges at the time for
insulting officials.
Key International Actors
Following a visit to Bolivia in September 2012, the UN special rapporteur on
racism, Mutuma Ruteere, commended Bolivia’s achievements in passing legislation
and creating institutions for combating racism. However, he noted that the
judiciary should determine whether the application of the anti-racism law conflicts
with Bolivia’s obligation to protect freedom of expression and opinion.
In September 2012, the United States government rejected a Bolivian request to
extradite former President Gonzalo Sánchez de Lozada and two ministers of his
administration to face trial on charges including genocide, homicide, and torture,
for their alleged responsibility for the deaths and injuries during “Black
October.”
Brazil
Brazil is among the most influential democracies in regional and global affairs,
yet it continues to confront very serious human rights challenges at home.
Faced with high levels of violent crime, some Brazilian police units engage in
abusive practices with impunity, instead of pursuing sound policing practices.
Justice officials who seek to hold police officers accountable for unlawful practices
face threats of violence.
Detention centers in various states are severely overcrowded, lengthy pre-trial
detention is common, and torture continues to be a serious problem. Forced
labor persists in some states despite federal efforts to eradicate it.
In 2012, Brazil took significant steps toward addressing grave human rights
abuses that were committed during the country’s military dictatorship (1964-
1985). In May, a national truth commission began investigating abuse cases
from that era, and in August, a federal judge ordered the first criminal trials of
former state agents for their alleged roles in enforced disappearances committed
in 1973 and 1974.
Public Security and Police Conduct
Widespread violence perpetrated by criminal gangs and abusive police plague
many Brazilian cities. In Rio de Janeiro, for example, drug gangs routinely
engage in violent crime and militias composed of police, jail guards, firefighters,
and others have been implicated in far-reaching extortion schemes.
According to official data, police were responsible for 214 killings in the state of
Rio de Janeiro and 251 killings in the state of São Paulo in the first 6 months of
2012. Police routinely claim these are “resistance” killings that occur in confrontations
with criminals. While many police killings undoubtedly result from
legitimate use of force by police officers, others do not, a fact documented by
Human Rights Watch and other groups and recognized by Brazilian criminal justice
officials.
In 2012, the state of Rio de Janeiro continued to award financial compensation
for meeting crime reduction targets, including police homicides, as part of the
System of Goals and Results Tracking, which was established in 2009. In April,
more than US$20 million were distributed among 9,000 police officers. In addition,
as of October, 28 Pacifying Police Units (UPP) had been installed in Rio
since 2008 in order to establish a more effective police presence at the community
level. However, the state has not yet taken adequate steps to ensure that
police who commit abuses are held accountable.
Judges and magistrates who take on cases of violence by illegal militia and government
corruption face threats of violence. On August 23, 2012, human rights
defender Diego Luiz Berbare Bandeira was gunned down outside his home in
the state of São Paulo, apparently in retaliation for exposing abuses and corrupt
practices by police officers and prison authorities in Caraguatatuba.
President Dilma Rousseff signed a law in July 2012 to allow criminal cases
involving organized crime to be adjudicated by panels of three judges. In
September, the president signed a law increasing prison sentences for paramilitary
and militia activities.
Detention Conditions, Torture, and Ill-Treatment of Detainees
Many Brazilian prisons and jails are violent and severely overcrowded.
According to the Ministry of Justice’s Integrated System of Penitentiary
Information (InfoPen), Brazil’s incarceration rate increased approximately 40
percent over the last five years and the prison population now exceeds half a
million people—two-thirds more than the prisons were built for. Delays within
the justice system contribute to the overcrowding: nearly 175,000 inmates are in
pre-trial detention. For example, the Unidade de Internação do Plano Piloto
juvenile detention center in Brasilia operated at more than double its capacity
in 2012. Three children were killed there in August and September, reportedly
by gang members.
Inhumane prison conditions facilitate the spread of disease, and prisoners’
access to medical care remains inadequate. In April 2012, nearly 500 detainees Sergipe rioted in protest against alleged beatings by prison guards and inadequate
food.
Torture is a chronic problem throughout Brazil’s detention centers and police
stations. The United Nations Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment visited penitentiary and police institutions
in the states of São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, Espírito Santo, and Goiás in
September 2011 and reported receiving “repeated and consistent” accounts
from inmates of beatings and other allegations of ill-treatment during police
custody such as the obligation to sleep in unsanitary cells without proper
access to water and food.
At this writing, the Chamber of Deputies had yet to vote on legislation proposed
by President Rousseff in September 2011 to create a national mechanism—the
National System to Prevent and Combat Torture—to monitor detention centers
throughout the country and investigate allegations of torture and ill-treatment.
Reproductive Rights and Gender-Based Violence
Although Brazil has significantly lowered its maternal mortality rate over the last
two decades, national statistics mask severe disparities based on race, economic
status, region, and urban or rural settings.
In February 2012, the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of Federal Law
11340 on domestic violence (the Maria da Penha law) and ruled that prosecutors
may bring domestic violence cases regardless of whether the victim presses
charges or not.
Brazil’s criminal code criminalizes abortion except in cases of rape or when necessary
to save a woman’s life. Women and girls who obtain an abortion outside
of these two exceptions face sentences of up to three years in jail, while people
who perform abortions face up to four years. In March 2012, federal police in
the states of Mato Grosso and Goiás arrested a doctor and 10 pharmacy workers
for allegedly providing illegal abortions or selling abortion-inducing drugs.
On April 12, the Supreme Court ruled that abortion is also constitutional in
cases of anencephaly, in which the fetus has a fatal congenital brain disorder, given the woman’s right to dignity, autonomy, privacy, and physical,
psychological, and moral integrity.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In May 2012, the Senate Human Rights Committee approved a bill providing for
civil unions between two persons, without specifying gender, and the conversion
of civil unions to civil marriages. This follows the 2011 rulings by the
Supreme Court and the Superior Justice Court that recognize equal rights for
same-sex unions and that same-sex marriage is permitted under the civil code.
Forced Labor
The federal government has taken important steps to eradicate forced labor
since 1995, and official data suggests that more than 41,000 workers have been
freed from slave-like conditions since then. However, the Pastoral Land
Commission reported that nearly 4,000 workers were subject to forced labor in
2011. Criminal accountability for offending employers remains relatively rare.
Congress approved a constitutional amendment in May 2012 that permits the
government to confiscate properties where forced labor is used without providing
compensation.
Rural Violence
Indigenous leaders and rural activists continue to face threats and violence.
According to the Pastoral Land Commission, 29 people involved in land conflicts
were killed and 38 were victims of attempted murder throughout the country in
2011, and the number of rural conflicts nationwide rose to 1,363 that year. More
than 2,000 rural activists have received death threats over the past decade.
Confronting Past Abuses
In May 2012, a truth commission, charged with “examining and clarifying”
human rights abuses committed between 1946 and 1988, began its work. The commission announced in September that it will only investigate grave human
rights violations committed by or on behalf of state agents.
Prosecutors in São Paulo state filed criminal charges against a retired army
colonel and a civil police precinct chief in April 2012 for grave abuses committed
in the 1970s. This was the second case in Brazil in which criminal charges
have been brought against a Brazilian official for human rights crimes committed
during the country’s military dictatorship. A 1979 amnesty law has thus far
been interpreted to bar most prosecutions of state agents, an interpretation
that the Supreme Court reaffirmed in April 2010.
Brazil has granted more than US$1 billion in financial compensation to more
than 12,000 victims of abuses committed by state agents during the military
dictatorship.
Freedom of Expression and Access to Information
At least seven journalists were killed in Brazil in 2012 and many more were
threatened and assaulted. In May 2012, the Ministry of Human Rights proposed
creating an observatory to monitor violence against journalists.
An access to information law went into effect in May 2012, expanding access to
documents under the custody of local, state, and federal government officials.
The law ensures that information regarding violations of fundamental rights
shall not be subject to access restrictions.
In September, a state court in São Paulo ordered Youtube to remove the movie
“Innocence of Muslims” from its website in a lawsuit brought by the National
Union of Islamic Entities against Google Brasil Internet Ltda.
Key International Actors
The Inter-American system has played an important role in addressing key
human rights issues in Brazil. In November 2010, the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights (IACrtHR) ruled that the country’s amnesty law cannot prevent the
investigation and prosecution of serious human rights violations and crimes
against humanity committed by state agents during the military regime. In February and September 2011 resolutions, the court also instructed the state of
Espírito Santo to take steps to address alleged abuses against juveniles
detained at the Unidade de Internação Socioeducativa (UNIS) detention center.
In April 2011, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) issued
precautionary measures for Brazil due to an alleged failure to consult with
indigenous groups prior to beginning the construction of the Belo Monte hydroelectric
dam, slated to be the world’s third largest. The Rousseff administration
publicly rejected the commission’s findings and characterized them as “premature
and unjustified.” It also recalled its ambassador to the Organization of
American States (OAS) and withdrew its candidate for the Inter-American
Commission. It has since supported efforts to weaken the Inter-American system
of human rights—most recently at the OAS annual assembly in June 2012—
including a proposed reform that would reduce the commission’s power to issue
precautionary measures.
In August 2012, a federal district court in Brasília halted construction of the Belo
Monte dam on the grounds that Brazil’s congress had failed to consult local
indigenous communities before construction. However, when this judgment was
appealed to the Supreme Court, the chief justice authorized the work at Belo
Monte to proceed. In September 2012, federal prosecutors requested that the
chief justice reconsider his decision.
Brazil has emerged as an important and influential voice in debates over international
responses to human rights issues at the UN. At the UN Human Rights
Council (HRC) from July 2010 to June 2011, Brazil consistently voted in support of
resolutions addressing country situations, including on Sudan, North Korea,
Iran, Belarus, and Syria. Brazil will again be a member of the council in 2013.
At the UN General Assembly, Brazil voted in favor of two resolutions condemning
state-sponsored violence in Syria in February and August 2012. During a
Universal Periodic Review (UPR) at the HRC in September 2012, Brazil accepted
most of the country recommendations regarding torture, detention conditions,
and public security.
The UN special rapporteur on adequate housing expressed concern in April 2011
regarding allegations of displacement and evictions potentially leading to human rights violations as Brazil prepares to host the 2014 World Cup and 2016
Olympic Games.
In February 2012, the UN Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) acknowledged the country’s efforts to
implement measures for reducing the maternal mortality rate, but also
expressed concern that the sole focus on care services for pregnant women may
not sufficiently address all causes of maternal mortality in Brazil.
Chile
During 2011 and 2012, Sebastián Piñera’s government faced student unrest and
other protests that often ended in the destruction of property and violent clashes
between police and demonstrators. Police abuses, including inappropriate
use of anti-riot weapons and ill-treatment of detainees, were reported. The
Piñera administration has ended the trial of civilians by military courts and
amended elements of counterterrorism legislation that were incompatible with
international standards of due process. However, military courts that lack independence
from the military hierarchy still try police accused of human rights
abuses. Although the government has not pressed terrorism charges against
indigenous protesters, some prosecutors have continued to bring charges
against them under the counterterrorism law for actions that should be considered
common crimes.
Most recorded cases of extrajudicial executions and enforced disappearances
committed during military rule (1973-1990) have been heard in court or are now
under judicial investigation. Judges continue to convict former military personnel
for these crimes. However, final sentences are often unacceptably lenient
given the seriousness of the crimes.
The passage of a law protecting sexual minorities and other vulnerable groups
from discrimination was a notable advance in 2012. Abortion continues to be
prohibited in all circumstances, even when the mother’s life is at risk.
Police Abuses
In 2011 and 2012, student marches and occupations demanding educational
reforms sometimes ended in violent clashes in which police were injured and
public and private property destroyed. A policeman was shot dead in September
2012 during disturbances on the anniversary of the 1973 military coup.
Carabineros (uniformed police) sometimes used excessive force against protestors,
including the misuse of non-lethal anti-riot weaponry such as tear gas and
rubber bullets, arbitrary arrests, and the ill-treatment of detainees.
During February and March protests over regional economic and social demands
in Aysen, southern Chile, local human rights monitors reported that police special
anti-riot forces fired water-cannons and tear gas into homes, and shot tear
gas cartridges directly at people. A 49-year-old mechanic, Teófilo Haro, was
blinded by a steel pellet in the eye fired by a Carabinero, according to press
reports. At a meeting of the Congressional Human Rights Commission, the head
of Carabineros admitted the use of excessive force, and that metal shotgun pellets
had been used incorrectly. The government spokesperson said in August
2012 that abuses by the police were “completely and categorically rejected, and
immediately investigated.”
At this writing, a police sergeant faced charges before a military court for unlawful
use of lethal force in connection with the fatal shooting of 16-year-old student
Manuel Gutiérrez Reynoso while he was watching a demonstration in
August 2011 from a Santiago footbridge during a national strike.
Reports of police abuses against Mapuches during evictions of occupied land
and attempts to arrest suspects in Mapuche communities continue. In July
2012, Carabineros fired rubber bullets at a group of Mapuches outside a hospital
in Collipulli, in the southern region of Araucanía, where doctors were checking
the injuries of people detained during a land eviction. According to an eyewitness,
the shots were fired at short range, without provocation or warning,
wounding seven people, including a 13-year-old girl and two 17-year-old boys.
Military Jurisdiction
Police accused of human rights abuses continue to be tried by military courts
that are not independent. Following the recommendations of the Inter-American
Court of Human Rights (IACrtHR) in its 2005 ruling against Chile in the Palamara
case, legislation introduced by Piñera’s administration and approved by
Congress in September 2010 finally ended the jurisdiction of military courts over
civilians.
However, the reforms did not address jurisdiction over abuses against civilians
by Carabineros, which is still exercised by military courts composed of military
officers on active service. Apart from their lack of independence, these courts do not provide the due process guarantees that have existed in ordinary criminal
proceedings since their reform in 2005.
Investigations are secret, criminal proceedings are conducted mainly in writing,
and lawyers representing victims of police abuse have limited opportunities to
cross-examine witnesses. Decisions by the Corte Marcial (the military appeals
court) in cases involving the alleged unlawful use of lethal force by Carabineros
have not inspired confidence in the court’s impartiality. At this writing, the government
was preparing a bill to restructure the military justice system.
Counterterrorism Laws
The inappropriate use of counterterrorism legislation to deal with common
crimes against property, such as arson, committed by indigenous Mapuche
activists remains an important due process issue. In September 2010, following
concern expressed by the United Nations and regional human rights bodies, the
government amended the counterterrorism law. Some due process guarantees
were strengthened, such as allowing witnesses whose identity can be concealed
to be cross-examined by defense attorneys, and children could no longer
be tried under the law. However, the inclusion in the law of crimes against property
was left unchanged and prosecutors continue to apply the law in such
cases, even though the government has refrained from doing so.
Confronting Past Abuses
More than three-quarters of the 3,186 documented killings and “disappearances”
during the Augusto Pinochet dictatorship (1973-1990) have been heard
by courts or are now under court jurisdiction, according to Diego Portales
University’s Human Rights Observatory, a nongovernmental organization that
monitors progress in human rights trials.
Between 2000 and September 2011, more than 800 former state security agents
had been indicted or convicted, and as of August 2012, 64 agents were serving
prison sentences. In many cases, the Supreme Court has used its discretionary
powers to reduce sentences against human rights violators in recognition of the
time elapsed since the criminal act. Others had their sentences commuted.
These practices raise concerns about Chile’s fulfillment of its obligation to hold
accountable perpetrators of crimes against humanity by imposing appropriate
punishments or sanctions.
Prison Conditions
Overcrowding and poor conditions in many prisons continue to be a problem.
As of May 2012, the official capacity of the prison system was 39,832, but there
were 54,339 prisoners.
Following a fire in December 2010 in Santiago’s San Miguel prison in which 81
prisoners died, the Ministry of Justice undertook important reforms both to
improve conditions and reduce overcrowding. In June 2012 a law entered into
force that allowed the release of low-risk inmates, including women with young
children who were within six months of completing two-thirds of their sentence,
and the voluntary return of non-Chilean inmates to their countries of origin.
Another law, promulgated the same month, provides six alternatives to prison
for low risk offenders, including community service and the use of electronic
bracelets.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In July 2012, President Piñera promulgated a law to provide legal protection for
Chile’s vulnerable minorities, including lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
(LGBT) individuals. The law explicitly includes sexual orientation and gender
identity as prohibited grounds of discrimination. It also creates a special judicial
process aimed at providing rapid redress to victims of discriminatory acts,
which allows judges to halt or reverse them and provide protection for victims
and toughens penalties. However, the law does not provide victims of discrimination
with a mechanism for compensation.
Reproductive Rights
Chile in is one of only three countries in Latin America (the other two being El
Salvador and Nicaragua) with an absolute prohibition on abortion, even prohibiting
medical necessity as a defense. In April 2012, the Senate rejected three bills to legalize abortion in cases in which the mother’s life was at risk or the
fetus was unviable. Such an absolute prohibition violates a woman’s fundamental
right to the highest attainable standard of health, life, nondiscrimination,
physical integrity, and freedom from cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment.
Key International Actors
In February 2012, the IACrtHR found that Chile had violated the rights of Karen
Atala, a lesbian, and her three children to equal treatment and to non-discrimination.
Atala lost custody of her children when Chilean courts ruled that, due to
her sexual orientation, her children would be at risk if she were to raise them
with her female partner.
As reparations for the violation of Atala’s rights, the court ordered Chile, inter
alia, to invite the victims and the organizations that represented them in the
case to a public event in which the state would recognize its responsibility. The
court also ordered Chile to implement training programs for judges and other
public officials to ensure respect for the rights of the LGBT population.
Colombia
Colombia’s internal armed conflict continued to result in serious abuses by
irregular armed groups in 2012, including guerrillas and successor groups to
paramilitaries. More than 4 million Colombians have been internally displaced,
and more than 100,000 continue to be displaced each year. Human rights
defenders, community leaders, trade unionists, journalists, indigenous and
Afro-Colombian leaders, and displaced persons’ leaders face death threats and
other abuses. The administration of President Juan Manuel Santos has publicly
condemned threats and attacks against rights defenders.
Chronic lack of accountability for human rights abuses continued to be a serious
problem. While justice authorities have made notable progress in some
areas, impunity remains the norm, and there have been very limited results in
holding accountable those with high-level responsibility for atrocities.
Furthermore, constitutional amendments backed by the Santos administration
concerning transitional justice and the military justice system threaten to dramatically
reverse recent progress and secure impunity for egregious abuses by
guerrillas, paramilitaries, and the military.
In 2012, Colombia began to implement the Victims and Land Restitution Law,
which aims to return millions of acres of abandoned and stolen land to internally
displaced persons (IDPs) who fled their homes over the past two decades.
Implementation has advanced slowly, and there have been threats and attacks
against individuals seeking land restitution, in some cases by paramilitary successor
groups or others interested in maintaining control over the stolen land.
The Colombian government and Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC)
guerrillas formally initiated peace talks in October 2012.The negotiations represent
Colombia’s first opportunity in over a decade to reach a settlement to end
the nearly 50-year conflict.
Guerrillas
The FARC and the National Liberation Army (ELN) continue to commit serious
abuses against civilians. The FARC in particular is often involved in killings, threats, forced displacement, and recruiting and using child soldiers. On August
12, 2012, presumed FARC members shot and killed Lisandro Tenorio, a leader of
the Nasa indigenous community in Caloto, Cauca department, southwest
Colombia.
The FARC and ELN frequently use antipersonnel landmines and other indiscriminate
weapons. The government reported that landmines and unexploded munitions
killed 25 civilians and injured 94 between January and June 2012.
In June 2012, the Santos administration secured passage of the Legal
Framework for Peace constitutional amendment, which would regulate administration
of justice in the context of peace agreements with guerrilla groups. The
amendment contains several provisions that facilitate impunity for egregious
abuses by guerrillas, paramilitaries, and the military. First, it empowers
Congress to limit the scope of prosecutions of atrocities to individuals found
“most responsible,” and provide statutory immunity to the other guerrillas,
paramilitaries, and military members who participated in planning, executing,
and covering up the same crimes—but who are not deemed “most responsible.”
Second, it gives Congress authority to exempt entire cases of serious abuses
from criminal investigation. Third, the reform enables Congress to fully suspend
prison sentences or apply non-judicial punishments for all guerrillas, paramilitaries,
and military personnel convicted of atrocities, including those found
“most responsible” for Colombia’s worst crimes.
Paramilitaries and Their Successors
Since 2003 more than 30,000 individuals have participated in a paramilitary
demobilization process. However, there is substantial evidence that many participants
were not paramilitaries, and that part of demobilized paramilitary
organizations’ membership remained active and reorganized into new groups.
Successor groups to paramilitaries, largely led by members of demobilized paramilitary
organizations, maintain a strong presence throughout Colombia. While
authorities have made notable progress in capturing their leaders, public security
force members have tolerated and colluded with paramilitary successor
groups, contributing to their continued power.
Like the paramilitary organizations that demobilized, the groups commit widespread
abuses against civilians, including massacres, killings, disappearances,
sexual violence, recruiting children, threats, and forced displacement. They continue
to threaten and attack social leaders, rights defenders, and victims of
paramilitary groups seeking justice and land restitution. The government’s
Human Rights ombudsman’s office reported receiving 1,500 complaints of possible
international humanitarian law violations by paramilitary successor groups
in 2011, more than half the total reported violations attributed to identified
armed actors that year.
On November 7, 2012, alleged members of the Rastrojos paramilitary successor
group opened fire and tossed a grenade at workers on a farm in Antioquia
department, killing 10.
Implementation of the Justice and Peace Law, which offers dramatically reduced
sentences to demobilized paramilitaries who confess their atrocities, has been
slow and uneven. As of July 2012, seven years after the law was approved, special
prosecutors had only obtained eight convictions.
Paramilitary Accomplices
In 2012, Colombia’s Supreme Court continued to make progress investigating
Congress members accused of collaborating with paramilitaries. Since the
“parapolitics” scandal erupted in 2006, more than 150 former and current members
of Congress have come under investigation, and approximately 55 have
been convicted. The sudden decision by the criminal chamber of the Supreme
Court to remove auxiliary magistrate Iván Velásquez from his position as coordinator
of the investigations—and his subsequent resignation in September
2012—raised questions as to whether the cases will continue to advance significantly.
While demobilized paramilitaries have also made statements about extensive
collaboration with local officials, senior military officers, and businesspersons,
the attorney general’s office’s investigations into such individuals, who fall
under their jurisdiction, have produced limited results. One important exception
is the August 23, 2012 conviction and 25-year sentence handed down to former army General Rito Alejo del Río for a murder committed in 1997 during a joint
army-paramilitary operation in Chocó department.
In 2011 and 2012, several former paramilitaries alleged that former President
Álvaro Uribe (2002-2010) maintained links to paramilitary groups. Uribe has
denied the allegations. On August 20, 2012, Uribe’s security chief while he was
president, retired police General Mauricio Santoyo, pleaded guilty in United
States federal court to collaborating with paramilitaries between 2001 and
2008.
Military Abuses and Impunity
Over the past decade, the Colombian Army committed an alarming number of
extrajudicial killings of civilians. In many cases—commonly referred to as “false
positives”—army personnel murdered civilians and reported them as combatants
killed in action, apparently in response to pressure to boost body counts.
The government does not keep statistics for cases of “false positives” as a separate
category of crimes. However, as of August 2012, the Human Rights Unit of
the attorney general’s office was investigating 1,727 cases of alleged extrajudicial
executions committed by state agents throughout the country involving
nearly 3,000 victims. Most cases are attributed to the army and occurred
between 2004 and 2008. There has been a dramatic reduction in cases of
alleged extrajudicial killings attributed to the security forces since 2009; nevertheless,
some cases were reported in 2011 and 2012.
Investigations into alleged extrajudicial killings continue to advance, but the
vast majority of cases have not been resolved. As of August 2012, the Human
Rights Unit of the attorney general’s office had obtained convictions for less
than 10 percent of the 1,727 cases under investigation. The successful prosecutions
led to the convictions of 539 army members, of whom 77 were officers,
including two lieutenant colonels and two colonels. The office of the prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) reported in November 2012 that the
existing judicial proceedings in false positive cases “have largely failed to focus
on the persons who might bear the greatest responsibility for the commission of
these crimes.”
Accountability achieved to date is due to the fact that civilian prosecutors are
investigating most cases. However, the Santos administration is promoting a
constitutional amendment that would result in military atrocities—including
extrajudicial killings, torture, and rape—being investigated and tried by the military
justice system. The amendment would likely also lead to the transfer of
past cases of “false positives” from civilian prosecutors to the military justice
system, which would virtually guarantee impunity for such crimes.
Violence against Trade Unionists
The number of trade unionists killed annually in recent years is less than a
decade ago, but remains high: 47 trade unionists were murdered in 2009, 51 in
2010, 30 in 2011, and 12 from January to September 15, 2012, according to the
National Labor School (ENS), Colombia’s leading NGO monitoring labor rights.
Threats against trade unionists are widespread: the ENS reported 539 such
cases in 2011, and 255 between January and September 15, 2012.
No one has been held accountable for the vast majority of the more than 2,900
trade unionist killings that the ENS has reported since 1986. As of May 2012, the
attorney general’s office’s sub-unit of prosecutors dedicated to anti-union violence
had opened investigations into 815 cases of trade unionists killings, and
in combination with other prosecutors from the Human Rights Unit, reported
having obtained convictions for 263 cases. This progress is largely due to confessions
by paramilitaries participating in the Justice and Peace process, and
there have been severely limited results in prosecuting crimes committed since
2007, which are not covered by the demobilization law.
Internal Displacement and Land Restitution
More than 100,000 Colombians continue to be forcibly displaced annually, making
them one of the world’s largest populations of IDPs. Colombia’s government
registered 3.9 million IDPs between 1997 and December 2011, compared to 5.4
million that CODHES, a respected Colombian nongovernmental organization,
reported between 1985 and December 2011. The government registered more
than 140,000 newly displaced people in 2011, while CODHES reports that nearly
260,000 Colombians were displaced that year. Threats, forced recruitment, and killings were the top causes of forced displacement in 2011, according to government
figures, which also show that nearly 25 percent of those displaced that
year identified themselves as Afro-Colombian—a disproportionately high percentage
compared to the government’s latest estimate of the overall Afro-
Colombian population.
At this writing, the Colombian government had progressed slowly in implementing
its land restitution program under the 2011 Victims and Land Restitution
Law. The government estimated that there would be 2,100 judicial rulings in
land restitution cases under the Victims Law in 2012, and 60,000 rulings by
2014; however, as of mid-September 2012, less than 200 claims had been
brought before specialized land restitution judges, and no land had been
returned under the law. Abuses against displaced land claimants and their leaders
in recent years—including threats, forced displacements, and killings—have
created a climate of fear for those seeking restitution in several areas of the
country, such as Urabá, Montes de María, and Cesar.
Gender-Based Violence and Displacement
Gender-based violence (GBV) is widespread in Colombia, but studies show that
it may be higher for displaced women and girls. The government has laws, policies,
and programs to address such violence, and the particular risk to displaced
women and girls. However, lack of training and poor implementation of
protocols create obstacles for women and girls seeking post-violence care.
These include the failure of health facilities to properly implement relevant laws
and policies—with the result that women and girls may not be adequately
screened for signs of GBV, may be mistreated, may face delays in accessing
essential services or be arbitrarily denied medical care altogether.
Barriers to justice for GBV victims include mistreatment by authorities, evidentiary
challenges, and fear of retribution. Women and girl victims of this kind of
violence are at times not informed about their legal rights, including where and
how to access services. Perpetrators of GBV crimes are rarely brought to justice.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders are routinely threatened and attacked by perpetrators
who are virtually never brought to justice. On February 28, a pamphlet allegedly
signed by the “Águilas Negras-Bloque Capital” paramilitary successor group
threatened two United Nations agencies and numerous human rights organizations,
including several women’s rights groups. Human Rights Watch documented
several cases of rape of women human rights defenders in late 2011 and
2012.
The Ministry of Interior runs a protection program that covers more than 10,000
members of vulnerable groups, including human rights defenders and trade
unionists. The program is unparalleled in the region, but its beneficiaries continue
to report deficiencies in protection measures.
Key International Actors
The United States remains the most influential foreign actor in Colombia. In
2012, it provided approximately US$482 million in aid, about 58 percent of
which went to the military and police. A portion of US military aid is subject to
human rights conditions, which the US Department of State has not enforced. In
August 2012, the State Department certified that Colombia was meeting human
rights conditions. However, it noted that “[t]hreats and attacks against human
rights defenders, land activists, trade unionists, journalists and other vulnerable
groups continued to be a concern…. Armed Forces and civilian authorities
could do more to investigate allegations of collusion with illegal armed groups,
which persist.”
The European Union provides social and economic assistance to Colombia.
Norway and Cuba were named “guarantors” of the peace negotiations between
the FARC and Colombian government, with Venezuela and Chile listed as
“accompaniers” of the process.
The Organization of American States’ Mission to Support the Peace Process in
Colombia, charged with verifying paramilitary demobilizations, noted in its 2012
report that paramilitary successor groups’ presence and illegal activities in certain regions “put at risk the return of people displaced by violence [to their
homes].”
The office of the prosecutor of the ICC continued to monitor local investigations
into crimes that may fall within the ICC’s jurisdiction. The Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) is active in Colombia, and in
November 2010 its mandate in the country was extended for three years. The
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) is also active in Colombia,
where its work includes providing assistance to IDPs.
Cuba
Cuba remains the only country in Latin America that represses virtually all forms
of political dissent. In 2012, the government of Raúl Castro continued to enforce
political conformity using short-term detentions, beatings, public acts of repudiation,
travel restrictions, and forced exile.
Although in 2010 and 2011 the Cuban government released dozens of political
prisoners on the condition that they accept exile in exchange for their freedom,
the government continues to sentence dissidents to one to four-year prison
terms in closed, summary trials, and holds others for extended periods without
charge. It has also relied increasingly upon arbitrary arrests and short-term
detentions to restrict the basic rights of its critics, including the right to assemble
and move freely.
Political Prisoners
Cubans who dare to criticize the government are subject to criminal prosecution.
They do not benefit from due process guarantees, such as the right to fair
and public hearings by a competent and impartial tribunal. In practice, courts
are “subordinated” to the executive and legislative branches, thus denying
meaningful judicial independence. Political prisoners are routinely denied
parole after completing the minimum required sentence as punishment for
refusing to participate in ideological activities such as “reeducation” classes.
The death of political prisoner Orlando Zapata Tamayo in 2010 after his 85-day
hunger strike, and the subsequent hunger strike by dissident Guillermo Fariñas,
pressured the government to release the political prisoners from the “group of
75” (75 dissidents who were sentenced to long prison terms in a 2003 crackdown).
Yet most were forced to choose between ongoing prison sentences and
forced exile, and dozens of other dissidents have been forced abroad to avoid
imprisonment.
Dozens of political prisoners remain in Cuban prisons, according to human
rights groups on the island. These groups estimate there are more political prisoners
whose cases they cannot document because the government does not allow independent national or international human rights groups to access its
prisons.
Rogelio Tavío López—a member the Unión Patriótica de Cuba dissident group—
was detained in March 2012 in Guantanamo province after organizing a protest
to demand the release of political prisoners. He has since been held in detention
without being brought before a judge or granted access to a lawyer.
Arbitrary Detentions and Short-Term Imprisonment
In addition to criminal prosecutions, the Cuban government has increasingly
relied on arbitrary detention to harass and intimidate individuals who exercise
their fundamental rights. The Cuban Commission for Human Rights and National
Reconciliation—an independent human rights group that the government views
as illegal—received reports of 2,074 arbitrary detentions by state agents in
2010, 4,123 in 2011, and 5,105 from January to September 2012.
The detentions are often used preemptively to prevent individuals from participating
in events viewed as critical of the government, such as peaceful marches
or meetings to discuss politics. Many dissidents are subjected to beatings and
threats as they are detained, even though they do not try to resist.
Security officers virtually never present arrest orders to justify the detentions
and threaten detainees with criminal sentences if they continue to participate in
“counterrevolutionary” activities. Victims of such arrests are held incommunicado
for several hours to several days, often at police stations. In some cases,
they are given an official warning, which prosecutors may later use in criminal
trials to show a pattern of delinquent behavior. Dissidents said these warnings
are aimed at discouraging them from participating in future activities seen as
critical of the government.
In July, at least 40 people were arbitrarily detained in Havana at the funeral of
dissident Oswaldo Payá, who died in a car accident. Police officers broke up the
non-violent procession and beat participants. The detainees were taken to a
prison encampment where they were held incommunicado for 30 hours before
being released without charge.
Freedom of Expression
The government controls all media outlets in Cuba and tightly restricts access to
outside information, which severely limits the right to freedom of expression.
Only a tiny fraction of Cubans have the chance to read independently published
articles and blogs because of the high cost of and limited access to the internet.
A small number of independent journalists and bloggers manage to write articles
for foreign websites or independent blogs, yet those who use these outlets
to criticize the government are subjected to public smear campaigns, arbitrary
arrests, and abuse by security agents. The authorities often confiscate their
cameras, recorders, and other equipment. According to the independent journalists’
group Hablemos Press, authorities arbitrarily detained 19 journalists in
September 2012, including Calixto Ramón Martínez Arias, who remained in
prison without charge at this writing.
The Cuban government uses selective allocations of press credentials and visas,
which are required by foreign journalists to report from the island, to control
coverage of the island and punish media outlets seen as overly critical of the
regime. For example, in anticipation of the March 2012 visit of Pope Benedict
XVI to Cuba, the government denied visas to journalists from El Pais and El
Nuevo Herald, newspapers whose reporting it has criticized as biased.
Human Rights Defenders
The Cuban government refuses to recognize human rights monitoring as a legitimate
activity and denies legal status to local human rights groups. Meanwhile,
government authorities harass, assault, and imprison human rights defenders
who attempt to document abuses. In the weeks leading up to and during Pope
Benedict XVI’s visit to Cuba, authorities detained, beat, and threatened scores
of human rights defenders.
Travel Restrictions and Family Separation
The Cuban government forbids the country’s citizens from leaving or returning to
Cuba without first obtaining official permission, which is often denied to those who criticize the government. For example, acclaimed blogger Yoani Sánchez,
who has been critical of the government, has been denied the right to leave the
island at least 19 times since 2008, including in February 2012 after the
Brazilian government granted her a visa to attend a documentary screening.
The Cuban government uses forced family separation to punish defectors and
silence critics. It frequently bars citizens engaged in authorized travel from taking
their children with them overseas, essentially holding children hostage to
guarantee their parents’ return.
The government restricts the movement of citizens within Cuba by enforcing a
1997 law known as Decree 217. Designed to limit migration to Havana, the
decree requires Cubans to obtain government permission before moving to the
country’s capital. It is often used to prevent dissidents traveling to Havana to
attend meetings and to harass dissidents from other parts of Cuba who live in
the capital.
Prison Conditions
Prisons are overcrowded, unhygienic, and unhealthy, leading to extensive malnutrition
and illness. More than 57,000 Cubans are in prisons or work camps,
according to a May 2012 article in an official government newspaper. Prisoners
who criticize the government, or engage in hunger strikes and other forms of
protest are often subjected to extended solitary confinement, beatings, restrictions
on family visits, and denial of medical care. Prisoners have no effective
complaint mechanism to seek redress, giving prison authorities total impunity.
In January 2012, Wilman Villar Mendoza, 31, died after a 50-day hunger strike in
prison, which he initiated to protest his unjust trial and inhumane prison conditions.
He had been detained in November 2011 after participating in a peaceful
demonstration, and was sentenced to four years in prison for “contempt” in a
summary trial in which he had no lawyer. After beginning his hunger strike, he
was stripped naked and placed in solitary confinement in a cold cell. He was
transferred to a hospital only days before he died.
Key International Actors
The United States’ economic embargo on Cuba, in place for more than half a
century, continues to impose indiscriminate hardship on the Cuban people, and
has done nothing to improve human rights in Cuba. At the United Nations
General Assembly in November, 188 of the 192 member countries voted for a
resolution condemning the US embargo.
In 2009, President Barack Obama enacted reforms to eliminate limits on travel
and remittances by Cuban Americans to Cuba, which had been put in place during
the administration of President George W. Bush. In 2011, Obama used his
executive powers to ease “people-to-people” travel restrictions, allowing religious,
educational, and cultural groups from the US to travel to Cuba. However,
in May 2012 the Obama administration established additional requirements to
obtain “people to people” licenses, which has reduced the frequency of such
trips.
The European Union continues to retain its “Common Position” on Cuba, adopted
in 1996, which conditions full economic cooperation with Cuba on the country’s
transition to a pluralist democracy and respect for human rights.
In June, the UN Committee Against Torture (CAT) issued a report on Cuba in
which it expressed concern about reports of inhumane prison conditions and
the use of ambiguous preventive detention measures such as “social dangerousness,”
among other issues for which it said the Cuban government failed to
provide key information.
Ecuador
President Rafael Correa has undercut freedom of the press in Ecuador by subjecting
journalists and media figures to public denunciation and retaliatory litigation.
Judicial independence continued to suffer in 2012 due to transitional
mechanisms for judicial reform that have given the government and its supporters
in Congress a powerful say in appointing and dismissing judges.
Freedom of Expression
In February 2012, President Correa won a US$2 million judgment against the coauthors
of a book, The Big Brother, which dealt with questionable contracts
between the president’s brother and state institutions. Correa subsequently
desisted from the demand, and also pardoned Emilio Palacio, former head of
the opinion section of the newspaper El Universo and three of its directors, who
had been sentenced to three years each in prison in 2011 and ordered, together
with the newspaper, to pay him damages totaling $40 million. In August,
Palacio was granted asylum in the United States.
President Correa continues to denounce his critics during national broadcasts
(cadenas) that private media are obliged to transmit and in his weekly address
on state media. In June 2012, for example, after El Universo published an article
critical of the president of the state investment bank, Correa showed a photo of
the newspaper’s editor on his weekly address and asked the Ecuadorian people
to “look at him and not to forget him, because he is the clearest example of this
country’s bad press.”
According to official statistics cited in the press, the state broadcasting authority
closed 20 private radio and television outlets in the first six months of 2012.
The Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) found that in some instances government
regulators ordered closures before judicial appeals had been heard, and
that more than half the stations closed had been critical of the government.
In January 2012, President Correa introduced changes to electoral legislation
that prohibit the media from disseminating “messages” or “reporting” that
could favor or detract from a “political thesis” or candidate or electoral preference. The law grants the National Electoral Council sweeping powers to censor
media deemed to violate the prohibition. In July 2012, the measures entered
into force after the Constitutional Court lifted their temporary suspension while
it considered a challenge to their constitutionality. In October, the court supported
the ban on media “directly or indirectly” “promoting” a candidate or
party.
Misuse of Anti-Terrorism Laws
Since President Correa took office in 2007, prosecutors have repeatedly applied
a “terrorism and sabotage” provision of the criminal code against participants
engaged in public protests against environmental and other issues. Involvement
in acts of violence or obstructing roads during such protests should be ordinary
criminal offenses. Yet Ecuador’s criminal code includes, under the category of
sabotage and terrorism, “crimes against the common security of people or
human groups of whatever kind or against their property,” by individuals or
associations “whether armed or not.” Such crimes carry a possible prison sentence
of four to eight years. Many of those charged with terrorism have benefited
from amnesties. In other cases, terrorism charges have subsequently been
dropped for lack of evidence, or trials have proceeded under lesser charges,
such as obstruction or damage to property. However, people engaging in public
protest continue to face the risk of prosecution for terrorism.
In July 2012, a prosecutor charged 10 people with “terrorist acts,” and breaching
state security after their arrest while holding a peaceful meeting to plan their
participation in a public protest. According to their lawyers, the only evidence
that prosecutors had produced against them consisted of personal objects like
innocuous books, t-shirts, and music found during a police raid on their homes.
Accountability for Past Abuses
A truth commission created by the Correa administration published a report in
June 2010 documenting 118 cases of human rights violations committed
between 1984 and 2008 involving 456 victims (including 68 victims of extrajudicial
execution and 17 of enforced disappearance).
As of November 2012, more than two years after the creation of a special prosecutorial
unit charged with investigating the 118 cases of human rights violations,
prosecutors had charged one perpetrator, a police captain, with the fatal
shooting of Damián Peña, a student, during a 2002 demonstration.
Judicial Independence
Corruption, inefficiency, and political influence have plagued Ecuador’s judiciary
for years. Despite a judicial reform program that the Correa administration
initiated in 2011, political influence in the appointment and conduct of judges
remains a serious problem.
During 2012, the Judicial Council—a body composed of independent jurists
responsible for selecting, promoting, and dismissing judges—was replaced by a
transitional council with three members, one of whom was appointed by the
president, one by the legislature (where Correa has majority support), and one
by the Transparency and Social Control Function, the citizens’ branch established
in the 2008 constitution.
In November 2011, six expert observers from Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
Guatemala, Mexico, and Spain, chaired by Spanish Judge Baltazar Garzón, convened
to monitor and make recommendations on the process of judicial reform.
The observers reported in May 2012 that replacements would have to be found
for 2,903 judges and court officials, over 1,500 of whom were removed after disciplinary
proceedings, poor evaluations, or forced retirements. Many were
replaced by temporary appointees without appropriate training.
In July 2012, 210 permanent first instance judges appointed by the transitional
council took their seats. The results of the qualifying exams were widely criticized
for alleged anomalies. Those who failed to achieve a minimum mark in a
final training course held by the council—in which an interview was a key component—
were rejected without the right to appeal, even though they rated highly
in their overall grade. Two judges who had ruled in Correa’s favor in the El
Universo case were appointed to permanent posts although their overall scores
were lower than others who were rejected. Among its preliminary recommendations, the observers’ group suggested that “the excessive weighting” given to
the final interview be reconsidered.
A memorandum issued by the transitional council in July warned judges that
they would face sanctions and possible dismissal if they accepted appeals for
the protection of constitutional rights against the state. Such threats constitute
unwarranted interference in judicial independence and discourage judges from
contesting the selection process organized by the council.
In July 2012, a prosecutor, Antonio Gagliardo, dismissed charges of prevarication
and forgery against Judge Juan Paredes—who had convicted Palacio and his
colleagues from El Universo in July 2011—as well as Gutemberg Vera, Correa’s
lawyer, despite credible evidence that the latter had given Paredes a draft of the
sentence in a pen drive beforehand. Paredes was selected for a permanent judicial
post, and in October Gagliardo was appointed to the Constitutional Court.
Human Rights Defenders
Correa’s government has sought to discredit human rights defenders by accusing
them of receiving foreign funds to destabilize the government. In April 2012,
President Correa accused Fundamedios—a nongovernmental organization that
in October 2011 had testified at a meeting convened by the Organization of
American States’ (OAS) special rapporteur on freedom of expression—of being a
US government “informant.” In July 2012, a top government official accused
Fundamedios of meddling in Ecuadoran politics and of receiving funds from
USAID to destabilize the government. Correa has repeatedly singled out
Fundamedios Director César Ricaurte for criticism, and shown photographs of
him during his weekly address.
A presidential decree adopted in July 2011, regulating international NGOs with
offices in Ecuador, allows the government to monitor all their activities and
rescind their authorizations if they engage in activities different from those
described in their application, resort to “political interference,” or “attack public
security and peace.”
Disability Rights
In June 2012, Ecuador’s Congress approved a law promoting the rights of people
with disabilities, which includes improvements in pensions, social security provisions,
and school curricula. It also created a National Council for Persons with
Disabilities (CONADIS) to monitor and propose reforms on provisions and rights
of people with disabilities.
Key International Actors
In December 2011, after the Inter-American Commission of Human Rights
(IACHR) and its Office of the Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression
raised concerns regarding press freedoms in Ecuador, President Correa called
for the IACHR to be replaced by a new regional human rights body. He also
pushed for the OAS to limit the special rapporteur’s funding and effectiveness.
At the OAS annual assembly in June 2012, Correa again vehemently criticized
the commission and the special rapporteur and promoted measures that would
seriously undermine their autonomy and effectiveness.
In May 2012, Ecuador’s human rights record came under scrutiny in the UN’s
Human Rights Council’s (HRC) Universal Periodic Review (UPR) for restrictions on
freedom of expression, efforts to regulate NGOs, and delays in implementing
judicial reform. Ecuador rejected a recommendation to end criminal sanctions
for the expression of opinions.
Guatemala
President Otto Pérez Molina, a former military officer who was elected in 2011,
has increasingly used the Guatemalan military in public security operations,
despite the serious human rights violations it committed during the country’s
civil war.
While impunity remains the norm in Guatemala, the prosecutor’s office made
progress in several prominent human rights cases in 2012, including bringing
charges against the former head of state, retired General Efraín Ríos Montt, for
atrocities committed in the early 1980s, and against eight members of the army
for allegedly killing protesters in October.
Public Security and the Criminal Justice System
Powerful criminal organizations contribute significantly to violence and intimidation,
which they use to further political objectives and illicit economic interests.
Mexican drug cartels, in particular the Zetas, have added to the violence,
as have transnational gangs such as Mara Salvatrucha. These groups have carried
out lethal attacks against rivals and those who defy their control, such as
those who refuse to pay extortion money.
Guatemala’s justice system has proved largely incapable of curbing violence
and containing organized crime and gang activity. According to official figures,
98 percent of crimes in Guatemala do not result in prosecutions. Deficient and
corrupt prosecutorial and judicial systems, as well as the absence of an effective
witness protection system, all contribute to this alarmingly low prosecution
rate.
Despite these obstacles, prosecutors made significant advances in 2012 in
recent cases involving torture, extrajudicial killings, and corruption—due in
large part to the work of Attorney General Claudia Paz y Paz and the United
Nations International Commission against Impunity in Guatemala (CICIG). In
March, former director of the National Police Marlene Raquel Blanco Lapola was
charged with the extrajudicial execution of three people in 2009 for allegedly
orchestrating a plan to kill individuals suspected of extorting transport workers.
Yet the progress made by the public prosecutor’s office and CICIG in bringing
charges against officials has been undercut by the dilatory practices of defendants’
lawyers, leading to trial postponements of up to several months or even
years. Efforts to reform the criminal code and other laws to limit such practices
have not advanced.
Use of Military in Public Security Operations
The Pérez Molina administration has increasingly relied on the military to carry
out law enforcement duties, in particular efforts to combat organized crime.
States of emergency have been declared on several occasions, allowing for the
suspension of basic rights, and the military has repeatedly been used to assist
police responding to public protests.
In October, soldiers intervened when protesters blocked a highway in
Totonicapán. Soldiers opened fire on the protesters, killing six people and
wounding more than 30 others, according to charges that the public prosecutor’s
office later brought against seven members of the military, including an
army colonel.
In the aftermath of the shooting, Pérez Molina said the military would no longer
be used to respond to public protests, but would continue to assist the police in
public security duties. He pledged to draft a legislative proposal clarifying the
role of the military in public security operations. At this writing, no proposal had
been submitted to Congress.
Accountability for Past Abuses
In January, Efraín Ríos Montt—a retired general who led the military regime from
1982 to 1983 that carried out hundreds of massacres of unarmed civilians—was
charged with genocide and crimes against humanity, and placed under house
arrest. He had been immune from prosecution during the previous 12 years
while serving in Congress.
In May, Ríos Montt was charged in a separate case for his role in a 1982 massacre
in the town of Dos Erres, in the Petén region, in which soldiers murdered more than 250 people, including children. In both cases, Guatemalan courts
denied appeals by his lawyers for amnesty under the National Reconciliation
Law. However, his lawyers continued to file numerous legal challenges that have
prevented the judicial proceedings from advancing.
President Pérez Molina, commenting on Ríos Montt’s prosecution, asserted that
while state actors may have carried out serious abuses, the crimes committed
during the civil war do not constitute genocide. Such statements represent
undue interference with the judicial process.
In March, a former member of army special forces, Pedro Pimentel, was sentenced
to 6,060 years in prison for his role in the Dos Erres massacre. His conviction
followed the sentencing in 2011 of four other retired officers who participated
in the massacre and received similar sentences. In August, a Guatemalan
court sentenced the former chief of detectives of the National Police, Pedro
García Arredondo, to 70 years in prison for his involvement in the disappearance
of a university student in 1981.
In June, Secretary of Peace Antonio Arenales Forno announced that the government
was closing the Office of the Peace Archives, which had been created in
December 2008 to systematize and analyze official documents from the internal
conflict, such as secret police records. While the government said that over two
million documents had been digitalized and would remain accessible, the
office’s closure ended the staff’s efforts to document evidence of past abuses,
which had played a key role in the prosecution of former officials.
Labor Rights and Child Labor
A high level of anti-union violence, including attacks and threats against trade
unionists, endangers freedom of association and the right to organize and bargain
collectively. The International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC) reported
that at least 10 trade unionists were killed in 2011.
In 2010, the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) found that, despite the
basic minimum age for work being 14, 21 percent of children aged 5 to 14 were
involved in child labor, many of them forced. Upon concluding an August 2012
visit to Guatemala, UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay said children continued to be widely exploited in sexual tourism, child pornography,
and organized crime—problems that the government has failed to address effectively.
Gender-Based Violence
Violence against women is a chronic problem in Guatemala and perpetrators
rarely face trial. According to Guatemala’s human rights prosecutor’s office,
rapes and sexual assaults of women increased by 34 percent from 2008 to 2011,
while in 9 of every 10 of these cases, those responsible are not punished.
Palliative Care
Palliative care is very limited in Guatemala, even though more than 10,000 people
die of cancer or HIV/AIDS each year, many in severe pain. In 2012,
Guatemala took the positive step of authorizing the use of immediate-release
oral morphine, although the drug is not widely available, and set up a national
commission to develop public palliative care policies. Nevertheless, Guatemala
has failed to ensure health care workers are adequately trained in modern pain
treatment methods or reform its regulatory policies, which continue to discourage
doctors from prescribing pain medication and limit patients from accessing
pain treatment.
Human Rights Defenders
Attacks and threats against human rights defenders are common, significantly
hampering human rights work throughout the country. Those responsible are
rarely prosecuted.
Key International Actors
The CICIG, established in 2007, plays a key role in assisting the Guatemala’s
justice system in prosecuting violent crime. The commission’s unique mandate
allows it to work with the Attorney General’s Office, the police, and other government
agencies to investigate, prosecute, and dismantle criminal organizations
operating in Guatemala. The CICIG can participate in criminal proceedings as a complementary prosecutor, provide technical assistance, and promote legislative
reforms. As of September 2012, it had initiated 289 investigations,
which had resulted in 70 people being sentenced. President Pérez Molina has
expressed support for extending CICIG’s mandate, which is set to expire in
2013, by two additional years.
Three former Guatemalan officials allegedly involved in a plan to execute prisoners
and escapees involved in a prison break are currently being investigated in
foreign countries. Erwin Sperisen, the head of Guatemala’s police from 2004 to
2007, was arrested in August in Switzerland, where he has dual citizenship,
while former Interior Minister Carlos Vielman, and Sperisen’s former deputy,
Javier Figueroa, have been charged in Spain and Austria, respectively. All three
investigations remain ongoing.
In September, Jorge Vinicio Orantes Sosa, the former Guatemalan soldier who
allegedly participated in the Dos Erres massacre, was detained in Canada and
extradited to the United States, where he has been charged with making false
claims in his application to become a US citizen. If convicted, he could be sent
to Guatemala after serving his sentence.
In January, Guatemala ratified the Rome Statute, making the country party to the
International Criminal Court (ICC).
The Pérez Molina government has asked the US to lift suspensions established
in 1990 on US military aid because of the Guatemalan military’s history of committing
serious abuses with impunity. In August, the US deployed 171 marines to
Guatemala to collaborate with security forces as part of a joint counternarcotics
mission.
Haiti
Political instability, the lasting effects of the January 2010 earthquake, and the
persistence of a deadly cholera epidemic continue to hinder the Haitian government’s
efforts to meet the basic needs of its people and address long-standing
human rights problems, such as violence against women and girls, inhumane
prison conditions, and impunity for past abuses.
The February resignation of Prime Minister Garry Conille, and the government’s
failure to hold key elections in 2012, left critical political posts vacant. In May,
the terms of one-third of Haiti’s senators ended. However, at this writing elections
had still been held to replace them, undermining the body’s ability to legislate.
In February, after President Michel Martelly announced his decision not to reestablish
the Haitian army, disbanded in 1995 after decades of committing
grave human rights abuses, former army personnel occupied old military bases
and other buildings. The Haitian National Police (HNP), with the support of
United Nations forces, intervened to end the illegal occupations.
The UN estimates nearly 400,000 internally displaced persons (IDPs) were living
in camps in June 2012. More than 65,000 people have been evicted from camps
since July 2010, and an additional 80,000 camp residents faced the threat of
eviction at this writing. A cholera epidemic is estimated to have killed more than
7,440 people and infected 600,000 since October 2010.
Justice System
Dismissals and resignations of high-ranking officials undercut efforts to
increase the effectiveness of the justice system. Minister of Justice Josué Pierre-
Louis resigned in late 2011 amid controversy over the arrest of a member of parliament.
Haiti’s capital, Port-au-Prince, has had seven chief prosecutors since President
Martelly took office in May 2011. In September 2012, Chief Prosecutor Jean
Renel Sénatus alleged he was fired for denying a request by Minister of Justice Jean Renel Sanon to issue 36 illegal arrest warrants for government opponents,
including three esteemed human rights lawyers.
Martelly formally established the Superior Council of the Judiciary in July 2012. A
2007 law provided for this body to promote judicial independence in a justice
system long troubled by politicization, corruption, and lack of transparency.
Within the first month of operation, two council members resigned over allegations
that the executive had wielded undue influence when appointing the
Permanent Electoral Council (CEP). As of November 2012, the council struggled
to fulfill its mandate as controversy continued to engulf the CEP appointments.
The HNP’s weak capacity contributes to overall insecurity in Haiti. While the government
and the UN Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) have made
reforming the police a priority, there have been difficulties training sufficient
numbers of entry-level cadets. According to the UN Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), Haitian authorities have made little
progress in investigating allegations of extrajudicial killings, arbitrary arrests,
and ill-treatment of detainees by police that occurred in 2011.
Detention Conditions
Haiti’s prison system remains severely overcrowded, in large part due to high
numbers of arbitrary arrests and prolonged pre-trial detentions. For example, in
the prison in St. Marc, western Haiti, 36 inmates occupy a cell designed to hold
only 8, and must take turns sitting and sleeping because of limited space. The
UN reported a dramatic increase in prisoner deaths in the first half of 2012—
from 43 in all 2011 to 69 in the first half of 2012—due to a resurgence of cholera
and tuberculosis in Haiti’s prisons.
A review of potential cases of arbitrary detention by prison and judicial officers
led to numerous individuals being released in 2012.
Women’s Rights
While Haiti has long suffered from high rates of sexual violence, the precarious
conditions after the earthquake have left some women and girls more vulnerable to such abuse. Even as displacement camps close, gender-based violence
continues to be a problem. Victims face challenges in accessing post-rape medical
services to prevent unwanted pregnancy or sexually transmitted diseases.
The justice sector fails to respond adequately to these crimes, yet 2012 saw
progress in some cases: courts in Port-au-Prince convicted at least 13 individuals
for rape in August 2012. Two of these convictions were obtained with the
support of forensic evidence, an advance for Haiti’s judicial system.
Children’s Rights
Prior to the earthquake, only about half of primary school-age children in Haiti
attended school. In 2011, President Martelly introduced a plan for free universal
primary education. By the beginning of 2012, an estimated 772,000 children
had received tuition assistance through the program.
Use of child domestic workers—known as restavèks—continues, despite efforts
to end the practice. Restavèks, 80 percent of whom are girls, are sent from lowincome
households to live with wealthier families in the hope that they will be
schooled and cared for in exchange for performing light chores. These children
are often unpaid, denied education, and physically or sexually abused.
After numerous reports of improper adoption procedures immediately after the
earthquake, some children’s rights advocates raised concerns that the government
lacked adequate adoption procedures. To ensure greater protection of
children in the adoption process, parliament ratified the 1993 Hague
Convention on Protection of Children and Co-operation in Respect of
Intercountry Adoption in June 2012.
Accountability for Past Abuses
Former President Jean-Claude Duvalier returned to Haiti in January 2011 after
nearly 25 years in exile. He was charged with financial and human rights crimes
allegedly committed during his 15-year tenure as president. From 1971 to 1986,
Duvalier commanded a network of security forces that committed serious human rights violations, including arbitrary detentions, torture, disappearances,
summary executions, and forced exile.
In January 2012, the investigating judge in the case found, contrary to international
standards, that the statute of limitations prevented prosecuting Duvalier
for his human rights crimes. An appeal was pending at this writing.
Key International Actors
MINUSTAH has been in Haiti since 2004. In October 2010, allegations surfaced
that a contingent of UN peacekeepers were the source of the cholera epidemic.
A UN independent investigation found that the cholera epidemic was caused by
a confluence of circumstances, while numerous scientific analyses claim evidence
that MINUSTAH soldiers most likely introduced the strain.
In November 2011, the Institute for Justice and Democracy in Haiti and the
Bureau des Avocats Internationaux filed a complaint with the UN on behalf of
5,000 cholera victims, alleging that MINUSTAH was the proximate cause of their
illness. The complaint seeks the installation of a national water and sanitation
system, financial compensation for individual victims, and a public apology
from the UN. At this writing, no progress had been reported in the case.
Sexual abuse and exploitation by UN forces in Haiti remains a problem.
According to UN figures, at least 60 allegations of sexual abuse have been
made against peacekeepers in the last five years. In 2012, several Pakistani
peacekeepers were accused of raping a 14-year-old boy. Pakistani authorities
court-martialed two of them on a UN base, sentencing each of them to one year
in prison in Pakistan. Local Haitian authorities were not notified until after the
trial.
The UN Security Council extended MINUSTAH’s mandate through October 15,
2013.
Haiti’s parliament ratified the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights (ICESCR) in January 2012.
Honduras
Honduras made very limited progress in 2012 in addressing the serious human
rights violations committed under the de facto government that took power after
the 2009 military coup, despite efforts by the human rights unit in the attorney
general’s office to investigate abuses, and the 2011 Truth and Reconciliation
Commission report documenting those that occurred.
Violence and threats by unidentified perpetrators against journalists, human
rights defenders, prosecutors, peasant activists, and transgender people remain
serious problems. Perpetrators are rarely brought to justice.
Lack of Accountability for Post-Coup Abuses
Following the June 2009 military coup, the de facto government suspended key
civil liberties, including freedom of the press and assembly. In the ensuing
days, the military occupied opposition media outlets, temporarily shutting their
transmissions. Police and military personnel responded to generally peaceful
demonstrations with excessive force. This pattern of the disproportionate use of
force led to several deaths, scores of injuries, and thousands of arbitrary detentions.
In July 2011, a truth commission, established by President Porfirio Lobo’s
administration to investigate events before and after the coup, issued a report
documenting 20 cases of excessive use of force and killings by state security
forces. The commission also reported that police and army officials were
responsible for “systematic obstruction” of investigations into these abuses.
As of October 2012, only one police officer had been held accountable for any of
the serious abuses that occurred in the context of protests in support of the
ousted president, Manuel Zelaya. In February 2012, a police officer was sentenced
to eight years in prison for the illegal arrest and torture of a protester
after a demonstration in San Pedro Sula in August 2009. Human rights prosecutors
face obstacles conducting investigations, including limited collaboration by
security forces, lack of sufficient resources, and an ineffective witness protection
program.
Attacks on Journalists
Honduras has the region’s highest rate journalists killed per population, according
to the United Nations special rapporteur on the promotion and protection of
the right to freedom of opinion and expression. At least 20 journalists have died
at the hands of unidentified attackers since 2009. In May 2012, for example,
Alfredo Villatoro, a radio journalist, was abducted after having received death
threats. His body was found less than a week later in the outskirts of
Tegucigalpa, the capital. Impunity continues to be the norm in these cases.
Rural Violence
More than 60 people have been killed in the Bajo Aguán Valley since November
2009, when peasants occupied land being cultivated by large agricultural enterprises.
Many victims were members of peasant associations who were allegedly
gunned down by security guards working for the enterprises. Other victims
included private security guards and law enforcement officials. According to the
attorney general’s office, as of November 2012, four security guards were facing
trial for the killing of five peasants in Trujillo, Colón department, in November
2010. Two police officers had been charged with attempted homicide and illegal
arrest in connection with a public protest in Tocoa, Colón, in August 2010, when
police opened fire on peasants to clear a road they were occupying. No one has
yet been convicted for any of the Bajo Aguán crimes.
Violence against Transgender Persons
Bias-motivated attacks on transgender people are a serious problem in
Honduras. According to local rights advocates, more than 70 members of the
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) population were killed between
September 2008 and March 2012. The alleged involvement of members of the
Honduran police in some of these violent abuses is of particular concern.
Impunity for these cases has been the norm. In January 2011, the government
established a special unit in the attorney general’s office in Tegucigalpa to
investigate killings of transgender women, among other vulnerable groups. In
January 2012, a similar unit was established in San Pedro Sula. As of November
2012, no one had been convicted for these crimes. According to an official in the attorney general’s office, suspects had been charged in 25 cases under
investigation by the special prosecutorial teams.
Prison Conditions
Overcrowding and poor prison conditions, including inadequate nutrition and
sanitation, are longstanding problems in Honduras. The country’s 24 prisons,
which have a capacity of 8,000, held 13,000 prisoners, according to local press
accounts. In February 2012, more than 300 inmates were killed and dozens were
injured during a fire in the Granja Prison in Comayagua. In May 2012, Congress
passed legislation to reform the prison system. At this writing, President Lobo
had not yet signed it into law.
Police Reform
In December 2011, Congress established an independent body, the Directorate
for Investigation and Evaluation of the Police Career, to evaluate police performance
and remove officers implicated in corruption and criminal activity, including
human rights abuses. As of October 2012, the unit had referred only two
police officers—including a former director of the police criminal investigation
division—to the attorney general’s office for prosecution for their alleged
involvement in the escape of four officers accused of the 2011 killing of two university
students.
In June 2012, President Lobo established an independent commission consisting
of three Honduran and two foreign experts to propose wide-ranging reforms
of the police, the attorney general’s office, and the courts.
Judicial Independence
In May 2010,the Supreme Court arbitrarily fired four judges who had publicly
opposed the coup on grounds that they had participated in politics, while taking
no action against judges who had publicly supported the ouster of former
President Zelaya. In 2011, Congress approved a constitutional reform creating
the Council of the Judiciary and Judicial Career, an elected body responsible for appointing and removing judges. As of October 2012, however, legislators had
yet to appoint the council’s members.
Human Rights Defenders
Violence and threats against human rights defenders are serious problems in
Honduras. For example, in September 2012, Antonio Trejo Cabrera, a lawyer who
advocated for peasant land rights and publicly opposed the creation of special
autonomous development zones, was shot several times and killed after attending
a wedding south of Tegucigalpa. Trejo had received death threats on multiple
occasions.
The ability of the Human Rights Unit of the attorney general’s office to investigate
these crimes is undermined by the alleged participation of members of the
police, who have impeded and obstructed investigations. The unit’s staff has
also been subject to threats and violence. In September 2012, unidentified
assailants shot and killed one of the unit’s prosecutors, Manuel Eduardo Díaz
Mazariegos.
Key International Actors
The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) has played an active
role in Honduras since the coup, producing press releases and comprehensive
reports documenting abuses, including killings, threats, and attacks on journalists.
Since August 2010, the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) has maintained a representative in Honduras to advise the government
on human rights policies and support the work of local human rights defenders.
In September 2012, the high commissioner urged the government to address
the vulnerability of human rights defenders and journalists.
United States legislation granting military and police aid to Honduras states that
20 percent of the funds will only be available if the Honduran government meets
human rights requirements, including implementing policies to protect freedom of expression and ensuring that abuses by police and military personnel are
investigated and prosecuted by civilian authorities.
In August 2012, the US State Department issued a report stating that Honduras
had met the requirements but nonetheless decided to withhold funds to police
forces under the command of a police chief who is alleged to have been
involved in past abuses. The US Congress has also put a hold on tens of millions
of dollars of aid to Honduras in light of existing human rights concerns.
Mexico
Mexican security forces have committed widespread human rights violations in
efforts to combat powerful organized crime groups, including killings, disappearances,
and torture. Almost none of these abuses are adequately investigated,
exacerbating a climate of violence and impunity in many parts of the country.
In an historic decision in August 2012, the Supreme Court ruled that the use of
military jurisdiction to prosecute a human rights violation was unconstitutional.
Nonetheless, most abuses by military personnel continue to be prosecuted in
military courts, which lack independence and impartiality.
Criminal groups and members of security forces continue to threaten or attack
human rights defenders and journalists. The government has failed to provide
these vulnerable groups with adequate protection or investigate the crimes
committed against them. In April, Mexico passed legislation to create a protection
mechanism for human rights defenders and journalists, but protocols to
evaluate risk and assign protection are still being designed.
Military Abuses and Impunity
Mexico has relied heavily on the military to fight drug-related violence and
organized crime. While engaging in law enforcement activities, the armed forces
have committed grave human rights violations. From January 2007 to mid-
November 2012, Mexico’s National Human Rights Commission issued detailed
reports of 109 cases in which it found that members of the army had committed
serious human rights violations, and received complaints of 7,350 military abuses.
One of the main reasons military abuses persist is because the soldiers who
commit them are virtually never brought to justice. This occurs largely because
such cases continue to be investigated and prosecuted in the military justice
system. The military prosecutor’s Office opened nearly 5,000 investigations into
human rights violations by soldiers against civilians from January 2007 to April 2012, during which time military judges sentenced only 38 military personnel
for human rights violations.
In August 2012, the Supreme Court ruled that the killing of an unarmed man by
soldiers at a military checkpoint should be prosecuted in civilian jurisdiction,
and that the article of the Military Code of Justice used to claim jurisdiction over
human rights cases was unconstitutional. Nevertheless, efforts to reform the
Military Code of Justice in Mexico’s Congress have met with stiff resistance. The
military has stated that it will continue to claim jurisdiction over cases of
alleged abuses until its justice code is reformed.
Torture
Torture remains a widespread practice in Mexico to obtain forced confessions
and extract information about organized crime. Torture is most frequently
applied in the period between when victims are arbitrarily detained and when
they are handed to prosecutors, a time when they are often held incommunicado
on military bases or other illegal detention sites. Common tactics include
beatings, asphyxiation, waterboarding, electric shocks, sexual torture, and
death threats.
One perpetuating factor is that some judges continue to accept confessions
obtained through torture and ill-treatment, despite the fact the constitution prohibits
the admission of such statements. Another is the failure to investigate
and prosecute most torture cases. Only two federal officials have been sentenced
for torture since 1994. In contrast, the National Human Rights
Commission received more than 100 complaints of torture and over 4,700 complaints
of ill-treatment from 2007 to 2011.
Mexico has committed to applying the Istanbul Protocol, an internationally recognized
set of guiding principles to assess the condition of a potential victim of
torture or ill-treatment. Yet justice officials rarely follow it, and medical examiners
often omit evidence of abuse from their reports.
Criminal Justice System
The criminal justice system routinely fails to provide justice to victims of violent
crimes and human rights violations. The various causes of this failure include
corruption, inadequate training and resources, and the complicity of prosecutors
and public defenders.
In June 2008, Mexico passed a constitutional reform that creates the basis for
an adversarial criminal justice system with oral trials, and contains measures
that are critical for promoting greater respect for fundamental rights. But implementation
of the reform, which authorities have until 2016 to complete, has
been sluggish, and most changes have yet to be translated into practice. Many
states continue to operate under Mexico’s traditional system and tolerate its
most insidious practices. Meanwhile, the few states where the new system has
been introduced have passed significant counter-reforms or inserted exceptions
that undercut the key modifications of the oral system.
In addition to its positive aspects, the reform also introduced the provision of
arraigo, which allows prosecutors, with judicial authorization, to detain individuals
suspected of participating in organized crime for up to 80 days before they
are charged with a crime. Detention without charge for up to 80 days violates
Mexico’s obligations regarding liberty and security and due process under international
law. Many detainees are held well beyond the 80-day limit, and in
some cases are subjected to torture in arraigo detention centers.
Prison Conditions
Prisons are overpopulated, unhygienic, and fail to provide basic security for
most inmates. Prisoners who accuse guards or inmates of attacks or other abuses
have no effective system to seek redress.
Approximately 60 percent of prisons are under the control of organized crime,
and corruption and violence are rampant, according to the National Human
Rights Commission. Criminal groups use their control to extort the families of
prisoners, threatening to torture inmates if they do not pay. In February 2012,
guards in Apodaca prison in Nuevo León state allowed prisoners from one criminal group to execute 44 prisoners who belonged to a rival group, and then
allowed many of those responsible to escape.
Freedom of Expression
Journalists, particularly those who have reported on drug trafficking or have
been critical of security forces and authorities, have faced serious harassment
and attacks. From 2000 to July 2012, 82 journalists were killed and 16 more disappeared.
Participants in social media networks and the offices of news outlets
have increasingly been the targets of violence. While many attacks on the press
in 2012 were attributed to organized crime, evidence points to the involvement
of state officials in some instances.
Authorities have routinely failed to adequately investigate and prosecute crimes
against members of the press or to protect journalists who face serious risk, fostering
a climate of impunity and self-censorship. Mexico created a special prosecutor’s
office for crimes against freedom of expression in 2006, and endowed
it with greater authority in 2010, but it has failed to effectively prosecute cases.
More than 630 attacks on the press were reported from 2006 through mid-2012,
yet the special prosecutor has obtained only one criminal sentence.
In June 2012, Mexico passed a constitutional amendment that makes attacks on
the press a federal crime, giving federal prosecutors the power to take over such
investigations from local prosecutors, who are more susceptible to corruption
and threats. Implementing legislation of the reform is pending.
Gender-Based Violence
Mexican laws do not adequately protect women and girls against domestic violence
and sexual violence. Some provisions, including those that make the
severity of punishments for some sexual offenses contingent on the “chastity”
of the victim, contradict international standards. Women who have suffered
these types of human rights violations generally do not report them to authorities,
while those who do report them are generally met with suspicion, apathy,
and disrespect.
Reproductive Rights
In August 2008, the Supreme Court affirmed the constitutionality of a Mexico
City law that legalized abortion in the first 12 weeks of pregnancy. Since that
time 16 of Mexico’s 32 states have adopted reforms that recognize the right to
life from the moment of conception, limiting women’s ability to exercise their
right to health. In 2010, the Supreme Court ruled that all states must provide
emergency contraception and access to abortion for rape victims. However, in
practice many women and girls face serious barriers to accessing abortions
after sexual violence, including inaccurate information, undue delays, and
intimidation by officials.
Same-Sex Marriage
In August 2010, the Supreme Court recognized the right of same-sex couples in
Mexico City to adopt children and to marry, and ruled that all Mexican states
must recognize same-sex marriages that take place in Mexico City. Yet the ruling
does not require that states recognize the right themselves, and many still deny
same-sex couples the right to marry.
Access to Palliative Care
Although since 2009 Mexican law provides for a right to home-based palliative
care for patients with terminal illnesses—one of very few countries to do so—
implementing regulations have not been passed. Consequently, tens of thousands
of patients continue to face major and often insurmountable obstacles in
accessing end-of-life care, leading to unnecessary suffering.
Migrants
Hundreds of thousands of undocumented migrants pass through Mexico each
year and many are subjected to grave abuses en route—such as disappearances
and physical and sexual assault—at the hands of organized crime, migration
authorities, and security forces. Approximately 22,000 migrants are kidnapped
annually, according to the National Human Rights Commission, often with the
aim of extorting payments from their relatives. Authorities have not taken adequate steps to protect migrants, or to investigate and prosecute those who
abuse them. Migration officials rarely inform migrants of their rights, such as
the right to seek asylum. Authorities and criminal groups have threatened and
harassed the staff of migrant shelters for assisting migrants.
Labor Rights
Agreements negotiated between management and pro-management unions
continue to obstruct legitimate labor-organizing activity. These agreements
often restrict workers’ ability to obtain effective representation, undermining
their ability bargain collectively and earn benefits beyond the minimums mandated
by Mexican law. Workers who seek to form independent unions risk losing
their jobs, as loopholes in labor laws and poor enforcement generally fail to protect
them from retaliatory dismissals. In November 2012, Congress passed a farreaching
reform of labor law that imposes onerous preconditions for striking
and makes it easier for employers to replace regular employees with workers on
short-term contracts supplied by third-party brokers, further undermining fundamental
labor rights and protections for workers.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders continue to suffer harassment and attacks, sometimes
directly at the hands of state officials. Meanwhile authorities consistently fail to
provide adequate protection or to investigate crimes against defenders such as
Margarita Martinez, who fled Chiapas state in June 2012 after repeated death
threats and attacks tied to her work denouncing police abuses.
In April 2012, Mexico’s Congress passed a law to protect human rights defenders
and journalists, which mandates formal protocols to evaluate the risk faced
by individuals from these groups and protection when necessary. At this writing,
the implementation of these processes—with civil society participation—
remained ongoing.
Key International Actors
The United States has allocated over US$2 billion in aid to Mexico through the
Merida Initiative, a multi-year aid package agreed upon in 2007 to help Mexico
combat organized crime. Fifteen percent of select portions of the assistance can
be disbursed only after the US secretary of state reports to the US Congress that
the Mexican government is meeting four human rights requirements, which
include ensuring that military abuses are investigated in the civilian justice system,
and prohibiting the use of testimony obtained through.
However, the impact of these requirements has been undermined by the fact
that the US State Department has repeatedly reported to the US Congress that
they are being met, despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary, leading
Congress to release the funds. For example, the State Department’s 2012
human rights report on Mexico found that “widespread impunity for human
rights abuses by officials remained a problem in both civilian and military jurisdictions,”
which violates one of the requirements.
In November 2011, a Mexican lawyer submitted a petition asking the Office of
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (OTP) to open an investigation
into the alleged responsibility of President Felipe Calderón and other officials
for war crimes and crimes against humanity, which was signed by more than
23,000 Mexicans. A press release that the presidency released in response
called the accusations in the petition slander, and said it was exploring legal
options against those who had made them. The prosecutor’s office was still
reviewing this petition at this writing.
The Inter-American Court of Human Rights (IACtHR) has issued decisions in four
cases since 2009 mandating that the military justice system should not be used
to investigate and prosecute human rights abuses committed by the military.
These rulings precipitated a Supreme Court decision in July 2011, which recognized
that the jurisprudence of the Inter-American Court was binding and stated
that Mexican judges should take its rulings into account in their judgments.
The United Nations Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances
(WGEID) conducted a fact-finding mission to Mexico in 2011, concluding that,
“sufficient efforts are not being made to determine the fate or whereabouts of persons who have disappeared, to punish those responsible and to guarantee
the right to the truth and reparation.”
Mexico appeared before the UN Committee Against Torture (CAT) in October
2012. During the hearing, committee experts expressed concern regarding the
ongoing use of torture to obtain confessions and the unlawful practice of arraigo
detention, among other abusive patterns.
Peru
In recent years, public protests against large-scale mining projects, as well as
other government policies and private sector initiatives, have led to numerous
confrontations between police and protesters, and resulted in the shooting
deaths of civilians by state security forces. As of September 2012, 18 civilians
had been killed during protests since President Ollanta Humala took office in
July 2011.
Efforts to prosecute those responsible for the many egregious abuses committed
during Peru’s internal armed conflict (1980-2000) have had mixed results.
The conviction in 2009 and 2010 of former President Alberto Fujimori, his advisor
Vladimiro Montesinos, several army generals, and members of a government
death squad were notable advances in accountability. However, progress
on cases involving abuses committed under earlier administrations has been
very limited.
Violence during Crowd Control Operations
The use of lethal force against public protesters is an ongoing problem. In addition
to the 18 civilians killed during protests since President Humala took office,
165 civilians were killed during the administration of his predecessor, Alan
García (2006-2011).
In some cases, the Peruvian police and army appear to have used lethal force
unlawfully. For example, in July, four civilians were fatally shot in Celendín,
Cajamarca, when soldiers reportedly opened fire on unarmed protesters.
Police guidelines require police officers to observe international norms on the
use of force, but a bill under debate in Congress in November 2012 would
undercut these guidelines and authorize the use of lethal force in circumstances
that international standards do not permit.
Military Justice
Military courts that lack independence and impartiality continue to conduct trials
of police and military officials accused of human rights abuses. Legislative
Decree 1095—which was issued in 2010 by then President Alan Garcíato to regulate
the use of the armed forces in public security operations—provides that
“illicit conduct committed by military personnel when applying the decree or
during the course of their duties” is subject to military court jurisdiction. This
violates earlier rulings of Peru’s Supreme Court and Constitutional Tribunal, and
of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights (IACtHR).
Confronting Past Abuses
Peru’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission estimated that almost 70,000 people
died or were subject to enforced disappearance during the country’s armed
conflict between 1980 and 2000. Many were victims of atrocities by the Shining
Path and other insurgent groups; others were victims of human rights violations
by state agents.
Former President Fujimori was sentenced in 2009 to 25 years in prison for
killings and “disappearances” in 1991 and 1992. His intelligence advisor,
Vladimiro Montesinos, three former army generals, and members of the Colina
group, a government death squad, are also serving sentences ranging from 15
to 25 years for the assassination in 1991 of 15 people in the Lima district of
Barrios Altos, and for 6 “disappearances.”
In July 2012, the Permanent Criminal Chamber of the Supreme Court reduced the
sentences in the Barrios Altos case on appeal. By denying that the crimes were
crimes against humanity, the court undercut the jurisprudence established by
the Supreme Court’s Special Criminal Chamber in the Fujimori case. The Ministry
of Justice and Human Rights filed an appeal for the sentence to be annulled on
constitutional grounds. In September, the Permanent Criminal Chamber rescinded
the sentence, after the IACtHR ruled that it was incompatible with the country’s
human rights obligations.
Progress to hold accountable those responsible for human rights violations
under earlier governments has been very limited. Prosecutors have not yet presented charges or have closed hundreds of cases, partly due to the Ministry of
Defense and the army failing to cooperate in providing information essential to
identify perpetrators.
Torture
Torture continues to be a problem. The Human Rights ombudsman’s office
received 62 denunciations of torture and ill-treatment by the police in 2011, and
18 during the first 6 months of 2012. A third of the 144 victims whose cases
were being monitored in 2012 by the nongovernmental organization,
COMISEDH, died or suffered permanent physical disabilities as a result of torture.
According to COMISEDH, many victims do not make formal complaints
about their torture, and those who do have trouble obtaining judicial redress
and adequate compensation.
Freedom of Media
Journalists continue to receive suspended prison sentences and face fines for
defamation. In June 2012, a court gave two journalists from the newspaper
Diario 16, Juan Carlos Tafur and Roberto More, two-year suspended prison sentences
and ordered each to pay compensation of 60,000 nuevos soles (about
US$23,000) to a former police general whom the newspaper had linked to a
family whose members faced money-laundering charges.
A bill that would replace prison sentences of up to three years for defamation—
as stipulated in the current law—with community service and fines, is still awaiting
a vote in the legislature. Although Congress approved the bill in July 2011,
former President García lodged objections that must still be debated and voted
on before the bill can become law.
In August 2012, President Humala introduced a bill that would introduce prison
sentences of up to eight years for anyone who “approves, justifies, denies or
minimizes the crimes committed by members of terrorist organizations” for
which courts have issued a final verdict. The bill contains broad language that
could criminalize publishing legitimate criticism of judicial decisions, such as
the guilt of an alleged offender or the penalty imposed, if a “social group” affected by terrorism felt belittled, offended, or insulted by it. By the end of
October, Congress had still to debate the bill.
Journalists in Peru’s provinces face threats and physical attack for criticizing
local authorities. Some of these attacks have been attributed to individuals
hired by elected officials. For example, a police investigation found that a mayor
in Casma, Ancash, ordered the murder of Pedro Alonso Flores, the director of a
local TV news program who was his staunch critic. Flores was shot to death in
Ancash in September 2011 after reportedly receiving death threats. At this writing,
the prosecutor had brought no charges.
Disability Rights
Under Peru’s system of judicial interdiction, judges can determine that individuals
with certain multisensory, intellectual, or mental disabilities are “incompetent”
and assign them legal guardians, effectively suspending their basic civil
rights, including the right to vote. International and regional human rights bodies
have called on Peru to abolish judicial interdiction because it is incompatible
with Peru’s obligations under the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (CRPD).
In June 2012, the General Law on People with Disabilities passed an initial vote
in Congress. The proposed law would help bring existing national legislation
into line with the convention, protecting the right of people with
disabilities to act in their own interests, with appropriate support when necessary.
As of November, a final vote on the bill was still pending.
Ill-Treatment of People with Drug Dependency
In January and May 2012, at least 41 people were killed and 5 critically injured in
fires that swept through two privately run “drug rehabilitation” facilities, where
patients were trapped behind locked doors and barred windows. Local authorities
subsequently inspected and closed some unlicensed centers. In May,
Congress passed a law permitting involuntary detention for treatment of drug
dependence in broad circumstances, raising concerns that people who use drugs would continue to face involuntary detention and ill-treatment in circumstances
that violate international standards.
Indigenous Rights
In September 2011, pursuant to Convention 169 of the International Labour
Organization (ILO), the government promulgated a law giving Peru’s indigenous
communities the right to be consulted over legislative or administrative issues
that directly affect them. The first consultation under the law, over an oil exploration
project affecting indigenous communities in Loreto department in the
Peruvian Amazon, is scheduled for early 2013.
Reproductive Rights
Women and girls in Peru have the right to seek abortions only in cases of medical
necessity; however the country lacks clear protocols that enable health
providers to determine in which specific circumstances an abortion may be lawful.
Both the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women (CEDAW) and the UN Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights (CESCR) have called on Peru to establish such protocols, as well
as to legalize abortion in cases in which the pregnancy is the result of rape. At
this writing, the government had failed to comply with these recommendations.
Human Rights Defenders
On at least two occasions in 2012, police arbitrarily detained or mistreated
human rights workers when they tried to protect detainees’ rights. In May 2012,
police arrested two workers at the Vicariate of Solidarity of Sicuani, a churchbased
human rights group, as they waited in a jeep outside a mining camp in
Espinar, Cusco, while lawyer colleagues checked on detainees reportedly held
there. The police told a prosecutor they had found ammunition under the back
seat. A judge found that the arrests were illegal.
Police in Cajamarca prevented Genoveva Gómez, a lawyer from the Human
Rights ombudsman’s office, and Amparo Abanto, a lawyer from the NGO GRUFIDES,
from intervening to help detainees they thought were being beaten in the police station during protests in the city in June 2012. Gómez was wearing a
jacket and a card that identified her as a member of the ombudsman’s office.
She reported that about 20 police forced her out of the building, insulted her,
pulled her hair, hit, and kicked her. The Human Rights ombudsman’s office filed
a complaint with the attorney general’s office, but at this writing, no action had
been taken against the police involved in the incident.
Key International Actors
In September 2012, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights (IACtHR) ruled
that the verdict of the Supreme Court’s Permanent Criminal Chamber in the
Barrios Altos case was incompatible with Peru’s obligation to ensure that the
events were fully investigated and those responsible held accountable.
In December 2011, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights asked the
IACtHR to open a case against Peru for the alleged extrajudicial execution of
three former members of the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA) who
were killed in April 1997 during a commando operation to free hostages held by
the MRTA in the Lima residence of the Japanese ambassador. The commission
had recommended that the case, which a military court had closed in 2004,
reopen under civilian jurisdiction. In October 2012, a Lima court found that one
of the MRTA members had been extrajudicially executed, but acquitted the three
main suspects, including Vladimiro Montesinos.
Venezuela
President Hugo Chávez, who has governed Venezuela for 14 years, was elected
to another six-year term in October 2012. During his presidency, the accumulation
of power in the executive branch and the erosion of human rights guarantees
have enabled his government to intimidate, censor, and prosecute
Venezuelans who criticize the president or thwart his political agenda. President
Chávez and his supporters have used their powers in a wide range of cases
involving the judiciary, the media, and human rights defenders.
While many Venezuelans continue to criticize the government, the prospect of
facing similar reprisals—in the form of arbitrary or abusive state action—has
undercut the ability of judges to adjudicate politically sensitive cases, and
forced journalists and rights defenders to weigh the consequences of publicizing
information and opinions that are critical of the government.
Prison violence and police abuse remain serious problems.
Judicial Independence
In 2004, Chávez and his legislative allies conducted a political takeover of the
Supreme Court, filling it with government supporters and creating new measures
that make it possible to purge justices from the court. The court—re-packed
with Chávez supporters in 2010—has largely abdicated its role as a check on
executive power. Its members have openly rejected the principle of separation
of powers and publicly pledged their commitment to advancing the political
agenda of President Chávez. This political commitment has been reflected in the
court’s rulings, which have repeatedly validated the government’s disregard for
international human rights norms.
Individual judges may face reprisals if they rule against government interests. In
December 2009, Judge María Lourdes Afiuni was detained on the day she
authorized the conditional release of a government critic who had spent nearly
three years in prison awaiting trial on corruption charges. Although Afiuni’s ruling
complied with a recommendation by United Nations human rights monitors—
and was consistent with Venezuelan law—she was promptly arrested. A provisional judge who had publicly pledged his loyalty to President Chávez
ordered her to stand trial. The day after her arrest, Chávez publicly branded
Afiuni a “bandit” who should receive the maximum 30 years in prison. Afiuni
spent more than a year in pretrial detention, in deplorable conditions, together
with convicted prisoners—including many she herself had sentenced—who subjected
her to repeated death threats. In the face of growing criticism from international
human rights bodies, Afiuni was moved to house arrest in February
2011, where she remained at this writing while awaiting trial.
Freedom of Media
The Chávez government has expanded and abused its powers to regulate the
media. While sharp criticism of the government is still common in the print
media, on the private TV station Globovisión, and in some other outlets, fear of
government reprisals has made self-censorship a serious problem.
Laws contributing to a climate of self-censorship include amendments to the
criminal code in 2005 extending the scope of desacato laws that criminalize disrespect
of high government officials, and a broadcasting statute allowing arbitrary
suspension of channels for the vaguely defined offense of “incitement.” In
December 2010, the National Assembly broadened this statute to include the
internet. Amendments to the telecommunications law grant the government
power to suspend or revoke concessions to private outlets if it is “convenient for
the interests of the nation.”
The Chávez government has used its regulatory authority to expand the number
of government-run and pro-Chávez media outlets, while reducing the availability
of media outlets that engage in critical programming. Venezuela’s oldest private
television channel, RCTV, which was arbitrarily removed from the public airwaves
in 2007, has since been driven off cable TV by the government, leaving
Globovisión as the only major channel that remains critical of Chávez.
The government has pursued administrative sanctions against Globovisión,
imposing a fine of US$2.1 million in one case for allegedly violating the broadcasting
statute when it aired images of a prison riot in 2011. Another six cases
remain pending against the station, which could lead to another heavy fine, or to its closure or suspension. In addition, the government has targeted media
outlets for sanction and/or censorship for their critical reporting on the government’s
response to issues of public interest.
The government has also targeted other media outlets for arbitrary sanction and
censorship. For example, after the weekly newspaper 6to Poder published a
satirical article in August 2011 depicting six high-level female officials as
dancers in a cabaret entitled, “The Revolution” directed by “Mr. Chávez,” the
paper’s director and president were arrested, and the newspaper received a
court order barring it from publishing text or images that might constitute “an
offense and/or insult to the reputation, or to the decorum, of any representative
of public authorities.”
Human Rights Defenders
The Chávez government has intensified its efforts to marginalize the country’s
human rights defenders by repeatedly accusing them of seeking to undermine
Venezuelan democracy with the support of the United States government. While
some human rights nongovernmental organizations have received funding from
US sources—a common practice among independent groups throughout Latin
America—there is no credible evidence that the independence and integrity of
their work has been compromised as a result.
The weight of the government’s unfounded allegations has been compounded
by Chávez supporters, who have filed multiple criminal complaints against leading
NGOs for receiving foreign funding. In addition, the Supreme Court ruled in
2010 that individuals or organizations that receive foreign funding could be
prosecuted for “treason” under a provision of the criminal code that establishes
a prison sentence of up to 15 years for anyone who “collaborates directly or indirectly
with a foreign country or Republic … or provides or receives money from
them … that could be used against the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, the
integrity of its territory, its republican institutions, citizens, or destabilizes the
social order.” The National Assembly, moreover, has enacted legislation blocking
organizations that “defend political rights” or “monitor the performance of
public bodies” from receiving international assistance.
These efforts to harass and discredit human rights defenders have contributed
to an environment in which they feel more vulnerable to acts of intimidation by
government officials and violence or threats by its supporters.
The Chávez government has also enacted rules that dramatically reduce the
public’s right to obtain information held by the government. In combination,
these measures have significantly increased the government’s ability to prevent
or deter human rights defenders from obtaining the funding, information, legal
standing, and public visibility they need to be effective advocates.
Police Abuses
Violent crime is rampant in Venezuela, and extrajudicial killings by security
agents remain a grave problem. The minister of the interior and justice has estimated
that police commit one of every five crimes. According to the most recent
official statistics, law enforcement agents allegedly killed 7,998 people between
January 2000 and the first third of 2009.
Impunity for police abuses remains the norm. In 2011, prosecutors charged individuals
allegedly responsible for abuses in less than 4 percent of cases investigated.
In April 2008, Chávez’s administration issued a decree that established a new
national police force and enacted measures to promote non-abusive policing
proposed by a commission comprised of government and NGO representatives.
At this writing, there had been no independent evaluation of the new police
force’s performance.
Prison Conditions
Venezuelan prisons are among the most violent in Latin America. Weak security,
deteriorating infrastructure, overcrowding, insufficient and poorly trained
guards, and corruption allow armed gangs to effectively control prisons.
Hundreds of violent prison deaths occur every year. For example, in August
2012, a clash between rival prison gangs in Yare 1 prison, Miranda state, left 24
inmates and one visitor dead and 43 people injured.
Labor Rights
The National Electoral Council (CNE), a public authority, has the power to organize
and certify all union elections, violating international standards that guarantee
workers the right to elect their representatives in full freedom, according to
conditions they determine. Established unions whose elections have not been
CNE-certified may not participate in collective bargaining.
For several years, the government has promised to reform the relevant labor and
electoral laws to restrict state interference in union elections. In April 2012,
President Chávez adopted a new labor law by decree. Although the law states
that unions are free to organize elections without interference, it lays down the
voting system that unions must incorporate into their statutes, as well as the
maximum length of tenure of union officers. These provisions limit the full freedom
that unions should have under international norms to draw up their constitutions
and rules and elect their representatives.
Key International Actors
Venezuela has increasingly rejected international monitoring of its human rights
record, rejecting binding rulings of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights
(IACtHR) and refusing to allow the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
(IACHR) to conduct in-country monitoring of human rights problems. In
September 2012, Venezuela formally announced its withdrawal from the
American Convention on Human Rights.
In March 2012, the UN Human Rights Council (HRC) adopted the Universal
Periodic Review (UPR) report of Venezuela. The government has rejected several
key recommendations aimed at protecting free speech, strengthening judicial
independence, complying with the IACtHR’s binding rulings, and supporting the
independent work of NGOs. At this writing, the government had yet to authorize
in-country visits by several UN human rights experts.
Afghanistan
Afghans feel enormous anxiety as the 2014 deadline for withdrawing international
combat forces from Afghanistan looms, and powerbrokers jockey for position.
The Afghan government’s failure to respond effectively to violence against
women undermines the already-perilous state of women’s rights. President
Hamid Karzai’s endorsement in March of a statement by a national religious
council calling women “secondary,” prohibiting violence against women only for
“un-Islamic” reasons, and calling for segregating women and girls in education,
employment, and in public, raises questions about the government’s commitment
to protecting women. The minister of justice’s description of battered
women shelters as sites of “immorality and prostitution” deepens that skepticism.
Government efforts to stifle free speech through new legislation and targeting
individual journalists were a worrying new development in 2012, while a crackdown
on a political party that advocates prosecuting warlords provided a troubling
indication of the government’s approach to the rights to freedom of association
and expression of political parties ahead of the 2014 presidential election.
Civilian casualties from the civil armed conflict remained alarmingly high, and
re-vetting of the Afghan Local Police (ALP) was underway due to abuses by these
forces. Rising numbers of “green on blue” attacks where members of the Afghan
security forces target foreign soldiers prompted joint operations with foreign
troops to be curtailed during the year.
Taliban laws-of-war violations against civilians continued, particularly indiscriminate
attacks causing high civilian losses. Following the end of the United States
military “surge,” many areas of Afghanistan remained under Taliban control,
where Taliban abuses, particularly against women and girls, were endemic.
Violence and Discrimination against Women and Girls
A series of high-profile attacks on women highlighted the heightened danger
that the future holds for Afghan women. The Law on Elimination of Violence
Against Women, adopted in 2009, remains largely unenforced. Women and girls
who flee forced marriage or domestic violence are often treated as criminals
rather than victims. As of spring 2012, 400 women and girls were in prison and
juvenile detention for the “moral crimes” of running away from home or sex outside
marriage.
The late December 2011 arrest and subsequent trial of the in-laws of Sahar Gul—
a girl sold into marriage at 13, locked in a basement, and tortured by her in-laws
after she refused their demands that she become a prostitute—underlined the
threat posed to Afghan girls by unchecked violence against women.
The unsolved February murder in Bamiyan of an adolescent girl named Shakila
led to street protests in Kabul and Bamiyan, and complaints from Bamiyan officials
to President Karzai over what was seen as a cover-up by government officials
of a murder. In July, a videotaped public execution of a woman in Parwan
for the alleged “crime” of adultery followed by the assassination of the head of
the government’s Department of Women’s Affairs in Laghman highlighted the
erosion of legal protections for Afghan women.
In the spring and summer, a series of “poisonings” at girls’ schools in several
provinces, alleged by the Afghan government to have been perpetrated by opponents
of girls’ education, escalated fear for schoolgirls and their families. World
Health Organization (WHO) investigations of some cases pointed to mass hysteria
as the likely cause. The Afghan government made several arrests, prompting
the United Nations to accuse the Afghan government of extracting forced confessions
from the alleged perpetrators.
Armed Conflict
The security transition moved rapidly, with international forces handing over
large areas of the country to Afghan security forces. NATO claimed no increases
in insurgent attacks in most areas, while evidence emerged of the failure by
Afghan security forces to maintain control in other areas including formerly peaceful Bamiyan province. Afghan security forces increasingly assumed a leadership
role in military operations, according to NATO, including controversial
“night raids.”
The Afghan government continues to allow well-known warlords, human rights
abusers, corrupt politicians, and businesspeople to operate with impunity, further
eroding its public support. Worries about the potential for a civil war along
geographic and ethnic lines following the withdrawal of international forces led
to reports of re-arming and preparations for conflict by warlords.
Civilian casualties from fighting remained high with 3,099 civilian casualties
(1,145 civilians killed and 1,954 injured) in the first 6 months of the year, down
from 2011’s high of 3,654 civilian casualties (1,510 killed and 2,144 injured) during
the same period, according to the UN. Most civilian casualties were due to
Taliban attacks that failed to distinguish between combatants and civilians, or
sometimes intentionally targeted civilians.
Pro-government security forces were also responsible for abuses against civilians.
In September, concerns about the US-backed ALP prompted a temporary
suspension of training of new recruits while all 16,300 members of the program
were re-vetted. While ALP abuses included reports of extortion, assault, rape,
and murder of civilians, ALP “reform” by the US and NATO focused solely on
measures to halt the rapidly escalating number of “green on blue” killings
where members of Afghan security forces, including possible Taliban infiltrators,
attack their international military mentors.
In May, a number of “uprisings” against the Taliban began in Ghazni as apparently
spontaneous community reactions and spread to other provinces. The
view that these local actions could help solidify government control of the country
were tempered by the apparent involvement of Hezb-i-Islami, an insurgent
Taliban-rival group. In September, the suggestion by International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) Commander John Allen that the US might support arming
these groups raised the specter of yet another untrained, undisciplined militia
operating with impunity.
Negotiations for a political settlement with the Taliban made little progress in
2012. Preliminary discussions between the Taliban and the US, ongoing since 2011, were widely reported to have broken down in March over failure to agree
on a US transfer of key Taliban prisoners from the US military facility at
Guantanamo Bay to Qatar.
Efforts by the Afghan government and some international experts to portray the
Taliban as significantly reformed since 2001 were undermined by the Taliban’s
continued abuses. These included the Taliban’s March attack on a Kabul restaurant,
its announcement in May of a spring offensive specifically aimed at killing
key civilians— including senior government officials, members of parliament,
High Peace Council members, contractors, and “all those people who work
against the Mujahideen”—and its order in April that schools in Ghazni be
closed, which led to local uprisings against the group in some communities.
The Taliban also continued to attack schools and to recruit children, including
as suicide bombers. The UN reported 34 attacks against schools in the first 6
months of 2012 (6 of which involved targeted assassinations of school staff or
education officials),
Ethnic violence between Tajiks and Hazaras in Kabul in September renewed
fears of rising sectarian strife, which has plagued neighboring Pakistan but has
so far been largely avoided in Afghanistan.
Abuse of Prisoners and Detainees
A March agreement between the Afghan and US governments set a deadline of
September for full transfer of the US-run Bagram detention facility to the Afghan
government. The handover occurred, but amid recriminations as the US refused
to hand over a number of prisoners, as well as disagreement over the continuing
role of the US in holding and interrogating detainees.
Provisions of the Afghan-US agreement also obliged the Afghan government to
establish an administrative detention system, which would permit the government
to hold conflict-related detainees without charge. Agreed upon in secret,
Afghan lawmakers criticized the deal as unconstitutional under Afghan law.
However, both governments agreed on plans for the US to maintain custody of
approximately 50 non-Afghan “third country national” prisoners being held indefinitely at Bagram without trial until the US makes arrangements for their
transfer or release.
The January 2012 transfer of responsibility for the Afghan prison system back to
the Ministry of Interior from the Ministry of Justice raised serious concerns about
potential torture and other ill-treatment of prisoners. The government had shifted
responsibility for prison operations from the former to the latter in 2003 as
part of an effort to reform the justice system and reduce torture by the abusive
Interior Ministry.
In March, additional concerns about the transfer were raised when a newly
appointed Ministry of Interior warden ordered invasive vaginal searches of all
female visitors at Pul-i-Charkhi, Kabul’s main men’s prison.
In September, Karzai’s appointment of Asadullah Khalid to head the National
Security Directorate, the country’s intelligence service, sparked domestic and
international dismay. Khalid, a former governor of Ghazni and Kandahar
provinces, has been accused of abuses that include operating a private, unlawful
prison where torture was routine during his tenure as governor of Kandahar
from 2005-2008. The intelligence service has a long and well-documented history
of torture of detainees.
Human Rights Defenders and Transitional Justice
The Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission (AIHRC) is an independent
government agency that has been praised globally as an example of an
effective human rights body. However, in December 2011, Karzai announced the
dismissal of three of its nine commissioners. The three positions remained
vacant at this writing. The move effectively disabled the commission. A fourth
position has been vacant since January 2011 when the commissioner responsible
for children’s rights was killed with her husband and four children in a Kabul
supermarket bombing.
Karzai may have sought to undermine the AIHRC by intervening to block the
release of one of the commission’s key projects—a 1,000-page report that maps
war crimes and crimes against humanity in Afghanistan since the communist era. Completed in December 2011, it is needed to provide a foundation for
future steps to prosecute those implicated in past abuses.
Freedom of Expression and Association
The rights to freedom of expression and association of the media and political
parties, hailed as one of the few clear human rights success stories since 2001,
came increasingly under threat in 2012. In March, the Afghan government supported
calls for banning and prosecuting a political party that sponsored a
protest calling for prosecution of suspected war criminals, some of whom are
current government officials. The Afghan government repeatedly lashed out at
journalists. In April, one reporter was detained without charge after his TV station
broadcast a show critical of the Kabul mayor.
In May, the government accused a foreign journalist of being a spy after she
alleged government corruption, but took no further action, and in November
reacted harshly to an International Crisis Group (ICG) report, calling the group’s
activities “detrimental to Afghanistan’s national interests” and said it was
“assessing the ICG’s operations in the country.”
In June, the government presented a new draft media law that sought to dramatically
tighten government control of media through measures including establishing
a government-controlled media complaints body, creating a long list of
media “violations,” limiting broadcast of foreign programming, and establishing
special courts and attorneys across the country to deal with media violations.
The draft law was significantly revised following outcry from Afghan journalists,
but the October creation of a new media standards committee raised concerns
that the government was simply taking a new approach in its effort to crack
down on the media. In September, the media commission instructed the attorney
general’s office to launch criminal investigations of two Afghan media
organizations accused of broadcasting “immoral” programs.
Key International Actors
Growing international fatigue with Afghanistan negatively impacted human
rights in 2012, particularly by reducing political pressure on the government to respect women’s rights. In spite of efforts by many countries to sign partnership
agreements with Afghanistan, and pledges of goodwill and support at the 2012
Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan, commitments to support human rights in
Afghanistan remain glaringly short on details.
Diplomats admit behind closed doors that willingness to continue high-level
support to Afghanistan is fading fast, and the planned military drawdown by
2014 is already prompting further disengagement when it comes to using political
pressure and providing aid. Cuts in international aid are already leading to
the closure of some schools and health clinics.
Afghanistan remained under preliminary analysis by the prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). Since 2007, the court has been looking into
allegations of crimes, including torture, recruitment of child soldiers, attacks on
humanitarian targets and the UN, and attacks on objects or locations protected
under international law that are not military targets.
Bangladesh
Bangladesh’s overall human rights situation worsened in 2012, as the government
narrowed political and civil society space, continued to shield abusive
security forces from accountability, and flatly ignored calls by Human Rights
Watch to reform laws and procedures in flawed war crimes and mutiny trials.
Civil society and human rights defenders reported increased governmental pressure
and monitoring.
The security forces’ practice of disguising extrajudicial killings as “crossfire”
killings or legitimate confrontations between alleged criminals and security
forces continued, as did disappearances of opposition members and political
activists. A prominent labor activist was kidnapped and killed, and other labor
activists threatened.
After June 2012 sectarian violence in Arakan state in neighboring Burma, the
government responded to an influx of Rohingya refugees by pushing back boatloads
of refugees and insisting that it had no obligation to provide them sanctuary.
The government curtailed the activities of nongovernmental organizations
operating in pre-existing Rohingya refugee camps in Cox’s Bazaar in Chittagong.
Flawed trials against those accused of war crimes in the 1971 war for independence
continued, as did mass and unfair trials of the Bangladesh Rifles (now
Bangladesh Border Guards) accused of mutineering in 2009.
The government continued to demand that Indian border guards stop killing
Bangladeshi nationals who cross into India for smuggling or other crimes.
Extrajudicial Killings, Torture, and Impunity
Although there was a decline in overall numbers of civilians killed by security
forces in 2012, the Rapid Action Battalion (RAB)—a force comprised of military
and police—continued to carry out extrajudicial killings. The ruling political
party, the Awami League, pledged to bring the RAB under control when it
assumed office, but abuses persisted.
The government continued to persecute 17-year-old boy, Limon Hossain, whom
RAB officials shot and maimed in March 2011. Although the government initially
said that Hossain was injured in a botched RAB operation, it quickly retracted
the statement and filed criminal charges against him. In August 2012, an
alleged RAB informant attacked and beat Hossain in a street in his hometown.
Instead of protecting Hossain, the government filed further charges against him,
and accused him and his relatives of murdering a bystander.
The authorities failed to investigate and prosecute the RAB or other security
forces responsible for extrajudicial killings or torture. While the RAB set up an
internal investigative unit with technical assistance from the United States, no
RAB member has ever faced criminal prosecution for a human rights violation.
In April, Elias Ali, secretary of the Sylhet Division of the opposition Bangladesh
Nationalist Party (BNP), disappeared without trace. Prime Minister Sheikh
Hasina called on the police to investigate Ali’s disappearance, but undermined
the effort by claiming that Ali and his driver were “hiding” at his party’s orders
to allow the opposition to blame the government. Human rights groups reported
more than 20 disappearances in 2012.
Labor Rights
Aminul Islam, a prominent labor rights activist, was found tortured and killed in
April 2012. In response to an intense outcry, the Home Ministry set up a highlevel
commission to investigate his killing, but there had been no progress in
the investigation at this writing. While there was no suggestion of political
responsibility, Prime Minister Hasina made public statements downplaying the
significance of the killing.
Workers in Bangladesh faced poor working conditions, low wages, and excessive
hours. Government repression and collusion with factory owners prevented
them from organizing effectively.
The government continued legal action against the Bangladesh Center for
Worker Solidarity (BCWS), an NGO that works closely with trade unions. Over a
dozen labor rights leaders, including BCWS leaders, faced criminal charges on a
variety of spurious grounds, including under the Explosive Substances Ordinance Act, which carries the death penalty as a sentence. Labor rights
groups faced registration problems that affected their funding and operations.
Hazaribagh Tanneries
The Hazaribagh neighborhood of Dhaka, the capital, is considered to be one of
the world’s most polluted urban sites; some 150 leather tanneries discharge 21
thousand cubic meters of untreated effluent into the nearby Buriganga River
each day. Local residents complain of fevers, skin diseases, and respiratory and
stomach illnesses due to contamination, while tannery workers suffer from skin
and respiratory diseases due to exposure to tanning chemicals, and limb amputations
caused by accidents in dangerous tannery machinery. In some tanneries,
children as young as 11 work directly with chemicals, operate heavy tannery
machinery, or slice hides with razor blades.
In 2001, Bangladesh’s High Court ordered the government to ensure that the
tanneries installed adequate waste treatment facilities. The government ignored
that ruling. Officials from the Department of Environment and the Department of
Labour confirmed that the government does not enforce labor and environmental
laws in Hazaribagh, which exports most of its leather to China, South Korea,
Japan, Italy, Germany, Spain, and the United States.
Restrictions on Civil Society and Political Opposition
The government was increasingly hostile in 2012 to civil society groups.
Following the July 2012 publication of a Human Rights Watch report on the 2009
Bangladesh Rifles mutiny, Bangladeshi officials threatened action against
domestic rights groups who had helped conduct the research.
Of particular concern is a draft law aimed at regulating foreign donations to
Bangladeshi NGOs. Many NGOs, such as BCWS or Odhikar, had already been
facing years of delays in getting critical foreign funds released for their projects.
The bill appeared aimed at severing funds for organizations engaged in publicly
criticizing the government. In August 2012, the government announced plans to
establish a new commission charged solely with regulating NGO activities, in addition to the NGO Affairs Bureau that already exists in the prime minister’s
office.
Refugees and Asylum Seekers
The government’s response to the influx of Rohingya refugees fleeing sectarian
violence in Arakan state, Burma, exposed its failure to respect the United
Nations Refugee Convention. Bangladesh pushed Rohingyas back at the border,
regardless of the risk they faced when they return to Burma, and blocked critical
humanitarian assistance.
The government suspended any third-country resettlement of the Rohingya
refugees, arguing it would encourage other Rohingya in Burma to seek refuge in
Bangladesh. Government officials labeled Rohingya “intruders” and “criminals,”
and blamed them for destroying Buddhist temples in mass riots in
October, without offering evidence to prove they were responsible.
International Crimes Tribunal and Bangladesh Rifles Mutiny
Trials against those accused of war crimes during the 1971 war of independence
continued, despite calls by the US war crimes ambassador, Stephen Rapp, and
several international groups to amend the International Crimes Tribunal Act (ICT
Act) to ensure it complied with international fair trial standards.
The trial chamber allowed several prosecution witnesses statements as evidence,
without any live testimony being heard. While the prosecution claimed
the witnesses were unavailable, the defense produced safe house logbooks
that showed they were available at the time when they were meant to appear in
court. However, the tribunal rejected the defense’s claims. In the first trial
against the accused Delwar Hossain Sayedee, defense lawyers claimed that
they could not produce their witnesses due to intimidation and threats against
them by the prosecution. The prosecution denied the claims.
Mass military trials against the 6,000 soldiers of the Bangladesh Rifles (since
renamed Bangladesh Border Guards) continued, with nearly every accused soldier
being found guilty. A mass trial in a civilian court of over 800 soldiers continued in 2012. In addition to the allegations of torture, most of the accused did
not have proper access to lawyers and were often unaware of the charges
against them. The government rejected Human Rights Watch’s concerns—published
in a July 2012 report—concerning these mass trials, which involved as
many as 800 accused being tried at one time, in one courtroom. Instead, the
government mounted a public relations campaign that denounced Human
Rights Watch and local groups that had helped to research the report.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
While Bangladesh has a strong set of laws and judicial guidelines to tackle violence
against women, implementation remains poor. Violence against women
including rape, dowry-related assaults, and other forms of domestic violence,
acid attacks, and illegal punishments in the name of fatwas or religious decrees
and sexual harassment continue.
Bangladesh reported the highest prevalence of child marriages in the world.
Archaic and discriminatory family laws for Muslims, Hindus, and Christians, continued
to impoverish many women when they separate from, or divorce spouses,
and trap them in abusive marriages for fear of destitution. The Law
Commission of Bangladesh researched and recommended reforms to these laws
in 2012.
International Community
The international community continued to press the government to respect civil
and political rights in the face of increased restrictions on political opposition
groups and civil society. The donor community was particularly vocal in calling
for swift and meaningful investigations into the murder of Aminul Islam and the
disappearance of Elias Ali, as well as calling on the government to give
Rohingya refugees sanctuary. The government often responded by suggesting
that critics were part of a conspiracy against it.
Under persistent pressure from Bangladesh, Indian authorities committed to
end all unlawful killings at their shared border.
In June, the World Bank announced that it was withdrawing its US$1.2 billion
credit assistance for building the Padma Multipurpose Bridge across the Padma
River due to evidence of serious corruption by senior government officials. In
September, the government agreed to put in place conditions that the World
Bank had demanded when the deal was suspended, including placing all public
officials suspected of involvement in the corruption scheme on leave from government
employment, appointing a special inquiry and prosecution team, and
granting an external international expert body access to investigate the corruption
charges and advise the bank. When the government announced in
September 2012 that the Padma Bridge deal was back on track, the World Bank
issued a public rejoinder stating that the project would resume only once all its
conditions had been fully and unconditionally fulfilled.
Bangladesh
Bangladesh’s overall human rights situation worsened in 2012, as the government
narrowed political and civil society space, continued to shield abusive
security forces from accountability, and flatly ignored calls by Human Rights
Watch to reform laws and procedures in flawed war crimes and mutiny trials.
Civil society and human rights defenders reported increased governmental pressure
and monitoring.
The security forces’ practice of disguising extrajudicial killings as “crossfire”
killings or legitimate confrontations between alleged criminals and security
forces continued, as did disappearances of opposition members and political
activists. A prominent labor activist was kidnapped and killed, and other labor
activists threatened.
After June 2012 sectarian violence in Arakan state in neighboring Burma, the
government responded to an influx of Rohingya refugees by pushing back boatloads
of refugees and insisting that it had no obligation to provide them sanctuary.
The government curtailed the activities of nongovernmental organizations
operating in pre-existing Rohingya refugee camps in Cox’s Bazaar in Chittagong.
Flawed trials against those accused of war crimes in the 1971 war for independence
continued, as did mass and unfair trials of the Bangladesh Rifles (now
Bangladesh Border Guards) accused of mutineering in 2009.
The government continued to demand that Indian border guards stop killing
Bangladeshi nationals who cross into India for smuggling or other crimes.
Extrajudicial Killings, Torture, and Impunity
Although there was a decline in overall numbers of civilians killed by security
forces in 2012, the Rapid Action Battalion (RAB)—a force comprised of military
and police—continued to carry out extrajudicial killings. The ruling political
party, the Awami League, pledged to bring the RAB under control when it
assumed office, but abuses persisted.
The government continued to persecute 17-year-old boy, Limon Hossain, whom
RAB officials shot and maimed in March 2011. Although the government initially
said that Hossain was injured in a botched RAB operation, it quickly retracted
the statement and filed criminal charges against him. In August 2012, an
alleged RAB informant attacked and beat Hossain in a street in his hometown.
Instead of protecting Hossain, the government filed further charges against him,
and accused him and his relatives of murdering a bystander.
The authorities failed to investigate and prosecute the RAB or other security
forces responsible for extrajudicial killings or torture. While the RAB set up an
internal investigative unit with technical assistance from the United States, no
RAB member has ever faced criminal prosecution for a human rights violation.
In April, Elias Ali, secretary of the Sylhet Division of the opposition Bangladesh
Nationalist Party (BNP), disappeared without trace. Prime Minister Sheikh
Hasina called on the police to investigate Ali’s disappearance, but undermined
the effort by claiming that Ali and his driver were “hiding” at his party’s orders
to allow the opposition to blame the government. Human rights groups reported
more than 20 disappearances in 2012.
Labor Rights
Aminul Islam, a prominent labor rights activist, was found tortured and killed in
April 2012. In response to an intense outcry, the Home Ministry set up a highlevel
commission to investigate his killing, but there had been no progress in
the investigation at this writing. While there was no suggestion of political
responsibility, Prime Minister Hasina made public statements downplaying the
significance of the killing.
Workers in Bangladesh faced poor working conditions, low wages, and excessive
hours. Government repression and collusion with factory owners prevented
them from organizing effectively.
The government continued legal action against the Bangladesh Center for
Worker Solidarity (BCWS), an NGO that works closely with trade unions. Over a
dozen labor rights leaders, including BCWS leaders, faced criminal charges on a
variety of spurious grounds, including under the Explosive Substances Ordinance Act, which carries the death penalty as a sentence. Labor rights
groups faced registration problems that affected their funding and operations.
Hazaribagh Tanneries
The Hazaribagh neighborhood of Dhaka, the capital, is considered to be one of
the world’s most polluted urban sites; some 150 leather tanneries discharge 21
thousand cubic meters of untreated effluent into the nearby Buriganga River
each day. Local residents complain of fevers, skin diseases, and respiratory and
stomach illnesses due to contamination, while tannery workers suffer from skin
and respiratory diseases due to exposure to tanning chemicals, and limb amputations
caused by accidents in dangerous tannery machinery. In some tanneries,
children as young as 11 work directly with chemicals, operate heavy tannery
machinery, or slice hides with razor blades.
In 2001, Bangladesh’s High Court ordered the government to ensure that the
tanneries installed adequate waste treatment facilities. The government ignored
that ruling. Officials from the Department of Environment and the Department of
Labour confirmed that the government does not enforce labor and environmental
laws in Hazaribagh, which exports most of its leather to China, South Korea,
Japan, Italy, Germany, Spain, and the United States.
Restrictions on Civil Society and Political Opposition
The government was increasingly hostile in 2012 to civil society groups.
Following the July 2012 publication of a Human Rights Watch report on the 2009
Bangladesh Rifles mutiny, Bangladeshi officials threatened action against
domestic rights groups who had helped conduct the research.
Of particular concern is a draft law aimed at regulating foreign donations to
Bangladeshi NGOs. Many NGOs, such as BCWS or Odhikar, had already been
facing years of delays in getting critical foreign funds released for their projects.
The bill appeared aimed at severing funds for organizations engaged in publicly
criticizing the government. In August 2012, the government announced plans to
establish a new commission charged solely with regulating NGO activities, in addition to the NGO Affairs Bureau that already exists in the prime minister’s
office.
Refugees and Asylum Seekers
The government’s response to the influx of Rohingya refugees fleeing sectarian
violence in Arakan state, Burma, exposed its failure to respect the United
Nations Refugee Convention. Bangladesh pushed Rohingyas back at the border,
regardless of the risk they faced when they return to Burma, and blocked critical
humanitarian assistance.
The government suspended any third-country resettlement of the Rohingya
refugees, arguing it would encourage other Rohingya in Burma to seek refuge in
Bangladesh. Government officials labeled Rohingya “intruders” and “criminals,”
and blamed them for destroying Buddhist temples in mass riots in
October, without offering evidence to prove they were responsible.
International Crimes Tribunal and Bangladesh Rifles Mutiny
Trials against those accused of war crimes during the 1971 war of independence
continued, despite calls by the US war crimes ambassador, Stephen Rapp, and
several international groups to amend the International Crimes Tribunal Act (ICT
Act) to ensure it complied with international fair trial standards.
The trial chamber allowed several prosecution witnesses statements as evidence,
without any live testimony being heard. While the prosecution claimed
the witnesses were unavailable, the defense produced safe house logbooks
that showed they were available at the time when they were meant to appear in
court. However, the tribunal rejected the defense’s claims. In the first trial
against the accused Delwar Hossain Sayedee, defense lawyers claimed that
they could not produce their witnesses due to intimidation and threats against
them by the prosecution. The prosecution denied the claims.
Mass military trials against the 6,000 soldiers of the Bangladesh Rifles (since
renamed Bangladesh Border Guards) continued, with nearly every accused soldier
being found guilty. A mass trial in a civilian court of over 800 soldiers continued in 2012. In addition to the allegations of torture, most of the accused did
not have proper access to lawyers and were often unaware of the charges
against them. The government rejected Human Rights Watch’s concerns—published
in a July 2012 report—concerning these mass trials, which involved as
many as 800 accused being tried at one time, in one courtroom. Instead, the
government mounted a public relations campaign that denounced Human
Rights Watch and local groups that had helped to research the report.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
While Bangladesh has a strong set of laws and judicial guidelines to tackle violence
against women, implementation remains poor. Violence against women
including rape, dowry-related assaults, and other forms of domestic violence,
acid attacks, and illegal punishments in the name of fatwas or religious decrees
and sexual harassment continue.
Bangladesh reported the highest prevalence of child marriages in the world.
Archaic and discriminatory family laws for Muslims, Hindus, and Christians, continued
to impoverish many women when they separate from, or divorce spouses,
and trap them in abusive marriages for fear of destitution. The Law
Commission of Bangladesh researched and recommended reforms to these laws
in 2012.
International Community
The international community continued to press the government to respect civil
and political rights in the face of increased restrictions on political opposition
groups and civil society. The donor community was particularly vocal in calling
for swift and meaningful investigations into the murder of Aminul Islam and the
disappearance of Elias Ali, as well as calling on the government to give
Rohingya refugees sanctuary. The government often responded by suggesting
that critics were part of a conspiracy against it.
Under persistent pressure from Bangladesh, Indian authorities committed to
end all unlawful killings at their shared border.
In June, the World Bank announced that it was withdrawing its US$1.2 billion
credit assistance for building the Padma Multipurpose Bridge across the Padma
River due to evidence of serious corruption by senior government officials. In
September, the government agreed to put in place conditions that the World
Bank had demanded when the deal was suspended, including placing all public
officials suspected of involvement in the corruption scheme on leave from government
employment, appointing a special inquiry and prosecution team, and
granting an external international expert body access to investigate the corruption
charges and advise the bank. When the government announced in
September 2012 that the Padma Bridge deal was back on track, the World Bank
issued a public rejoinder stating that the project would resume only once all its
conditions had been fully and unconditionally fulfilled.
of the state’s 17 townships in October, including in several townships that did
not experience violence in June, resulting in an unknown number of deaths and
injuries, the razing of entire Muslim villages, and the displacement of an additional
35,000 persons. Many of the displaced fled to areas surrounding Sittwe,
where they also experienced abuses, such as beatings by state security forces.
Despite serious ongoing abuses, foreign governments—including the United
States and the United Kingdom—expressed unprecedented optimism about
political reforms and rapidly eased or lifted sanctions against Burma, while still
condemning the abuses and violence.
Limited Political Change and Ongoing Abuses
Burma’s national parliament and 14 regional and state assemblies completed a
first full year in operation in 2012 since the formal end of military rule. Former
military generals hold most senior ministerial portfolios and serving generals
are constitutionally guaranteed the posts of ministers of defense, home affairs,
and border affairs security. Many former military officers hold important positions
in the ruling military-backed Union Solidarity and Development Party.
Two new laws passed in 2012 related to land use fail to adequately protect farmers’
rights. A new law on peaceful assembly—signed in December 2011 and
hailed as a reform by Western governments—fails to meet international standards,
providing for imprisonment for permit violations, and requiring that
protest slogans be pre-approved.
Thirteen activists in Rangoon faced charges for failing to get permission for a
demonstration held peacefully in September to oppose the armed conflict in
Kachin State. Other laws that have been used to imprison peaceful activists,
lawyers, and journalists remain on the books, including, among others, the
Unlawful Associations Act, the Electronics Act, the State Protection Act, and the
Emergency Provisions Act.
Media freedoms improved in 2012 but remain highly restricted. In August, the
government abolished pre-publication censorship that had been in place nearly
50 years but retained 16 guidelines restricting publication of articles critical of
the government or related to corruption, illicit drugs, forced labor, and child soldiers. Editors continue to self-censor out of concern for arrest and hesitate to
publish stories regarding government abuses.
The National Human Rights Commission, created in September 2011, continued
to disappoint in 2012. The commission exists by executive order and lacks independence
from the government, contrary to the Paris Principles—minimum standards
endorsed by the UN on the functioning of national human rights commissions.
Statements from Burma’s commission on Kachin and Arakan States failed
to mention any abuses by the state security forces, or government-imposed
restrictions on delivering humanitarian aid to tens of thousands of internally
displaced persons (IDPs).
After spending a total of 15 years under house arrest since 1989, and otherwise
facing travel restrictions, Aung San Suu Kyi’s right to travel domestically and
internationally was restored, and she traveled to five European countries in
June, including Oslo to accept her 1991 Nobel Peace Prize. In September she
travelled to the US where she accepted the Congressional Gold Medal in recognition
of her non-violent struggle for democracy and human rights, awarded in
2008 while she was under house arrest
However, other former political prisoners continue to face persecution, including
restrictions on travel and education. The Ministry of Home Affairs refused to
issue passports to many former political prisoners, including democracy and
human rights activists, public interest lawyers, and journalists, preventing them
from traveling abroad.
While parliament in 2012 appointed a commission to investigate land confiscation,
the practice continues throughout the country. Farmers lose their land to
private and state interests and in some cases are effectively forced to work as
day laborers on their own land. Numerous disputes about land confiscations
under the prior military juntas remain largely unresolved.
Forced labor continued in various parts of the country despite the government’s
commitment to end the practice by 2015 in an action plan agreed to with the
International Labour Organization (ILO). The army continued to have child soldiers
in its ranks, but in June, signed an action plan with the United Nations to
halt further recruitment of children and demobilize and reintegrate those already in the army within 18 months. Several non-state armed groups continue
to use and recruit child soldiers and the government continues to prevent UN
agencies from accessing ethnic areas controlled by non-state armed groups to
focus on demobilization and reintegration of child soldiers.
Ethnic Conflict and Displacement
Fighting slowed between government forces and most ethnic armed groups in
eastern Burma as negotiations on tenuous ceasefires continued. In northern
Burma, however, fighting continued between the Burmese armed forces and the
KIA.
The Burmese military continues to engage in extrajudicial killings, attacks on
civilians, forced labor, torture, pillage, and use of antipersonnel landmines.
Sexual violence against women and girls remains a serious problem, and perpetrators
are rarely brought to justice. The KIA and some other ethnic armed
groups have also committed serious abuses, such as using child soldiers and
antipersonnel landmines.
Internally displaced Kachin swelled to an estimated 90,000 in 2012, and the
government continued to prevent international nongovernmental organizations
and UN agencies access to IDP camps in KIA-held territory to provide humanitarian
assistance. Kachin fleeing to China to escape violence and persecution were
not welcome. Several thousand Kachin refugees temporarily in Yunnan province
in southwest China lacked adequate aid and protection. In August, China forced
back more than 4,000 Kachin to conflict zones in northern Burma.
More than 550,000 people remain internally displaced in Burma, including
400,000 due to decades of conflict in eastern Burma. There are an additional
140,000 refugees in camps in Thailand and several million Burmese migrant
workers and unrecognized asylum seekers who suffer due to inadequate and ad
hoc Thai policies causing refugees to be exploited and unnecessarily detained
and deported.
Some 30,000 ethnic Rohingya refugees live in an official camp in Bangladesh
and another 200,000 live in makeshift settlements or surrounding areas.
Bangladeshi authorities ordered three international aid agencies to close humanitarian operations for Rohingya refugee camps and pushed back thousands
of Rohingya asylum seekers to Burma in 2012.
Sectarian Violence and Ensuing Abuses
Burmese security forces committed killings, rape, and mass arrests against
Rohingya Muslims after failing to protect both them and Arakanese Buddhists
during deadly sectarian violence in western Burma in June 2012. Over 100,000
people were displaced by widespread abuses and arson. State security forces
failed to intervene to stop the sectarian violence at key moments, including the
massacre of 10 Muslim travelers in Toungop that was one of several events that
precipitated the outbreak. State media published incendiary anti-Rohingya and
anti-Muslim accounts of the events, fueling discrimination and hate speech in
print media and online across the country.
Violence erupted again in late October in 9 of the state’s 17 townships, with
coordinated violence and arson attacks by Arakanese against Rohingya and
Kaman Muslims—a government-recognized nationality group, unlike the
Rohingya. In some cases violence was carried out with the support and direct
involvement of state security forces and local officials, including killings, beatings,
and burning of Muslim villages, displacing an additional 35,000 Rohingya
and non-Rohingya Muslims.
Government restrictions on humanitarian access to the Rohingya community
have left tens of thousands in dire need of food, adequate shelter, and medical
care. The authorities indefinitely suspended nearly all pre-crisis humanitarian
aid programs, affecting hundreds of thousands more Rohingya who were otherwise
unaffected by the violence and abuse.
Local security forces detained hundreds of Rohingya men and boys—primarily in
northern Arakan State—and held them incommunicado without basic due
process rights. UN and international NGO staff were among the arrested and
charged. Many remain detained at this writing.
The Rohingya number approximately one million in Burma and were effectively
stripped of their citizenship in 1982 through the discriminatory Citizenship Law.
There has been little political will to repeal the law due to widespread prejudice against Rohingya, including by prominent pro-democracy figures. The government
has long restricted their rights to freedom of movement, education, and
employment.
President Thein Sein suggested in July that the Rohingya be expelled from
Burma to “third countries” or to camps overseen by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). He later appointed a 27-member commission
to investigate the violence in Arakan State and make recommendations,
but failed to include a Rohingya representative on the panel.
Key International Actors
In 2012, foreign governments expressed unprecedented optimism about
Burma’s political changes, despite evidence of ongoing human rights abuses. In
April, the European Union suspended all of its sanctions for one year, enabling
investment by European companies and lifting travel and visa bans on nearly
500 people, but retained an arms embargo.
In July, the United States eased sanctions to allow American companies to
invest in all sectors of Burma’s economy, including the controversial and
opaque oil and gas sector. The US maintained targeted sanctions against some
Burmese military officers and companies they control, and appointed its first
ambassador to Burma in 22 years.
Tomas Ojea Quintana, the UN special rapporteur on Burma, conducted his sixth
visit in late July and early August, expressing concern over alleged abuses in
Arakan State and calling for a credible investigation and a review of the 1982
Citizenship Law, which he said discriminates against Rohingya. He also voiced
concern about ongoing abuses in Kachin State and the need to release remaining
political prisoners.
Several high-profile visits to Burma in 2012 were ostensibly aimed to show support
for ongoing changes, including visits in November by US President Barack
Obama—the first by a sitting US president—in April by British Prime Minister
David Cameron, and UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. President Obama gave
a historic speech at Rangoon University raising human rights concerns, including
the military’s role in parliament, ethnic conflicts, national reconciliation, and abuses against Rohingya Muslims. Other high-profile visits were explicitly
more economically motivated, including visits in May by India’s Prime Minister
Manmohan Singh, and in September by China’s top legislator, Wu Bangguo,
chairman of the Standing Committee of China’s National People’s Congress.
Others expressed concerns for the plight of Burma’s Rohingya Muslims, including
visits by Turkey’s foreign minister and a high-level delegation from the
Organization for Islamic Cooperation (OIC), which in September reached an
agreement with the Burmese government to open an office in the country to
facilitate delivery of humanitarian aid in Arakan State. President Thein Sein terminated
the agreement in October following several protests in Sittwe,
Mandalay, and Rangoon led by anti-Rohingya Buddhist monks opposing the
OIC’s involvement in the issue.
Members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) continue to
invest in and trade extensively with Burma, especially in the extractive and
hydropower industries. Burma continued to earn billions of US dollars in natural
gas sales to Thailand, little of which is directed into social services such as
health care and education. Gas dollars will increase markedly when a gas
pipeline from Arakan State to Yunnan in China is operational in 2013. Work continues
on that project, which passes through northern Shan State where the
Burmese army has moved in to secure territory and where armed conflict has led
to abuses such as torture, forced labor, and forced displacement of Kachin and
Shan.
Russia, China, and North Korea continued to sell arms to Burma in 2012, and
there are concerns that North Korean sales breached UN Security Council punitive
sanctions on North Korea passed in 2006 and 2009. In May, Thein Sein
assured South Korean President Lee Myun-bak that his government would cease
buying weapons from North Korea.
Cambodia
The human rights situation in Cambodia deteriorated markedly in 2012 with a
surge in violent incidents, as the ruling Cambodian People’s Party (CPP) prepared
for national elections scheduled for July 28, 2013. On June 1, Prime
Minister Hun Sen reached his 10,000th day (more than 27 years) in office, making
him one of the 10 longest-serving leaders in the world. The prime minister,
now 60, has said he wants to remain in office until he is 90.
Violence involving state security forces occurred amidst increasing land-taking
by powerful business and security interests, and growing labor unrest due to
dissatisfaction with an economic policy that relies heavily on state authorities’
often-corrupt promotion of unbridled foreign investment, especially via granting
economic and other land concessions, which continued despite the government’s
May 2012 announcement of a moratorium.
Opposition party leader Sam Rainsy remained in exile in France rather than face
prison sentences totaling 12 years as a result of politically motivated and manifestly
unfair trials. At least 35 other political and social activists and residents
involved in defending human rights, opposing land grabs, and demanding better
working conditions were killed, wounded, arbitrarily arrested, threatened
with arrest, or kept in exile by CPP-led security forces and the CPP-controlled
judiciary.
Cambodian judicial officers working at the Extraordinary Chambers of the Courts
of Cambodia (ECCC) continued to implement Hun Sen’s pronouncements by
refusing to investigate additional Khmer Rouge suspects, including CPP-linked
perpetrators from Pol Pot’s 1975-1979 Khmer Rouge regime. At the same time, as
chair of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Cambodia’s government
played a leading role in stymying efforts by regional civil society organizations
to adopt a credible and effective human rights mechanism.
Attacks, Harassment, and Prosecutions against Activists
and Protesters
On February 20, three young women factory workers were wounded by gunfire
during a large peaceful protest demanding increased wages and allowances for
foreign enterprise employees in Bavet municipality of Svay Rieng province, eastern
Cambodia. While evidence suggests that the CPP mayor, Chhouk Bandit,
intentionally fired directly into the crowd, a provincial court only placed him
under investigation for unintentional injury without holding him for trial.
On April 26, noted environmental activist Chhut Wutthy was shot dead after military
police and company security guards stopped him from documenting illegal
logging activities in Koh Kong province, southwestern Cambodia. Although the
exact circumstances of his death remain unclear, government and judicial investigations
into his killing appeared designed to shield those most responsible
and further conceal their unlawful economic activities. The killing had a chilling
effect on efforts by others to uncover similar activities.
On May 16, security force gunfire killed Heng Chantha, a 14-year-old girl, during
a government military operation against villagers in Kratie province, eastern
Cambodia, who were protesting the allegedly illegal seizure of their land by a
foreign concessionaire. Instead of launching a criminal investigation into police
conduct, Hun Sen accused protesters of organizing a “secessionist movement”
and then ordered the arrest of its leaders.
The government also used the incident to falsely accuse Mom Sonando—the 71-
year-old owner of Cambodia’s main independent radio station and an outspoken
critic of the government—of being the ringleader of the supposed succession.
Sonando was arrested on July 12 and later sentenced to 20 years’ imprisonment
during a trial in which no credible evidence against him was presented.
The government also targeted for prosecution leading investigators of ADHOC, a
major Cambodian human rights organization, apparently to punish them for
their human rights activities. A court in Phnom Penh, the capital, ordered Chan
Sovet to appear on August 24 in connection with the land protests in Kratie
noted above to answer allegations that he provided a small amount of humanitarian
assistance to a community organizer who fled the government operation suppressing the protests, saying the aid constituted intentional assistance to a
known perpetrator of a felony. A local court in Ratanakiri province, northeastern
Cambodia, summoned Pen Bonnar on October 1 in connection with land disputes
there.
On May 24, prominent Buddhist monk Luon Sovath, who had on many occasions
expressed sympathy and support for victims of land-grabbing, was briefly
detained while en route to observe the trial of 13 women activists (the “Boeng
Kak 13”) opposing evictions in Phnom Penh. On February 14, he had been
secretly indicted on frivolous grounds for “incitement to commit a felony,” leaving
him vulnerable to arrest at any time. Sovath was named winner of the prestigious
Martin Ennals human rights prize in October.
Also on May 24, the court sentenced the 13 women, including a 72-year-old, to
two-and-a-half years in prison for involvement in a campaign protesting evictions
and demanding proper resettlement for people displaced by a development
project owned by a Hun Sen crony and a Chinese investor in Phnom
Penh’s Boeng Kak area. Under domestic and international pressure, an appeal
court released the 13 on June 27, but upheld their convictions.
In August and September, a provincial court repeatedly summoned Rong Chhun,
president of the Cambodian Confederation of Unions who is widely seen as the
country’s most determined labor leader, to answer allegations that he had incited
a supposedly illegal garment worker strike in a factory near Phnom Penh,
also putting him at risk of imprisonment.
In early September, two more leaders of protests against urban evictions, Yorm
Bopha and Tim Sakmony, were arrested after apparently politically motivated
allegations lodged with the Phnom Penh court. They were held pending trial and
faced prison sentences if convicted.
Khmer Rouge Tribunal (ECCC)
CPP political interference effected via government-appointed judges, prosecutors,
and other personnel at the ECCC precipitated the resignation—with effect
from May 4—of Laurent Kasper-Ansermet, an investigating judge nominated by
the United Nations secretary-general. Kasper-Ansermet claimed that government interference and lack of cooperation made it impossible for him to do his
job. His court submissions detailed how that interference had blocked his
efforts to investigate five suspects whom Prime Minister Hun Sen had not
approved.
The CPP’s longstanding strategy of attempting to control the court via delaying
tactics and passive non-cooperation contributed to reducing the prosecution of
Nuon Chea, Ieng Sary, and Khieu Samphan—three Hun Sen-authorized indictees
among former Khmer Rouge leaders—to a “mini-trial” in which only a few of the
crime against humanity counts against them would be adjudicated. It appeared
unlikely that they would ever go on trial for the additional charges of genocide
and war crimes laid against them in December 2009, even though the tribunal is
the most expensive international or hybrid criminal tribunal ever, calculated in
terms of cost per accused put on trial.
Impunity for Human Rights Violators
Hun Sen’s protection of perpetrators of Khmer Rouge crimes and failure in 2012
to credibly investigate killings involving security forces bookended a consistent
pattern of impunity for human rights abuses committed during his prolonged
rule. These include torture and forced labor in the 1980s, political killings when
the UN attempted to midwife a democratic transition in the early 1990s, and a
string of extrajudicial executions, assassinations, and attempted assassinations
in the years between then and 2011.
These crimes have targeted journalists, opposition party organizers, labor leaders,
activists, and intellectuals—with the dead numbering in the hundreds. The
crimes, and impunity for them, have characterized Hun Sen’s rise and hold on
power, and the surge of human rights violations in 2012 confirmed that he considers
their perpetration as fundamental to his rule and to preventing popular
and democratic challenges.
Drug Detention Centers
In December 2011, revisions to Cambodia’s drug law enabled drug users to be
detained for compulsory “treatment” for up to two years. Despite a March 2012 call by 12 UN agencies to close drug detention centers, various government
agencies—including security forces—continued to operate 10 centers across the
country. Former detainees reported that they had been held without due
process, subjected to exhausting military exercises, and ill-treated and even tortured
by staff.
Migrant Workers
A 2011 government moratorium on temporary migration of Cambodians as
domestic workers to Malaysia, announced after revelations of grave abuses during
recruitment in Cambodia and work in Malaysia, remained in place. Officials
made statements about lifting the ban, despite uncertain prospects for a
Cambodian-Malaysian agreement to establish minimum protections for these
migrants, and new media reports of ill-treatment of Cambodian domestic workers
in Malaysia. Available statistics pointed to a general increase in the international
trafficking of Cambodian workers, many of whom worked in conditions
amounting to forced labor.
Key International Actors
The United States, China, and Vietnam provided security assistance to
Cambodia in the form of training, equipment, or both. Although US law required
that beneficiaries of its training be vetted to ensure none were human rights violators,
the vetting process remained deeply flawed. There were no human rights
safeguards in Chinese and Vietnamese security aid.
Japan continued to be a major provider of economic assistance without effective
conditions. Large-scale state and private Chinese, Vietnamese, and South
Korean aid and investment lacked any mechanisms for community participation
in decisions related to land or the local environment. Conversely, the World
Bank continued to withhold funding for new projects pending a satisfactory government
resettlement solution for evictees from the Boeng Kak development
project in Phnom Penh, while the Asian Development Bank agreed to review its
performance in addressing deteriorations in living conditions suffered by people
affected by a bank-financed railway project.
The US made a number of public and private demarches to the government on
specific human rights concerns, including the Boeng Kak 13. However, a
September donor conference in Phnom Penh was almost silent on the deteriorating
human rights situation.
The government reacted with invective to reports by the UN special rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in Cambodia that recommended reforming
electoral and land concession systems.
China
China’s new leadership, consisting of the Communist Party’s seven permanent
standing committee members, assumed power at the 18th Party Congress in
November, ending the decade-long leadership of Hu Jintao and Wen Jiabao.
That era saw sustained economic growth, urbanization, and China’s rise as a
global power, but little progress on human rights. The government rolled back
protections on the administration of justice, presided over a significant rise in
social unrest, including the largest inter-ethnic incidents in decades in Tibet
and Xinjiang, and expanded the power of the security apparatus.
Chinese people had no say in the selection of their new leaders, highlighting
that despite the country’s three decades of rapid modernization, the government
remains an authoritarian one-party system that places arbitrary curbs on
freedom of expression, association, religion, prohibits independent labor
unions and human rights organizations, and maintains party control over all
judicial institutions. The government also censors the press, internet, and publishing
industry, and enforces highly repressive policies in ethnic minority areas
in Tibet, Xinjiang, and Inner Mongolia.
At the same time, citizens are increasingly prepared to challenge authorities
over volatile livelihood issues, such as land seizures, forced evictions, abuses
of power by corrupt cadres, discrimination, and economic inequalities. Based
on law enforcement reports, official and scholarly statistics estimate that there
are 250-500 protests each day, with anywhere from ten to tens of thousands of
participants. Despite facing risks, internet users and reform-oriented media are
aggressively pushing censorship boundaries by advocating for the rule of law
and transparency, exposing official wrongdoing, and calling for political
reforms.
Despite their precarious legal status and surveillance by the authorities, civil
society groups continue to try to expand their work. An informal but dedicated
network of activists monitors and documents human rights cases under the
banner of a country-wide weiquan (rights defense) movement. These activists
face a host of repressive state measures.
The government announced in its 2012-2015 “National Human Rights Action
Plan” that it would interpret its international legal obligations on human rights
with a new vaguely defined “principle of practicality”—departing from the its
previous rhetorical commitment to the principle of universality of human rights.
The new principle appears to be another iteration of the government’s oftrepeated
justification that China’s “national conditions” do not allow for participatory
politics.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders in China regularly face police harassment, house arrest,
short-term detention, “reeducation through labor,” forcible commitment to psychiatric
facilities, or imprisonment on criminal charges, often on state security
or public order grounds.
Nobel Peace Prize laureate Liu Xiaobo is serving an 11-year sentence in
Heilongjiang province for incitement to subvert state power. His wife, Liu Xia,
has been missing since December 2010. She is believed to be under house
arrest in the capital Beijing to prevent her from campaigning on her husband’s
behalf.
Li Tie, a writer and dissident from Wuhan in Hubei province, was sentenced on
January 18 to 10 years in prison for subversion. Li’s especially harsh sentence
was the last of several given to several long-standing democracy activists in the
wake of the Arab Spring.
After a year in detention, veteran activists Ni Yulan and Dong Jiqin were sentenced
on April 10 to two years and eight months, and two years respectively for
“creating a disturbance.” An appeal court shortened Ni’s sentence by two
months in July.
In late April, the blind activist Chen Guangcheng escaped from his home in
Shandong province where he had been unlawfully confined with his family since
his release from an unjustified prison term for “intentionally damaging property
and gathering crowds to disturb transport order.” In September 2010, helped by
a network of activists, Chen sought refuge at the United States Embassy in
Beijing. Following tense negotiations between the US and China over several weeks, Chen was finally allowed to leave with his family on May 19 to study in
the US, after central government envoys gave assurances there would be an
investigation into his unlawful detention. Chen Kegui, Chen’s nephew, faces
homicide charges for injuring several guards who raided Chen’s brother’s home
in the middle of the night after they realized Chen had escaped. Local judicial
authorities barred Chen Kegui’s lawyers from representing him, claiming they
had already appointed a legal aid lawyer for him.
On July 25, Hunan activist Zhu Chengzhi was formally arrested on a charge of
“inciting subversion of state power” for exposing the suspicious conditions surrounding
the alleged suicide of veteran dissident Li Wangyang. Li, who spent
most of his life imprisoned, was found hanged in a hospital room in Shaoyang
city, Hunan province, on June 6, his feet touching the ground. His suspicious
death prompted an internet outcry amongst Chinese rights activists and led to
several large demonstrations in Hong Kong. Relatives and supporters of Li were
placed under house arrest to stop them challenging the results of a second
party-led investigation into the case, which Li’s supporters see as a part of the
official cover- up.
On August 13, police detained a dozen activists in Beijing and arrested another,
Peng Lanlan, in Hunan province. These activists had pressed the State Council
to disclose government-held information about implementing measures of the
country’s second National Human Rights Action plan, publicized earlier in June.
Legal Reforms
While legal reforms effectively stalled under the Hu-Wen leadership and the government
rejects judicial independence, large parts of the legal community continue
to be a force for change, spurred by increasing popular legal awareness
and activism. The party maintains authority over all judicial institutions and
mechanisms, and coordinates the work of the judiciary through its political and
legal committees. The Public Security, or police, remains its most powerful
actor. Forced confessions under torture remain prevalent and miscarriages of
justice frequent due to weak courts and tight limits on the rights of the defense.
In March 2012, in an effort to reduce such cases and improve the administration
of justice, the government adopted comprehensive revisions to the Criminal
Procedure Law (CPL). However, the new revisions also legalize the power of the
police to place “state security, terrorism, and major corruption” suspects in
detention in a location of the police’s choice, outside the formal detention system,
for up to six months. These measures put suspects at risk of torture while
giving the government a justification for “disappearance” of dissidents and
activists.
Domestic critics of the administrative detention system of “reeducation through
labor,” frequently used against people petitioning the authorities for redress,
received a boost following a national outcry over the police sentencing to 18
months a woman who had pressed officials over the rape of her 11-year-old
daughter. She was released after approximately a week in detention.
China continued in 2012 to lead the world in executions. The exact number
remains a state secret but experts estimate it to be 5,000 to 8,000 a year.
Freedom of Expression
Government restrictions on journalists, bloggers, and an estimated 538 million
internet users continued to violate domestic and international legal guarantees
of freedom of press and expression. Sina Weibo, the largest of China’s social
media microblog services, gives 300 million subscribers space to express opinions
and discontent to an extent previously unavailable. But like all online content,
Weibo is subject to strict scrutiny and manipulation by China’s censors
tasked with shaping online debate in line with government policy. Alternative
social media operations including Twitter, YouTube, and Facebook are blocked.
In mid-June, internet censors blocked all searches for Yili milk powder, an infant
formula, after the company recalled products contaminated with mercury.
Government censors excised eight pages of Southern Weekend newspaper’s
coverage of the disastrous July 21-22 Beijing flood that caused widespread property
damage and disrupted transportation infrastructure. On September 12, censors
banned searches for the name “Jinping” amid frantic speculation as to why
Chinese Vice President Xi Jinping had disappeared from public view and from mention in Chinese state media for almost two weeks. He later reappeared with
no official explanation for his absence.
At least 27 Chinese journalists were serving prison terms in 2012 due to ambiguous
laws on “revealing state secrets” and “inciting subversion.” Journalists are
also at risk of perceived violations of censorship restrictions. Southern
Metropolitan editor Yu Chen was removed from his position after an anonymous
posting to the paper’s website criticized the Chinese Communist Party’s control
over the People’s Liberation Army. Xian Evening News reporter Shi Junrong was
suspended on July 2 for an unspecified time for writing a June 27 expose about
local Communist Party member spending money on cigarettes. He remained
suspended at this writing.
Journalists who report on sensitive topics remained vulnerable to physical violence
in 2012. In one of the higher profile of such incidents, Lei Zhaohe, a
reporter with Hong Kong’s Asia Television, was punched and kicked by two men
on August 10 while filming police detain protesters outside a courthouse in
Hefei, Anhui province. Other journalists at the scene identified the two men as
plainclothes police.
2012 marked the first expulsion of a foreign journalist since 1998. On May 7, the
Chinese government expelled Al Jazeera correspondent Melissa Chan for alleged
violations of unspecified rules and regulations. On August 21, the Foreign
Correspondents’ Clubs of Hong Kong, China, and Shanghai issued a joint statement
expressing “extreme concern” over four incidents between July 28-August
12 in which seven foreign journalists were “threatened, harassed and even
beaten.” The statement said that several of those incidents “involved members
of the official security forces and associated elements.”
The Chinese government sought to extend its stringent controls on freedom of
expression overseas on at least two occasions. In March, the Chinese government
successfully pressured the organizers of the annual London Book fair to
exclude any dissident or exiled Chinese writers from the list of official participants.
In September, the Chinese consulate in San Francisco unsuccessfully
sought to persuade the mayor of Corvallis, Oregon, to remove a mural on a private
building that supported Tibetan and Taiwanese independence.
Freedom of Religion
Despite a constitutional guarantee of freedom of religion, the Chinese government
restricts religious practices to officially approved mosques, churches, temples,
and monasteries. The government also audits the activities, employee
details, and financial records of religious bodies. Religious personnel appointments,
religious publications, and seminary applications are subject to government
review.
Unregistered spiritual groups such as Protestant “house churches” are deemed
unlawful and the government subjects their members to fines and prosecution.
The government classifies Falun Gong—a meditation-focused spiritual group
banned since July 1999—as an “an evil cult” and arrests, harasses, and intimidates
its members.
In February, municipal religious management officials in Wugang city, Hunan
province, required parents to sign a guarantee to not participate in “evil cult”
activities as a condition for registering their children in city schools. The registration
was part of a wider municipal campaign against Falun Gong and
Protestant house churches during the Chinese Lunar New Year period.
On August 22, the Shanghai municipal government indefinitely suspended
classes at the city’s Sheshan Catholic seminary as a reprisal related to the July 7
decision of Ma Daqin, the new auxiliary bishop of Shanghai, to resign from the
official Chinese Catholic Patriotic Association. Ma has been under house arrest
following his decision and remained so at this writing.
The government continues to heavily restrict religious activities in the name of
security in ethnic minority areas. See sections below on Tibet and Xinjiang.
Health and Disability Rights
The government remains hostile towards claims for compensation stemming
from the 1990s blood scandal in Henan province. On August 27, baton-wielding
police beat several members of a group of 300 people with HIV-AIDS protesting
outside headquarters of the Henan provincial government headquarters in
Zhengzhou. The crowd was protesting the government’s refusal to pay compensation to those infected with the virus via government-organized mass blood
plasma sales in Henan province in the 1990s.
The government’s National Human Rights Action Plan (2012-2015) issued on
June 11 commits the government to greater protection from widespread heavy
metal pollution, yet no redress or medical attention had materialized at this
writing for children poisoned by lead in in Henan, Yunnan, Shaanxi, and Hunan
in recent years.
Although it is a party to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (CRPD), China’s protections of the rights of persons with disabilities
remains inadequate. During China’s first CRPD review on September 18-19 in
Geneva, government officials generally denied the existence of abuses and their
failure to provide people with disabilities access to information, justice, and
basic services.
On October 26, the Chinese government adopted a mental health law, which
had been in the works for more than 20 years. The law has numerous flaws,
including inadequate safeguards to protect against involuntary detention in
psychiatric institutions.
Women’s Rights
Women’s reproductive rights and access to reproductive health remain severely
curtailed under China’s family planning regulations. The government continues
to impose administrative sanctions, fines, and coercive measures, including
forced abortion. In recent years coercive birth control policies increasingly
extend to ethnic minority areas such as Tibet and Xinjiang. These policies contribute
to an increasing gender-imbalance (118.08 males for every 100 females
according to the 2010 census), which in turn contribute to different rights violations,
including forced marriage and trafficking.
The government’s erratic and punitive crackdowns on sex work often lead to
serious abuses, including physical and sexual violence, increased disease risk,
and constrained access to justice for the country’s estimated 4 to 10 million sex
workers.
Although the government acknowledges that domestic violence, employment
discrimination, and discriminatory social attitudes are acute and widespread, it
limits the activities of independent women’s rights groups and discourages
public interest litigation.
Migrant and Labor Rights
Chinese workers are becoming more active and outspoken in their efforts to
improve wages and conditions despite the absence of meaningful union representation.
The official All-China Federation of Trade Unions (ACFTU) is the sole
legal representative of China’s workers due to a ban on independent labor
unions.
Nongovernmental labor groups devoted to protecting migrant workers’ rights in
Guangdong province’s assembly manufacturing areas came under sustained
attack from government officials and security forces in 2012. In 2012, government
authorities or landlords under pressure from local government officials targeted
at least a dozen other migrant labor NGOs in Shenzhen with forced evictions.
On August 30, two dozen plainclothes thugs who appeared to be operating
at official behest attacked the Shenzhen office of Little Grass Center for
Migrant Workers, smashing windows and breaking the front door in an apparent
act of intimidation.
In June, joint research by the official All-China Women’s Federation and the
Guangdong provincial judiciary revealed that thousands of children left behind
in rural villages by their migrant worker parents due to restrictions of the hukou
(household registration) system are victims of sexual abuse. The hukou system,
which the government has pledged to abolish, unfairly limits the access of
China’s 220 million migrant workers to education, medical services, and housing.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
The Chinese government stopped classifying homosexuality as a mental illness
in 2001 following decriminalization of homosexual behavior in 1997. In June,
more than 80 lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) activists gathered in Beijing for China’s first LGBT conference. However, activists describe deliberate
official harassment through occasional police raids on popular gay venues.
China also lacks anti-discrimination laws based on sexual orientation and the
state does not recognize same sex relationships or adoption rights.
In September, parents of gay men and women protested the publication of an
educational booklet produced for Zhejiang province’s Hangzhou Education
Bureau that described homosexuality as “sexual deviance” and advocated that
parents seek to “prevent” it. The publishing company later announced those
passages would be excised from the booklet’s second edition in October.
In May, for the second year in a row, the Beijing LGBT Center was the target of a
forced eviction after the center’s landlord insisted that homosexuality was “too
sensitive” a topic for his property and demanded the center relocate. The facility
subsequently relocated.
Tibet
The situation in the Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR) and the neighboring Tibetan
autonomous areas of Qinghai, Sichuan, Gansu, and Yunnan provinces remained
tense following the massive crackdown on popular protests that swept the
plateau in 2008, and the introduction of measures designed to place all Tibetan
monasteries under the direct control of government officials who will be permanently
stationed there.
The government has yet to indicate that it will accommodate the aspirations of
Tibetan people for greater autonomy, even within the narrow confines of the
country’s autonomy law on ethnic minorities’ areas. At this writing, 85 Tibetans
had self-immolated since the first recorded case on February 27, 2009—72 of
them in 2012 alone. At least 69 of those who self-immolated have died.
Chinese security forces maintain a heavy presence and the authorities continue
to tightly restrict access and travel to Tibetan areas, particularly for journalists
and foreign visitors. Tibetans suspected of being critical of political, religious,
cultural, or economic state policies are systematically targeted on charges of
“separatism.” On June 18, a Sichuan province court sentenced senior Tibetan cleric, Yonten Gyatso, to seven years in prison for disseminating information
about the situation in Tibet and contacting human rights organizations abroad.
Secret arrests and torture in custody remains widespread. In June, a 36-year-old
Tibetan monk named Karwang died due to prolonged torture in police custody in
Ganzi (Kardze in Tibetan). He had been arrested mid-May on suspicion of having
put up posters calling for Tibetan independence.
As part of its drive to build “a New Socialist Countryside” on the Tibetan
plateau, the government continues to implement large development programs
mandating rehousing or relocating up to 80 percent of the rural population. The
relocation policies have been carried out—contrary to Chinese government
claims—with no effective choice and without genuine consultation of those
affected, while compensation mechanisms are opaque and inadequate.
Pastoralists deprived of their traditional livelihood face declining living standards
and increased dependency on government subsidies.
Xinjiang
Under the guise of counterterrorism and “anti-separatism” efforts, the government
maintains a pervasive system of ethnic discrimination against Uighurs and
other ethnic minorities in the Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region, and sharply
curbs religious and cultural expression. Politically motivated arrests are common.
A pervasive atmosphere of fear among the Uighur population contributes to
growing ethnic polarization. Factors contributing to this bleak atmosphere
include the omnipresence of the secret police, the recent history of disappearances,
and an overtly politicized judiciary.
Also contributing to this polarization is the legacy of the Urumqi riots of July
2009, the most deadly episode of ethnic unrest in recent Chinese history. The
government has not accounted for hundreds of persons detained after the riots,
investigated serious allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detainees that
have surfaced in testimonies of refugees and relatives living outside China, or
released definitive numbers or names of victims—the majority of whom were
ethnic Chinese—killed during the riots.
Several violent incidents took place in a year of increasing restrictions on religious
and cultural expression. In one of the most severe, On February 28, a
group of Uighurs, led by a man the government claimed was an underground
radical cleric, attacked passers-by in a mainly Chinese-inhabited street of
Yechen (Kargilik in Uighur), killing at least 12 people. The cleric, Abdudukeremu
Mamut, was sentenced to death on March 26.
A policy to raze traditional Uighur neighborhoods and relocate or forcibly evict
inhabitants, accompanied by a campaign to settle the majority of the nomadic
and pastoralist population of Xinjiang, are the most visible aspects of a comprehensive
development policy launched in 2010 that is supposed to reduce socioeconomic
disparities and lift the livelihood of ethnic groups and help “smash
separatist sentiment.”
Hong Kong
Civic groups and the public have challenged the Hong Kong government on
rights issues. Hong Kong authorities appear unwilling to deviate much from pro-
Beijing interests. They have not moved towards universal suffrage as mandated
by the territory’s mini-constitution, and have shown weakness in safeguarding
the territory’s autonomy, civil and political freedoms, and the rule of law.
In September, the government bowed to popular pressure and suspended introducing
patriotic education teaching material aimed at inculcating loyalty to the
Chinese Communist Party. Concerns continue to grow about the use of excessively
restrictive methods by the police in controlling assembly and procession,
and over the Immigration Department’s arbitrary bans on individuals critical of
Beijing. Concerns are also growing about the failure of the government to properly
investigate the rising number of claims that mainland security personnel or
individual working at their behest are operating in the territory, monitoring or
intimidating critics of the Beijing government.
In July, two mainland petitioners were each sentenced to 14 months of “reeducation
through labor” in their home province of Jiangxi for having participated to
the annual July 1st pro-democracy demonstration in Hong Kong, the first known
such instance.
Key International Actors
Despite claims to “making unremitting efforts” at peace in Syria, the Chinese
government, along with Russia, vetoed three resolutions aimed at pressuring
the Syrian government. China also demonstrated its disdain for international
law by pushing back from Yunnan province at least 7,000 ethnic Kachin refugees
into a conflict zone in northern Burma, insisting that they were not refugees.
Although the United States won praise for helping Chen Guangcheng and his
family, neither it nor other governments moved to alter or improve their largely
ineffective bilateral human rights dialogues with the Chinese government. Few
of these dialogues involve meaningful participation by civil society groups.
In early April, Japanese Diet members adopted a highly unusual resolution on
Tibet calling for the Chinese government to resume talks with the Dalai
Lama. Beijing also found itself forced to respond to critical South Korean press
reports that China had forcibly repatriated North Koreans; in response, Beijing
allowed a handful of North Koreans sheltered in the South Korean consulates in
China to depart for Seoul.
Indonesia
Competitive, credible, and fair local elections in Jakarta and the province of
West Kalimantan in 2012 underscored the ongoing transition from decades of
authoritarian rule in Indonesia. The government’s willingness to accept numerous
recommendations from United Nations member states during the UN’s
Universal Periodic Review (UPR) of Indonesia’s human rights record was another
hopeful sign of a growing commitment to respecting human rights.
However, Indonesia remains beset by serious human rights problems. Violence
and discrimination against religious minorities, particularly Ahmadiyah, Bahai,
Christians, and Shia deepened. Lack of accountability for abuses by police and
military forces continues to affect the lives of residents in Papua and West
Papua provinces.
Freedom of Expression
Indonesia’s vibrant media routinely reports on crucial social and political issues
including corruption, environmental destruction, and violence against religious
minorities. But a rising climate of religious intolerance and an infrastructure of
discriminatory national and local laws deny freedom of expression to
Indonesia’s religious minorities.
In May, the Indonesian government dismissed recommendations during its UPR
to release more than 100 political prisoners, the majority in the Moluccas
Islands and Papua. These activists are serving sentences of up to 20 years for
acts of peaceful protest including staging protest dances or raising separatist
flags. In January, the government refused to accept the UN Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention’s determination, issued in September 2011, that Papuan
independence activist Filep Karma is a political prisoner. The working group
called on Indonesia to immediately and unconditionally release Karma.
Indonesian police and government authorities failed to adequately protect
artists, writers, and media companies targeted with threats and protests by militant
Islamist groups. In May, neither police nor government officials intervened
to prevent Islamist groups from disrupting the book tour of Canadian-Muslim writer Irshad Manji in the capital, Jakarta, and Yogyakarta. In June, Jakarta police
bowed to pressure from the militant Islamic Defenders Front organization
protesting the planned concert of US pop star Lady Gaga and revoked the permit
to the concert organizers, prompting its cancellation.
Military Reform and Impunity
Impunity for members of Indonesia’s security forces remained a serious concern,
with the military courts having a poor prosecution record and no civilian
jurisdiction over soldiers who commit serious rights abuses. On June 6, over
300 soldiers from the 756th Battalion rampaged in the Papuan village of
Wamena as a reprisal for an incident in which in which villagers beat to death
two soldiers involved in a fatal traffic accident. Soldiers randomly fired their
weapons into shopping areas, burned down 87 houses, stabbed 13
villagers, and killed a native Papuan civil servant.
Although military officials on June 12 apologized for the incident and promised
compensation, victims said military investigators failed to question them about
the incident. They said rather than paying any compensation, the military has
limited its response to the violence to a traditional Papuan “stone-burning” ceremony
and declared the case closed.
Freedom of Religion
In 2012, incidents of violence against religious minorities were frequent and
occasionally deadly. Islamist militants mobilized mobs to attack religious
minorities with impunity. Light prison terms imposed on those prosecuted sent
a message of official tolerance for such mob violence. Dozens of regulations,
including ministerial decrees on building houses of worship, continue to foster
discrimination and intolerance.
Throughout 2012, dozens of minority Christian congregations, including GKI
Yasmin church in Bogor and HKBP Filadelfia church in the Jakarta suburb of
Bekasi, reported that local government officials arbitrarily refused to issue them
permits required under a 2006 decree on building houses of worship. Both
churches had already won Supreme Court decisions to build such structures.
Senior government officials, including Religious Affairs Minister Suryadharma
Ali and Home Affairs Minister Gamawan Fauzi, continued to justify restrictions
on religious freedom in the name of public order. They both offered affected
minorities “relocation” rather than legal protection of their rights.
Suryadharma Ali has himself inflamed tensions by making highly discriminatory
remarks about the Ahmadiyah and Shia, suggesting that both are heretical. In
September 2012, he stated that the “solution” to religious intolerance of Shia
and Ahmadiyah was their conversion to the Sunni Islam that most Indonesians
follow. That same month, President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono called for the
development of an international instrument to prosecute “religious blasphemy,”
which could be used to restrict free expression and the religious freedom of
minorities.
According to Indonesia’s Setara Institute, which monitors religious freedom,
religious attacks increased from 216 in 2010 to 244 in 2011. In the first nine
months of 2012 there were 214 cases.
On December 29, 2011, Sunni militants attacked a Shia village in Sampang
regency, Madura Island, burning houses and the madrasa, causing around 500
Shia residents to flee. Police arrested and charged only one of the militants for
the arson attack. On August 26, at the end of the holiday following the end of
Ramadan, hundreds of Sunni militants again attacked the same Shia village and
burned down around 50 Shia houses, killing one man and seriously injuring
another. Several police officers at the scene failed to intervene to stop the
attack.
In March, a court in Central Java sentenced Andreas Guntur, the leader of the
spiritual group Amanat Keagungan Ilahi, to four years’ imprisonment on charges
of blasphemy on the basis of allegedly improper teachings of certain verses of
the Quran.
In June, a West Sumatra court sentenced Alexander An, an administrator of the
“Minang Atheist” Facebook group, to 30 months in prison and a fine of 100 million
rupiah (US$11,000) for “inciting public unrest” via Facebook postings
espousing atheism.
In July, an East Java district court sentenced Shia cleric Tajul Muluk to two years’
imprisonment for blasphemy against Islam. The East Java high court later
increased his sentence to four years and two months for causing “riots” in
August.
In November, Acehnese villagers attacked a Muslim sect in Bireuen, Aceh, targeting
the house of Muslim teacher Tengku Aiyub Syakuban. Mainstream
Muslim clerics accused Syakuban of disseminating “heretical teachings.”
Hundreds of villagers burned and killed Syakuban and his student Muntasir.
One attacker, Mansyur, also died in the melee.
Papua/West Papua
In March, a Jayapura court convicted five men—Selpius Bobii, a social media
activist; August Sananay Kraar, a civil servant; Dominikus Sorabut, a filmmaker;
Edison Waromi, a former political prisoner; and Forkorus Yaboisembut, a
Papuan tribal leader—and sentenced them to three years in prison for statements
made at a Papuan People’s Congress in October 2011. The security forces
had brutally attacked the congress, leaving at least three people dead.
In May, more than a dozen UN member countries raised questions and made
recommendations during Indonesia’s UPR in Geneva about human rights problems
in Papua including impunity for abuses by security forces, restrictions on
the rights to freedom of expression, and excessive restrictions and surveillance
of foreign journalists and human rights researchers. In September, Indonesia
rejected all the Papua-related UPR recommendations. The government instead
denied that Indonesia has political prisoners and asserted that there is no
impunity in Papua and that “national journalists” could travel freely in the
region.
From May to August there was a marked upsurge in violence as Indonesian
security forces apparently sought to crackdown on Papuan activists. Forty-seven
reported violent incidents in this period left 18 dead, including one Indonesian
security officer, and dozens of wounded, including a German tourist.
On June 14, police shot and killed KNPB deputy chairman Mako Tabuni, triggering
riots in the Jayapura neighborhood of Wamena, over perceptions that Tabuni was the victim of an extrajudicial execution. Papua police suspected Tabuni of
involvement in numerous shootings.
Aceh
In June, former Aceh guerilla leaders Zaini Abdullah and Muzakir Manaf took the
offices of Aceh’s governor and deputy governor respectively after winning an
April 9 election.
In May, the Singkil regency closed down 19 churches and one house of worship
belonging to followers of Pambi, a native faith among the Pakpak Dairi ethnic
group, after protests from the militant Islamic Defenders Front who asserted the
structures were “illegal.” Governor Zaini refused to intervene in the dispute,
blaming religious tension on unnamed “outsiders.”
Aceh’s provincial government continued to implement a repressive Shariainspired
dress code and law on “seclusion,” banning association between
unmarried men and women in “isolated” places. The provisions are enforced
primarily through a Sharia police force that harasses, intimidates, and arbitrarily
arrests and detains women and men.
In September, a 16-year-old teenage girl arrested by the Sharia police in Langsa
regency committed suicide after two daily newspapers reported that she was a
“prostitute.” In her suicide note, she denied the allegation and said she could
not bear the shame.
Migrant Workers
More than four million Indonesian women work abroad in Malaysia, Singapore,
and the Middle East as live-in domestic workers. These women often encounter
a range of abuses, including labor exploitation, psychological, physical, and
sexual abuse, and situations of forced labor and slavery-like conditions. The
Indonesian government has become an increasingly vocal advocate for its workers
abroad, successfully negotiating the pardon of 22 Indonesian women on
Saudi Arabia’s death row, calling for improved labor protections, and ratifying
the Migrant Workers Convention.
However, Indonesia has consistently failed to rein in abusive recruitment agencies
that send workers abroad. Many agencies charge workers high fees that
leave them heavily indebted and give them deceptive or incomplete information
about their work conditions. Revisions to its migration law remain pending.
Within Indonesia, an important draft law extending key protections to domestic
workers has languished in parliament. The country’s labor law excludes all
domestic workers from the basic labor rights afforded to formal workers, such
as a minimum wage, overtime pay, limits to hours of work, a weekly rest day,
and vacation. Hundreds of thousands of girls, some as young as 11, are
employed as domestic workers. Many work 14 to 18-hour days, seven days a
week, with no day off. Many employers forbid child domestic workers from leaving
the house where they work and pay little or none of their salaries. In the
worst cases, girls are physically, psychologically, and sexually abused by their
employers or their employers’ family members.
Refugees and Asylum Seekers
Indonesia detains and mistreats thousands of asylum seekers, including children,
from Sri Lanka, Afghanistan, Burma, and elsewhere. Asylum seekers face
detention, abuses in custody, limited access to education, and have little or no
basic assistance. In February 2012, an Afghan asylum seeker died from injuries
allegedly inflicted by guards at the Pontianak Immigration Detention Center.
There are at least 1,000 unaccompanied migrant children in Indonesia, approximately
200 of whom remain in detention with unrelated adults. Indonesia is not
party to the 1951 Refugee Convention, and does not provide most migrants
opportunities to obtain legal status, such as to seek asylum. Many migrants
consider traveling on to Australia on boats arranged by smugglers a viable
option, despite the risks of drowning in the dangerous sea crossing.
Key International Actors
In April 2012, British Prime Minister David Cameron visited Jakarta. Cameron
applauded Indonesia’s political progress, but challenged the government to
stand up against “despicable violence and persecution” of religious minorities.
Much of US policy towards Indonesia has focused on cementing military ties,
including with Indonesian special forces, which have long been implicated in
serious abuses. In September, the US announced the sale of eight Apache
attack helicopters to Indonesia.
In November, United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay
visited Jakarta and asked the Indonesian government to address “increasing
levels of violence and hatred towards religious minorities and narrow and
extremist-interpretations of Islam.”
Malaysia
In a nationally televised speech on Malaysia Day in September 2011, Prime
Minister Seri Najib Tun Razak called for a Malaysia “which practices functional
and inclusive democracy, where peace and public order are safeguarded in line
with the supremacy of the Constitution, the rule of law and respect for basic
human rights and individual rights.” However he added that there had to be
“checks and balances … between national security and personal freedom,” and
ensuing reforms have favored security over internationally recognized human
rights.
Parliamentary elections must be held no later than April 2013, and political tensions
were already high in November with both the opposition and the government
alleging engagement by their political opponents in election-related intimidation
and violence.
Preventive Detention
In his September 2011 speech, Prime Minister Najib pledged to replace the
notorious Internal Security Act (ISA), which permitted long-term detention without
trial, and other rights-restricting legislation. The Banishment Act 1959 and
the Restricted Residence Act 1933 were the first to be rescinded, followed by
three emergency declarations and the emergency-related laws they made possible.
One of the rescinded laws, the Emergency (Public Order and Crime
Prevention) Ordinance 1969, had been regularly used to hold criminal suspects
indefinitely without charge or trial.
The Security Offences (Special Measures) 2012 Act (SOSMA) replaced the ISA on
July 31, 2012. On a positive note, SOSMA reduced initial detention without
charge from 60 to no more than 28 days, and required that a suspect be
charged in court or released thereafter. However, other provisions reduce
human rights protections, including an overly broad definition of a security
offense, allowing police rather than courts to authorize interception of communications
during investigations, and permitting prosecutors to conceal the
source of evidence and to keep the identities of witnesses secret, thereby preventing
cross-examination. Even if a suspect is acquitted under SOSMA, the law permits a series of appeals, with bail disallowed, that could result in a suspect’s
indefinite detention. Malaysian authorities, using transitional authority at
the time SOSMA replaced the ISA, still hold 27 ISA detainees.
Freedom of Assembly and Association
In 2012, the government continued to violate rights to free association and
peaceful public assembly. While Prime Minister Najib agreed in September 2011
to review section 27 of the Police Act, which mandated police permits for public
assemblies, the government hastily drafted and passed a replacement Peaceful
Assembly Act on December 20, 2011.
The new law rescinded the requirement for a permit but also introduced major
new restrictions, including a broad ban on “moving assemblies” of any kind.
Static protests are also prohibited closer than 50 meters from many prohibited
sites, making it virtually impossible to hold an assembly in an urban setting.
Other restrictions include empowering the police to set assembly conditions
such as time, place, and date after taking into consideration other groups’
objections or “any inherent environmental factor.” Police were also given the
power to use all “reasonable force” to break up a protest.
City and federal officials sought to prevent an April 28 sit-in sponsored by
Bersih 3.0, the Coalition for Clean and Fair Elections. They barred Bersih from
using Dataram Merdeka (Independence Square) in central Kuala Lumpur and
barricaded the area. Nevertheless, marchers numbering in the tens of thousands
walked peacefully toward the barricaded square and when the announcement
came that the rally was over began a peaceful dispersal. However, a small
group breached the barricades. The police reacted with excessive force in what
became a four-hour onslaught of tear gas, water cannon, and indiscriminate
beatings and arrests.
On July 1, 2011, Home Affairs Minister Hishammuddin Hussein declared Bersih
an illegal organization under the Societies Act. On July 24, 2012, the Kuala
Lumpur High Court overturned that decision, ruling that the original decision
was “tainted with irrationality.”
Freedom of Expression
Most major newspapers and television and radio stations remain controlled by
media companies close to political parties in the government coalition. A recent
amendment to the Evidence Act has raised fears that intermediary liability on
the internet will further decrease freedom of expression. The provision creates a
legal presumption that an owner, administrator, host, editor, or subscriber to a
network service who has in their custody or control any computer from which
any publication originates is presumed to have published or republished the
content of the publication unless the contrary is proven.
The Printing Presses and Publications Act (PPPA) retains its potency despite
some reforms, such as ending the need to renew licenses annually and adding
judicial oversight to what was the home minister’s unchecked power to approve
or reject license applications. New publications still require initial approval and
licenses still may be arbitrarily revoked. Other means of control include calls
from the ministry offering “advice” to editors and prison terms and fines for
“maliciously” printing so-called false news. The home minister maintains
absolute discretion over licensing of printing presses.
In 2012, Malaysian courts partially advanced the right of free expression.
Malaysiakini, the largest online newspaper in Malaysia, had repeatedly and
unsuccessfully applied to publish a daily print version. On October 1, the Kuala
Lumpur High Court ruled the home minister’s refusal was “improper and irrational”
and the application should be resubmitted. In a significant statement
contradicting the prevailing government view, the judge said that a license to
publish was “a right, not a privilege.” The attorney general’s chambers and the
Home Ministry appealed the court’s decision.
Sisters in Islam, a local nongovernmental organization, also won a significant
victory in July when the Court of Appeal dismissed a government appeal to overturn
a 2010 High Court decision lifting the ban on Muslim Women and the
Challenge of Islamic Extremism, a book of essays originally banned in 2008.
A civil court’s decision that the arrest of political cartoonist Zunar under the
Sedition Act and the PPPA in September 2012 was lawful had a more negative impact, reinforcing the unwillingness of printing presses, publishers, and bookstores
to be associated with controversial books.
Police Abuses and Impunity
Human Rights Watch and local civil society groups have documented police
abuses, including excessive use of force during arrests, suspicious deaths in
custody, failure to adequately investigate such incidents and to hold accountable
those responsible; and inadequate post-mortem inquiries and investigations.
Victims of police violence reported few effective avenues for redress and
decried an apparent culture of police impunity for mistreatment.
Trial of Anwar Ibrahim
On January 9, 2012, a Kuala Lumpur court acquitted Anwar Ibrahim, parliamentary
leader of Malaysia’s political opposition, of sodomy on the grounds that it
could not “be 100 percent certain that the [DNA] evidence can be accepted, as
there could have been tampering.” An appeal by the attorney general’s chambers,
could add months, if not years, to resolution of the case.
Human Rights Defenders
On July 3, 2012, government agencies initiated a multi-pronged investigation
into Suaram, one of Malaysia’s leading human rights NGOs. Government officials
and civil servant investigators accused Suaram of financial irregularities,
accepting foreign donations to undermine the Malaysian government, and hiding
an illegal association behind the group’s registration as a company.
Regulatory agencies, including the Companies Commission of Malaysia and the
Registrar of Societies, demanded information and documents going back years,
and interrogated Suaram staff and board members. No one had been charged at
this writing.
Many observers believe the investigation was prompted by Suaram’s decision in
2010 to become involved in a French judicial investigation examining alleged
corruption in Malaysia’s purchase of submarines from a French defense company.
Throughout September and October, pro-government media alleged that
Suaram and a number of other NGOs critical of the government were receiving
foreign funding in an attempt to destabilize the government.
Refugees, Asylum Seekers, and Trafficking Victims
Malaysian immigration law does not recognize refugees and asylum seekers.
The government is not a party to the 1951 Refugee Convention and lacks domestic
refugee law and asylum procedures. Malaysia refuses to permit refugees to
work or to allow for education of refugee children.
In February, Malaysia denied the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) access to asylum seeker Hamza Kashgari, who appeared to
be an asylum seeker from Saudi Arabia. He had fled after it was learned he had
tweeted messages that some deemed insulting to the Prophet Muhammad.
Kashgari was deported amid execution calls in his homeland. At this writing, he
was still imprisoned.
The Anti-Trafficking in Persons and Anti-Smuggling of Migrants Act conflates trafficking
and people smuggling, and fails to provide meaningful protection to victims
of either crime. The government confines trafficking victims in sub-standard
government shelters without access to services and assistance until legal
cases they are involved with are adjudicated.
Detention and Drugs Policy
The Dangerous Drugs (Special Preventive Measures) Act continues to authorize
preventive detention. During 2012, an estimated 700 people were held under
the act.
The National Anti-Drugs Agency maintains over 20 puspens (drug detention centers)
where users are held for a minimum of two years. Rates of relapse in
Malaysia have been estimated at 70 to 90 percent and those re-arrested as
users face long prison terms combined with caning. Drug traffickers face mandatory
death sentences, but the number of people executed is not publicly available.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In 2012, discrimination against lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT)
persons reached new levels of intensity. On June 25, Prime Minister Najib publicly
stated that LGBT activities do not “have a place in the country.” On July 19,
speaking before 11,000 imams and mosque committee members, he stated that
“it is compulsory for us to fight” LGBT behavior.
In March, the High Court dismissed the application of the LGBT group Seksualiti
Merdeka for a review of the police ban on their November 2011 festival, leaving
the future of the annual festival in doubt.
Two October court rulings concerning transsexuals also caused alarm: in one, a
transsexual was refused the right to change the gender recorded on her national
identity card; and in the other it was ruled that Muslims born as males may not
dress as females.
The government refuses to consider repeal of article 377B of the penal code
which criminalizes adult consensual “carnal intercourse against the order of
nature,” or to replace article 377C on non-consensual sexual acts with a modern,
gender-neutral law on rape.
Key International Actors
The United States has not strongly pressed Malaysia over its failure to honor
international human rights standards. Other than its demands for a fair trial for
Anwar Ibrahim, the US has allowed concern for security cooperation to trump
speaking out about human rights. During Trans-Pacific Pact free trade negotiations,
the US has failed to hold Malaysia accountable for its human rights violations.
Malaysia is a member of the UN Human Rights Council (HRC), but has not signed
or ratified most core human rights treaties. The government has also opposed
including protections on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity in the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Human Rights Declaration and
has blocked consideration of a comprehensive agreement to protect the rights
of all migrant workers in ASEAN.
Nepal
Nepal’s six-year peace process between government forces and Communist
party of Nepal (Maoist) combatants remained in limbo in 2012, and human
rights commitments undertaken in the 2006 Comprehensive Peace Accord (CPA)
remained unfulfilled.
Impunity for wartime abuses continued, with the government continuing to
advocate for establishing a Commission of Inquiry on Disappeared Persons,
Truth, and Reconciliation that would be empowered to recommend amnesty for
suspects implicated in crimes committed during the decade-long conflict from
1996-2006. The government has also promoted government officials and security
force members suspected of involvement in human rights abuses. The closure
in March of the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) symbolizes the government’s retreat from promises for accountability.
In May, the Constituent Assembly, tasked to draft a new constitution, was dissolved
amid political deadlock over extending its term. The collapse of the
assembly, which also served as the country’s parliament, left the country without
a legislature. In September, the government announced elections for a new
Constituent Assembly, without clarifying the date or terms of the vote.
The political stalemate, along with weak governance, corruption and impunity,
contributed to ongoing political instability, and problems with law and order.
Accountability for Past Abuses
The government failed to provide redress in 2012 for wartime crimes, including
enforced disappearances, torture, rape, and extrajudicial executions. The government
pushed for a politically appointed Commission of Inquiry on
Disappeared Persons, Truth, and Reconciliation, with discretionary powers to
grant amnesties for crimes under international law.
In the absence of a legislature, the cabinet controversially forwarded the bill to
the president for executive approval, a power that no president has exercised to date. The framework for a Truth and Reconciliation Commission was part of the
November 2006 Comprehensive Peace Agreement. However, granting amnesty
for crimes against humanity clearly violates international law and Nepal’s
Supreme Court decisions, and would undermine reconciliation.
The army continued to shield alleged perpetrators of human rights abuses. In
July, the army recommended the promotion of Col. Raju Basnet, implicated in
dozens of cases of enforced disappearance and torture, to the rank of brigadier
general. The cabinet approved the promotion in October.
In September, the government promoted Kuber Singh Rana from additional
inspector general of police to inspector general. Rana is a suspect in ongoing
criminal investigations that the Supreme Court ordered in February 2009 related
to the October 2003 enforced disappearance and extrajudicial killings of five
students from Dhanusha district in Nepal’s southern plains.
Integration of Maoist Combatants
In October, the government completed the integration of a total of 1,450 former
Maoist fighters into the Nepalese army. The integration marked the conclusion
of a November 2011 agreement that all political parties signed allowing for a
maximum of 6,500 former combatants to be integrated into a specially created
general directorate under the army in non-combat roles.
Forced Evictions of Squatters
In May, the municipal government of the capital, Kathmandu, and the city’s
armed police force started to forcibly evict residents of settlements along the
Bagmati River to make way for a planned urban development project. Those
forced evictions, which did not comply with UN-developed specific standards
and due process, left over 800 people homeless, nearly half of them children.
Authorities plan to evict some 12,000 people in Kathmandu for the planned
project, without ensuring adequate and sustainable alternative housing.
Women’s Rights
Trafficking of young girls, rape and sexual assault, domestic violence, and
dowry-related violence remain serious concerns.
Migrants’ Rights
Hundreds of thousands of Nepalis migrate every year to the Gulf and Malaysia
for employment, primarily in construction and domestic work. The money they
send home makes up approximately 20 percent of Nepal’s gross domestic product.
In August, the government banned young women under 30 years old from
traveling to Gulf countries for work. The ban was a response to numerous cases
of abuse of Nepali domestic workers, including unpaid wages, excessive work
hours, and physical or sexual abuse.
International and national rights groups said the ban could push women to
migrate through irregular channels and increase risk of exploitation. They called
for the ban to be revoked and for better protections during training and recruitment.
Nepali construction workers also face deception during recruitment, and
exorbitant fees that leave them deeply in debt. This may put them at greater risk
of getting trapped in abusive situations while working abroad. Corruption hampers
effective monitoring of the recruitment industry. In October, Labor Minister
Kumar Belbase resigned after he was caught seeking bribes from recruitment
agencies.
Disability Rights
Despite policy advancements, children with disabilities face many barriers to
education due to lack of implementation and monitoring. Nepal has ratified the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), and the government
publicly promotes an inclusive education system in which children with
and without disabilities attend school together in their communities. However
in practice, many schools remain inaccessible and the current curriculum is
inadequate for students with different learning needs. In addition, Nepal continues
to have a system of separate schools for children who are deaf, blind, or have physical and intellectual disabilities, as well as segregated classes for children
with disabilities in mainstream schools.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Nepal’s government has made significant strides towards ensuring equality for
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) people in recent years. The government’s
2011 census allowed citizens to self-identify as male, female, or
“third gender,” though independent observers reported problems with tallying
census figures.
In May, the Ministry of Home Affairs issued a directive to allow citizens to identify
as male, female, or “other” on citizenship documents based on self-identification,
in line with a 2007 Supreme Court decision. However, the directive had
yet to be implemented at this writing. In August, the UN Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) welcomed the government’s
announcement that citizens would be allowed to identify their own gender,
including those who do not identify as male or female.
Statelessness
Flaws in the citizenship law continued to make it difficult for women to secure
legal proof of citizenship, especially when male family members refuse to assist
them or are unavailable to do so. Without proof of citizenship, Nepali women
cannot assert their rights to marital property, inheritance, or land. Moreover, the
current law continues to deny citizenship to children born to non-Nepali fathers,
effectively leaving them stateless. The 2012 draft articles on citizenship, which
did not rectify these flaws, stalled after the Constituent Assembly dissolved.
Tibetan Refugees
Under increasing pressure from China, the government continued to deny
Tibetans safe passage to India. In 2012, authorities also obstructed peaceful
gatherings by Tibetans and Nepalis of Tibetan origin, including detaining
demonstrators in violation of orders from Nepal’s Supreme Court.The government continues to deny Tibetans the right to openly celebrate their
holidays, including the Tibetan New Year. In March, 100 Tibetans were arrested
during protests in Kathmandu to mark the 53rd anniversary of the Tibetan uprising
against Chinese rule. In September, the police arrested seven Tibetans in
Kathmandu. Six were released the same day, but the police charged one under
the Public Offenses Act and were investigating his activities at this writing.
In September, following a meeting between Tibetan refugees in Kathmandu and
Robert O. Blake, the United States assistant secretary of state for South and
Central Asia, the government queried the US embassy as to why Nepali authorities
had not been notified of the meeting before it took place.
Key International Actors
Geographically located between Asia’s two powers, India and China, Nepal has
a delicate balancing act to perform. India continues to exert a dominant external
influence on Nepal’s politics, sometimes resulting in negative Nepali public
opinion of India. India also continues to compete with China to invest in large
infrastructure projects in Nepal, especially hydropower.
In recent years, Nepal has accepted increasing amounts of financial aid from
China to finance infrastructure development and support the Nepali military. In
return, the Nepalese government explicitly supports Beijing’s “one-China policy”
that China has sovereignty over Tibet and Taiwan. Nepal also prohibits “anti-
Chinese activities” within Nepal, even though there are no specific laws to support
such prohibition.
In March, the Nepali government refused to extend the tenure of the OHCHR
office in Kathmandu. The government has also failed to respond to OHCHR’s
request to place a human rights officer in the city’s United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) office.
In September, the US removed the ruling Maoist party from its list of terrorist
organizations, allowing US entities to legally interact with the party and its
members after a nine-year ban.
North Korea
Kim Jong-Un’s succession as North Korea’s supreme leader after the death of
his father, Kim Jong-Il, in December 2011 had little impact on the country’s dire
human rights record.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (North Korea) systematically violates
the rights of its population. The government has ratified four key international
human rights treaties and includes rights protections in its constitution, but
does not allow organized political opposition, free media, functioning civil society,
or religious freedom. Arbitrary arrest, detention, lack of due process, and
torture and ill-treatment of detainees remain serious and pervasive problems.
North Korea also practices collective punishment for various anti-state offenses,
for which it enslaves hundreds of thousands of citizens in prison camps, including
children. The government periodically publicly executes citizens for stealing
state property, hoarding food, and other “anti-socialist” crimes, and maintains
policies that have continually subjected North Koreans to food shortages and
famine.
In April, the International Coalition to Stop Crimes against Humanity in North
Korea (ICNK), which includes Human Rights Watch, filed a comprehensive submission
on political prison camps to 11 United Nations special procedures operating
under the mandate of the UN Human Rights Council (HRC), and called for
the creation of a UN commission of inquiry to investigate crimes against humanity
in North Korea.
On November 2, the UN special rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
the DPRK recommended that the UN General Assembly and the international
community should consider setting up a “more detailed mechanism of inquiry”
into the egregious human rights abuses in the country.
Food Shortages and Famine
North Korea continues to face serious food insecurity in 2012, following a major
famine in 2011. In November 2012, the World Food Program (WFP) and Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO) estimated that 2.8 million vulnerable people, equal to slightly more than 10 percent of all North Koreans, face under-nutrition
and a lack of vital protein and fat in their daily diet. The troubling food situation
is the result of several factors, including a dry spell that heavily impacted soybean
production in the first half of 2012; economic mismanagement; and the
government’s blatantly discriminatory food policies that favor the military and
government officials.
Torture and Inhumane Treatment
Testimony from North Korean refugees that Human Rights Watch gathered in
2012 indicates that individuals arrested on criminal or political charges often
face torture by officials aiming to elicit confessions, extract bribes and information,
and enforce obedience. Common forms of torture include sleep deprivation,
beatings with iron rods or sticks, kicking and slapping, and enforced sitting
or standing for hours. Detainees are subject to so-called “pigeon torture,”
in which they are forced to cross their arms behind their back, are handcuffed,
hung in the air tied to a pole, and beaten with a club. Guards also rape female
detainees.
Executions
North Korea’s criminal code stipulates that the death penalty can be applied
only for a small set of crimes, but these include vaguely defined offenses such
as “crimes against the state” and “crimes against the people” that can be, and
are, applied broadly. A December 2007 amendment to the penal code extended
the death penalty to many more crimes, including non-violent offenses such as
fraud and smuggling. Testimony that Human Rights Watch collected in 2012
revealed that authorities executed persons for “crimes” that included stealing
metal wire from a factory, taking plate glass from a hanging photo of Kim Jong-Il,
and guiding people to the North Korea-China border with intent to flee the country.
Political Prisoner Camps
Information provided by escapees who have fled North Korea in the past two
years has again shown that persons accused of political offenses are usually
sent to brutal forced labor camps, known as gwalliso, operated by the National
Security Agency.
The government practices collective punishment, sending to forced labor camps
not only the offender but also their parents, spouse, children, and even grandchildren.
These camps are notorious for horrific living conditions and abuse,
including severe food shortages, little or no medical care, lack of proper housing
and clothes, continuous mistreatment and torture by guards, and executions.
Forced labor at the gwalliso often involves difficult physical labor such as
mining, logging, and agricultural work, all done with rudimentary tools in dangerous
and harsh conditions. Death rates in these camps are reportedly
extremely high.
North Korea has never acknowledged that these camps exist, but United States
and South Korean officials estimate some 200,000 people may be imprisoned
in them, including in camp No. 14 in Kaechun, No. 15 in Yodok, No. 16 in
Hwasung, No. 22 in Hoeryung, and No. 25 in Chungjin.
Refugees and Asylum Seekers
North Korea criminalizes leaving the country without state permission. Following
the death of leader Kim Jong-Il, the new government decreed a shoot-on-sight
order to border guards to stop illegal crossing at the northern border into China.
Increased border security in both North Korea and China significantly reduced
the numbers of North Koreas reaching Thailand, and ultimately, South Korea.
Those who leave face harsh punishment upon repatriation. Interrogation, torture,
and punishments depend on North Korean authorities’ assessments of
what the returnee did while in China. Those suspected of simple commerce or
other money-making schemes are usually sent to work in forced labor brigades
(known as ro-dong-dan-ryeon-dae, literally labor training centers) or jip-kyul-so
(collection centers), low-level criminal penitentiaries where forced labor is
required.
Others suspected of religious or political activities, especially including contact
with South Koreans, are given lengthier terms in horrendous detention facilities
known as kyo-hwa-so (correctional, reeducation centers) where forced labor is
combined with chronic food and medicine shortages, harsh working conditions,
and mistreatment by guards.
Beijing categorically labels North Koreans in China “illegal” economic migrants
and routinely repatriates them, despite its obligation to offer protection to
refugees under customary international law and the Refugee Convention of 1951
and its 1967 protocol, to which China is a state party. Former North Korean security
officials who have defected told Human Rights Watch that North Koreans
handed back by China face interrogation, torture, and referral to political prisoner
or forced labor camps. In a high profile case, China forced back at least 30
North Koreans in February and March 2012, defying a formal request from South
Korean President Lee Myung-Bak to desist from doing so, and despite protests
in front of the Chinese Embassy in Seoul.
North Korean women fleeing their country are frequently trafficked in forced de
facto marriages with Chinese men. Even if they have lived there for years, these
women are not entitled to legal residence and face possible arrest and repatriation.
Many children of such unrecognized marriages lack legal identity or access
to elementary education because their parents fear that by attempting to register
such the child, the Chinese authorities will identify the mother as an undocumented
North Korean migrant, and arrest and forcibly repatriate her.
Government-Controlled Judiciary
North Korea’s judiciary is neither transparent nor independent. The government
appoints and tightly controls judges, prosecutors, lawyers, court clerks, and
even jury members. In some cases designated as political crimes, suspects are
not even sent through a nominal judicial process; after interrogation they are
either executed or sent to a forced labor camp, often with their entire families.
Labor Rights
North Korea is one of the few nations in the world that is not a member of the
International Labour Organization (ILO). The ruling Korean Workers’ Party firmly
controls the only authorized trade union organization, the General Federation of Trade Unions of Korea. South Korean companies employ over 50,000 North
Korean workers in the Kaesong Industrial Complex (KIC), close to the border
between North and South Korea, where the law governing working conditions
falls far short of international standards on freedom of association, the right to
collective bargaining, and protection from gender discrimination and sexual
harassment.
Freedom of Association, Information, and Movement
The government uses fear—generated mainly by threats of forced labor and public
executions—to prevent dissent, and imposes harsh restrictions on freedom
of information, association, assembly, and travel.
North Korea operates a vast network of informants who monitor and report to
the authorities fellow citizens they suspect of criminal or subversive behavior.
All media and publications are state controlled, and unauthorized access to
non-state radio or TV broadcasts is severely punished. North Koreans found with
unauthorized TV programs, such as South Korean drama and entertainment
shows, are punished. The government periodically investigates the “political
background” of its citizens to assess their loyalty to the ruling party, and forces
Pyongyang residents who fail such assessments to leave the capital.
Key International Actors
The North Korean government continues to refuse to recognize the mandate of
the UN special rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the DPRK, or cooperate
with him.
In March, the HRC adopted a resolution against North Korea for the fifth year in
a row condemning Pyongyang for its abysmal, systematic human rights violations.
For the first time the resolution passed by consensus, marking a breakthrough
in international recognition of the gravity of North Korea’s human rights
abuses. This followed condemnation by the UN General Assembly for the seventh
straight year in a December 19, 2011 resolution that demanded North Korea
halt its “systematic, widespread and grave violations of human rights” and reiterated
UN member states’ concerns about the country’s “all-pervasive and severe restrictions on the freedoms of thought, conscience, religion, opinion
and expression, peaceful assembly and association.”
Both resolutions condemned North Korea’s failure to state whether it accepted
any of the 167 recommendations that it took under advisement from a HRC’s
Universal Periodic Review (UPR) session of its record in December 2009.
The six-party talks on denuclearizing the Korean peninsula—involving North and
South Korea, China, Japan, Russia, and the US—remained moribund during the
year. A potential breakthrough deal between the US and North Korea in February
to provide substantial US food assistance in exchange for an end to uranium
enrichment and missile testing by North Korea, and a return of International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) inspectors, fell apart when North Korea insisted on
attempting to launch a rocket carrying a satellite to commemorate the 100th
anniversary of the birth of North Korean founder Kim Il-Sung.
Japan continued to demand the return of 17 Japanese citizens that North Korea
abducted in the 1970s and 1980s for, among other things, training North Korean
spies. It returned five to Japan, but claimed eight had died and that the other
four had never entered North Korea. Some Japanese civil society groups insist
the number of abductees is much higher. South Korea’s government continued
to increase its attention and efforts to demand return of hundreds of its citizens
it claimed were abducted by North Korean government agents.
Pakistan
Pakistan had a turbulent year in 2012, with the judicial ouster of Prime Minister
Yusuf Raza Gilani, attacks on civilians by militant groups, growing electricity
shortages, rising food and fuel prices, and continuing political dominance of the
military, which operates with almost complete impunity. Religious minorities
continued to face insecurity and persecution as the government failed to provide
protection to those threatened or to hold extremists accountable. Islamist
militant groups continued to target and kill Shia Muslims—particularly from the
Hazara community—with impunity. In September, the southwestern province of
Balochistan experienced massive flooding for the third year running, displacing
some 700,000 people.
Ongoing rights concerns included the breakdown of law enforcement in the face
of terror attacks, continuing abuses across Balochistan, ongoing torture and illtreatment
of criminal suspects, and unresolved enforced disappearances of terrorism
suspects and opponents of the military. Abuses by Pakistani police,
including extrajudicial killings, also continued to be reported throughout the
country in 2012.
Relations between Pakistan and the United States —Pakistan’s most significant
ally and its largest donor of development and military aid—remained tense for
much of the year due to the “Salala Attack” in November 2011, in which US
forces killed 24 Pakistani soldiers during a military operation near the Afghan
border.
Sectarian Attacks
In 2012, at least 325 members of the Shia Muslim population were killed in targeted
attacks that took place across Pakistan. In Balochistan province, over 100
were killed, most of them from the Hazara community. On August 16, gunmen
ambushed four buses passing through the Babusar Top area of Mansehra district
in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province. The attackers forced all the passengers to
disembark, checked their national identity cards, and summarily executed 22
travelers whom they identified as belonging to the Shia community. A
spokesman for the Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan, the Pakistani Taliban, claimed responsibility. On August 30, gunmen shot dead Zulfiqar Naqvi, a Shia judge, in
Quetta, Balochistan’s capital. In two separate attacks on September 1, 2012,
gunmen attacked and killed eight Hazara Shia in Quetta.
Sunni militant groups, including those with known links to the Pakistani military,
its intelligence agencies, and affiliated paramilitaries—such as the ostensibly
banned Lashkar-e Jhangvi—operated with widespread impunity across
Pakistan, as law enforcement officials effectively turned a blind eye to attacks.
Students and teachers were regularly attacked by militant groups. On October 9,
2012, gunmen shot Malala Yousafzai, a 15-year-old student and outspoken
advocate for children’s right to education, in the head and neck leaving her in
critical condition. The Tehreek-e-Taliban Pakistan claimed responsibility for the
attack in the Swat Valley. The attack on Yousafzai garnered condemnation from
across the political spectrum in Pakistan. Militant Islamist groups also attacked
more than 100 schools, and rebuilding is slow.
Religious Minorities and Women
Abuses under the country’s abusive blasphemy law continued as dozens were
charged in 2012 and at least 16 people remained on death row for blasphemy,
while another 20 served life sentences. Aasia Bibi, a Christian from Punjab
province, who in 2010 became the first woman in the country’s history to be
sentenced to death for blasphemy, continued to languish in prison. In July 2012,
police arrested a man who appeared to suffer from a mental disability for
allegedly burning the Quran. A mob organized by local clerics demanded that
the man be handed to them, attacked the police station, pulled the victim out,
and burned him alive.
On August 17, Islamabad police took into custody Rimsha Masih, a 14-year-old
Christian girl from a poor Islamabad suburb with a “significantly lower mental
age,” who was accused of burning pages filled with Quranic passages. Police
had to beat back a mob demanding that it be handed the girl so that it could kill
her. Threats against the local Christian community forced some 400 families to
flee their homes. But Islamist groups who support the blasphemy law took a significantly
different position, demanding a full investigation. The accuser, local cleric Khalid Chishti, was himself arrested for fabricating evidence in order to rid
the neighbourhood of Christians. On September 23, police officials stated they
had found no evidence against Rimsha Masih, who was released and given
state protection at an undisclosed location.
Members of the Ahmadi religious community continued to be a major target for
blasphemy prosecutions and subjected to specific anti-Ahmadi laws across
Pakistan. They faced increasing social discrimination as militant groups used
provisions of the law to prevent Ahmadis from “posing as Muslims,” forced the
demolition of Ahmadi mosques in Lahore, barred Ahmadis from using their
mosques in Rawalpindi, and vandalized Ahmadi graves across Punjab province.
In most instances, Punjab provincial officials supported militants’ demands
instead of protecting Ahmadis and their mosques and graveyards.
Violence against women and girls—including rape, “honor” killings, acid
attacks, domestic violence, and forced marriage—remained a serious problem.
Intimidation and threats against women and girls out in public increased in
major cities in 2012.
Freedom of Expression
At least eight journalists were killed in Pakistan during the year, including four
in May alone. On May 9 and 10 respectively, Tariq Kamal and Aurangzeb Tunio
were killed. On May 18, the bullet-riddled body of Express News correspondent
Razzaq Gul was found dumped in a deserted area near Turbat in Balochistan
province. Security agencies are suspected of involvement in his killing. On May
28, Abdul Qadir Hajizai was shot dead in Balochistan by armed men on a motorbike.
The Baloch Liberation Front reportedly claimed responsibility for his
killing. No one was held accountable in any of these cases.
A climate of fear impeded media coverage of the state security forces and militant
groups. Journalists rarely reported on human rights abuses by the military
in counterterrorism operations, and the Taliban and other armed groups regularly
threatened media outlets over their coverage.
In June, gunmen shot at the building of Aaj TV, a private Urdu-language news
channel, wounding two guards. The Pakistani Taliban claimed responsibility and threatened such attacks would continue if media outlets did not reflect the
Taliban’s priorities and positions in coverage. However, as has been the case
since the return to civilian rule in 2008, journalists vocally critical of the government
experienced less interference from elected officials than in previous years.
Judicial Activism and Independence
Pakistan’s judiciary continued to assert its independence from the government
in 2012. In December 2011, the judiciary began controversial hearings into the
so-called “Memogate” scandal investigating Husain Haqqani, Pakistan’s former
ambassador to the US on charges that he attempted to conspire against
Pakistan’s military in collusion with the US. The court notably failed to investigate
allegations from the same source that the head of the country’s dreaded
Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) had conspired to oust the elected government.
In June, the Supreme Court controversially fired Prime Minister Yusuf Raza Gilani
for refusing to sign a letter to Switzerland asking for an investigation into corruption
allegations against President Asif Zardari.
Despite the adoption of a National Judicial Policy in 2009, access to justice
remained abysmal and courts remained rife with corruption and incompetence.
Case backlogs remain huge at all levels. The judiciary’s use of suo motu proceedings—
acting on its own motions—was considered so excessive that the
International Commission of Jurists raised concerns about it.
While the Supreme Court was active in raising the issue of government abuses
in Balochistan, no high-level military officials were held accountable for them.
As has been the case since Pakistan’s independent judiciary was restored to
office in 2009, Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry and the provincial high courts
muzzled media criticism of the judiciary in 2012 through threats of contempt of
court proceedings. In October, both the Lahore and Islamabad high courts effectively
barred media from criticizing the judiciary or giving airtime to critics in the
aftermath of a multi-million dollar corruption scandal involving Arsalan Iftikhar,
the son of the Supreme Court chief justice.
Balochistan
The human rights crisis continued to worsen in the mineral-rich province of
Balochistan. Human Rights Watch recorded continued enforced disappearances
and killings of suspected Baloch militants and opposition activists by the military,
intelligence agencies, and the paramilitary Frontier Corps. Baloch nationalists
and other militant groups also stepped up attacks on non-Baloch civilians.
Pakistan’s military continued to publicly resist government reconciliation efforts
and attempts to locate ethnic Baloch who had been subject to “disappearances.”
Pakistan’s government appeared powerless to rein in the military’s
abuses. As a result, large numbers of Hazara community members sought asylum
abroad.
Militant Attacks and Counterterrorism
Suicide bombings, armed attacks, and killings by the Taliban, al Qaeda, and
their affiliates continued in 2012, targeting politicians, journalists, religious
minorities, and government security personnel. Many of these attacks were
claimed by groups such as the Haqqani network, the Lashkar-e-Jhangvi, and
other al Qaeda affiliates.
Security forces routinely violated basic rights in the course of counterterrorism
operations. Suspects were frequently detained without charge or were convicted
without a fair trial. Thousands of suspected members of al Qaeda, the Taliban,
and other armed groups—who were rounded up in a nationwide crackdown that
began in 2009 in Swat and the Federally Administered Tribal Areas—remained in
illegal military detention; few were prosecuted or produced before the courts.
The army continued to deny lawyers, relatives, independent monitors, and
humanitarian agency staff access to persons detained during military operations.
Terrorism suspects, particularly in the Swat Valley, reportedly died inexplicably
of “natural causes.” However, lack of access to the detainees made independent
verification of the cause of death impossible.
Aerial drone strikes by the US on suspected members of al Qaeda and the
Taliban in northern Pakistan continued in 2012, with some 44 strikes taking
place through early November. As in previous years, these strikes were often accompanied by claims from Pakistanis of large numbers of civilian casualties,
although lack of access to the conflict areas largely prevented independent verification.
Human Rights Defenders
Community-based human rights activists faced increased threats. In June, Asma
Jahangir, the country’s most prominent human rights defender, alleged that she
had discovered that an assassination attempt was being planned against her
from “the highest levels of the security establishment.” In the preceding
months, Jahangir had been at odds with the Pakistani military in a series of
high-profile standoffs, including over the military’s policies in Balochistan and
elsewhere.
Key International Actors
The US remained the largest donor of development and military aid to Pakistan,
but relations remained abysmal through much of 2012. The US rejected apologizing
for the “Salala Attack,” prompting Pakistan to ban the movement of NATO
supplies to Afghanistan through Pakistan. The routes were only reopened in July
after the US offered a formulation of regret that Pakistan found acceptable.
Major areas of bilateral tension remained, particularly Pakistan’s alleged persistent
support for the Haqqani network, a militant group that US officials
accused of targeting US troops in Afghanistan. In September, the US declared
the Haqqani network a terrorist body.
Pakistan and China continued to deepen extensive economic and political ties.
Historically tense relations between Pakistan and nuclear rival India showed
marked improvement in 2012. In September, the two countries signed landmark
trade and travel agreements.
The United Nations Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances
(WGEID) visited Pakistan in September and reported in preliminary findings that
there is “acknowledgment that enforced disappearances have occurred and still
occur in the country.”
Papua New Guinea
Papua New Guinea’s (PNG) significant oil, gas, and gold reserves are powering
strong economic growth. In the last four years, the country’s gross domestic
product has doubled. Yet poor governance and corruption prevent ordinary citizens
from benefitting from this wealth. Large-scale extractive projects have generated
environmental and human rights concerns that the government has
failed to address, and disputes over compensating landowners impacted by
these projects trigger protests and occasional violence.
One year after the United Nations special rapporteur on torture released a report
on PNG, the government has failed to adequately respond to his recommendations.
Police and security forces continue to commit abuses with impunity.
Violence against women is rampant.
In 2012, political turmoil paralyzed the government. Parliament re-elected Peter
O’Neill as prime minister after July’s general election—despite a December 2011
Supreme Court ruling that the change of government in August 2011, in which
parliamentarians first elected him prime minister, was unconstitutional. Former
Prime Minister Sir Michael Somare, the country’s dominant political figure for
more than 40 years, joined O’Neill’s coalition. While the new leadership has
made positive strides in instituting a more transparent political culture, much
work remains in reversing the legacy of corruption and unaccountable governance.
Extractive Industries
Extractive industries are PNG’s key economic driver. The US$15 billion
ExxonMobil Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) project, currently under construction, is
expected to begin output by 2014. LNG contractors had disputes in 2012 with
local landowners over land use compensation, as well as with workers protesting
benefits.
The Porgera gold mine, 95 percent owned by the Canadian firm Barrick Gold,
accounts for approximately 11 percent of the country’s GDP. A 2011 Human
Rights Watch report implicated the mine’s operators in serious abuses. The report documented gang rapes and other violent abuses at the mine site by private
security personnel. In January 2011, Barrick fired six employees for involvement
in, or failure to report, alleged sexual violence. In October 2012, Barrick
began implementing a remediation framework to provide compensation and
assistance to women who suffered sexual violence at the hands of its personnel.
The company said that the program would include financial reparations,
legal aid, and access to medical and psychological support services.
Torture and Other Police Abuse
Human Rights Watch has previously documented widespread abuse by PNG’s
police, including use of excessive force against demonstrators, torture, and sexual
violence, including against children.
In September, a police officer was suspended from duty and charged with
assault after attacking a school administrator for sending his son home from
school. In October, an officer received a 15-year prison sentence for sexually
assaulting a woman in police custody. That same month, another officer was
found guilty of sexually assaulting his daughter. Yet despite these signs of
progress, police impunity remains the norm.
Violence against Women and Girls
Women and girls are victims of rampant sexual violence in PNG. In March, the
UN special rapporteur on violence against women, Rashida Manjoo, visited the
country on a fact-finding mission and observed that violence against women “is
a pervasive phenomenon … in the home, the community and institutional settings.”
Manjoo also documented the government’s failure to hold perpetrators
to account. In June 2011, the draft Family Planning Law, which would criminalize
domestic violence, was sent to the attorney general’s office. More than a year
later, the bill had yet to be sent to parliament for a vote.
Corruption
Corruption remains a serious problem in PNG. In October, Task Force Sweep, the
government-appointed team tasked with investigating institutional graft, estimated that close to 3.8 billion PNG Kina (US$1.7 billion) from the country’s
budget was lost due to corruption between 2009 and 2011.
Earlier in May, the task force submitted its report on its seven-month investigation
into corruption across government agencies including the departments
of Health and National Planning and Monitoring. The report documented
20 politicians who had been referred to the ombudsman commission for further
investigation and 24 public servants who had been suspended for “facilitating
or benefiting from corruption.” Systemic graft continues to negatively impact the
country’s ability to provide basic social and economic services, such as infrastructure
improvements and access to health care and education.
Key International Actors
Australia is the country’s most important international partner and provided
over $500 million dollars in development assistance in 2012.
In September, after the Australian parliament approved legislation that authorizes
the transfer from Australian territory of “irregular maritime arrival”—
Australia and PNG agreed to reopen a processing center on Manus Island for
asylum seekers who arrive in Australia by boat. However, that agreement does
not release PNG from its obligations as a party to the 1951 Refugee Convention
for ensuring a fair refugee status determination process and respect for the principle
of non-refoulement (“non-return” to persecution), as well as being responsible
for humane treatment of migrants and durable solutions for refugees.
In October, UN High Commissioner for Refugees Antonio Guterres sent a letter
raising concerns about PNG’s capacity to act as a regional processing country
for asylum claims, including the absence of any national legal or regulatory
framework for asylum processing, and its failure to sign international treaties
against torture and in favor of protecting stateless people. At this writing, PNG
authorities expected the processing center on Manus Island to begin operating
in late 2012.
Philippines
The Philippines is a multi-party democracy with an elected president and legislature,
an active civil society sector, and a vibrant media. Two years into power,
President Benigno S. Aquino III continues to enjoy significant political capital
and goodwill, in part because the economy has performed better in the past two
years than during the administration of Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo. Aquino has
expressed his commitment to improve the human rights situation and to undo
the harm done to basic rights by his predecessor.
In 2012, the government pushed for legislation improving reproductive health
and domestic workers rights, and actively engaged international bodies in seeking
ways to improve the criminal justice system. In October, Congress passed
legislation criminalizing enforced disappearances, the first of its kind in Asia.
The Aquino administration has promised to expedite human rights investigations
and to improve the capacity of investigators, prosecutors, and the courts.
It has taken some action against high-profile officials implicated in abuses,
including ordering that charges be filed against a high-ranking military officer,
and a former governor implicated in the killing of a journalist. More importantly,
extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances have decreased since Aquino
took office in 2010. However, harassment and violence against political activists
and journalists continue. No one was convicted in any extrajudicial killing case
since Aquino became president.
Military and police personnel frequently commit serious human rights violations.
Armed opposition forces, including the communist New People’s Army
(NPA), the separatist Moro Islamic Liberation Front, and the Islamist extremist
group Abu Sayyaf, have often committed serious abuses against civilians. The
Philippine government and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front signed a “framework
agreement” in October, which promised an end to the four-decades-old
conflict in the southern region of Mindanao.
Free expression suffered a serious setback when Congress passed a law in
October that allows for stiff criminal sentences for online defamation.
Criminal Defamation and Media Freedom
While the Philippines has long had one of the world’s freest cyberspaces, in
2012 Congress passed the Cybercrime Prevention Act, which Aquino signed into
law on September 12. The law’s criminal penalties for online libel and other
restrictions are a serious threat to free expression in the Philippines. The new
law drastically increases the penalty for computer-related libel, with the minimum
punishment raised from six months to six years. In October, lawyers, journalists,
and bloggers filed several petitions before the Supreme Court against
the law. On October 9, the court issued a temporary restraining order suspending
its implementation for 120 days.
Media and human rights organizations have long urged the government to
decriminalize libel, which the United Nation Human Rights Committee (UNHRC)
views as a violation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(ICCPR), but bills for this proposal have languished in Congress over the years.
In October, Aquino said he “subscribes to the idea of decriminalizing libel.” The
bills were still in Congress at this writing.
Killings and harassment of journalists continued in 2012. According to media
groups, three journalists were murdered in 2012 because of their work, bringing
the total number to 10 since Aquino took office. Journalists also complained
about being physically assaulted by men allegedly working for local politicians
and of being threatened through text messages.
Extrajudicial Killings and Enforced Disappearances
The Aquino administration has failed to keep its commitment to hold those
responsible for extrajudicial killings to account. Since 2001, hundreds of leftist
activists, journalists, environmentalists, and clergy have been killed by alleged
members of the security forces. Local human rights organizations reported
approximately 114 cases of extrajudicial killings since Aquino came to office,
and 13 at this writing.
Despite strong evidence that military personnel have been involved, investigations
have stalled. No one was convicted for political killings in 2012. The government
has attempted to hold some high-profile suspects accountable. Retired Maj. Gen. Jovito Palparan, who is facing kidnapping and illegal detention
charges for the 2006 abduction of activists Sherlyn Cadapan and Karen
Empeño, went into hiding after the government announced plans in December
2011 to arrest him. Joel Reyes, a former governor of Palawan province and the
alleged mastermind in the January 2011 killing of journalist and environmentalist
Gerry Ortega, managed to leave the country.
Abuses by Paramilitary Forces
While the government claims that it has managed to reduce the number of “private
armies” controlled by politicians, it has resisted calls for dismantling government-
backed paramilitary forces.
Several extrajudicial killings have recently been attributed to members of the
Citizen Armed Force Geographical Units (CAFGU), which the military controls and
supervises, as well as the Special CAFGU Active Auxiliary, which the army trains
but companies hire to protect their operations. In October 2011, Aquino authorized
paramilitary forces to protect mining investments.
Aquino had at this writing still not fulfilled his promise during the 2010 election
campaign to revoke Executive Order 546, which local officials cite to justify the
provision of arms to their personal forces. Among those who benefited from this
order is the Ampatuan political clan in Maguindanao, whose senior members
are accused of the November 23, 2009 massacre of 58 supporters of a political
opponent and media workers in Maguindanao province. The trial continued in
2012. Although authorities have identified 197 suspects in the massacre, only
99 have been arrested (one of them died in jail and the court dropped charges
against another). Of the accused, only 78 have been indicted. Four of the 98
suspects still at large are soldiers; the rest are members of the Ampatuan militia.
Some witnesses have been killed, while families of the victims reported
being harassed and threatened in 2012.
Attacks on Environmentalists
Activists vocal in opposing mining and energy operations that they say threaten
the environment and will displace tribal communities from their land continued to face attack in 2012. Many mining investments in the Philippines are in areas
with large indigenous populations or controlled by tribal groups. In one case,
Margarito J. Cabal, 47, organizer of a group opposing a hydroelectric dam in
Bukidnon province, was gunned down on May 9. At this writing, no one had
been arrested for the killing in October 2011 of Italian priest Father Fausto
Tentorio in North Cotabato province, reportedly carried out by the Bagani (“tribal
warriors”) paramilitary group under military control. Tentorio was a longtime
advocate of tribal rights and opposed mining in the area.
Death Squad Killings
So-called death squad killings in Davao City, in the southern Philippines, and
other cities continued in 2012. In August, the Commission on Human Rights
released a “resolution” on its investigation of the so-called Davao Death Squad.
It affirmed reports of the targeted and systematic killings by the so-called Davao
Death Squad in Davao City, mostly of suspected criminals, many of them young
men and teenagers. The commission said it verified 206 out of an alleged 375
killings between 2005 and 2009 that it had previously listed. The commission
called for the investigation of local officials and police, which had not started at
this writing.
New People’s Army Abuses
The military and the communist New People’s Army continue to clash across the
Philippines, particularly in southern Mindanao. Peace talks that began in 1986
between the government and the National Democratic Front, the political arm of
the Communist Party of the Philippines, made no progress in 2012.
The NPA committed frequent abuses against civilians. On September 1, NPA
rebels lobbed a grenade at a military outpost in Paquibato, Davao City, but
instead hit and wounded civilians who were attending a nearby community fair.
The NPA continued to kill individuals it deemed to have committed “crimes
against the people” or the communist movement, among them tribal leader
Abantas Ansabo, who was shot dead in July in North Cotabato province. The NPA
claimed Ansabo was a paramilitary leader who committed abuses against local
residents. In March, the NPA killed Patrick Wineger, a North Cotabato business man of Swiss-Filipino descent, saying the victim had been engaged in “anticommunist
activities.”
Children and Armed Conflict
The NPA, the Moro Islamic Liberation Front and Abu Sayyaf allegedly continued
to recruit and use children within their forces. The Philippine army at times used
schools for military purposes, such as camping on school grounds and using
school facilities during civil-military operations, despite a Philippine law prohibiting
such activities. The latest reported incident of this violation occurred in
Davao City in October.
Domestic Workers
The Philippines’ ratification of the Domestic Workers Convention in September
will bring the groundbreaking international treaty into legal force, promising better
working conditions and key labor protections for millions of domestic workers
worldwide. At this writing, Aquino had not signed into law a bill promising
better wages and benefits, and more protection for the country’s estimated 2
million domestic workers.
Key International Actors
In July, the European Union and the Philippines strengthened their relationship
by signing a new Partnership and Cooperation Agreement that promises, among
other things, better cooperation on such issues as human rights, security,
migration, and energy.
The United States remained the Philippines’s most influential ally and, together
with Australia and Japan, the country’s largest bilateral donors.
The US military has access to Philippine territory and seas under a Visiting
Forces Agreement, and the two militaries held in October one of their annual
joint exercises. In August, the US delivered military hardware as part of the
Philippines’ efforts to modernize its military. The US has made some effort to
address the problem of extrajudicial killings in the Philippines by providing assistance to the Philippine Commission on Human Rights, training investigators
and prosecutors, and supporting judicial reform. Despite Philippine government
efforts to end restrictions, the US Congress continued in 2012 to withhold
$3 million in annual assistance to the Philippines military because of human
rights concerns.
In June, the European Parliament adopted a resolution calling on the Philippine
government to end impunity for extrajudicial killings, torture, and enforced disappearances.
The Philippines is a member of the UN Human Rights Council (HRC), but during
2012, as in previous years, it failed to take a strong or principled stand on key
votes. For example, it repeatedly abstained from voting on measures to improve
the human rights situation in Syria. In March, the Philippines voted against the
HRC resolution calling on the Sri Lankan government to take action to ensure
justice and promote national reconciliation following the country’s internal
armed conflict.
Singapore
The Singapore government in 2012 continued to sharply restrict basic rights to
free expression, peaceful assembly, and association. However, there were small
signs of progress in other areas, including changes in mandatory death penalty
laws, and limited improvements in protecting the rights of migrant workers and
combating human trafficking.
Freedom of Expression, Peaceful Assembly, and Association
Singapore’s constitution guarantees the rights to freedom of expression, peaceful
assembly, and association, with exceptions for broadly worded restrictions in
the name of security, public order, morality, and racial and religious harmony. A
network of restrictive government regulations still applies to broadcast and electronic
media, films, video, music, and sound recordings. In October, Singapore
banned a satirical film “Sex, Violence, Family Values,” on the grounds it offended
the country’s Indian population.
The Newspaper and Printing Presses Act requires that all newspapers renew
their registration annually, and allows the government to limit the circulation of
foreign newspapers it believes “engage in the domestic politics of Singapore.”
The two corporations that dominate media regularly tow a pro-government line:
MediaCorp, which is owned by a government investment company and dominates
broadcasting, and Singapore Press Holdings Limited (SPH), a private company
that dominates print media. The government must approve and can
remove SPH shareholders, who in turn have the authority to hire and fire all
directors and staff.
Outdoor gatherings of five or more persons still require police permits. The citystate’s
Speakers Corner—where people may demonstrate, perform, and hold
exhibitions—remains the only outdoor space where uncensored speech is
allowed in the country.
The Registrar of Societies must approve associations of 10 or more members,
and can deny approval if it deems a body “prejudicial to public peace, welfare
or good order.”
The Singaporean government and senior government officials have frequently
brought charges of “scandalizing the court,” criminal and civil defamation, and
sedition to silence and even bankrupt its critics.
In July 2012, the attorney general’s chambers wrote to Alex Au, a prominent
blogger and gay rights activist, demanding that he take down and apologize for
a June post in his Yawning Bread blog that criticized the judiciary for showing
deference to the executive. Au removed the post. In February, after being threatened,
prominent domestic blog site TR Emeritus, apologized to Prime Minister
Lee Hsien Loong for suggesting nepotism was a factor in Lee’s wife obtaining a
position to head a state-linked firm.
Criminal Justice System
Singapore’s Internal Security Act (ISA) and Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions)
Act permit the authorities to arrest and detain suspects for virtually unlimited
periods of time without charge or judicial review. In September 2011,
Singapore’s Home Affairs Ministry said threats of subversion, espionage, terrorism,
and racial and religious extremism keep the long-criticized ISA “relevant.”
The Misuse of Drugs Act permits the authorities to confine suspected drug users
in “rehabilitation” centers for up to three years without trial. Second-time
offenders face prison terms and may be caned.
On November 14, 2012, Singapore’s parliament passed new laws authorizing
incremental changes in mandatory death penalty provisions that affect some 20
drug-related and intentional murder offenses. In drug cases, judges may drop
the mandatory death sentence requirement and opt instead for life in prison
with caning if two conditions are met: the accused must have functioned only as
a courier, and either meaningfully cooperated with the Central Narcotics Bureau
or have a “mental disability that impairs appreciation of his own actions.”
However, a new section of the Misuse of Drugs Act limits judicial discretion by
stating that the public prosecutor has “sole discretion” to determine whether a
person has substantively assisted the Central Narcotics Bureau in disrupting
drug trafficking activities. Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Home Affairs
Teo Chee Han has defended mandatory death sentences in drug-related cases,
citing what he said is their known deterrent effect.
Parliament also passed less controversial amendments to the criminal law,
which remove mandatory death sentences for murderers who had “no outright
intention to kill.” Courts may instead choose to impose life imprisonment.
All future death penalty cases will be automatically reviewed, and the new laws
provide that all eligible existing death penalty cases will be reviewed for re-sentencing.
There are some 35 inmates currently on death row, but all executions
have been on hold since July 2011.
Judicial caning is a mandatory punishment for medically fit males between the
ages of 16 and 50 who have been sentenced to prison for a range of violent and
non-violent crimes, including drug trafficking, rape, and immigration offenses. A
sentencing official may also order caning in cases involving some 30 other
crimes. The United States State Department reported that in 2011 “2,318 convicted
persons were sentenced to judicial caning, and 98.9 percent of caning
sentences were carried out.” During its United Nations Human Rights Council
(HRC) Universal Periodic Review (UPR) in 2011, Singapore rejected all recommendations
designed to eliminate caning.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Although the government has said it will not enforce the law, penal code section
377A still criminalizes sexual acts between consenting adult men. On August 21,
2012, the Court of Appeals found that legitimate grounds existed for a constitutional
challenge to section 377A, and referred the case to the High Court. Sexual
acts between women are not criminalized.
There was an unprecedented turnout on June 30 for Singapore’s Pink Dot fourth
annual festival, held at the Speakers Corner, supporting “freedom to love.”
However, lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) groups continue to report that LGBT people face a range of harassment and abuses, including physical
assault.
Rights of Migrant Workers and Human Trafficking
Despite partial reforms introduced in recent years, including capping recruitment
fees at two months’ salary, Singapore’s 208,000 foreign domestic workers
are still excluded from the Employment Act and key labor protections, such as
limits on daily work hours.
A March 2012 reform guaranteeing domestic workers who arrive on new contracts
after January 1, 2013, a weekly rest day rather than the current monthly
day off, contains a provision permitting employers to give domestic workers
monetary compensation in lieu of rest so long as the worker agrees. Given the
power imbalance, there is significant risk that an employer will coerce a worker
to sign away their rest days.
In 2012, at least 11 foreign domestic workers fell to their deaths, many while
washing windows or hanging laundry from apartments in high-rise buildings. In
June, the government responded by strengthening safety requirements so that
domestic workers only clean windows in the presence of their employers and if
window bars have been installed and locked. In at least one case, an employer
was fined S$5000 (US$4093) for negligence.
Foreign workers in Singapore, both men and women, are subject to forced labor
through debts owed to recruitment agents, non-payment of wages, restrictions
on movements, confiscated passports, and physical and sexual abuse.
Although the government is still not in compliance with minimum standards for
trafficking elimination, it has demonstrated some improvement in prevention
and protection, but prosecutorial efforts have been weak.
A government-mandated standard contract for migrant workers does not
address issues such as long work hours, poor living conditions, and enforced
confinement. Instead of guaranteeing one day off per month and a set number
of rest hours per day, it makes such breaks a matter of negotiation between
employer and employee. It also fails to provide protections against denial of
annual or medical leave.
Singapore is one of only nine countries that did not vote for passage of
International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention No. 189 on Decent Work for
Domestic Workers. It has not ratified the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders in Singapore risk being fined, imprisoned, bankrupted,
and banned from traveling outside the country without government approval.
In September, opposition leader and human rights activist Chee Soon Juan
announced that former Prime Ministers Lee Kuan Yew and Goh Chok Tong had
accepted his SG$30,000 ($24,550) offer to settle his debts with them and annul
his bankruptcy resulting from politically motivated defamation proceedings. The
annulment will allow Chee to travel overseas and to stand in the 2016 parliamentary
elections. However, in October, the High Court dismissed an application
by Chee and three other defendants seeking a hearing to appeal their conviction
for illegal assembly in 2008.
Members of Singaporeans for Democracy (SFD), a human rights organization,
voted in June to disband due to the onerous government regulations imposed
on its political advocacy and activities.
At its 2011 UPR, Singapore rejected the recommendation from other countries
that it accept a visit by the UN special rapporteur on the situation of human
rights defenders.
Key International Actors
The US and Singapore maintain strong military ties, including bilateral access
agreements that allow the US to use a Singapore naval base, and to operate resupply
vessels, dock its aircraft carriers, and maintain a regional logistical command
unit. Discussion of Singapore’s poor human rights record was not part of
the bilateral agenda.
Singapore continued to play a leading role in the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN), but did little to ensure the regional body engaged meaningfully with civil society organizations, particularly during development of the
ASEAN Human Rights Declaration, adopted in November.
Sri Lanka
The Sri Lankan government in 2012 continued its assault on democratic space
and failed to take any meaningful steps towards providing accountability for war
crimes committed by either side during the internal armed conflict that ended in
2009.
The government targeted civil society through threats, surveillance, and clampdowns
on activities and free speech. Statements by government officials and
government-controlled media named and threatened human rights defenders
who called for accountability for wartime abuses or criticized other government
policies. Local activists expressed deep concern about the security of their staff
and the people they assist.
Overly broad detention powers remained in place under various laws and regulations.
Several thousand people continued to be detained without charge or
trial. State security forces committed arbitrary arrests and torture against ethnic
minority Tamils, including repatriated Sri Lankan nationals allegedly linked to
the defeated Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE). The Tamil population in the
north benefitted from humanitarian groups having greater access to the area,
but the government did not take adequate steps to normalize their living conditions.
President Mahinda Rajapaksa and his brothers continued to accumulate power
at the expense of democratic institutions. Calls to restore the independence of
the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) and other government commissions
that Rajapaksa marginalized via the Eighteenth Amendment to the constitution,
which passed in 2010, went unheeded.
Accountability
Sri Lanka made no progress in 2012 toward ensuring justice for the victims of
numerous violations of human rights and the laws of war committed by both
sides during the 26-year-long conflict between the government and the LTTE.
These violations include the government’s indiscriminate shelling of civilians and the LTTE’s use of civilians as “human shields” in the final months of the
conflict, which ended in May 2009.
The government continued to ignore the 2011 report of the panel of experts
appointed by United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, which recommended
establishing an independent international mechanism to monitor the
government’s implementation of the panel recommendations, conduct an independent
investigation, and collect and safeguard evidence.
In March 2012, the UN Human Rights Council (HRC) adopted a resolution finding
that the government’s Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation Commission (LLRC) did
not adequately address serious allegations of violations of international law,
and called on Sri Lanka to take all necessary steps to ensure justice and
accountability. It requested that the government expeditiously present a comprehensive
plan detailing the steps it had taken to implement the LLRC’s recommendations
and to address accountability.
The Sri Lankan government responded by publicly threatening human rights
defenders who had advocated for the resolution. In July, the government
announced that it had adopted an action plan to implement LLRC recommendations.
The plan vaguely calls for the government to look into civilian deaths and
prosecute any wrongdoers. It sets out a 12-month timeframe to conclude disciplinary
inquiries and 24 months for prosecutions. 􀀀􀀀But the government proposal
merely leaves responsibility for investigations with the military and police,
the entities responsible for the abuses, using processes lacking in transparency.
There has been no information regarding actions of the special army courts of
inquiry, supposedly established in 2012 to look into allegations of war crimes.
Despite strong evidence that government forces were involved in the executionstyle
slayings of 17 aid workers and 5 students in separate incidents in 2006, no
one was arrested for the crimes. Other recommendations, such as the need to
restore the independence of the police and remove them from the purview of
the Ministry of Defence, were tasked to parliamentary select committees that
had yet to be established at this writing.
During its Universal Periodic Review (UPR) before the HRC in November 2012,
the Sri Lankan government rejected 100 recommendations from member states,
including some that have a direct impact on accountability.
Arbitrary Detention, Torture, and Enforced Disappearances
The police and security forces continue to enjoy overly broad detention powers.
The president issued monthly decrees granting the armed forces search and
detention powers, effectively granting police powers to the army.
Despite the end of the formal state of emergency in 2011, the government continued
to hold without trial several thousand people initially detained under the
emergency regulations. In spite of public commitments, the government also
failed to publish comprehensive lists of the names of the detained, as well as
places of detentions.
The government released most of the more than 11,000 suspected LTTE members
detained at the end of the war and announced plans to prosecute 180 of
those still detained.
Local rights groups reported arbitrary arrests, new enforced disappearances,
abductions, and killings in the north and the east in 2012. The government lifted
its restrictions on travel to the north, although it maintained a high security
presence. Tamils with alleged links to the LTTE were increasingly at risk of arbitrary
arrests and torture. In April, nearly 220 Tamil men and women in the
Trincomalee area were arrested and held for several days without charge in military
detention camps.
Tamils who returned to Sri Lanka, including deported asylum seekers, reported
being detained and accused of having links to the LTTE or taking part in antigovernment
activities abroad. A number reported being tortured by the Central
Intelligence Department and other security forces. On the basis of these reports,
courts in the United Kingdom granted injunctions to stop the deportation of
more than 30 Tamil asylum seekers.
The Prevention of Terrorism Act remained in place, giving police broad powers
over suspects in custody.
Attacks on Civil Society
Free expression remained under assault in 2012. Government officials and
state-owned media publicly threatened civil society and human rights activists
who spoke in favor of March’s HRC resolution. Their names and faces were publicized
and they were branded as traitors. The government took no action
against a cabinet minister, Mervyn de Silva, who threatened activists.
Media reported increased surveillance and clampdowns on free speech. In June
2012, the Criminal Investigation Department raided the offices of the Sri Lanka
Mirror, a news website, and the Sri Lanka X News website of the opposition
United National Party. The authorities confiscated computers and documents
and arrested nine people on the grounds that the websites were “propagating
false and unethical news on Sri Lanka.” They were charged under article 120 of
the penal code, which imposes up to two years in prison for those who “excite
or attempt to excite feelings of disaffection to the president or to the government.”
The nine were released on bail the day after their arrest.
The government shut down at least five news websites critical of the government
in 2012 and put in place onerous registration requirements and fees for all
web-based media services. Many news websites moved their host proxies
abroad to avoid the censorship. Frederica Jansz, then-editor of the anti-government
Sunday Leader newspaper, reported that Gotabhaya Rajapaksa threatened
her in July, when she criticized his decision to reroute a government plane in
order to pick up a puppy from Switzerland. The paper retracted the story in
November. There were reports of other independent or outspoken members of
the media being pushed out of their positions due to political pressure.
Unknown assailants gunned down the previous Sunday Leader editor, Lasantha
Wickrematunge, in broad daylight near a police station in 2009. No investigation
has been conducted into his death.
There were no further developments in the case of Prageeth Ekneligoda, a contributor
to Lanka E-news, who disappeared on January 24, 2010. Attorney
General Mohan Peiris, summoned to testify in Colombo, retracted a previous
statement where he had claimed that Ekneligoda had not disappeared but had
willingly moved abroad.
In September, elections for local provincial councils in the east were marred by
allegations of violence and vote-rigging.
Internally Displaced Persons and Militarization
The last of the nearly 300,000 civilians illegally confined in military-controlled
detention centers after the war—including Menik Farm near Vavuniya, which was
closed in September 2012—moved back into communities, although not necessarily
to their home areas. Tens of thousands of persons still live with host families
or in temporary accommodation, and several thousand are not able to
return home because their home areas have not been de-mined.
Although the government claimed to have considerably decreased its military
presence in the north and east, credible accounts indicate that military personnel
still frequently intervene in civilian life. A Defence Ministry video on the
north and east showed the military involved in numerous civilian activities,
including organizing school cricket competitions and celebrations in temples.
Soldiers commit abuses against soldiers with impunity. Fishermen and farmers
complained about the armed forces continuing to encroach into their coastal
areas and onto their land, impacting their livelihoods.
Key International Actors
Sri Lanka’s government faced mounting pressure from key international actors
after it failed to take meaningful action on accountability issues. At the March
HRC session, the government tried to block the council from adopting a resolution
focusing on accountability. The resolution, which passed with 24 votes in
favor, 15 against, and 8 abstentions, effectively overturned a May 2009 council
resolution that ignored serious human rights concerns during the Sri Lankan
war. Member countries voting for the resolution included Nigeria, Uruguay, and
India, which faces pressure from Tamil Nadu state and civil society activists
demanding accountability. The resolution calls on the UN Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) to report back in March 2013.
India continued to press the Sri Lankan government to address allegations of
human rights violations, implement the LLRC recommendations, and initiate a
reconciliation process with the Tamil minority.
China has emerged in recent years as an important ally of Sri Lanka’s government.
In addition to investing heavily in developing Sri Lankan infrastructure,
China had several high-level diplomatic and military missions to the country
during the year and vocally opposed the HRC resolution on Sri Lanka.

Thailand
The government of Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra, which won a landslide
victory in July 2011 elections, has not yet addressed Thailand’s many serious
human rights problems, including lack of accountability for the 2010 political
violence, abuses in southern border provinces, free speech restrictions, and violations
of refugee and migrant rights.
Accountability for Political Violence
At least 90 people died and more than 2,000 were injured during violent political
confrontations from March to May 2010 as a result of unnecessary or excessive
use of lethal force by Thai security forces, as well as attacks by armed elements
operating in tandem with the United Front for Democracy against
Dictatorship (UDD), known as the “Red Shirts.”
On September 17, 2012, the independent Truth for Reconciliation Commission of
Thailand (TRCT) presented its final report, which blamed both sides for the 2010
violence but indicated that the security forces were responsible for the majority
of deaths and injuries. The commission urged the Yingluck government to
“address legal violations by all parties through the justice system, which must
be fair and impartial.”
The results of the first post-mortem inquest delivered by the Bangkok Criminal
Court on September 17, 2012, found that UDD supporter Phan Khamkong was
shot dead by soldiers during a military operation near Bangkok’s Ratchaprarop
Airport Link station on the night of May 14, 2010. However, in what appeared to
be a response to pressure from Army Commander-in-Chief Gen. Prayuth Chanocha,
the government adopted a policy that soldiers should be treated as witnesses
in the investigations and protected from criminal prosecution.
At the same time, the status of investigations into alleged crimes by UDD-linked
“Black Shirt” militants remains unclear. A number of those accused of violence
against soldiers, police officers, and anti-UDD groups were released on bail with
the expectation they would not be prosecuted. The UDD leadership and their
supporters, including those holding positions in the government and the parliament, dismissed the TRCT findings and asserted that there were no armed elements
within the UDD during the events of 2010.
The Yingluck government provided reparations to all those harmed by the 2010
violence. However, many victims and their families said they feared that financial
compensation has been offered as a substitute to full investigations and
commitment to bring perpetrators of violence to justice. Early drafts of a
National Reconciliation Bill submitted to parliament in May 2012 by the ruling
Pheu Thai Party and its coalition partners contained a proposal for a broad
amnesty for leaders and supporters of all political movements, politicians, government
officials, and members of the security forces involved in the 2010 violence.
On November 24, 2012, police deployed teargas, shields, and batons to push
back anti-government Pitak Siam protesters, who charged at police lines and
drove trucks through barricades. At least 52 protesters and 29 police officers
were injured in the clashes.
Freedom of Expression and the Media
According to a study by the National Human Rights Commission of Thailand, the
number of arrests and convictions for lese majeste (insulting the monarchy)
offenses declined significantly since Prime Minister Yingluck came to office in
2011. On October 31, 2012, the Bangkok Criminal Court acquitted Red Shirt supporter
Surapak Phuchaisaeng of lese majeste charges, ruling that the prosecutor
had failed to prove Surapak’s computer was used for posting on Facebook messages
deemed insulting to the royal family. Arrested in September 2011,
Surapak had been the first lese majeste case brought by the Yingluck government.
However, Thai authorities continue to use the lese majeste statute in article 112
of the penal code, and the Computer Crimes Act, to suppress and prosecute perceived
critics of the monarchy.
On October 10, 2012, the Constitutional Court ruled that the restriction of freedom
of expression and the penalty for lese majeste offenses were constitutional.
Since December 2011, Thai authorities have blocked more than 5,000 alleged
lese majeste webpages.
Other persons charged with lese majeste offenses were denied bail and
remained in prison for many months, awaiting trial. In most cases, their trials
resulted in harsh sentences. Amphon Tangnoppakul, who was sentenced in
November 2011 to 20 years in prison for sending four lese majeste SMS messages
in 2010, died of cancer in prison on May 8, 2012.
Lese majeste prosecutions also target intermediaries, leading to widespread
self-censorship in discussion about the monarchy. On May 30, 2012, the
Bangkok Criminal Court sentenced Chiranuch Premchaiporn, website manager
of the well-known online news portal Prachatai, to a suspended one-year prison
term for lese majeste statements posted by others on the Prachatai webboard.
Labor activist and magazine editor Somyos Pruksakasemsuk was arrested in
April 2011 and charged with lese majeste in connection with articles written by
someone else in his Voice of Taksin magazine. He was denied bail eight times
during the course of his pre-trial detention, shackled, and compelled to appear
in hearings in four different provinces, despite the fact that witnesses were resident
in Bangkok. At this writing, the verdict was scheduled for December 19.
Deputy Prime Minister Chalerm Yubamrung and military commanders have publicly
and repeatedly warned human rights activists, academics, and political
movements from about calling for the reform of lese majeste laws.
Violence and Human Rights Abuses in Southern Border
Provinces
Separatist insurgents in the network of National Revolution Front-Coordinate
(BRN-Coordinate) continued in 2012 to target civilians in bomb attacks, roadside
ambushes, drive-by shootings, and assassinations.
Civilians make up more than 90 percent of the more than 5,000 deaths in the
southern border provinces since January 2004. Insurgent groups have used violence
to intimidate and ultimately drive out ethnic Thai Buddhists in Pattani, Yala, and Narathiwat, as well as to discredit Thai authorities for being unable to
protect citizens and to keep ethnic Malay Muslims under control.
The Yingluck government initiated a government-funded compensation scheme
for Malay Muslim victims of abuses committed by the security forces. However,
Thai security forces faced few or no consequences for extrajudicial killings, torture,
enforced disappearances, and other abuses.
Local human rights groups reported the “disappearance” of Nasulan Pi in
Narathiwat’s Joh Airong district on January 17, 2012, after two armed security
personnel forced him into their pickup truck and drove away.
After former Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra and Malaysia’s Prime Minister
Najib Razak pressured exiled separatist leaders to enter negotiations with Thai
officials, insurgents retaliated by attacking the commercial districts of Yala and
Songkhla with car bombs on March 31, 2012. At least 16 civilians were killed
and more than 400 wounded.
Insurgents continued to burn down government-run schools and attack teachers
whom they accused of representing the ideology of the Thai Buddhist state. On
November 22, 2012, insurgents shot dead Nanthana Kaewjan, a teacher from
Pattani’s Ban Thakamsam school. Since January 2004, insurgents have killed
154 teachers from government-run schools. Insurgents also recruited children
from private Islamic schools to participate in armed hostilities and perform secondary
tasks such as distributing separatist leaflets. They also used some private
Islamic schools to assemble bombs.
Reacting to domestic and international concerns, the Fourth Region Army
Commander Lt. Gen. Udomchai Thammasarorat ordered security units to stop
using government schools as barracks.
In 2012, insurgents admitted that they planted antipersonnel landmines in and
near rubber plantations owned by Thai Buddhists to force them to relinquish
land ownership.
Anti-Narcotics Policy
While vowing to respect human rights and due process when implementing antinarcotics
policy, the Yingluck government still denied any official involvement in
the more than 2,800 extrajudicial killings that accompanied then-Prime Minister
Thaksin Shinawatra’s 2003 “War on Drugs.”
On March 14, 2012, the parliamentary Police Affairs Committee found that police
officers from the Sakon Nakhon provincial anti-drug squad used excessive force
in the 2011 fatal shooting of Pairote Saengrit, and had planted a bag of methamphetamine
on his body after his death.
After a seven-year trial, the Bangkok Criminal Court found five police officers
from Kalasin province guilty on July 30, 2012, for the murder of Kiettisak
Thitboonkrong. Kiettisak’s case was the first prosecution of more than 20 extrajudicial
killings in Kalasin province allegedly committed by this group of police
officers from 2003 to 2005. However, the judge released the convicted officers
on bail pending the outcome of their appeal, raising serious concerns about the
safety of witnesses.
As of November 2012, the Yingluck government had sent more than 500,000
drug users to so-called rehabilitation centers, mostly run by the military and the
Interior Ministry, where the ostensible treatment is based on military-style physical
exercise. Routinely detained in prison prior to compulsory rehabilitation,
detainees get little or no medical assistance for drug withdrawal symptoms.
Human Rights Defenders
Since 2001, more than 20 environmentalists and human rights defenders have
been killed in Thailand. Investigations into the killings have frequently suffered
from shoddy police work, the failure of the Justice Ministry to provide adequate
protection for witnesses, and political interference in law enforcement efforts.
In the southern border provinces, Malay Muslim human rights defenders, paralegals,
and student activists have often been profiled by security agencies as
“insurgent sympathizers” and subjected to surveillance, arbitrary arrest, and
detention.
Refugees, Asylum Seekers, and Migrant Workers
Thailand is not a party to the 1951 Refugee Convention, and has no law that recognizes
refugee status. Asylum seekers and refugees who are arrested often
face long periods of detention until they are accepted for resettlement or agree
to be repatriated at their own expense.
Burma’s President Thein Sein called for Burmese exiles to return as his government
signed preliminary ceasefire agreements with nearly all armed ethnic
groups. But enormous obstacles remain, including a lack of firm political settlements,
landmines, and still-blocked access of the office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to the Burma side of the border.
Prime Minister Yingluck publicly assured that, regardless of what appeared to
be positive developments in Burma, the 140,000 refugees living in camps on
the Thai-Burmese border would not be forced to return home.
Thai authorities continued to implement a policy of intercepting and pushing
back boats carrying ethnic Rohingya Muslims from Burma and Bangladesh
despite allegations that such practices led to hundreds of deaths in 2008 and
2009.
Thai labor laws afforded migrant workers little protection in 2012. A migrant
worker registry and “nationality verification” scheme provides legal documentation
for workers, but does little to counter the impunity with which employers
violate such workers’ rights. Migrant workers remain extremely vulnerable to
labor exploitation, physical and sexual violence, and trafficking. Male migrants
in particular face being trafficked onto fishing boats.
In October 2012, factory owners and local officials prevented thousands of
Burmese workers living in the border town of Mae Sot from leaving the area to
search for work elsewhere in Thailand, despite possessing legal work permits
that allowed them to do so.
After receiving strong criticisms at home and abroad, Labor Minister Padermchai
Sasomsap in July 2012 scrapped his plan to send home migrant workers who
are three to four months pregnant.
Key International Actors
The United Nations, United States, Australia, European Union, Switzerland, and
Norway expressed strong support for political reconciliation and greater human
rights protections in Thailand in 2012, calling on the government and all other
conflicting political factions to engage in dialogue and refrain from using violence.
On September 18, 2012, the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights
Navi Pillay urged the Yingluck government to act on the TRCT’s recommendations
by holding those responsible for the 2010 violence to account and
addressing reforms identified by the omission.
Vietnam
The Vietnam government systematically suppresses freedom of expression,
association, and peaceful assembly, and persecutes those who question government
policies, expose official corruption, or call for democratic alternatives
to one-party rule. Police harass and intimidate activists and their family members.
Authorities arbitrarily arrest activists, hold them incommunicado for long
periods without access to legal counsel or family visits, subject them to torture,
and prosecute them in politically pliant courts that mete out long prison sentences
for violating vaguely worded national security laws.
In 2012, police used excessive force in response to public protests over evictions,
confiscation of land, and police brutality.
Land confiscation continues to be a flashpoint issue, with local farmers and villagers
facing unjust confiscation of their lands by government officials and private
sector projects. Those who resist face abuses from local authorities.
Following a series of arrests of well-connected tycoons and managers of stateowned
companies, the Party Central Committee held its sixth plenum in
October. During the session, factions led by Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung
and by Communist Party Secretary General Nguyen Phu Trong and President
Truong Tan Sang vied for control of the state’s political and economic machinery
in a still ongoing power struggle. However, neither faction has voiced or otherwise
demonstrated a commitment to protect human rights.
Vietnam has stated that it will seek a seat on the United Nations Human Rights
Council (HRC) for the 2014-2016 term.
Freedom of Expression, Assembly, and Information
On the surface, private expression, public journalism, and even political speech
in Vietnam show signs of enhanced freedom. This trend was especially evident
in a surge of criticism of Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung during the course of
the 6th Plenum of the Party Central Committee in October, and a high-profile call
for his resignation issued from the floor of the National Assembly in November.
However, there continues to be a subcurrent of state-sponsored repression and
persecution of individuals whose speech crosses boundaries and addresses
sensitive issues such as criticizing the state’s foreign policies in regards to
China or questioning the monopoly power of the communist party.
The government does not allow independent or privately owned media outlets
to operate, and exerts strict control over radio and TV stations, and publications.
Criminal penalties apply to those who disseminate materials deemed to
oppose the government, threaten national security, reveal state secrets, or promote
“reactionary” ideas. The government blocks access to politically sensitive
websites and requires internet cafe owners to monitor and store information
about users’ online activities.
In April, the government revealed a draft Decree on Management, Provision, and
Use of Internet Services and Information on the Network. As drafted, the decree
will outlaw posting internet content that opposes the Vietnam government,
national security, public order, customs and traditions, national unity, offends
the reputation of an individual or group, or transgresses a number of other illdefined
areas of concern. The decree would also require domestic and foreign
companies to filter whatever content the government finds objectionable. The
National Assembly had not yet begun considering the draft at this writing.
In September, Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung ordered the Ministry of Public
Security to target blogs and websites not approved by the authorities, and to
punish those who create them.
On August 5, authorities forcibly dispersed peaceful marchers in Hanoi protesting
Chinese foreign policies on sovereignty over the Paracels and Spratly
islands. Authorities temporarily detained more than 20 protesters for disrupting
public order. Yet on the same day, authorities did not interfere with over 100
people on bicycles participating in Vietnam’s first public demonstration for lesbian,
gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) rights.
Repression of Rights Activists
During 2012, the Vietnam government used vaguely defined articles in the penal
code that criminalize exercise of civil and political rights to send at least 33 activists to prison and arrest at least another 34 political and religious advocates.
At least 12 other rights campaigners detained in 2011 were still being
held, awaiting trial at this writing.
Rights activists continue to suffer from intrusive police surveillance, interrogation,
monetary fines, and restrictions on domestic and international travel.
Police use temporary house arrest to prevent them from participating in protests
or attending trials of other bloggers and activists. In a number of instances in
2012, unidentified thugs have assaulted dissidents and police have done little
or nothing to investigate.
In a prominent, internationally monitored trial that lasted only several hours on
September 24, a court convicted the country’s three most prominent dissident
bloggers—Nguyen Van Hai (also known as Dieu Cay), Ta Phong Tan, and Phan
Thanh Hai (also known as Anhbasg)—for violating article 88 of the penal code
(conducting propaganda against the state). The court sentenced them to 12, 10,
and 4 years in prison respectively. All are founding members of the Club for Free
Journalists. United States President Barack Obama, US Secretary of State Hillary
Clinton, and European Union High Representative Catherine Ashton have all
raised concerns about their cases on different occasions during the year.
Authorities also widely used article 88 to silence other bloggers and rights
activists. In October, musicians Tran Vu Anh Binh and Vo Minh Tri (also known
as Viet Khang) were sentenced to a total of 10 years in prison for writing songs
critical of the regime. In August, bloggers Dinh Dang Dinh and Le Thanh Tung
were sentenced to six and five years in prison respectively. In June and July,
labor rights activist Phan Ngoc Tuan in Ninh Thuan province and land rights
activists Nguyen Kim Nhan, Dinh Van Nhuong, and Do Van Hoa in Bac Giang
province were sentenced to a total of eighteen-and-a-half years in prison for
conducting propaganda against the state for storing and distributing prodemocracy
documents and leaflets. In March and May, five Catholic activists—
Vo Thi Thu Thuy, Nguyen Van Thanh, Dau Van Duong, Tran Huu Duc, and Chu
Manh Son—were jailed for a total of 17 years and 9 months for distributing prodemocracy
leaflets, reduced to the total of 16 years and 3 months on appeal.
In March, the People’s Court of Go Dau district in Tay Ninh province sentenced
rights activists Ho Thi Hue and Nguyen Bich Thuy to three years each in prison
for participating in protests against land confiscation in Tay Ninh province. Their
sentences were reduced to two years each on appeal in August. In April and
June, land right activists Nguyen Van Tu in Can Tho and Nguyen Van Tuan in Ba
Ria-Vung Tau were sentenced to two and a half years and four years respectively
in prison for “abusing rights to democracy and freedom to infringe upon the
interests of the State.” Both were accused of helping local people file petitions
against land confiscation. Nguyen Van Tuan’s sentence was reduced to two
years on appeal in August.
Freedom of Religion
The government restricts religious freedom through legislation, registration
requirements, and harassing and intimidating unsanctioned religious groups,
including independent Protestant home churches, and individuals and congregations
of Hoa Hao Buddhists, Cao Dai, the Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam,
and Falun Gong.
Religious groups must register with the government and conduct their operations
under the direction of government-controlled management boards. The
authorities do generally allow government-affiliated churches and pagodas to
hold worship services. However, local authorities routinely harass and intimidate
religious communities, especially unregistered ones, when they take up
politically disfavored issues including land rights and freedom of expression;
when they are were popular among groups that the government considers to be
potentially disaffected, such as ethnic minorities with a history of resistance
against central rule and assimilation policies; or when they simply refuse to
conform to state-sanctioned religious organization.
In February and March, Phu Yen province police arrested at least 18 members of
a Buddhism-based religious group that refers to itself as the Council for Public
Law and Affairs of Bia Mountain. They face charges under penal code article 79
for “activities aiming to overthrow the people’s administration.” At this writing,
the 18 members of the group were in police detention in Phu Yen province,
awaiting trial.
In Gia Lai province in March, Pastor Nguyen Cong Chinh was sentenced to 11
years in prison for “undermining national unity” in violation of article 87 of the
penal code. The same month, eight ethnic Hmong Protestant activists from
Muong Nhe district in Dien Bien were each given sentences of between two to
two-and-a-half years in jail for “disrupting security” after they participated in a
mass protest in Muong Nhe in May 2011.
In April and June, three other Protestant activists, Kpuil Mel, Kpuil L􀀀, and Nay Y
Nga, were sentenced to a total of 22 years in prison for transgressing article 87.
All three were accused of practicing Dega Protestantism, which is outlawed by
the state.
In May, three ethnic Montagnard activists, Runh, Jonh, and Byuk, were arrested
in Gia Lai for being affiliated with the unregistered Ha Mon Catholic group and
charged with “undermining national unity” according to article 87.
Police in An Giang prevented members of the unregistered Pure Hoa Hao
Buddhist Association from gathering to commemorate key events, including the
anniversary of the disappearance of the group’s founder Huynh Phu So. Hoa
Hao activist Bui Van Tham was sentenced to 30 months in prison for “resisting
officials in the performance of official duties.”
In June and July, local authorities sought to prevent Catholic priests from performing
masses at the private homes of Catholic followers in Con Cuong and
Quy Chau districts in Nghe An province. In both areas, local Catholics have filed
multiple requests to authorities to form and register new parishes without success.
Criminal Justice System
Police brutality, including torture in detention and fatal beatings, continued to
be reported in all regions of the country in 2012. At least 15 people died in
police custody in the first 9 months of the year, according to state-controlled
media.
Vietnamese courts lack independence since they are firmly controlled by the
government and the Vietnam Communist party, and trials of political and religious dissidents fail to meet international fair trial standards. Police intimidate,
and in some cases detain, family members and friends who try to attend trials
or publicly display dissenting views during court proceedings.
Vietnamese law continues to authorize arbitrary “administrative detention”
without trial. Under Ordinance 44 (2002) and Decree 76 (2003) persons deemed
threats to national security or public order can be placed under house arrest,
involuntarily committed to mental health institutions, or detained at “re-education”
centers.
In June, the National Assembly passed the Law on Handling of Administrative
Violations that will finally halt the practice of sending sex workers to administrative
detention in the so-called “05 centers” where they often suffer abuse.
Human rights observers welcome this rare example of a concrete and positive
institutional reform.
The policy of detention of drug users, however, remained unchanged. The mainstay
of Vietnam’s approach to drug treatment remains detention in government
centers where detainees are subjected to so-called “labor therapy.” Some 123
centers across the country hold around 40,000 people, including children as
young as 12 years old. Their detention is not subject to any form of due process
or judicial oversight and routinely lasts as long as four years. Infringement of
center rules—including the work requirement—is punished by beatings with
truncheons, shocks with electrical batons, and imprisonment in disciplinary
rooms where detainees are deprived of food and water. Former detainees report
that authorities forced them to work in cashew processing and other forms of
agricultural production, including potato or coffee farming, construction work,
and garment manufacturing and other forms of manufacturing.
Key International Actors
Vietnam’s complicated relationship with China plays a key role in domestic and
foreign affairs. Hanoi pledges friendship with China, but domestically must
respond to criticism that it fails to counter China’s aggressive behavior in the
disputed Spratly and Paracel Islands. Internationally, the government has
increased cooperation with the US, the EU, Russia, India, Japan, and neighboring Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) to counter-weight to
China’s growing influence.
The EU and Vietnam launched negotiations on a comprehensive free trade
agreement in June. Two rounds of the EU-Vietnam human rights dialogue took
place in January and October.
The relationship between Vietnam and the US continues to grow. The US is
Vietnam’s largest export market, and the June visit of US Defense Secretary Leon
Panetta symbolized the growing ties between the two countries’ militaries. The
US and Vietnam are also negotiating a Trans-Pacific Partnership free trade
agreement. However, during a July visit to Vietnam, Secretary of State Hillary
Clinton publicly raised serious concerns about Vietnam’s poor human rights
record, and US policy makers indicated that failure to improve human rights
could impose limits on the closeness of the relationship between the two governments.
Starting in 2013, Le Luong Minh, Vietnam’s deputy foreign minister, will start his
five- year term as secretary-general of ASEAN, greatly increasing Vietnam’s influence
in this regional bloc.
Armenia
Armenia’s ruling coalition retained a parliamentary majority following the May
2012 elections amid allegations of abuse of administrative resources, and
intimidation of voters, observers, and journalists. Ill-treatment in police custody
persists. The government has yet to offer conscientious objectors a genuine
civilian alternative to military service and has failed to effectively investigate a
troubling number of non-combat deaths in the military.
Politically motivated defamation lawsuits no longer appear to be a problem, but
media pluralism is lacking, and some journalists covering the May 6 parliamentary
elections suffered violent attacks by onlookers, some of them members of
Armenia’s ruling political party. Violence and discrimination based on sexual
orientation are serious problems. Bureaucratic restrictions prevent people with
terminal illnesses from accessing strong pain medications.
Parliamentary Elections
The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe’s (OSCE) monitoring
report assessed the May 6 parliamentary elections as competitive and largely
peaceful, yet marred by “an unequal playing field” due to misuse of administrative
resources, and party representatives and local authorities pressuring voters,
interfering in voting, and hindering the work of journalists.
Several violent incidents occurred during the campaign period in Yerevan,
including assaults on opposition party Armenian National Congress (ANC) candidate
Babken Garoyan and three other ANC members on April 15, and on ANC
candidate Karen Tovmasyan on April 17. In both cases, the ANC members were
distributing campaign information. Police opened investigations into each case.
Helsinki Association campaign monitor Arman Veziryan filed complaints alleging
that Yerevan resident Tigran Manukyan punched him and hindered his work as
an observer while Veziryan observed an opposition activist distributing election
pamphlets on April 30. Instead of investigating, prosecutors pressured Veziryan
to withdraw the complaint and in June charged him with beating Manukyan, although Manukyan never claimed to be a victim. Veziryan was awaiting trial at
this writing.
Torture and Ill-Treatment in Custody
According to local human rights defenders, torture and ill-treatment in police
custody persist. Authorities often refuse to investigate ill-treatment allegations
or coerce citizens into retracting complaints. The October report of the European
Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) on a follow-up visit in December
2011 noted overcrowding, unhygienic conditions, and inadequate medical care
in two prison facilities. CPT also noted that it received no new cases of ill-treatment
from these facilities in 2012.
The government has not effectively investigated a complaint from seven ANC
activists that police beat them in detention in August 2011. The activists’
lawyers also filed a complaint alleging police denied them access to their
clients, refused their request for a medical examination for the activists, and
detained the lawyers for seven hours, during which a lawyer witnessed police
beating one of the activists, Artak Karapetyan. The activists testified about the
abuse during trial, but a Yerevan court did not request an investigation.
In July, the court sentenced four of the activists—Karapetyan, Tigran Arakelyan,
Sargis Gevorgyan, and David Kiramijyan—to two to six years’ imprisonment for
hooliganism and resisting authority. In November, the appeals court upheld
their sentences. In August, police dropped charges against the other three for
lack of evidence.
In October, the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) ruled that Armenia had
violated the prohibition against inhuman or degrading treatment in the case of
opposition party member Grisha Virabyan when police repeatedly hit him in the
testicles with metal objects after detaining him following demonstrations in
2004. The court denounced the authorities’ failure to effectively investigate.
\Army Abuses
Local human rights groups reported 44 non-combat army deaths through
September. On February 29, conscript Tigran Varyan was killed by a gunshot
wound. The government-mandated autopsy revealed that Varyan was subject to
violence, but investigators classified his death as suicide. A report by local
human rights groups noted the Defense Ministry’s failure to initiate investigations
promptly, to account for signs of violence in cases of alleged suicides, and
to disclose the circumstances of many deaths.
A January ECtHR ruling found Armenia had violated the right to religious freedom
of two Jehovah’s Witnesses by imprisoning them for refusing to perform mandatory
military service in 2003.
According to Forum 18, an international religious freedom nongovernmental
organization, 32 conscientious objectors were in prison as of September 20 for
refusing military and alternative service, believing the alternative service was
not independent of the military. In 2012, courts sentenced to prison terms 16
additional Jehovah’s Witnesses for refusal to serve. The sentences were not
enforced.
In 2011, authorities proposed amendments to the alternative service law.
However, the OSCE and the Council of Europe (CoE) criticized the amendments
for not making alternative service truly independent of the military and for making
it 12-18 months longer than military service. In its July review of Armenia, the
United Nations Human Rights Committee (HRC) urged the government to ensure
a real alternative to military service, and release those imprisoned for refusing
to perform military service or the existing alternative to it.
Freedom of Expression
Politically motivated defamation lawsuits no longer appear to be a serious problem.
However, a June 2012 Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe
(PACE) report on media freedom in Europe found Armenian journalists’ capacity
to report was “hampered by pressures of self-censorship” and expressed concern
about television stations’ use of material from political advertisements in
news coverage.
At least two journalists suffered attacks while covering the May elections. In
Yerevan, a man punched Elina Chilingaryan as she filmed a bus arriving at a
polling station, knocking her camera to the ground. Police brought charges
against the assailant for interfering with the professional duties of a journalist.
They later dropped the charges, claiming that Chilingaryan was not performing
her professional duties at the time of the attack since she was not wearing her
press badge. The authorities did not bring separate assault charges.
In Gyumri, four unidentified men approached journalist Karen Alekyan at a
polling station, ripped off his press badge, and broke his camera. Alekyan filed
a complaint. The investigation was ongoing at this writing.
Palliative Care
Armenia’s complicated and time-consuming prescription and procurement procedures
for opioid medications obstruct the delivery of adequate palliative care.
UN statistics from 2009-2010 suggest that approximately 7,000 people die
annually in Armenia from cancer and HIV/AIDS. However, analysis of strong pain
medicine consumption suggests only about 600 patients with moderate to
severe pain gained access in 2012 to adequate pain relief during the last stages
of their illness.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In July, the NGO Public Information and Need of Knowledge (PINK) Armenia
reported that lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) people experience
employment discrimination, obstacles accessing healthcare, and physical and
psychological abuse in the army, in families, and in public.
On May 8, unidentified people threw a homemade bomb at DIY, a Yerevan bar
frequented by LGBT and women’s rights activists. Graffiti identified LGBT people
as targets. Deputy Speaker of Parliament Eduard Sharmazanov called the attack
“right and justified.” Police arrested two suspects who were released pending
trial. Unidentified attackers destroyed bar property and made death threats
against its owners in three subsequent May incidents. Police were called during
each attack but intervened only once.
On May 21 in Yerevan, a group of people threatened violence and shouted
homophobic slogans at participants in a march organized by PINK Armenia and
the Women’s Resource Center Armenia to celebrate diversity.
Human Rights Defenders
In April, about 200 people gathered outside the human rights nongovernmental
Helsinki Citizens’ Assembly’s (HCA) Vanadzor office, throwing eggs and stones,
breaking windows, and threatening staff with further violence if films made by
Azerbaijani filmmakers were screened as planned. The group dispersed after
HCA leaders agreed to cancel the films. As the crowed assembled HCA staff
called the police, who failed to intervene.
In April, a court rejected a lawsuit by Lernapat Mayor Vano Yeghiazaryan against
Artur Sakunts, head of HCA Vanadzor. In a 2011 newspaper interview Sakunts
accused Yeghiazaryan of embezzlement and abuse of power. The court concluded
that Yeghiazaryan, as a public official, “must be more tolerant towards opinions
and publications relating to him.”
Key International Actors
In its May European Neighborhood Policy Progress Report, the European
Commission urged Armenia to address corruption, media freedom, low public
trust in the judiciary, and inadequate investigation of ill-treatment. It commended
the government for strengthening laws on gender equality and health care.
European Union foreign ministers’ conclusions on the South Caucasus adopted
in February at the Foreign Affairs council in Brussels highlighted the importance
of free and fair elections and further judiciary reforms, political pluralism, freedom
of and equal access to media, and protection of human rights defenders.
In his July visit to Yerevan, EU President Herman Van Rompuy welcomed
Armenian authorities’ efforts to deliver more competitive and transparent parliamentary
elections, but cautioned that February 2013 presidential elections
should be more democratic.
Following its July review of Armenia’s compliance with the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), the HRC highlighted a host of concerns,
including lack of comprehensive antidiscrimination legislation, violence
against racial and religious minorities and LGBT people, discrimination and violence
against women, lack of accountability for torture, and threats and attacks
against rights defenders.
In May, the UN Office in Armenia condemned violence and intolerance based on
sexual orientation and gender identity. The EU Delegation to Armenia and the
CoE’s European Commission against Racism and Intolerance expressed concern
over Armenia’s inadequate response to anti-LGBT hate speech and violence.
In a new strategy for Armenia adopted in May, the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development stressed the need for “further steps” such as
police and judiciary reform and facilitating media pluralism.
Azerbaijan
Azerbaijan hosted the 2012 Eurovision Song Contest, casting an international
spotlight on the government’s deteriorating human rights record. The atmosphere
for political activists and independent and pro-opposition journalists
grew acutely hostile. Authorities used imprisonment as a tool for political retribution
and forcibly dispersed a number of peaceful demonstrations, indiscriminately
arresting activists and passersby. Restrictions on freedom of religion and
the prosecution of unregistered religious groups continued. The government
intensified its urban renewal campaign in the capital Baku, forcibly evicting
thousands of families and illegally demolishing homes.
Foreign actors failed to fully realize the potential of their relationships with the
government to press it to honor its human rights obligations.
Freedom of Media
In June, the Supreme Court released Bakhtiyar Hajiyev, a social media activist
who had been serving a two-year prison sentence for allegedly avoiding mandatory
military service. But Azerbaijani journalists continue to face prosecution on
bogus charges, harassment, intimidation, and physical attacks. Defamation
remained criminalized.
In November 2011, a court sentenced Aydin Janiyev, a Khural newspaper correspondent,
to three years in prison on hooliganism charges, apparently in retaliation
for his articles criticizing the authorities. Avaz Zeynalli, Khural’s editor, in
custody since his October 2011 arrest, was at this writing on trial on dubious
extortion charges brought by a member of parliament from the ruling party.
Khrural, which regularly published allegations of government corruption, closed
in October 2011, when a court ordered that bailiffs seize its property to pay fines
imposed in three defamation cases.
In March 2012, police arrested the executive director and editor-in-chief of
Khayal TV, a local station, who remained in custody at this writing pending trial
on charges of organizing social unrest and abuse of authority. The charges are
linked to a video posted on YouTube showing the governor of the northern city of Guba insulting local residents in a speech, which many believe was the catalyst
for the March 1 mass protests in the city.
In June, a court convicted Anar Bayramli, a journalist for the Iranian satellite television
station Sahar TV, on trumped-up charges of illegal drug possession. In
July, the Appeals Court halved his two-year prison sentence.
Hilal Mammadov, the editor-in-chief of Tolishi Sado newspaper who was arrested
in June on bogus drug possession charges, remained in custody pending
trial. In June, police also detained Mehman Huseynov, a blogger and photographer
at the Institute for Reporters’ Freedoms and Safety, a local media monitoring
organization, and released him pending investigation on trumped-up
charges of hooliganism.
In August, a court sentenced Faramaz Novruzoglu, a freelance journalist, to fourand-
a-half years in jail on bogus charges of illegal border crossing and inciting
mass disorder, stemming from spring 2011 Facebook postings, written using a
pseudonym, calling for riots. Novruzoglu has denied the allegations and claims
they are retribution for his investigations into business ties of high-level officials.
In April, police and private security personnel beat unconscious Idrak Abbasov,
a journalist who was filming forced evictions and house demolitions. A police
investigation was pending at this writing.
In March, unknown persons attempted to blackmail Khadija Ismailova, a Radio
Liberty journalist, in retaliation for her investigation into the business holdings
of the president’s family and close associates.
In November 2011, Rafig Tagi, a journalist with Sanet weekly, was stabbed on
the street near his apartment, and died of the wounds. No one had been
charged for the attack at this writing.
In September 2012, the opposition daily Azadlig faced eviction threats from its
premises at the state publishing house for failing to pay its outstanding debts,
while at the same time a court fined the paper 3o,000 AZN (about US$40,000)
in a defamation suit brought by the head of Baku metro system.
Freedom of Assembly
The government limited freedom of assembly by breaking up peaceful protests,
in some cases violently, and arresting protesters. In March, at the first sanctioned
opposition protest since 2006, police detained two popular musicians as
they played at the peaceful gathering. Police beat and denied them access to
their lawyer. They were released after five and ten days of detention.
In April, police detained 20 activists distributing flyers encouraging people to
attend an opposition rally. Courts sentenced 7 of the activists to 10 to 15 days of
detention, and fined or released others.
In the days before and during May’s Eurovision Song Contest, police broke up
several protests in Baku’s center. Police rounded up dozens of peaceful demonstrators,
forcing them onto buses, and beating some as they did so. The demonstrators
were released several hours later.
In October, police rounded up dozens of protesters in an unsanctioned rally in
central Baku, roughed them up and forced them into buses. Courts imprisoned
13 on misdemeanor charges for up to 10 days, and fined several others.
In November, the parliament increased sanctions for participating and organizing
unauthorized protests, establishing fines of up to 1,000 AZN ($ 1,274) for
participation, and 3,000 ($ 3,822) for organization.
Political Prisoners
Imprisonment on politically motivated charges is a continuing problem. A June
2012 report by a committee of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe (PACE) described the cases of 89 political prisoners in Azerbaijan. Just
before the report’s publication, nine were released under a presidential pardon.
The PACE report documents the cases of journalists, human rights defenders,
and activists who remain in detention in Azerbaijan on a range of trumped-up
charges in retaliation for their work.
Ill-Treatment and Deaths in Custody
Torture and ill-treatment continue with impunity, and two men died in police
custody in 2012. In the first eight months of 2012, the Azerbaijan Committee
Against Torture, an independent prison monitoring group, received 136 complaints
alleging ill-treatment in custody.
Forced Evictions and Illegal Demolitions
Since 2008, the authorities in Azerbaijan have been implementing a program of
urban renewal in Baku, involving illegal expropriation of hundreds of properties—
primarily apartments and homes in middle class neighborhoods—to make
way for parks, roads, and luxury residential buildings. Most evictees have not
received fair compensation based on market values of their properties. In 2012,
hundreds of homeowners were affected as the authorities accelerated construction
for the Eurovision Song Contest.
Freedom of Religion
The government continued to tighten restrictions on freedom of religion. In
December 2011, the president signed legislative amendments criminalizing the
illegal production, distribution, and import of religious literature not approved
by the state; they were previously administrative offenses. A new criminal code
article punishes the creation of a group that undermines social order under the
guise of carrying out religious work.
According to Forum 18, an independent international religious freedom monitoring
group, police raided several private homes on religion-related grounds.
Human Rights Defenders
Police arrested two human rights defenders associated with Kur Civil Union in
retaliation for protecting flood victims in southern Azerbaijan. In April 2012,
police arrested Ogtay Gulaliyev, the organization’s coordinator, and charged him
with hooliganism. In June, police released him, pending investigation and
arrested Ilham Amiraslanov, another Kur activist. In September, a court sentenced Amiraslanov to two years imprisonment on trumped-up weapons possession
charges. No investigation was made into Gulaliyev’s claim of ill-treatment
in custody, and after a preliminary inquiry the prosecutor’s office refused to
investigate an ill-treatment complaint by Amiraslanov.
In April, a court sentenced Taleh Khasmammadov, a blogger and human rights
defender from Goychay, to a four-year prison term on charges of hooliganism
and physically assaulting a public official. Khasmammadov investigated allegations
of abuse and corruption by law enforcement officials. Another human
rights defender from Goychay region, Vidadi Isganderov, remained in jail after
being convicted in August 2011 on false charges of interfering with parliamentary
elections.
Azerbaijan Human Rights House, a member of the International Human Rights
House Network, remained closed following the Ministry of Justice suspending its
registration in March 2011.
Key International Actors
While expressing concern about Azerbaijan’s worsening human rights record,
the European Union, United States, and other international and regional institutions
did not impose policy consequences or make their engagement with
Azerbaijan conditional on concrete improvements.
A great number of foreign governments and international organizations condemned
President Ilham Aliyev’s decision to pardon Ramil Safarov, a military
officer, whom Hungary extradited to Azerbaijan so that he could serve out his
life imprisonment term there. In 2004, a Hungarian court convicted Safarov for
murdering an Armenian colleague at a NATO-sponsored training in Budapest.
Safarov confessed to the crime, which he justified by citing his victim’s ethnicity.
The EU, Organization for Security and Co-Operation in Europe (OSCE), and the
US Embassy in Baku all condemned the assault on journalist Idrak Abbasov, and
called on the government to launch a prompt and thorough investigation, to no
avail.
In its May European Neighborhood Policy progress report, the EU highlighted
Azerbaijan’s failure to meet its commitments regarding electoral processes,
human rights protections, and judicial independence. It also, for the first time,
addressed concrete recommendations to the authorities.
The European Broadcasting Union, which oversaw the Eurovision Song Contest,
made a public commitment to promote freedom of expression in Azerbaijan, but
declined to take a strong public stand on the Azerbaijani government’s record. It
also refused to urge the government to properly compensate homeowners
whose apartments were demolished in connection with the construction of
Eurovision-related infrastructure.
While in Baku in June, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton met with Bakhtiyar
Hajiyev, and urged the authorities to release others imprisoned on politically
motivated charges.
In a landmark vote on June 26, the Legal Affairs and Human Rights Committee of
the Council of Europe’s Parliamentary Assembly adopted a report on political
prisoners in Azerbaijan. The government had refused to cooperate with the committee’s
rapporteur and denied him access to Azerbaijan.
In its March 2012 concluding observations, the UN Committee on the Rights of
the Child (CRC) criticized Azerbaijan, for, inter alia, the lack of improvement in
the juvenile justice system, and the lack of alternatives to institutionalization
for children without families.
Belarus
The Belarusian government continues to severely curtail freedoms of association,
assembly, and expression, and the right to fair trial. New restrictive legislative
amendments paved the way in 2012 for even more intense governmental
scrutiny of civil society organizations and activists. Governmental harassment of
human rights defenders, independent media, and defense lawyers continues,
including through arbitrary bans on foreign travel. At this writing, at least 12
political prisoners remain jailed. Allegations of torture and mistreatment in custody
persist.
Parliamentary Elections
Parliamentary elections took place in September against a backdrop of stifled
civil and political freedoms, and were marked by a lack of competitiveness and
a low level of public confidence.
The continuing political crackdown impeded a competitive campaign. The elections
resulted in 110 members elected for a four-year term to the lower chamber
of the parliament. The opposition did not win any seats.
The elections complied with recent amendments to the electoral code, which
the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) and the Venice
Commission assessed as a positive but insufficient step towards a legal framework
allowing for genuinely democratic elections. The OSCE’s Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights and the OSCE Parliamentary
Assembly found elections had fallen short of international standards, noting, in
particular, irregularities during the vote count, a flawed process for considering
complaints, and biased campaign coverage by state-controlled media.
Domestic monitors noted flaws in the rules on forming district and precinct election
commissions, resulting in a low level of representation in the commissions
by opposition parties. Monitors also documented incidents of intimidation by
officials of opposition activists.
Days before the voting, the two registered opposition parties decided to boycott
the elections, citing procedural violations, political repression, and the fact that
opposition activists were imprisoned on politically motivated charges and could
not run as candidates or vote.
Political Prisoners, Threats to Human Rights Defenders, and
Civil Society Groups
In April, apparently responding to international criticism, the authorities
released former opposition presidential candidate Andrei Sannikau and his
aide, convicted in connection with the peaceful protests in 2010. In August and
September 2012, the government pardoned three prisoners sentenced on criminal
charges of “rioting” in connection with the December 2010 mass protests.
All released prisoners had to sign a request for pardon that acknowledged their
guilt.
Throughout the year, the authorities intensified the crackdown on dissent.
Legislative amendments adopted in October 2011 established criminal liability
for receiving foreign grants in violation of the law, and broadened the definition
of treason to include “any form of assistance to a foreign state” that is detrimental
to Belarus’s national security. The amendments put civil society groups
at risk of arbitrary prosecution if they receive foreign funding or engage in international
advocacy.
In November 2011, a court sentenced leading human rights defender, Ales
Bialiatski, to four-and-a-half years in prison on politically motivated charges of
tax evasion. Prison officials have regularly subjected Bialiatski to arbitrary reprimands
and other kinds of pressure. The authorities frequently sentence opposition
activists and human rights defenders to arbitrary detention for “hooliganism”
and other misdemeanor charges.
In February, opposition activist Siarhei Kavalenka was sentenced to 25 months’
imprisonment for evading his supervised release, after being sentenced in 2010
for flying a banned pre-Lukashenka era national flag on a Christmas tree. He
was freed in September 2012, after authorities forced him, including by making veiled threats regarding his son, to sign a request for pardon that acknowledged
his guilt.
In May, a court handed human rights defender Aleh Vouchak a nine-day jail sentence
on misdemeanor charges of “minor hooliganism,” allegedly for swearing
at police. Vouchak’s arrest was apparently in retaliation for his human rights
work and for meeting with a Human Rights Watch researcher a day earlier.
In June, the prosecutor’s office issued a warning to human rights defender
Andrei Bandarenka, for “discrediting” Belarus by participating in an ultimately
unsuccessful campaign to convince the International Ice Hockey Federation not
to hold the 2014 Men’s World Ice Hockey Championship in Belarus because of
its human rights record. At least 15 activists and journalists were banned during
the year from leaving Belarus under arbitrary pretexts.
In July, President Aliaxander Lukashenka—in power since1994—signed a decree
expanding the grounds on which the State Security Service (KGB) can impose
travel bans on individuals.
Death Penalty
Belarus remains the only country in Europe to still use the death penalty. In
March, Belarusian authorities executed Dzmitry Kanavalau and Uladzislau
Kavalyou, convicted of carrying out a terrorist attack in the Minsk metro in April
2011 after a trial that raised serious due process concerns, including allegations
of torture to extract confessions. The execution was carried out while a complaint
regarding the men’s treatment was pending with the United Nations
Human Rights Committee. The committee had asked the authorities not to carry
out the sentence until the review was complete.
Freedom of Assembly
Legislative amendments adopted in October 2011 further restricted freedom of
peaceful assembly by broadening the definition of mass events and establishing
criminal liability for organizing them in violation of the law. The amendments
also required event organizers to report financing sources for mass events and expanded the powers of law enforcement during public gatherings
to, among other things, limit access to the event site and conduct personal
searches of participants.
Authorities regularly prohibit peaceful gatherings and use “hooliganism” or similar
misdemeanor charges to intimidate activists and prevent them from carrying
out their work. Dozens have been sentenced, some repeatedly, to short-term
detention.
In April, riot police broke up the screening of “Europe’s Last Dictator,” a documentary
about President Lukashenka, arrested all 19 viewers and staff, and took
them to a police station for interrogation and fingerprinting. They were later
released.
In February, a court sentenced activist Pavel Vinahradau to 10 days of detention
for holding an “unsanctioned protest” for placing stuffed toys with anti-government
slogans in front of government headquarters in Minsk. In August, two
independent journalists, who were taking photos with teddy bears on a street in
Minsk, were sentenced to fines for protesting.
Freedom of Expression
The government severely restricts freedom of expression. Most media is statecontrolled,
and television, radio, and internet censorship is widespread. The
authorities continue to harass independent journalists for their work, including
through arbitrary arrests, warnings, and criminal convictions. Journalists face
great difficulties obtaining accreditation.
In June 2012, Belarusian authorities charged a journalist, Andrzej Poczobut, for
libel against the president, a criminal offense punishable by up to five years’
imprisonment. He was later released under his own recognizance. In a separate
case brought in 2011, Poczobut had received a suspended sentence for allegedly
defaming President Lukashenka.
In July, blogger Anton Suryapin was arrested and charged with complicity in an
unlawful border crossing after posting in his blog photographs of a political
stunt that month organized by Swedish activists who dropped teddy bears carrying freedom of speech messages from a plane into Belarusian territory. Suryapin
denied involvement, and in August was released under his own recognizance.
The trial was ongoing at this writing and Suryapin faces up to seven years in
prison if convicted
In August, four Swedish journalists were refused entry into Belarus upon arriving
in Minsk airport. Two of them had been accredited by the government to
report on the September parliamentary elections.
In September, customs officials held an Australian journalist in Minsk airport
and confiscated his laptop, phone, video camera, and memory cards. The journalist
was released but his equipment was not returned.
Key International Actors
2012 marked a new low for the Belarusian government’s pariah status in the
international arena. The European Union and the United States government further
tightened existing sanctions imposed against Belarusian officials, private
individuals, and companies implicated in repression and human rights abuse.
Responding to the continuing crackdown on civil society, the UN Human Rights
Council (HRC) in July denounced abuses committed in Belarus, called for the
release of all political prisoners, and appointed a special rapporteur to document
and report back on violations in the country. The Belarusian Foreign
Ministry swiftly announced that the government did not recognize the special
rapporteur’s mandate and refused to cooperate with it.
A diplomatic scandal unfolded in February when Lukashenka’s government
expelled the Polish and EU delegation ambassadors, and recalled Belarusian
ambassadors in Warsaw and Brussels in response to the expansion of EU sanctions.
All EU member states recalled their ambassadors from Belarus in solidarity.
Belarus allowed all ambassadors to be reinstated after they later returned to
Minsk.
In March, the European Parliament adopted a resolution urging additional sanctions
that targeted several more officials and companies linked to the government
and prohibited the export to Belarus of arms and materials that could be
used for repression.
In a September 2012 report presented to the council, the UN high commissioner
for human rights singled out Belarus among 16 countries where government
intimidation of civil society activists is commonplace, and authorities mostly fail
to hold accountable those responsible.
After the July teddy bear stunt, the government expelled the Swedish ambassador
and closed the Swedish embassy in Minsk.
In September, the authorities refused visas to a Lithuanian politician and a
German parliamentarian who planned to visit the country during parliamentary
elections, stating that their presence in Belarus was “undesirable.”
Bosnia and Herzegovina
There was little improvement in human rights in 2012 in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (BiH) despite the formation of a national government in February
after a delay of 14 months.
The government missed several deadlines to make changes to the constitution
that were needed to end discriminatory restrictions on Jews and Roma holding
political office. Roma remain subject to widespread discrimination. Some
refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) wishing to return to their prewar
homes faced an obstacle in the courts, and there was no progress on implementing
a return strategy. Journalists remained vulnerable to threats and attack.
Ethnic and Religious Discrimination
The new Bosnian government failed to implement a 2009 European Court of
Human Rights (ECtHR) ruling ordering the country to amend its constitution to
eliminate ethnic discrimination in the national tri-partite presidency and House
of Peoples, both currently restricted to the three main ethnic groups (Bosniaks,
Serbs, and Croats).
This was despite the government agreeing in June to present reform proposals
by August 31, and a binding September 3 deadline set by the ECtHR itself. A
joint working group established to propose changes has not met since March,
and there are sharp disagreements among the main parties on the way forward.
Local elections scheduled for October 2012 were held under the existing constitution.
A questionnaire for BiH’s first national census since 1991, made public in April
2012 and scheduled for 2013, drew criticism from the International Monitoring
Operation (IMO) and the Conference of European Statisticians. The IMO was
established by the European Union and Council of Europe (CoE) to monitor the
census. Criticism was based on questions requiring respondents to identify
their ethnicity, religion, and mother tongue in the form of a closed question and
limiting them to a single response. Amendments to the questionnaire largely
failed to address the IMO’s criticisms, and continued to require respondents to identify their mother tongue, which may have a discriminatory effect on national
minority groups and those who want to declare themselves as multilingual and
multi-ethnic.
Roma remain the most vulnerable minority group, subject to widespread discrimination.
Many Roma are still not on the national public registry that records
births, deaths, and marriage, impeding their access to public services. Roma
continue to face problems accessing health care due to registration restrictions,
lower educational enrollment than other groups, and employment discrimination.
Many Roma, particularly refugees and IDPs, including from Kosovo, remain
in informal settlements. The practice of placing Roma in special schools in
Mostar, a city in the Federation, instead of mainstream schools, continued during
the year.
Most of the 100 Roma evicted from their homes in Mostar in October 2011 to
make room for a housing project for other Roma families simply relocated to
other informal settlements in the city and remain vulnerable to further evictions.
Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons
There was virtually no progress on implementing the 2010 strategy to support
the return of refugees and IDPs to their pre-war homes, even after the new government
was formed in February 2012. In the first 6 months of 2012, 185
refugees and 198 IDPs returned, according to the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), a slight increase relative to same period in
2011. According to the latest updates in June 2012, there were still 112,802 IDPs
registered, down from 113,188 at the end of June of the previous year.
District court rulings awarding excessive compensation to temporary occupants
of property were an obstacle to displaced people wanting to return to pre-war
homes, prompting repeated criticism during the year by the Office of the
International High Representative (OHR). Faik Zulcic, a returnee to Bjeljina in
Republika Srpska, was evicted from his home in April after he was unable to pay
40,000KM (around US$26,000) to the former occupant as ordered in March
2012 by the Bjeljina District Court.
National Security and Human Rights
BiH continued to subject foreign nationals to indefinite detention without trial
on national security grounds. In February, the ECtHR halted the deportation of
Imad Al Husin to Syria because of the risk of torture on return and ordered
Bosnian authorities to charge him with a crime, find a third country to which he
could safely travel, or release him. He remained in Bosnian detention without
trial at this writing.
Also at this writing, Zeyad Khalad Al Gertani, another foreign national security
suspect remained in detention without trial. Four others left BiH in 2012:
Noureddine Gacci (deported to Algeria in January), Omar Frendi (deported to
Algeria in March), Fadhil Al Hamadini (escaped house arrest to an unknown
location in May), and Ammar Al Hanchi (deported to Tunisia in September after
the ECtHR in June rejected his claim that he risked torture on return).
War Crimes Accountability
On May 16, the trial against Bosnian Serb wartime General Radtko Mladic commenced
at the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
The trial was periodically delayed by Mladic’s ill-health. Mladic is charged with
genocide, including the murder of 8,000 men and boys from Srebrenica in 1995,
war crimes, and crimes against humanity.
The trial of Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb wartime president who is
charged with many of the same crimes as Mladic, continued at the ICTY with the
prosecution concluding its case on May 25 and the defense seeking Karadzic’s
acquittal on all counts. The court upheld all charges except one genocide charge
not involving Srebrenica, which it dismissed due to insufficient evidence. On
September 24, the office of the prosecutor at the ICTY appealed this decision;
the appeal procedure was ongoing at this writing.
On January 21, Bosnia police captured convicted war criminal Radovan
Stankovic in the city of Foca. Stankovic had been at large since escaping from
Foca prison in BiH in 2007, where he was serving a 20-year sentence for crimes
against humanity committed in 1992 when he was serving as a soldier in the
army of the Serb Republic of BiH.
The War Crimes Chamber of the State Court of BiH reached verdicts on 13 cases
between September 2011 and 2012.
Inadequate capacity and funding for war crimes prosecutions continued to hamper
implementation of the national war crimes strategy in cantonal and district
courts. In May, the OHR and ICTY chief prosecutor discussed ways to strengthen
local prosecutor and courts on war crimes cases. The mandate of the international
judges and prosecutors is scheduled to expire by the end of 2012, having
been extended once in 2009.
Human Rights Defenders
The national journalists’ association and the Helsinki Committee in BiH
expressed concern about the high frequency of verbal abuse of journalists leveled
mostly by politicians but also by religious leaders and media regulators,
with 42 violations of free expression and personal freedoms recorded between
September 2011 and 2012, including 19 verbal assaults, 3 physical assaults,
and one death threat.
On July 18, Stefica Galic, chief editor of the web portal tacno.net, was attacked
in the city of Ljubuski after a documentary screening that honored her late husband’s
efforts to protect Bosniaks during the 1992 to 1995 Bosnian War.
Nedjeljko Galic was a Croat living in the federation and helped hundreds of
Bosniaks to leave Ljubuski during the war. Despite appeals by the EU, United
States, and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe’s (OSCE)
representative on freedom of the media to investigate the case thoroughly, the
police failed to address the issue adequately, labeling it a minor offence against
peace and order that was exaggerated by media.
In June, the local lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transsexual (LGBT) rights organization
Sarajevo Open Centre reported a telephone threat to police relating to their
work. The organization did not organize a Sarajevo Gay Pride parade for 2012
because it regarded other issues affecting LGBT people as more pressing.
Key International Actors
A March report on post-war justice in the Western Balkans from outgoing CoE
Human Rights Commissioner Thomas Hammarberg recommended that Bosnian
authorities strengthen local courts’ capacity to try war crimes and protect witnesses,
and expressed support for a regional truth and reconciliation commission.
In May, ambassadors to BiH from the US, Brazil, Germany, Norway, the
Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom, together with the
CoE office, issued a joint statement calling on the government of BiH to ensure
equal rights for LGBT people.
In a September 2012 joint statement, EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fule
and CoE Secretary General Thorbjorn Jagland expressed their “great disappointment”
that the BiH government had failed to meet the August deadline on constitutional
reform. They affirmed that doing so remains a precondition for formal
EU candidate status.
Also in September 2012, EU Special Representative Peter Sorensen, together
with OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media Dunja Mijatovic, and the
head of the OSCE mission to Bosnia and Herzegovina, issued a statement calling
for legal reforms to ensure media freedom in the country.
Following a country visit in late September, Rita Izsak, UN expert on minority
issues, criticized continuing ethnic segregation in the education system and
discrimination against Roma.
The European Commission’s annual progress report on Bosnia and Herzegovina
in October identified the failure to reform the constitution, discrimination
against Roma, intimidation and violence against human rights advocates, and
segregated education amongst its main concerns.
The UN Human Rights Committee in its concluding observations on BiH, adopted
in
October, highlighted poor conditions in prisons and detention centers and
urged the authorities to address overcrowding and combat prison violence.
Following a country visit in November, Rashida Manjoo, UN special rapporteur
on violence against women, voiced concern about the prevalence of domestic
violence in BiH.
In a report published in November, the OSCE Mission to BiH emphasized the
need to combat hate crimes, including those committed against returning
refugees and IDPs, Roma, Jews, and sexual minorities.
Croatia
As Croatia moved closer to European Union integration, expected in July 2013,
human rights protection dipped. Croatian authorities took a significant step
towards improving domestic war crimes trials. Abuses against persons with disabilities
continue. A housing program aimed at Serbs stripped of property rights
during the war helped only two out of more than a thousand households that
were eligible, while the asylum system remains unable to cope with growing
arrivals, mainly from Afghanistan and Somalia.
Accountability for War Crimes
In November, the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
appeals chamber overturned the 2011 convictions of two Croatian generals,
Ante Gotovina and Ivan Cermak, for war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed against Serbs in the Krajina region in 1995.
The trial at the ICTY of Croatian Serb wartime leader Goran Hadzic charged with
the killing and deportation of Croats and other non-Serbs began on October 17.
Hadzic is the last of 161 indictees to be brought before the tribunal as it winds
down its operations.
Fifteen domestic war crimes prosecutions were transferred in late 2011 and early
2012 from local county courts to four courts designated for war crimes cases, with
only two remaining in local courts as of August, the most recent data available at
this writing. Following the transfer, the designated courts suspended several
cases, particularly those affecting Serbs, because the trials had been conducted
in absentia, a long-standing concern about war crimes cases heard in local
courts.
In March, five former Croatian armed forces soldiers were arrested on suspicion
of 1993 war crimes against Serbs during the Medak Pocket operation in the village
of Medak, eastern Croatia. Three were released the next day after questioning,
while the court released a fourth, Josip Krmpotic, in October pending a
prosecution review of the indictment against him for allegedly ordering executions of four prisoners of war. To date, General Mirko Norac remains the only
high-ranking official convicted of war crimes during the operation.
The presiding judge in the trial of Zeljko Gojak, convicted in February 2012 of
war crimes near Karlovac in 1991, ruled that Gojak’s military service would not
be used to reduce his nine-year sentence, a change to the judicial practice of
considering participation in the Croatian armed forces as a mitigating factor in
sentencing for war crimes.
The trial continued of Tomislav Mercep, the former police commander accused
of having command responsibility for—and in some cases ordering—the illegal
detention, torture, and killing of 53 Yugoslav Army soldiers in 1991. According to
Croatian nongovernmental organizations, the Croatian government is paying for
Mercep’s defense, totaling almost 400,000 Kuna (US$69,000) as of August, the
most recent data available. Mercep was released from detention on medical
grounds in July 2012.
Rights of Persons with Disabilities
In September, Ministry of Social Policy officials closed down a privately run
state-funded social care home for people with mental disabilities following findings
of severe abuse, including lack of food, use of solitary confinement, and
inadequate sleeping facilities. The ministry moved all 129 residents to other
institutions in Croatia.
There was virtually no progress implementing the government’s March 2011
master plan for deinstitutionalization. The number of people with intellectual or
mental disabilities living in institutions remained steady at around 9,000, with a
small increase in the number of places in community-based housing and support
services (up to 425 from about 300 in 2010) for all people with disabilities.
According to disability rights NGOs in Croatia, the government has directed
greater resources to foster families for adults with disabilities, placements that
may still amount to institutionalization.
Efforts by Croatia’s parliament to amend the country’s guardianship laws continued.
But the proposed changes were limited to children, despite the need for reforms for almost 19,000 adults deprived of legal capacity at the end of 2011,
including more than 16,000 deprived of all ability to make major life decisions.
Return and Reintegration of Serbs
Only 128 Serbs returned to Croatia during the last 6 months of 2011 and the first
6 months of 2012, down significantly from the 479 returns during the same period
a year previously. According to the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), there were 2,059 internally displaced persons (IDPs) in
Croatia as of the end of 2011, but most IDPs are now settled in their new homes
or are in the process of being settled.
More than two years after the start of a program permitting Serbs stripped of
tenancy rights during the 1991-1995 war to buy apartments at discounts of up to
70 percent, only 2 out of a total 1,317 eligible households had completed a purchase
as of September. The UNHCR attributed the low up-take to onerous application
and administrative procedures. Work on a regulation to better implement
the program, begun in July, was ongoing at this writing.
The government made some progress in providing public housing for returnees.
Of 8,930 approved requests for such housing, 8,047 units had been allocated at
the end of June 2012. There were 237 new applications approved from
November 2011 to June 2012, the vast majority of which were from Serb families.
There was some progress in processing Serb pension eligibility claims for recognition
of wartime work in formerly rebel-held areas. According to the UNHCR,
27,090 requests had been processed (up from 23,568 a year earlier) at the end
of June, although only 55 percent were resolved positively (down from 57 percent).
Despite a ruling from the Croatian Constitutional Court broadening the
standard for admissible evidence to prove years of working service, the High
Administrative Court, which adjudicates final appeals in such cases, continued
to require registration in a pension fund as evidence of employment.
Asylum and Migration
The number of people seeking asylum in Croatia increased as the country
moved closer to EU membership. There were 704 asylum applications in the first
9 months of 2012, compared to 807 applications in 2011. Croatia had granted 11
people asylum in 2012 and 6 subsidiary protection during that period, bringing
the total granted international protection since 2004 to 64.
Croatia continued to lack sufficient reception accommodation for asylum seekers.
The state does not provide free legal aid in first instance proceedings. But
the main issues facing asylum-seekers and new refugees in Croatia continues to
be the lack of services available for their employment, education, and integration,
according to the UNHCR.
Systems to provide special assistance to the growing number of unaccompanied
migrant children (173 in the first nine months of 2012) remained inadequate.
Guardians appointed to all unaccompanied migrant children upon arrival in
Croatia lack capacity and guidance on how to secure the best interests of their
wards, with no provision for interpreters or legal assistance (other than for asylum
appeals).
Freedom of Media
On September 14, the Dubrovnik County Court approved the extradition of
Vicdan Özerdem, a Turkish journalist wanted on terrorism charges in Turkey, following
her arrest in Dubrovnik. The Croatian human rights ombudsman wrote to
the Ministry of Justice in September calling on it to halt the extradition, citing
violations of the UN Convention Against Torture because of the risk Özerdem
would be tortured if returned to Turkey. An appeal against the extradition order
was pending at this writing.
In May, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) representative
on freedom of media and the European Federation of Journalists
expressed concerns about public television and radio station HRT conducting
disciplinary proceedings and possibly dismissing Elizabeta Gojan, a journalist
and Croatian Journalists’ Association board member. HRT’s actions followed an interview Gojan gave on German broadcaster Deutsche Welle criticizing the
state of media freedom in Croatia.
Human Rights Defenders
In July 2012, the Human Rights Center and the People’s Ombudsman’s Office
merged, after a law passed in 2011 to merge Croatia’s five national human
rights institutions. The three other national human rights institutions (the
ombudspersons’ offices for gender equality, children, and persons with disabilities)
will remain separate until at least 2014 following a decision by the new
government.
The Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender (LGBT) Pride March in Split went
ahead in June without incident, after the 2011 march was marred by violence by
anti-gay protesters.
Key International Actors
In January, the OSCE ended its Croatia presence after more than 15 years, following
several years of winding down operations in the country, leaving a significant
monitoring gap related to domestic war crimes accountability.
Croatia continued to proceed in negotiations to join the EU, slated for July 2013.
The October 2012 EU monitoring report noted that Croatia needed to intensify
efforts to tackle impunity for war crimes, protect Serb and Roma minorities, and
ensure LGBT rights.
The Council of Europe’s (CoE) European Commission against Racism and
Intolerance (ECRI) released its fourth report on Croatia in September, noting
positive developments in the impartiality of war crimes trials and investments
related to property and pensions to promote the return and reintegration of
Serbs. It noted that many Roma still lack citizenship or registration papers in
Croatia, few attend secondary schools, and migrants and refugees face many
barriers to integration.
European Union
In the face of a political and economic crisis affecting the European Union and
many of its member states, protection of human rights was rarely a priority in
2012, especially when those negatively affected were marginalized or unpopular
groups, such as Roma, migrants, and asylum seekers.
Despite deteriorating rights in Hungary and elsewhere, EU institutions largely
failed to live up to the promise of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights, with
the European Council particularly reluctant to hold member states to account for
abuse.
EU Migration and Asylum Policy
Despite efforts towards establishing the Common European Asylum System
(CEAS) by the end of 2012, migrants and asylum seekers continue to experience
gaps in accessing asylum and poor reception and detention conditions, including
for unaccompanied children. At this writing, the EU had not adopted a coordinated
response to the Syrian refugee crisis, and Syrians had access to varying
levels of access to protection in different member states.
In May, the EU adopted the Action on Migratory Pressures strategy detailing a
broad range of steps, including strengthening the capacity of countries outside
the EU to control their borders and the capacity for those countries to provide
refugee or humanitarian protection to individuals who might otherwise seek to
travel on to EU countries.
Boat migration across the Mediterranean decreased, although over 300 people
died at sea between January and November. In April, the Parliamentary
Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) adopted a report documenting a “catalogue
of failures” by EU member states, Libya, and NATO resulting in the
deaths of 63 boat migrants in April 2011. Negotiations continued to create the
European Border Surveillance System (EUROSUR) amid concerns that it lacked
clear guidelines and mechanisms for ensuring rescue of migrants and asylum
seekers at sea.
In September, the European Union Court of Justice (CJEU) annulled rules governing
sea surveillance by the EU border agency Frontex, including where rescued
boat migrants are to be disembarked, because the European Parliament had not
approved them. The rules remain in effect until new ones are adopted. An
inquiry that the European ombudsman launched in March into Frontex compliance
with fundamental rights continued at this writing. Frontex appointed its
new fundamental rights officer in September.
Efforts to revise common EU asylum rules progressed, with changes to the EU
Qualification Directive agreed in December 2011 providing clearer recognition of
gender-specific forms of persecution and gender identity as ground for protection.
The European Parliament and the European Council were expected to give
changes to the Reception Directive and Dublin II Regulation their final approval
by the end of 2012. Changes on minimum reception conditions would improve
access to employment and oblige states to identify vulnerable groups, but still
allow detention of asylum seekers, including unaccompanied children.
Changes to Dublin II would block transfers to countries where an asylum seeker
risks inhuman or degrading treatment, following a December 2011 ruling by the
CJEU on Greece, and improve safeguards but leave intact the general rule that
the first EU country of entry is responsible for claims. In September, the CJEU
ruled that member states must provide minimum reception standards to all asylum
seekers awaiting transfer under Dublin II.
In September, the European Commission released its mid-point assessment of
the Action Plan for Unaccompanied Minors, noting improvements in coordination,
dedicated European funding, and the European Asylum Support Office’s
positive role, but also problems with data collection. Discrepancies in age
assessment procedures continued, with insufficient procedures in Greece, Italy,
and Malta affecting access to appropriate services. Unaccompanied children
faced detention in the EU, including Greece and Malta. In July, Malta initiated a
review of immigration detention, including policies affecting children whose age
is disputed.
In September, Denmark joined efforts by Norway, the UK, and Sweden—through
the EU-funded European Return Platform for Unaccompanied Minors (ERPUM)—to initiate the return of unaccompanied Afghan children to Afghanistan, despite
serious risks of violence, military recruitment, and destitution. At this writing
none had been returned.
In March, the EU adopted a framework for facilitating refugee resettlement,
including increased funds. Five EU countries formally announced national resettlement
programs in 2012, but resettling refugees displaced by conflict in Libya
the previous year progressed slowly. In September, Germany resettled 195
refugees who had taken shelter in Tunisia.
In June, EU interior ministers endorsed a proposal allowing member states to
reinstate border controls within the Schengen area—a free movement zone comprising
25 EU and other countries—if a country fails to control external EU borders.
There were enduring concerns that countries, including France, Germany,
the Netherlands, and Italy, use ethnic profiling to conduct spot-checks at internal
borders. In response to a 73 percent increase over last year in asylum applications
from Balkan countries—primarily from Roma and ethnic Albanians from
Serbia and Macedonia, the vast majority rejected—some member states including
Germany and France pressed for renewed visa restrictions on Balkan citizens,
and in October, the European Commission called on Balkan states to do
more to arrest the trend.
Discrimination and Intolerance
A Fundamental Rights Agency survey published in May showed destitution and
social exclusion among Roma in 11 EU countries, with high levels of unemployment
(over 66 percent) and low levels of secondary school graduation (around
15 percent). In May, a European Commission assessment on progress by member
states in integrating Roma found gaps in health care and housing. In
August, the commission announced it was monitoring evictions and removals of
Eastern European Roma from France, and in September wrote to Italy asking for
information about discrimination against Roma.
The European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (ECRI) warned in May
that economic downturn and austerity were feeding intolerance and anti-immigrant
violence. Council of Europe (CoE) Commissioner for Human Rights Nils Muižnieks called in July for a “European Spring” to counter anti-Muslim prejudice,
citing bans on full-face veils and ethnic profiling by police as examples.
In October, the EU adopted a directive on minimum standards for victims, obliging
states to ensure access to justice without discrimination, including for
undocumented migrants.
At this writing, 14 EU member states had signed (but not ratified) the CoE
Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic
violence, including the United Kingdom in June, and Belgium and Italy in
September.
Counterterrorism
European parliamentarians and victims continued to demand accountability for
complicity in counterterrorism abuses. The European Court of Human Rights
(ECtHR) heard arguments in May in its first case on European complicity in rendition
to torture by the United States concerning German citizen Khaled al-Masri
who was detained in Macedonia in 2003 before the US rendered him to torture
in Afghanistan. At this writing, similar cases against Poland, Romania, and
Lithuania remained pending before the court.
A European Parliament report and accompanying September resolution condemned
the lack of transparency and use of state secrecy impeding public
accountability for collusion in abuses. The report urged full inquiries in
Romania, Lithuania, and Poland, and called on other EU countries to disclose
information about secret CIA flights on their territory.
Human Rights Concerns in Select EU Member States
France
A summer campaign to evict Roma camps and remove migrant Roma from
France echoed a similar push in 2010, raising questions about pledges by
Socialist President François Hollande, elected in June, to tackle discrimination.
By mid-September, an estimated 4,000 people had been forcibly evicted, and
hundreds returned to Eastern Europe.
The UN special rapporteurs on housing, migrants’ rights, minority rights, and
racism issued a joint statement in August expressing concern over authorities’
failure to provide alternative housing, the risk of collective expulsions, and
stigmatization of Roma. The French government moved in September to ease
restrictions on access to employment for Eastern Europeans, including Roma,
and signed a new agreement with Romania on deportations providing for reintegration
projects.
In September, the government backtracked on a proposal to introduce stop
forms for identity checks—a way to improve police accountability and address
persistent concerns about ethnic profiling—in the face of strong opposition from
police unions. The rights ombudsman recommended reforms in October and
legal rules on pat-downs during such checks. In June, France’s highest criminal
court ruled that police powers to ask individuals to prove their right to be in
France, regardless of behavior, violated EU free movement norms.
The government moved to limit detention of children with their families pending
deportation, after an ECtHR ruling in January against France for detaining two
young children with their parents for two weeks in 2007. A July government circular
clarified that detention of families with children remained possible if families
do not respect the conditions of compulsory residence in a particular place
or if one or more family members abscond.
In February, the ECtHR ruled in a case brought by a Sudanese asylum seeker
that the fast-track asylum procedure, including lack of suspensive appeal, did
not provide effective protection against refoulement.
The European Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) expressed concern
in April about conditions and treatment in police and immigration detention,
prisons, and psychiatric facilities, recommending further reforms to ensure that
all suspects can access a lawyer from when they first enter police custody.
Parliament adopted a new sexual harassment law in late July, after the
Constitutional Court struck down previous legislation for vagueness. The new law protects a broader range of situations beyond employment and introduces
protections based on gender identity. In November the government tabled a bill
to legalize same-sex marriage.
In October, one man was killed and eleven arrested in multi-city raids following
a mid-September grenade attack on a Jewish supermarket outside Paris. At this
writing, parliament was examining draft legislation to criminalize acts of terrorism
abroad by French citizens. The measure, first proposed by the previous
administration after a man claiming to be inspired by al-Qaeda shot seven people
in March—including three Jewish children and a rabbi—would allow prosecution
for participating in terrorism training abroad.
Germany
The Federal Constitutional Court ruled in July that asylum seekers and refugees
should receive the same welfare benefits as German citizens, ordering retroactive
payments starting from 2011 to approximately 130,000 people. The suicide
of an asylum seeker in Würzburg in March launched a series of nationwide
protests about conditions in reception centers, restrictions on freedom of movement,
and obstacles to employment for asylum seekers.
German states, including Lower Saxony and Nordrhein-Westfalen, continued to
deport Roma to Kosovo despite concerns about inadequate reception conditions,
including problems accessing and integrating into the educational system.
Three senior intelligence officials resigned in July after repeated failures to correctly
identify and investigate a neo-Nazi cell responsible for murdering nine
immigrants and a policewoman. In October, a Frankfurt court upheld a 2002 ruling
that awarded compensation to a man later convicted of murdering a child
because a police officer had threatened violence during his interrogation.
At this writing, the lower house of parliament was examining two different bills
to make racist motivation an aggravating circumstance during sentencing for
criminal offenses, as well as a bill to introduce hate crimes as a specific category.
In October, the Koblenz administrative appeals court ruled that it was unlawful
and a violation of anti-discrimination law for German police to use racial profiling to conduct checks for irregular migrants, annulling an earlier February
decision that had permitted the police tactic.
In September, the federal justice minister drafted legislation to clarify the legality
of religiously motivated circumcisions, following a June Cologne court ruling
that circumcising young boys amounted to criminal bodily harm. The ruling provoked
considerable debate about freedom of religion and rights of the child.
The same month, Chancellor Angela Merkel called for greater tolerance towards
Muslims.
Greece
There was widespread hardship and protest in 2012 amid economic crisis. The
far-right anti-immigrant Golden Dawn party entered parliament for the first time
with 7 percent of the vote in the June general election.
Legislation passed in April permits police to detain migrants and asylum seekers
on overly broad public health grounds, including susceptibility to infectious
disease based on national origin and living in conditions that do not meet minimum
hygiene standards, prompting condemnation by the UN Committee
Against Torture (CAT).
The new government continued its predecessor’s heavy-handed immigration
control approach. Construction of a 12.5-kilometer fence along the border with
Turkey, begun in February, neared completion at this writing. A vast sweep operation
launched in August had by mid-November led to more than 50,000 presumed
undocumented migrants being detained for questioning based on
appearance alone, and more than 3,700 arrests. By the end of October, over
1,900 of these had been deported and 1,690 had returned home under the
International Organization for Migration’s (IOM) voluntary program. The operation
continued at this writing.
Critical problems with the asylum system persisted. New government bodies
inaugurated in March to oversee asylum reception and application processing
were not fully operational due to staffing delays by November. Severe obstacles
to submitting asylum applications remained, and latest available figures show Greece remained in 2011 the country with the lowest overall protection rate at
first instance in Europe (2 percent).
In July, September, and November, the ECtHR ruled in five separate cases that
Greece had subjected undocumented migrants and asylum seekers in detention
to inhuman and degrading treatment. In October, the government extended permissible
detention of asylum seekers to 3 to 15 months (and from 6 to 18
months for those who applied for asylum only once detained), a decision likely
to increase overcrowding in detention.
Greece established five new detention camps for undocumented migrants
between April and October, with more facilities planned on islands in response
to increased arrivals in 2012, including of Syrians. The European Commission,
the CPT, and CAT noted problematic conditions in detention centers, while nongovernmental
reports documented substandard detention conditions on islands
including overcrowding, poor hygiene, and limited access to health care, water,
and food.
Xenophobic violence reached alarming proportions with regular attacks on
migrants and asylum seekers, and growing evidence of the involvement of
Golden Dawn members. In October, the public order minister presented a draft
presidential decree to create specialized police units to tackle racist violence,
following a commitment in September by the justice minister to initiate legislative
reforms to toughen hate crime sentencing.
The Council of State, the highest administrative court, ruled in November that
criteria for acquiring citizenship under a 2010 law were too lenient; the government
announced it would present stricter requirements shortly.
The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, voiced its concern in May
after the government published photos and personal information, including HIV
status, of accused sex workers after police arrested them for allegedly having
unprotected sex with customers while HIV positive.
In May, the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child (CRC) expressed deep concern
about inhumane conditions experienced by children with disabilities at the Lechaina Children’s Care Center and urged Greece to ensure that children with
disabilities are never placed in such conditions.
Hungary
A new constitution and cardinal laws entered into force on January 1, 2012,
weakening human rights protection, stripping the constitutional court of some
powers, and undermining judicial independence, including a forced retirement
affecting 300 judges. In November, the CJEU ruled that lowering the retirement
age for judges constituted unjustified age discrimination.
In January, 348 religious groups lost their status as “churches” under the new
constitution. The constitution also defines the right to life as starting from conception,
raising concerns about reproductive rights; limits the right to vote for
persons with mental disabilities; and defines family in a way that excludes lesbian,
gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) people.
In November, the Hungarian Constitutional Court ruled unconstitutional a law
adopted in April criminalizing homelessness with repeat offenders subject to
fines or imprisonment. No one was prosecuted while the law was in force.
Despite criticism by the CoE, the European Commission, and the Organization
for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) representative on media freedom,
the Hungarian government failed to sufficiently amend problematic media
laws. The main media regulator, the Media Council, lacks political independence,
potential fines for journalists are excessive, and requirements for content
regulation are unclear. Journalists and media outlets reported self-censorship
and editorial interference. At this writing, the Media Council had yet to renew
the long-term broadcast license of leading independent news station Klubradio,
despite three court rulings in the station’s favor.
Roma continue to face discrimination and harassment. In July and August, rightwing
paramilitary groups marched through Romani settlements threatening residents
and attacking homes. In August, paramilitaries threw stones and bottles
at Romani houses and shouted threats in Devecser during a march against
“gypsy crime.” Police were present at the time but made no arrests. A police
investigation was ongoing at this writing.
There were several anti-Semitic attacks against Jewish leaders and memorials.
In October, two assailants beat and insulted a Jewish leader in Budapest. He
suffered minor injuries. Police later arrested the attackers, who were in custody
at this writing.
Hungary continued to return asylum seekers and migrants to neighboring countries,
including Serbia and Ukraine, despite lack of access to asylum, risk of
return to persecution in third countries, and in the case of Ukraine, risk of illtreatment
in detention. In October, the ECtHR ruled in two separate cases that
Hungary had unlawfully detained asylum seekers in 2010 without effective judicial
review of their detention.
Italy
An estimated 18,000 asylum seekers who arrived in 2011 remained in reception
centers, including emergency facilities, many awaiting final decisions on their
applications. To date, 30 percent of those who arrived from North Africa since
early 2011 had received some form of protection, including refugee status, subsidiary
protection, or humanitarian leave to remain in the country.
In October, the Italian government issued rules for the reexamination of denied
claims that could allow authorities to grant temporary protection. At this writing,
it remained unclear what would happen to those housed in facilities at year’s
end, when the “North Africa Emergency,” which the government declared in
February 2011, is set to expire.
Concern over living conditions and integration for asylum seekers and refugees,
including the risk of homelessness and destitution, led German courts, as well
as the ECtHR, to block transfers to Italy under Dublin II.
In February, the ECtHR ruled that Italy’s summary “push-backs” of migrant boats
to Libya in 2009 amounted to collective expulsions and exposed people to torture
and cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment in Libya or their countries of
origin. The government indicated it would respect the ruling, but commitments
reached with the new Libyan authorities in April raised questions over continued
efforts to externalize border control in ways that violate human rights.
Summary returns to Greece continued, including of unaccompanied children
and asylum seekers who stow away on ferries to Italy. In September and
October respectively, Commissioner Muižnieks and UN Special Rapporteur on
Migrants’ Rights François Crépeau urged Italy to suspend all returns to Greece
due to grave deficiencies in the country’s asylum system.
Muižnieks urged the government to ensure implementation of the first national
strategy on Roma inclusion, which it adopted in February, by establishing precise
targets and allocating adequate resources. Roma continued in 2012 to face
evictions from informal camps and segregation
In March, the ECtHR ruled Italy’s expulsion of a Tunisian terrorism suspect in
2010 violated the prohibition of torture and ill-treatment and the court’s order to
stay removal.
In March, the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD)
expressed serious concerns about racist violence in Italy, and urged measures
to improve prevention, investigation, and prosecution. In June, the UN special
rapporteur on violence against women recommended that Italy adopt a specific
law on violence against women and ensure access to justice for victims, including
Roma, Sinti, and undocumented migrant women.
In July, Italy’s highest criminal court upheld the convictions of senior police officers
for falsifying evidence in relation to police violence during the 2001 G8
summit in Genoa; it also upheld controversial long prison sentences of up to 15
years for some protesters over property destruction, ordering others to be
reviewed.
In September, the same court upheld the 2011 in absentia convictions of 23 US
citizens for the 2003 abduction and rendition to Egypt of an Egyptian imam
known as Abu Omar, and ordered the retrial of five Italian intelligence officers,
including two senior officials, whom lower courts had acquitted citing state
secrecy.
The Netherlands
The People’s Party for Freedom and Democracy and Dutch Labor Party formally
took power in a coalition government in November after winning the September
elections. The anti-immigrant Freedom Party lost nine seats.
In September and October, parliament suspended deportations of children who
have been living in the Netherlands for at least five years, and to postpone
implementation of tighter family reunification requirements. Both measures will
be considered now that a government has been formed.
The Council of State, the highest administrative court, ruled in July that Somalia
was not a safe country of return, and ordered that dozens of Somali failed asylum
seekers be released from immigration detention. The previous government
halted deportations of gay Iraqis in June, and in July announced a policy to grant
protection to Iraqis seeking asylum based on sexual orientation or gender identity.
In August, the Dutch national ombudsman and the CPT criticized conditions in
immigration detention. The CPT expressed concern over families with children
being detained for longer than the 28-day maximum permitted by law. They
urged the government to only detain children in exceptional circumstances and
without locking them in cells.
During the Netherlands’ Universal Periodic Review (UPR) at the Human Rights
Council (HRC) in May, numerous countries recommended measures to combat
discrimination and racism.
At this writing, parliament was due to examine draft legislation tabled in August
to eliminate the sex reassignment surgery requirement for transgender people
who want to get a new identification document.
Poland
In March, news emerged that Poland’s former intelligence chief had been
charged over complicity in CIA secret detention on Polish territory. The ECtHR
agreed in July to examine a case brought by a Saudi national, currently held in Guantánamo Bay, who alleges he was held incommunicado and tortured in a
secret CIA facility in Poland in 2002-2003.
In September, parliament passed a law authorizing appointed provincial governors,
rather than the courts, to decide on appeals against denials of permission
to hold a public demonstration. In September, the OSCE called for Poland to
repeal its defamation laws after a court convicted Robert Frycz, editor of the
Antykomor.pl website, for insulting the president, and sentenced him to 15-
months of community service.
In September, parliament voted against a bill to liberalize access to abortion
and contraception, and institute comprehensive sex education. In October, the
ECtHR ruled that Poland violated the rights of a 14-year-old rape victim who was
denied a legal abortion.
Romania
A political crisis between the president and prime minister led the government
to take steps that undermined separation of powers and the rule of law.
Following a May constitutional court ruling that the president, rather than the
prime minister, should represent Romania in EU meetings, the government in
July stripped the court of its powers to overrule parliamentary decisions,
replaced the ombudsman with a party loyalist, and took control of the official
gazette that publishes court decisions and laws, in order to delay Constitutional
Court rulings coming into effect.
In July, the European Parliament, European Commission, and CoE criticized
these actions as contrary to the rule of law, with Commission President José
Manuel Barroso referring to possible infringement proceedings. A July European
Commission report raised serious concerns about Romania’s commitment to the
rule of law. It called on the country to reverse measures impacting judicial independence
and appoint an ombudsman with cross-party support.
Romanian authorities continued in 2012 to deny allegations that they housed a
secret CIA prison to detain and interrogate terrorism suspects, despite a joint
investigation by the Associated Press and German public television ARD Panorama, and German newspaper Süddeutsche Zeitung, which in December
2011 identified the former location of the prison in Bucharest.
Discrimination and marginalization of Roma remained a concern. Approximately
150 Roma were forcibly evicted in June from informal settlements in Baia Mare,
northwestern Romania, and relocated to a former chemical plant without adequate
accommodation or sanitation. Several hundred more faced imminent
eviction from other informal settlements in Baia Mare.
Spain
Demonstrations continued throughout 2012 as the government imposed austerity
measures amid a deepening economic crisis, and protester and police violence
that included use of rubber bullets. The UN Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR) expressed concern in June that austerity
measures disproportionately affect vulnerable groups, highlighting forced evictions
without due safeguards, curtailed access to health services for undocumented
migrants, and deep cuts in education budgets.
In July, the ECtHR found that Spain had violated anti-torture and non-discrimination
obligations by failing to investigate allegations that in 2005, police conducted
a racially abusive identity check on an African woman who was a legal
resident. In a separate ruling the same month, the court found that retroactive
lengthening of prison sentences, limiting eligibility for parole for people convicted
of terrorism offenses, violated fair trial standards. The ECtHR agreed in
November to hear the Spanish government’s appeal against the ruling.
In April, Frontex attributed continued low levels of boat migration to Spain to
sea patrols and the country’s migration cooperation with African countries.
Spain forcibly removed to Morocco around 70 sub-Saharan Africans from a nearby
Spanish island in September, despite media and NGO reports of migrant illtreatment
in Morocco and dumping at the Algerian border. Two women and
eight children were transported to Spanish mainland. In February, CAT published
its decision against Spain for failing to investigate the responsibility of a
Spanish coast guard unit in the 2007 drowning of a Senegalese man off Ceuta,
the Spanish enclave in Morocco.
In February, the Spanish Supreme Court acquitted Judge Baltasar Garzón of
abusing his judicial powers by investigating enforced disappearances during
the Franco era between 1939 and 1975, despite Spain’s amnesty law. Earlier that
month, the same court convicted Garzón of ordering unlawful wiretaps in a corruption
case and suspended him from the bench for 11 years.
In September, parliament rejected an opposition bill initiated under the previous
government to improve Spain’s anti-discrimination legislation. In
November, the Constitutional Court upheld Spain’s law on marriage equality.
The justice minister announced his intention in July to limit access to abortion
laws, but at this writing no draft legislation had been tabled.
United Kingdom
In May, the government reduced pre-charge detention in terrorism cases from
28 to 14 days, but left open the possibility for parliament to reinstate 28 days in
an emergency. Replacements to control orders on terrorism suspects no longer
permit forced relocation and are subject to stricter time limits. But the new
measures can still be based in part on secret evidence, and parliament can
quickly approve harsher powers in an emergency.
A draft law in parliament at this writing would widen use of secret hearings in
civil courts on national security grounds and prevent material that shows UK
involvement in wrongdoing by other countries being disclosed. In September,
the UN special rapporteur on torture expressed concern that the draft law could
inhibit accountability for torture.
In January, the government halted a widely criticized inquiry into UK involvement
in rendition and torture. It cited new criminal investigations into UK complicity
in rendition and torture in Libya by former dictator Muammar Gaddafi’s
security forces. Although the government promised a second inquiry, it was
unclear at this writing when it would begin, and whether it would have the necessary
independence and powers.
In January, the ECtHR blocked deportation of Jordanian terrorism suspect Abu
Qatada due to the risk of evidence obtained through torture being used against
him at trial upon return, but also held that diplomatic assurances were sufficient to protect him from torture or ill-treatment. In November, a UK court
ordered Qatada’s release from custody saying it was not satisfied that he would
received a fair trial in Jordan; he was placed under house arrest.
In October, the UK extradited five terrorism suspects to the US after the ECtHR in
September definitively rejected their appeals that they would face ill-treatment.
In June, the government signed the CoE Convention on preventing and combating
violence against women and domestic violence, but continued to reject calls
to sign the International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention on Decent Work
for Domestic Workers. Instead, in April it changed immigration rules that will
make it harder for foreign domestic workers to leave abusive situations without
losing their immigration status.
The UK continued to deport failed Sri Lankan Tamil asylum seekers, including 25
on a chartered flight in September, despite evidence of torture upon return for
some Tamils with perceived links to Sri Lanka’s separatist Tamil Tigers.
Official statistics published in August revealed that the number of children
being detained with their parents pending deportation was rising, although
such detention is limited to one week. In April, the UK Border Authority suspended
a pilot program to use dental x-rays to determine age, amid medical
ethics concerns.
In September, the UK’s chief prosecutor announced he would develop guidelines
related to prosecuting offensive speech on the internet and social media
after a series of controversial convictions raised free expression concerns.
Georgia
The October 2012 parliamentary elections marked Georgia’s first peaceful transition
of power since independence. The opposition Georgian Dream coalition,
led by billionaire Bidzina Ivanishvili, defeated President Mikheil Saakashvili’s
ruling United National Movement (UNM), gained a majority in parliament, and
formed a new government. Harassment and intimidation of opposition party
activists and other violations marred the pre-election environment. Authorities
used administrative (misdemeanor) charges to detain activists for minor public
order breaches without full due process.
Graphic video material showing torture and ill-treatment of inmates illustrated a
long-standing problem. Lack of judicial independence is a serious problem.
Parliamentary Elections
International observers, led by the Organization for Security and Co-operation in
Europe (OSCE), concluded that the October 1 parliamentary elections were in
line with Georgia’s commitments. However, the pre-election environment was
polarized and tense, with some instances of violence. Georgian Dream activists
were targeted in several violent incidents in June and July.
On June 26, during Ivanishvili’s campaign visit to Mereti village, ruling party
supporters, including civil servants, allegedly provoked a fistfight. Several people
sustained injuries. Police detained four, including two opposition supporters,
and the courts sentenced them to ten days of administrative imprisonment.
No officials were held accountable.
A similar incident took place on July 10, when government supporters in Karaleti
village threw stones and swore at opposition supporters campaigning in the village.
Thirteen people, including ten journalists, sustained injuries and were
hospitalized. Police arrested six, including four opposition members, and sentenced
them to fifteen days of administrative imprisonment.
Domestic observers reported misuse of administrative resources by the incumbent
party. UNM candidates at times had preferential access to public venues and transport, and some of them had their campaign offices in local administration
buildings.
The State Audit Office, which monitors parties’ compliance with campaign
financing rules, overwhelmingly targeted the opposition. In March, it summoned
and questioned over 100 opposition supporters as witnesses in cases of possible
breaches of campaign finance regulations. OSCE said the authorities selectively
targeted the opposition, “raising questions about the impartiality of
enforcement.” According to Georgia’s ombudsman, in some cases the authorities
investigated these individuals without respecting due process and in an
intimidating manner that may have deterred other potential donors. Courts
imposed staggering fines—sometimes as high as five times the amount of the
donation— on donors they found to have violated regulations, often leading to
seizure of their property.
Administrative (Misdemeanor) Detentions
The government continued to resist reforming its system of administrative
detention. Georgia’s Code of Administrative Offences sets out misdemeanor
sentences of up to 90 days. Although the sentence is equivalent to a criminal
penalty, detainees do not have access to full due process rights. Although
defense counsel is permitted, some detainees had difficulties accessing a
lawyer in part because they are not allowed to inform their families of their
detention. Lawyers who act for those facing administrative charges have sometimes
as little as 10 to 15 minutes to prepare a defense. Defendants also often
cannot present evidence or call witnesses in court.
For example, in September, police detained at least seven individuals under
similar circumstances in four separate incidents in Tbilisi. The Ministry of
Interior stated that all seven defendants disobeyed police orders and insulted
them. Courts sentenced the detainees to administrative imprisonment ranging
from 10 to 40 days. Two of those detained alleged ill-treatment in police custody
and bore visible bruises at a trial, but the court failed to refer this for investigation.
Administrative detainees are held in Ministry of Interior holding cells. Although
some of them were renovated, many are unsuitable for long-term detention,
with inadequate access to exercise and hygienic and medical care.
Torture and Ill-treatment
In September, local media broadcast a series of video recordings showing
graphic images of beating and sexual abuse of prisoners in several penitentiary
facilities. Hours before the videos were released, the Ministry of Interior said
that it arrested three officials of Tbilisi’s Gldani prison for ill-treatment of
inmates. The ministry released footage depicting two prison guards beating an
inmate, and a television station broadcast further video materials showing
Gldani prison officials beating and humiliating newly arrived inmates. Shortly
afterward, another television station aired further footage graphically depicting
prison staff raping inmates.
The authorities acknowledged both the systemic nature of prison abuse and
their failure to react effectively to years of warnings about such abuse. The ministers
for prisons and interior resigned, and police arrested 16 penitentiary staff,
pending investigations.
Judicial Independence
In March, the Georgian Young Lawyers’ Association published a report showing
that in all 520 cases it monitored at the Tbilisi City Court during a six-month
period between 2011 and 2012, the judges granted all motions filed by the prosecution
regarding the admissibility of evidence, while denying all defense
motions that prosecution did not support.
The court satisfied all requests for pre-trial custody and of the 113 judgments it
handed down during the six months there was not a single acquittal. Since the
Tbilisi City Court accounts for about 40 percent of all cases handled by Georgia’s
courts, the report raised serious questions on the independence of the judiciary.
Prison Conditions
The policy of zero tolerance towards crime and high conviction rates led to a rise
in the prison population. According to the ombudsman’s 2012 report, prison
overcrowding is a persistent problem, leading to poor prison conditions. The
report noted that in four prisons, inmates did not have “their own personal
beds.”
Freedom of Media
Georgia’s print media presents diverse political views, but nationwide television
broadcasting was limited to the state-funded public broadcaster and two progovernment
stations, which were often biased in favor of the government. One
partial improvement was an amendment to the election code requiring cable
networks and satellite content providers to broadcast all television stations that
carry news for 60 days ahead of elections. This allowed the three pro-opposition
private channels, Maestro, Kavkasia, and TV 9, to increase their penetration into
the urban areas being reached by cable networks. Most networks continued to
broadcast all stations following the elections.
In July, the cable network provider Global Contact Consulting (GCC) and Maestro
TV unsuccessfully attempted to increase their penetration by distributing satellite
receivers. The authorities seized their satellite dishes on grounds that they
were intended for “vote-buying” and released them only after the polls. In June,
the authorities detained and questioned Alexander Ronzhes, a United States
citizen and GCC shareholder. During questioning, authorities claimed Ronzhes
had been involved in suspicious financial transactions but they released him
the same day without charges.
In July, the OSCE media freedom representative, Dunja Mijatovic, expressed concern
over violence against journalists, highlighting the Mereti and Karaleti incidents
when journalists were physically and verbally assaulted.
In September, Giorgi Abdaladze—one of four photographers arrested in 2011,
charged with espionage and released after plea bargaining—said in a media
interview that prison staff and investigators coerced him into rejecting his legal
counsel and making a false confession under threats of ill-treatment.
Lack of Accountability for Excessive Use of Force
The authorities still failed to ensure full accountability for excessive use of force
on May 26, 2011, when police used water cannons, tear gas, rubber bullets, and
other violence to disperse anti-government protests in Tbilisi.
Authorities’ failure to fully address excessive use of force by police was further
tainted by the continued lack of effective investigations into past instances of
abuse, including the events of November 7, 2007, when police used excessive
force against largely peaceful protestors in Tbilisi, injuring at least 500, and the
June 15, 2009 police attack against 50 opposition supporters outside police
headquarters in which at least 17 demonstrators were injured.
In October, the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) ruled that Georgia had
violated the prohibition against inhuman or degrading treatment in the case of
Giorgi Mikiashvili. Police used excessive force when they arrested Mikiashvili in
2005, causing multiple bruises on his face and head. The court denounced the
authorities’ failure to effectively investigate the incident.
Key International Actors
The United States, the European Union, the Council of Europe (CoE), OSCE, and
other institutions and bilateral partners of Georgia welcomed the October parliamentary
elections and subsequent peaceful political transition as a significant
step forward in the country’s democratic development.
A large number of foreign governments and international organizations condemned
the abuses depicted in the prison video footage and urged the authorities
to ensure prompt, thorough, and transparent investigation and accountability
for those responsible.
In its May European Neighborhood Policy progress report, the EU expressed
concerns about a dominant executive branch, weak parliamentary oversight,
and lack of judicial independence. It also, for the first time, made concrete recommendations
to the authorities to address these and other concerns.
While visiting Georgia in June, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton highlighted
the importance of the 2012 and 2013 parliamentary and presidential elections
in meeting the country’s “Euro-Atlantic aspirations”. She also stressed the
importance of labor rights, judicial independence, and media independence.
In its June report, the UN special rapporteur on the rights to freedom of assembly
and association expressed concern about a “climate of fear and intimidation”
against members of opposition political parties and civil society.
Kazakhstan
Kazakhstan’s human rights record seriously deteriorated in 2012, following violent
clashes In December 2011 between police and demonstrators, including
striking oil workers, in western Kazakhstan. Authorities blamed outspoken oil
workers and political opposition activists for the unrest. Freedom of assembly is
restricted and dozens were fined or sentenced to administrative arrest in early
2012 for participating in peaceful protests. A restrictive law on religious freedoms
remained in force. Media remains under tight control and there were
attacks on independent journalists. Legislation regulating workers’ rights is
vague and burdensome, and a ban on strikes in certain sectors of the economy
improperly restricts workers’ rights.
Parliamentary Elections
Despite the state of emergency in effect in the western Kazakh oil town of
Zhanaozen, Kazakhstan held early parliamentary elections on January 15, 2012.
The Observation Mission of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in
Europe’s (OSCE) Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR)
concluded that the vote did “not meet fundamental principles of democratic
elections,” and the authorities did not provide “the necessary conditions for the
conduct of genuinely pluralistic elections.”
Conduct of Police and Security Forces
On December 16, 2011, clashes broke out between police and demonstrators,
including striking oil workers, who had gathered in Zhanaozen’s central square.
In response to the clashes and subsequent mayhem, police and government
troops opened fire, killing 12 and wounding dozens, according to government
figures. Three further people died in the clashes and several police officers were
injured. On December 17, police shot dead a protester in Shetpe. The security
forces’ use of force and firearms did not appear to be justified or proportionate.
In May 2012, five officers were convicted for “abuse of power,” but no officers
were held accountable for the sixteen killings. In trials that did not adhere to international human rights standards, courts convicted a total of 45 oil workers
and demonstrators for participating or organizing mass riots, putting 17 behind
bars.
Detention of Activists
During 2012, the authorities amnestied a number of imprisoned activists,
including, Kazakhstan’s most prominent human rights defender Yevgeniy
Zhovtis, union lawyer Natalia Sokolova, and political activist Aidos Sadykov.
Vadim Kuramshin, a civil society activist arrested in January on various charges,
including extortion, was released in August on a one-year suspended sentence.
However, after he spoke at an OSCE meeting in September in Warsaw, an
appeals court sent his case for retrial. Kuramshin was rearrested, raising fears
his detention was retribution for his public criticism of the government. His case
was ongoing at this writing.
Starting in January, authorities misused criminal charges to arrest over a dozen
others, including Vladimir Kozlov, the leader of the unregistered opposition
party Alga!, civil society activist Serik Sapargali, and oil worker Akzhanat
Aminov. On October 8, in a politically motivated trial marred by due process violations
and vague and overbroad criminal charges, a court sentenced Kozlov to
seven-and-a-half years in prison. Sapargali and Aminov will serve suspended
sentences. Following Kozlov’s conviction, the United States expressed serious
concern about “the government’s apparent use of the legal system to silence
political opposition.” In November, Kozlov’s sentence was upheld on appeal.
Torture
Detainees made credible and serious allegations of torture in 2012, particularly
in the aftermath of the Zhanaozen violence. The authorities failed to take any
meaningful steps to thoroughly investigate these allegations or hold the perpetrators
accountable, reinforcing a culture of impunity.
Between December 16 and 19, 2011, police detained hundreds of people in
Zhanaozen, several of whom stated that police kicked and beat detainees with truncheons, stripped them naked, walked on them, and subjected them to
freezing temperatures. In March, defendants at one of the trials following the
Zhanaozen events testified that guards and investigators subjected them to
physical and psychological abuse, including beatings, suffocation, and threats
of rape or harm to family members. The prosecutor’s office declined to open a
criminal investigation.
On December 22, Bazarbai Kenzhebaev, 50, died from wounds he sustained in
police custody. Kenzhebaev had described to his family how police severely
beat him, forced him to undress, lie face down on the floor and walked on him,
stepping on his head. In May, the former director of the Zhanaozen temporary
detention facility was sentenced to five years in prison, but those directly
responsible for the beatings that led to Kenzhebaev’s death have not been held
accountable.
Human rights groups expressed concern about Vladislav Chelakh, a 19-year-old
border guard accused of murdering 15 colleagues at a Kazakhstan-China border
post. The groups said the authorities held him incommunicado for weeks and
coerced his confession. His case, ongoing at this writing, had been marred by
irregularities.
Freedom of Expression
In December 2011, Kazakh authorities declared a state of emergency in
Zhanaozen, temporarily blocking several key websites, including Twitter, across
Kazakhstan. Other popular websites, including the blogging platform
Livejournal, remained blocked at this writing. Independent journalists continued
to be targeted for their work. One journalist, Lukpan Akhmedyarov, was hospitalized
in March 2012 following a vicious attack by unknown assailants. Libel
remains a criminal offense and journalists are forced to pay prohibitive fines in
defamation lawsuits.
In January, President Nazarbaev signed a new controversial broadcast law even
though the previous month the OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media
Dunja Mijatović had urged the president to veto the bill. In January and February, authorities arrested civil society activists for “inciting
social discord,” a vague and overbroad charge that can be used to criminalize
legitimate exercise of the rights to freedom of expression and association as
protected under international human rights law. They arrested Vzglyad editor-inchief
Igor Vinyavskii in January on charges of “calling for the forcible overthrow
of the constitutional order.” He was released two months later after his case
received sustained international attention, including from the OSCE representative
on freedom of the media, who in January called for his “immediate release.”
Freedom of Assembly
Kazakh authorities maintain restrictive rules on freedom of assembly. In
response to a series of public protests in the first half of 2012, the authorities
detained and fined opposition and civil society activists and others for organizing
and participating in unsanctioned protests, sentencing some to up to 15
days in prison and fining others up to US$550.
Freedom of Religion
Following the 2011 adoption of a restrictive law on religion—which outlaws any
practice of religion in association with others without state permission—respect
for religious freedoms continued to decline, according to Forum 18, an independent,
international religious freedom group. In 2012, hundreds of small religious
communities have been forced to close, unable to meet the 50 person
membership requirements for re-registration, compulsory under the new law.
Makset Djabbarbergenov, a protestant pastor from Uzbekistan who sought asylum
in Kazakhstan in 2007, was arrested by Kazakh authorities on September 5,
2012, and currently faces extradition to Uzbekistan where he faces criminal
charges of illegally teaching religion and distributing religious literature.
Child Labor in Agriculture and Labor Rights
The Kazakhstan government and several companies violated fundamental labor
and other rights of thousands of workers employed in the country’s petroleum
sector in 2011. Burdensome collective bargaining requirements and a broad prohibition on the right to strike violate workers’ rights. Proposed amendments to
Kazakhstan’s law on unions, and administrative and criminal codes, would further
restrict workers’ rights and did not appear to meet international standards
concerning freedom of association.
Risk of debt bondage and cases of hazardous child labor persist on some farms,
despite steps by Philip Morris Kazakhstan, a subsidiary of Philip Morris
International, to increase protections for migrant tobacco workers, including
insisting on written contracts and improved training. Following her September
visit, UN Special Rapporteur on Contemporary Forms of Slavery Gulnara
Shahinian indicated that complex legal requirements for employing migrants
and obstacles to migrant children attending schools may undermine the government’s
progress in preventing forced labor and hazardous child labor.
Key International Actors
Kazakhstan’s key international partners have failed to respond to serious
human rights abuses in Kazakhstan in 2012 with any discernible policy consequences.
Instead, in February 2012, the US upgraded relations by agreeing to
commence “Strategic Partnership” dialogues in place of the annual bilateral
consultations. No known human rights benchmarks were set in advance of
upgrading US-Kazakhstan relations.
In 2012, the European Union and Kazakhstan held several rounds of negotiations
on an enhanced Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA), which
promises preferential political and economic ties to Kazakhstan. However, the
EU has not set any clear human rights benchmarks for enhanced engagement,
despite a March 2012 statement by the EU High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy Catherine Ashton that the “successful conclusion of
the negotiations will be influenced by the advancement of democratic reforms,”
and a March 2012 European Parliament resolution that states “progress in the
negotiation[s] … must depend on the progress of political reform.”
In July, United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay visited
Kazakhstan where she issued a highly critical statement on the country’s deteriorating rights record and calling for “an independent international investigation
into the [December] event” in Zhanaozen. Previously, in December 2011 and
February 2012, Ashton had called for an “objective and transparent investigation
of the events.” The US also called for a “complete impartial investigation”
into the Zhanaozen violence.
Kyrgyzstan
Kyrgyzstan has failed to adequately address abuses in the south, in particular
against ethnic Uzbeks, undermining long-term efforts to promote stability and
reconciliation following inter-ethnic clashes in June 2010 that killed more than
400 people. Despite an uneasy calm in southern Kyrgyzstan, ethnic Uzbeks are
still subjected to arbitrary detention, torture, and extortion, without redress.
Human rights defender Azimjon Askarov remains wrongfully imprisoned.
Authorities blocked access to an independent news portal and banned a film
about gay men. Violence and discrimination against women and lesbian, gay,
bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) persons remain serious concerns.
Following a visit by the United Nations special rapporteur on torture in
December 2011, authorities adopted new legislation and made reforms to the
criminal code to address incompatibilities with international standards on the
prevention of torture. However, ill-treatment and torture remain pervasive in
places of detention, and perpetrators go unpunished.
Access to Justice
Local human rights nongovernmental organizations reported that the overall
number of reported incidents of arbitrary detention and ill-treatment in police
custody continued to decrease in 2012 in the south, although they still document
new cases. Groups also reported the growing problem of law enforcement
extorting money, in particular from ethnic Uzbeks, threatening criminal prosecution
related to the June 2010 events. Victims of extortion rarely report incidents
for fear of reprisals.
Investigations into the June 2010 violence have stalled. Trials of mostly ethnic
Uzbeks connected to the violence continued to take place in violation of international
fair trial standards, including the trials of Mahamad Bizurukov and
Shamshidin Niyazaliev, each of whom was sentenced to life in prison in October
2012. According to Kylym Shamy, a Bishkek-based human rights group, some
victims of the violence have not received financial compensation promised by
the government.
Lawyers in southern Kyrgyzstan continued to be harassed in 2012 for defending
ethnic Uzbek clients who were charged with involvement in the June 2010 violence,
perpetuating a hostile and violent environment that undermined defendants’
fair trial rights. On January 20, a group of persons in Jalalabad verbally
and physically attacked a lawyer defending the ethnic Uzbek owner of an Uzbeklanguage
television station. No one has been held accountable for such violence
against lawyers.
Torture
UN Special Rapporteur on Torture Juan Mendez concluded after his December
2011 mission to Kyrgyzstan that “the use of torture and ill-treatment to extract
confessions remains widespread” and that “general conditions in most places
of detention visited amount to inhuman and degrading treatment.” In October
2012, the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) cited the “widespread use of
torture against members of the Uzbek minority in the southern part of
Kyrgyzstan” in a ruling in the case of Ergashev v. Russia, concerning an ethnic
Uzbek man threatened with extradition from Russia. In November, as many as
37 detainees alleged they were beaten by police in a pretrial detention facility in
Jalalabad, and some said they were stripped naked and humiliated. In statements
to the media, the Ministry of Internal Affairs said they found no evidence
of a crime during a preliminary review.
In July, the government adopted a law on the National Center for the Prevention
of Torture, fulfilling Kyrgyzstan’s obligation under the Optional Protocol to the
United Nations Convention against Torture (CAT) to establish a national torture
prevention mechanism. Concurrently, criminal code amendments went into
effect, bringing the definition of torture in line with international standards.
In June, government agencies, international organizations, and domestic NGOs
concluded a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms, which allows the signatories to make unannounced visits
to places of detention. However in practice some NGOs still encountered
restrictions despite the MoU.
In hearings related to the June 2010 violence, judges continue to dismiss,
ignore, or fail to order investigations into torture allegations. In a rare exception,
four police officers were charged with torture after the August 2011 death of
Usmonzhon Kholmirzaev, an ethnic Uzbek, who succumbed to internal injuries
after he was beaten by police in custody. Repeated delays in proceedings have
meant that over a year later, the trial has yet to conclude. In June, after
Abdugafur Abdurakhmanov, an ethnic Uzbek serving a life sentence in relation
to the June 2010 violence, died in prison, authorities did not open an investigation,
alleging he committed suicide.
Farrukh Gapirov, an ethnic Uzbek, was awarded damages in March for unlawful
imprisonment and torture in custody. He was arrested in 2010 on charges related
to the inter-ethnic violence and later acquitted.
Freedom of Expression
In February, state-controlled KyrgyzTelecom began to block access to
Ferghana.ru, an independent Central Asia news website, enforcing a June 2011
parliament resolution adopted after Ferghana.ru’s critical reporting on the June
2010 violence. NGOs and Kyrgyzstan’s international partners strongly criticized
the blocking of the site. The Organization for Security and Co-operation in
Europe (OSCE) Representative on Freedom of the Media Dunja Mijatović called
for it to be “lifted immediately.” KyrgyzTelecom continues to block access to
Ferghana.ru, although the site can be accessed through other providers.
Mijatović also expressed concern about the case of Vladimir Farafonov, a journalist
who, on July 3, was fined US$1,000 for inciting inter-ethnic hatred in articles
posted online, stating the verdict “might negatively influence the journalistic
community in Kyrgyzstan.” Farfonov had written articles about growing
Kyrgyz nationalism and ethnic Russians in Kyrgyzstan.
In 2012, some journalists were physically or verbally attacked while doing their
work. Several times in October, Ata-Jurt political party supporters attacked journalists
during protests. Journalists reported that police did not intervene.
“Insult” and “insult of a public official” remain criminal offenses.
In September, the authorities banned a documentary about gay Muslims which
was to be screened during the One World human rights film festival in Bishkek,
finding it “extremist.” Officials and others pressured human rights defender
Tolekan Ismailova not to show the film.
Sexual Orientation and Gender-Based Violence
Authorities have not effectively addressed long-standing problems of genderbased
violence, including widespread domestic violence and bride kidnapping,
which continue, largely with impunity. On September 20, a court sentenced
Shaimbek Aimanakunov, 35, to 6 years in prison on a conviction for incitement
to suicide, rape, and forced marriage. Two days after Aimanakunov had kidnapped,
raped, and forcibly married a nineteen-year-old university student, she
hung herself.
Gay and bisexual men are at serious risk of entrapment, extortion, beating and
sexual violence. Such abuses largely go unpunished. In May, the prosecutor
general’s office refused to investigate approximately 10 cases of entrapment
and extortion on the grounds that the victims declined to be identified. Lesbian
and bisexual women continue to be subjected to forced marriages and “curative
rapes,” according to Labrys, a local NGO focusing on LGBT rights.
Human Rights Defenders
Azimjon Askarov, a human rights defender who has worked on documenting
police treatment of detainees, is serving a life sentence, despite a prosecution
marred by serious violations of fair trial standards. Askarov was found guilty of
“organizing mass disorders,” “inciting ethnic hatred,” and taking part in killing
a police officer on June 13, 2010. On December 20, 2011, Kyrgyzstan’s Supreme
Court upheld the verdict. Prosecutorial authorities refused to open a criminal
investigation into Askarov’s credible allegations of torture in custody. In May,
the prosecutor general’s office denied a request filed by Citizens Against
Corruption, a local human rights NGO, to reopen the case on grounds of new
evidence. In November, Askarov and his lawyers submitted a complaint on his
case to the Human Rights Committee.
In January, parliamentarians introduced a draft law on foreign assistance that, if
adopted, would “make foreign financing of NCOs [non-commercial organizations]
more difficult and may lead to restriction of activities of NCOs in
Kyrgyzstan,” according to the International Center for Not-for-Profit Law (ICNL).
At this writing, work on this law remained suspended.
In March, human rights activist Ravshan Gapirov won compensation from the
state for being unlawfully held in pretrial detention in 2008, after it was determined
that articles he had written did not incite hatred.
Key International Actors
In June, UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay presented her second
report to the Human Rights Council (HRC) on Kyrgyzstan following the 2010
violence, in which she noted that “serious institutional deficiencies have hampered
the delivery of justice and undermined the rule of law” and “lack of
progress in addressing these matters impacts on reconciliation and peacebuilding
efforts.” The report includes recommendations to address discrimination,
ill-treatment and torture, and minority rights, among others.
During her July visit to Kyrgyzstan, Pillay called attention to human rights issues
including torture, discrimination on ethnic, religious and gender grounds, and
violations of fair trial standards. She “urged the president…[to make] clear public
statements stressing there will be zero tolerance for torture.”
In February, the European Union held an EU-Kyrgyzstan Civil Society Seminar on
Human Rights, and in September held its fourth annual human rights dialogue
with Kyrgyzstan. The EU’s voice on rights violations in Kyrgyzstan was overall
muted.
United States Ambassador to the OSCE Ian Kelly publicly criticized the imprisonment
of Askarov, discrimination against ethnic minorities, and restrictions on
media freedoms. In late October, the US-Kyrgyzstan Annual Bilateral
Consultations took place in Bishkek .
During a September mission, the UN Subcommittee on the Prevention of Torture
(SPT), under the CAT’s Optional Protocol (OPCAT), visited temporary detention
facilities, prisons, and psychiatric institutions. The SPT presented confidential
conclusions and recommendations to help the government “establish effective
safeguards against the risk of torture and ill-treatment in places of deprivation
of liberty.”Russia
Mass protests following Russia’s December 2011 parliamentary elections
prompted promises of political reforms. However, after his return to the presidency,
Vladimir Putin oversaw the swift reversal of former President Dmitry
Medvedev’s few, timid advances on political freedoms and unleashed an
unprecedented crackdown against civic activism. New laws in 2012 restrict nongovernmental
organizations and freedoms of assembly and expression. New
local laws discriminate against lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT)
people. Abuses continue in the counterinsurgency campaign in the North
Caucasus.
Undermined Reforms
Russia’s international partners initially praised reforms to Russia’s electoral system
that took place early in 2012, when parliament adopted legislative amendments
that restored popular election of regional governors (since 2004, governors
had been appointed by the Kremlin). However, under these reforms, gubernatorial
candidates are required to secure support from local legislatures, which
the ruling party dominates.
Amendments also lowered the minimum number of members for political party
registration from 50,000 to 500 and lowered the threshold of votes a party
needs for parliamentary representation from 7 to 5 percent. However, the ban on
electoral blocs and the requirement that parties field candidates or risk losing
registration attenuated the reforms’ potential to strengthen political pluralism.
The reforms were adopted too late to apply to the December 4, 2011 parliamentary
vote, which saw the ruling party win 49.3 percent of the vote.
Freedom of Assembly
The September 2011 announcement by Medvedev and Putin that they would
essentially switch posts became a tipping point for people dissatisfied with a
decade of “soft” authoritarianism, bringing tens of thousands to the streets of Russia’s capital for unprecedented protests a day after the December parliamentary
vote.
Thousands protested alleged electoral fraud, and riot police attacked some protesters
and randomly detained about 300, some of who were sentenced to 15
days’ detention. Protests and detentions continued in following days in Moscow
and large Russian cities, but police subsequently ceased interfering with mass
rallies.
However, on May 6, the day before Putin’s inauguration, there were clashes in
Moscow between police and demonstrators. By May 8, police detained over
1,000 people, many for simply wearing the protest movement’s symbolic white
ribbons, and even raided several cafes favored by protesters, detaining patrons.
At this writing, 17 people awaited trial for alleged participation in mass disorders
and attacking police, punishable by up to 10 years in prison. Witnesses
and video recordings indicate that some people were detained when they
arrived at the demonstration before they could engage in any action, violent or
otherwise.
One month later, the Duma rushed through amendments that increase by 30-
fold fines for violating rules on holding public events, essentially making them
equivalent to fines for criminal offenses. The amendments also imposed new
restrictions, for example, allowing authorities to compile lists of permanent
public event-free locations.
Freedom of Association
Legislative amendments adopted in July require advocacy groups that accept
foreign funding to register and identify themselves publicly as “foreign agents,”
demonizing them in the public eye as foreign spies. The authorities may suspend
organizations that fail to register for up to six months, without a court
order. The law imposes additional reporting requirements and stiff civil and
criminal penalties.
Golos, the election monitoring organization, faced severe pressure, including a
fine for allegedly violating the election law, a smear campaign in pro-government
media, and hacker attacks. During the parliamentary vote, the authorities harassed Golos election monitors and at times denied them access to polling
stations.
In October, parliament adopted a broad, expanded legal definition of the crime
of treason that could lead to criminal action against those who conduct international
advocacy on human rights issues. Despite his promise to “look into the
law” and possibly narrow down the overly broad and vague definition of treason,
President Putin signed it in November.
Some civil society groups lost an important source of funding in October 2012
when the Russian government expelled the United States government assistance
organization, USAID, and banned its programming in Russia. The Russian
government increased funding to local NGOs, but groups working on sensitive
issues, such as human rights abuses related to counterinsurgency, right to free
and fair elections, and police torture, are unlikely to benefit from it.
Freedom of Expression
In February, the Federal Drug Control Service (FSKN) blocked the Andrey Rylkov
Foundation’s website for including information about methadone, which is classified
as an essential medicine by the World Health Organization for opiate
dependence treatment, but illegal in Russia. The website included international
research findings showing that methadone treatment reduces HIV risk among
heroin and other opiate users and helps them stay on AIDS and TB treatments.
In July, the Duma adopted amendments recriminalizing certain kinds of libel
seven months after it had been decriminalized. The new law provides for harsh
financial penalties instead of prison terms. A special provision “on libel against
judges, jurors, prosecutors, and law enforcement officials” could restrict legitimate
criticism of public officials.
A July law requires internet providers to block web content that a court deems to
be “extremist” or that competent federal agencies deem harmful to children. In
practice, this forces internet-hosting services to block offending websites upon
authorities’ instructions.
In August, three young women from the feminist punk band Pussy Riot were
sentenced to two years’ imprisonment for a forty40-second political stunt in a
Moscow cathedral that criticized Putin and the Russian Orthodox Church’s close
relationship with the Kremlin. The court supported the prosecutor’s view that
the women were motivated by hatred for Christian Orthodox believers. The
authorities could have brought misdemeanor charges, punishable by a fine,
against the women for their disruptive behavior under the code of administrative
offenses but instead pursued criminal charges. In October, one of the
women was given a suspended sentence on appeal and was released from
prison.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
By the end of 2012, legislation banning “homosexual propaganda” was in force
in nine Russian provinces. The “propaganda” bans could be applied for such
things as displaying a rainbow flag or a gay-friendly logo. In May, prominent
Russian LGBT rights activist Nikolai Alekseev became the first person to be fined
under the new St. Petersburg law after he picketed city hall with a poster declaring,
“Homosexuality is not a perversion.”
In 2010, the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) had firmly rejected the
Russian government’s argument that there is no general consensus on issues
relating to the treatment of “sexual minorities.” In spite of the court’s ruling,
Moscow city authorities in both 2011 and 2012 banned the Gay Pride event.
Harassment of Kremlin Critics and Human Rights Defenders
In the lead-up to Putin’s inauguration, authorities in some cities repeatedly tried
to intimidate political and civic activists, and interfered with news outlets critical
of the government through arbitrary lawsuits and detentions, threats by
state officials, beatings, and other forms of harassment. State-controlled media
ran articles seeking to discredit the protest movement and government critics.
Police also threatened several activists’ families.
In June 2012, according to the independent print outlet Novaya Gazeta, the head
of Russia’s Investigation Committee, Alexander Bastrykin, abducted Sergei Sokolov, deputy chief editor of the newspaper, took him to a forest in the outskirts
of Moscow and threatened his life. Bastrykin was not dismissed.
In April, two men attacked Elena Milashina, a Novaya Gazeta journalist, inflicting
multiple bruises and kicking out a tooth. Investigators termed the attack a
common mugging and arrested and charged two people who Milashina said did
not resemble the attackers.
In October, Leonid Razvozzhaev, a political activist under investigation on suspicion
of organizing riots during the May 6 demonstration in Moscow, was
allegedly kidnapped in Kiev, Ukraine. He had stepped out of the office of the
local partner organization of the United Nations High Commissioner on
Refugees (UNHCR) during a break in his asylum interview, when he disappeared.
Several days later he reappeared in custody in Russia. According to
Razvozzhaev, after the kidnapping he was forced to sign a confession under
duress while in incommunicado detention. The UNHCR expressed concern over
the situation and called for an investigation. At this writing, Ravozzhaev was in
custody awaiting trial in Moscow.
Human rights defenders working in the North Caucasus remained especially at
risk, and impunity for past attacks continues.
The investigation into the 2009 murder of leading Chechen rights activist
Natalia Estemirova remains inadequate with no progress made in 2012 in bringing
the perpetrators to justice. At this writing, investigators had also yet to hold
accountable the perpetrators of the December 2011 murder of Gadzhimurad
Kamalov. Kamalov was the founder and publisher of Chernovik, Dagestan’s
independent weekly known for its reporting on corruption and human rights
abuses.
In January 2012, Umar Saidmagomedov, a local lawyer who frequently defended
individuals arrested on insurgency-related charges and worked closely with
local human rights activists, died from gunshot wounds in the Dagestani capital,
Makhachkala, together with local resident Rasul Kurbanov. According to official
reports, Kurbanov opened fire on police officials, who responded, killing
both men. Saidmagomedov’s colleagues, however, argued that the circumstances of the killing were different and that law enforcement officials killed the
lawyer in retaliation for his work. Police did not examine this allegation.
The Joint Mobile Group of Russian Human Rights Organizations in Chechnya,
which investigates human rights violations by law enforcement officials in the
region, faced severe harassment. On January 21, police in Nizhny Novgorod
detained one of the group’s leading members, Anton Ryzhov, interrogated him
about the organization’s work, and confiscated his work laptop and memory
sticks for eight months.
In June, Chechen leader Ramzan Kadyrov threatened three Mobile Group lawyers
at a televised meeting they were forced to attend, sending a clear warning to
victims to avoid the organization. In July, federal investigators interrogated
Mobile Group head Igor Kalyapin as part of a criminal inquiry regarding alleged
disclosure of secret information regarding a torture case. This inquiry, which
was still ongoing at this writing, represented the authorities’ third attempt in
two years to open criminal proceedings against Kalyapin.
In the course of 2012, three Chechen activists reported to Human Rights Watch
that they received death threats. One of them chose to leave Chechnya, fearing
for the well-being of family members.
In October, a local group well known for publishing periodic online bulletins on
the situation in Chechnya stopped working. According to the group’s leadership,
their decision resulted from pressure by the authorities.
In May, a police official in Kabardino-Balkaria explicitly threatened Rustam
Matsev, a lawyer with the Memorial Human Rights Center, insinuated that
Matsev supported Islamic insurgents, and warned he could be “eliminated.”
According to Matsev, his complaints against the official to competent authorities
yielded no result.
North Caucasus
The Islamist insurgency remained active, especially in Dagestan. According to
official data, in the first six months of 2012, insurgents perpetrated 116 “terrorist
crimes” in Dagestan, killing 67 people, including seven civilians. In April, in an unprecedented move, the state-supported Sufi community and adherents of
Salafism—a strand of Sunni Islam that promotes a literalist interpretation of the
Koran—signed a resolution for cooperation. The authorities tend to view adherents
of Salafism as supporting the Islamist insurgency. In August, a suicide
bomber killed the region’s leading Sufi sheikh who had actively promoted negotiations
for the April resolution.
Adherents of Salafism are especially vulnerable to persecution and counterinsurgency-
related abuses, such as enforced disappearances, torture, and extrajudicial
executions. According to Memorial, six local residents were “disappeared”
following abduction-style detentions between January and August
2012. Most were adherents of Salafism.
In Ingushetia, four local residents were abducted, two of whom “disappeared”
between January and August, according to Memorial.
In Chechnya, law enforcement and security agencies under Ramzan Kadyrov’s
de facto control continued collective punishment against relatives and suspected
supporters of alleged insurgents. Victims increasingly refuse to speak about
violations due to fear of official retribution, meaning that abuses remain largely
under-reported
Kadyrov’s “virtue” campaign for women in Chechnya continued in 2012, with
pressure on women to wear headscarves in all public places. Women must wear
headscarves in most public buildings. According to local women’s activists,
“honor” killings have become more frequent in Chechnya.
Cooperation with the European Court of Human Rights
At this writing, the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) had issued more
than 210 judgments holding Russia responsible for grave human rights violations
in Chechnya. While Russia continues to pay the required monetary compensation
to victims, it fails to meaningfully implement the core of the judgments
by not conducting effective investigations, failing to hold perpetrators
accountable, and using statutes of limitation and amnesties acts to avoid holding
perpetrators to account.
Palliative Care
Restrictive government policies and limited availability of pain treatment continued
in 2012 to be a major obstacle to the delivery of palliative care. Each year,
tens of thousands of dying cancer patients (up to 80 percent) are denied their
right to adequate relief. Such inexpensive drugs as oral immediate-release morphine
are largely unavailable through the public healthcare system.
In 2012, the Russian Ministry of Health and Social Development acknowledged
the need to significantly increase the number of hospices. But drug regulations
have not been revised, and training of healthcare workers on pain management
still does not meet World Health Organization (WHO) standards.
Disability Rights
In May, Russia ratified the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (CRPD). However, the 13 million people with disabilities in Russia
continue to face a range of barriers that limit their participation in society,
including inaccessible public buildings and transportation for people with physical
disabilities and confinement of people with mental disabilities to institutions
for long periods of time against their will and without appropriate legal
safeguards for their rights.
Abuses Linked to Preparations for the 2014 Olympic Games
Authorities expropriated property from hundreds of Sochi families for building
venues for the 2014 Winter Olympics. Most homeowners received compensation,
but in many cases amounts were unfair and the process was opaque. In
September, authorities forcibly evicted a family of six without any compensation.
Some migrant workers building sports venues and other infrastructure for the
Olympics reported that employers were failing to provide contracts or promised
wages and demanded excessively long working hours.
Some journalists reporting on Olympics-related concerns faced censorship and
threats of dismissal. Activists faced harassment and arrest. For example, police in early fall detained three activists who peacefully voiced concerns about a proposed
thermal power plant. Administrative charges against two of them were
later dropped.
Key International Actors
Many actors were forthright in their criticism of the restrictive legislation
described above. Concerns centered on the shrinking space for vibrant civil
society. For example, the re-criminalization of libel was flagged as a “step backwards”
by the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) and
the Council of Europe’s Parliamentary Assembly (PACE). The UN commissioner
for human rights expressed “concern” that the law would “stifle all criticism of
government authorities.”
Similarly, the “foreign agents” law was adopted despite public criticism by key
international actors, including the UN, the US, and the European Union; the
Council of Europe’s (CoE) secretary general said the law did “not belong to a
democratic society.”
Most of these governments and institutions publicly voiced concern about the
Pussy Riot trial, legislative amendments restricting public assemblies, the new
treason law, and homophobic legislation.
A PACE resolution adopted in October welcomed electoral reforms while cautioning
that other developments “must call the authorities’ real intentions into
question.”
The International Olympic Committee (IOC) intervened with the Russian authorities
on cases involving human rights abuses occurring in the run-up the 2014
Winter Olympics. However, the IOC has not insisted on comprehensive reforms
to prevent and remedy violations.
In October, the European Parliament called for a visa ban and asset freeze
against Russian officials allegedly responsible for the death in custody of
whistleblower tax lawyer Sergei Magnitsky and recommended that the European
Council draw up a list of implicated Russian officials. At this writing, a vote was
pending on similar legislation in the US Congress, named for Magnitsky, which would apply to government officials around the world involved in the torture or
killing of whistleblowers. In response, Russia banned entry for US officials
allegedly involved in abuses in counterterrorism operations in Afghanistan.
In November, the UN Committee Against Torture (CAT) reviewed Russia’s periodic
report and noted persistent problems with torture and inhuman and degrading
treatment by law enforcement officials.
Serbia
Despite being granted status as a candidate for European Union membership in
March, Serbia did little to improve its human rights record in 2012. The situation
of ethnic minorities remains precarious, especially for Roma. Journalists still
face a hostile environment, despite some progress in bringing perpetrators of
attacks to justice. The asylum system remains weak and overburdened.
Relations with Kosovo remain tense, exemplified by Kosovo and Serbian police
carrying out tit for tat arrests of Serbian election officials and Kosovo Albanian
activists in the run-up to the May 6 Serbian elections.
Accountability for War Crimes
There was ongoing progress in domestic war crimes prosecutions. In
September, the Belgrade War Crimes Chamber convicted 11 members of the
Kosovo Liberation Army’s (KLA) “Gnjilane group” to a combined total of 116
years in prison for crimes against civilians, mainly Roma and Ashkali, during the
1999 Kosovo war. In June, the chamber sentenced 14 former members of the
Yugoslav People’s Army (JNA) to a combined total of 126 years in prison for war
crimes against Croat civilians in the Croatian village of Lovas in 1991. The
Serbian war crimes prosecutor indicted three people for crimes against civilians
during 2012. Sixteen cases were pending at this writing.
However, Chief Prosecutor Serge Brammertz at the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in a June report criticized Serbia’s lack
of efforts to uncover the networks that helped war crimes fugitives wanted by
the ICTY to evade justice. The Serbian war crimes prosecutor’s office subsequently
began investigating 13 suspects, including a former high-ranking security
official. In his report Brammertz also criticized Serbia’s failure to sign a proposed
protocol on war crimes cooperation between the Serbian prosecutor and
his Bosnian counterpart.
Freedom of Media
Journalists continue to face a hostile environment, although the authorities
brought some perpetrators of attacks on journalists to justice.
In February, a cameraman from Studio B television was punched and kicked in
the capital Belgrade. The sole assailant was arrested by police and charged in
June for the assault. In February, a Belgrade appeals court increased the prison
sentences of two men for the 2008 attack on journalist Bosko Brankovic while
he reported on a demonstration in support of Radovan Karadizic, the Bosnian
Serb wartime president, on trial at the ICTY for genocide and crimes against
humanity. The court upheld sentences for two others.
Despite having 24-hour police protection since October 2005, threats continued
against Vladimir Mitric, a journalist specializing in uncovering corruption. In
September, Mitric was threatened twice by the same person and told not to
report on particular individuals. On the second occasion the person making the
threats was accompanied by a police officer who had been responsible for
Mitric’s protection. The person making the threats was charged with minor
offences in September, but at this writing the police officer had not been disciplined.
In October, the homes of three journalists were attacked, although it is unclear
whether the attacks were linked to their reporting. Unknown assailants lobbed
Molotov cocktails at the Belgrade homes of Biljana Vujovic, a presenter at TV
Kopernikus, and Damir Dragic, director of Belgrade-based tabloid Informer. No
one was injured but Dragic’s car was destroyed by the fire. It is unclear whether
the incidents were connected to their reporting. An explosive device, which did
not detonate, was placed near the home of Tanja Jankovic, an investigative journalist
at TV B92 in Vranje, southern Serbia. At this writing, all three incidents
were under police investigation.
In July, a Belgrade appeals court sentenced freelance journalist Laszlo Szasz to
120 days in prison for a 2007 commentary criticizing the leader of the Hungarian
nationalist 64 Counties Youth Movement. Szasz was released after receiving a
presidential pardon on August 3.
In September, Information Minister Bratislav Petkovic announced that the government
was preparing legislation guaranteeing freedom and independence of
the media. The same month, the government announced it would establish an
international commission to investigate unsolved murders of three prominent
journalists more than a decade ago.
Treatment of Minorities
Roma continued to experience harassment, threats, discrimination when
accessing education, and problematic forced evictions.
In April, around 1,000 Roma were forcibly evicted from the Belvil informal settlement
in Belgrade. Those internally displaced Romani families from Kosovo and
those with permanent residency in Belgrade were rehoused in metal containers
on the outskirts of Belgrade. Families with residency registered in other parts of
Serbia were returned there, including four families returned to Nis, southern
Serbia, where they were housed in an abandoned warehouse without access to
water or electricity.
On May 1, 15 to 20 masked persons armed with baseball bats approached the
Jabucki Rit container settlement occupied by Roma. They shouted racist slogans
and drew a swastika on one metal container. At this writing, police had made
only one arrest and the case remained under investigation.
There was progress in addressing problems of undocumented persons, many of
whom are Roma. A new law adopted in September removes administrative barriers
and simplifies registration procedures for birth certificates.
Tension rose in the Vojvodina region, northeast Serbia, between members of the
Serb majority and Hungarian minority. In September, approximately 20 Serbs
armed with iron rods attacked eight Hungarian children and young adults in the
town of Subotica, allegedly because the victims spoke Hungarian. Police were
investigating at this writing.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Serbia made some progress in protecting the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual,
and transgender (LGBT) people. In February, Simo Vladicic was sentenced to a
three-month jail term for making threats against LGBT people via a Facebook
group called “500,000 Serbs against Gay Pride.” In March, a Belgrade court sentenced
Mladen Obradovic, leader of the right-wing extremist movement Obraz,
to 10 months in prison for threatening gays and inciting hatred in the run-up to
the 2009 Gay Pride Parade, which was then cancelled on security grounds. In a
separate case, Obradovic was sentenced to two years in prison in April 2011 for
inciting violence during the 2010 Gay Pride Parade, a sentence that was under
appeal at this writing. The Serbian Ministry of Interior banned the October 6
parade and other public gatherings citing security reasons, but took no measures
to try to facilitate the parade in face of the threats of violence. Serbian
authorities also banned the Belgrade Pride Parade in 2011 due to violent incidents
during and after the 2010 event that injured policemen and participants.
Asylum Seekers and Displaced Persons
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) said
in September that the defects in Serbia’s asylum system mean that it cannot be
considered a safe country of asylum or safe third country and that countries
should refrain from sending asylum seekers from other countries back to Serbia.
Hungary, Greece, and Turkey are among the countries sending asylum seekers
back to Serbia. In the first eight months of 2012, 1,454 asylum seekers were registered
in Serbia, down from 2,134 during the same period in 2011.
There were concerns about inadequate capacity in Serbia’s two asylum centers,
which can only accommodate a total of 280 people. The Asylum Office, which
makes initial decisions on asylum claims, has not granted refugee status or
temporary protection to any applicant since it assumed responsibility for the
asylum procedure in 2008.
There was little progress towards finding a lasting solution for refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs) from the Balkan wars. According to the
UNHCR, in July there were 66,563 refugees in Serbia, most from Croatia, and 228,215 IDPs of whom 210,146 hail from Kosovo. A successful international
donors conference in Sarajevo in April raised financial support for the housing
needs of 74,000 of the most vulnerable IDPs in Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia, and Montenegro.
In October, the EU renewed calls on Serbian authorities to stop the influx of asylum
seekers, mainly Roma, to EU countries, adding that failure to do so risked
losing the right for Serbian citizens to travel to the EU without visas. There were
credible reports by international human rights NGOs throughout 2012 that
Serbian border guards prevent persons of perceived Romani origin from crossing
the border from Serbia into Hungary.
Key International Actors
On March 1, EU heads of state granted candidate status to Serbia following a
February 28 recommendation by the General Affairs Council, which made clear
the decision was linked to Serbia’s progress on cooperation with Kosovo,
including on management of their border, and made no reference to human
rights. The European Commission’s annual progress report on Serbia stressed
the need to strengthen the rule of law, ensure judicial reforms and protect vulnerable
groups, particularly Roma. The commission said that Serbia needed to
increase efforts to fight corruption and protect freedom of expression in the
media.
A joint US and EU Balkans tour led by US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and
EU High Representative Catherine Ashton in late October and early November
failed to emphasize the importance of improving human rights protection in
Serbia and instead focused on political dialogue between authorities in
Belgrade and Pristina.
In June, the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) published a
report on its 2011 visit to Serbia expressing concerns about allegations of illtreatment
of detainees by law enforcement officials and overcrowding in all prisons
it visited.
The UN special rapporteur on human rights defenders expressed concern about
allegations of harassment of LGBT human rights defenders in Serbia in her
February global report.
In April 2012, Serbia signed the Council of Europe (CoE) Convention on preventing
and combating violence against women and domestic violence.
Kosovo
There was no significant improvement in human rights protection in Kosovo in
2012. Tensions in the divided north sometimes flared into violence. Roma,
Ashkali, and Egyptian (an Albanian speaking group that claims roots in Egypt)
continue to be marginalized and vulnerable to discrimination. The justice system
remains poor with large case backlogs. Mechanisms for human rights protection
remain weak.
On September 10, the countries comprising the International Steering Group,
which oversaw Kosovo after it unilaterally declared independence from Serbia in
2008, proclaimed an end to its supervision of Kosovo’s self-governance. The
decision signals a downgrading of international engagement.
Protection of Minorities
Roma, Ashkali, and Egyptians (RAE) remained among the most vulnerable
groups in Kosovo. They continued to face discrimination in areas such as housing,
education, and access to public services. A June 2012 United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) report found that around three-quarters of RAE
lack formal employment, compared to around 45 percent of the general population.
Many are displaced and unable to rebuild or return to their original homes.
Tensions between the Serb minority and the Albanian majority remained high in
2012, particularly in the divided city of Mitrovica in northern Kosovo. In April, an
explosion in the majority Serb “Three Towers” neighborhood in the city killed an
ethnic Albanian man and wounded two of his children. Police were investigating
at this writing. In July, a Serb community activist, Milovan Jevtic, and his wife
were shot dead in their home south of Pristina, the capital. Jevtic worked for the
return of Kosovo Serb families and peaceful coexistence with Kosovo Albanians,
raising concerns that the deaths may have been intended to discourage such
returns. European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) and local authorities were
conducting a joint investigation at this writing.
Following confrontations in June between members of the Kosovo Police Service
(KPS) and ethnic Serbs at four border crossings, unknown perpetrators in Pristina pelted two buses carrying Serb children aged between 8 and 16 with
Molotov cocktails and stones. Sixteen children sustained light injuries. Police
were still investigating at this writing.
Despite these events, the KPS recorded only 16 inter-ethnic incidents during the
first eight months of the year, a reported decline from 2011, when 60 inter-ethnic
incidents were recorded. They comprised two attacks resulting in serious
injuries and five in light injuries, seven other unspecified physical attacks, and
two cases of property damage. There were concerns among international
observers that many inter-ethnic incidents are unreported, unregistered, and
misclassified.
Return of Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons
During the first 10 months of the year, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) registered 785 voluntary returns, including
those outside Kosovo and internally displaced persons (IDPs), compared to 989
returns during the same period in 2011.
Deportations to Kosovo from Western Europe continued, with limited assistance
provided upon return. Between January and September, the UNHCR registered
1,717 forced returns to Kosovo, including 546 deportations of minorities, mostly
from Sweden (235) and Germany (196): 327 Roma, 105 Ashkali, 2 Egyptians, 21
Serbs, 8 Albanians, 32 Bosniaks, 44 Gorani, 7 Turks, and 8 Albanians to Serb
majority areas.
Roma, Ashkali, and Egyptian forced returnees continued to face particular hardships
upon return, including difficulties accessing public services. A United
Nations Children Fund (UNICEF) report in March stated that three out of four children
deported from Germany drop out of school due to language barriers.
There was little progress in implementing two national strategies designed to
facilitate the integration of returnees (the Strategy for Reintegration of
Repatriated Persons) and for Roma generally (the Roma, Ashkali, Egyptian
Integration Strategy), with central and local authorities failing to allocate needed
resources, and local authorities often unaware of their responsibilities.
At this writing, the lead-contaminated Osterode camp outside Mitrovica was still
open, with five remaining Romani families waiting to be resettled. Work had
begun to construct apartments in the north to house the families.
Impunity, Accountability, and Access to Justice
On November 29, the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) acquitted Ramush Haradinaj, the former prime minister of Kosovo, and
his two co-defendants, Lahi Brahimaj and Idriz Balaj, former Kosovo Liberation
Army (KLA) commanders, after their retrial for crimes against humanity against
Serb Roma and Albanian civilians in the Jablanica detention camp in 1998.
The EULEX special investigation team continued its investigation into allegations
that some KLA members, including senior officials in Kosovo, had participated
in post-war abductions, enforced disappearances, killing of Serbs, and
organ trafficking.
In the first nine months of 2012, EULEX judges handed down three war crimes
judgments, including in May sentencing Zoran Kolic to 14 years’ imprisonment
for war crimes against prisoners in Lipjan prison in May 1999, and confirmed
one new war crimes indictment in October. During January and September, local
judges handed down 20 other verdicts. As of October 78 war crimes cases were
under investigation and in November, EULEX police arrested three former KLA
members suspected of war crimes against civilians during 1998-1999. At this
writing the case was being investigated by the Special Prosecutorial Office,
which did not render details about the charges.
In November, the Supreme Court of Kosovo ordered the retrial of Fatmir Limaj
and three other former KLA members on charges of war crimes against Serb and
Albanian civilians and prisoners of war held in a detention center in the village
of Klecka in 1999. The four were acquitted in May by a Pristina district court,
including a EULEX judge. In March, the same court acquitted six other defendants
in the case.
Freedom of Media
The Kosovo National Assembly adopted a new criminal code in April containing
provisions that criminalized defamation and force journalists to reveal sources,
raising media freedom concerns. In light of those concerns, Kosovo President
Atifeta Jahjaga in May sent the code back to the National Assembly for reconsideration.
But in June, the assembly adopted the criminal code without revising
the controversial provisions. In September, it finally approved government
amendments abrogating the controversial provisions, which will be removed
from the criminal code once it enters into force on January 1, 2013.
Threats against journalists continued to be a serious problem. In March, journalists
at the Express newspaper received threatening phone calls following an article
on corruption in the fuel industry. Halil Matoshi, an outspoken journalist
reporting on corruption, was assaulted in Pristina in July by three unidentified
men, one of them armed with a knife. Matoshi escaped with minor injuries and
the police were investigating at this writing.
In May, a EULEX judge at the Pristina municipal court confirmed indictments
against Rexhep Hoti and four other staff at Kosovo daily Infopress and
Skenderaj Mayor Sami Lushtaku for threats made against Balkan Investigate
Reporting Network (a regional news group) Kosovo Director Jeta Xharra in 2009.
In October, the Kosovo Special Prosecution Office launched a separate investigation
against Lushtaku for threats made in March, May, August, and
September against Adem Meti, a correspondent for the leading daily newspaper
Koha Ditore, due to his reporting on corruption.
Key International Actors
The end of supervised independence of Kosovo on September 10 resulted in the
closure of the International Civilian Office. EULEX’s mandate was extended until
2014.
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in July expressed concern over escalating
ethnic tensions in northern Kosovo and stressed that the basic needs and rights
of affected communities in the north must be democratically represented.
An October report from the European Commission recommended opening negotiations
with Kosovo on a Stabilization and Association Agreement (SAA), a
framework for closer relations seen as a prelude to candidate status for EU
membership, subject to progress on rule of law, including cooperation with the
EULEX task force, and respect for minority rights. The commission’s assessment
made clear that signing the agreement would require tackling impunity and
access to justice, improving media freedom, implementing programs to secure
the rights of Roma, and taking steps to facilitate the return of displaced Serbs.
Following a July meeting with Kosovo President Atifete Jahjaga, European
Council President Herman Van Rompuy stressed the need for progress on the
rule of law, public administration reform, electoral reform, and outreach to
minority communities.
In October, German Defense Minister Thomas de Maiziere said that the EULEX
was “on the wrong track” and that its failure—together with that of the KPS—to
deal with ethnic violence was placing an unreasonable burden on NATO forces.
An OSCE report in October said authorities need to take concrete action to
implement laws on anti-discrimination and protection against domestic violence,
among others.
In October, Council of Europe (CoE) Secretary General Thorbjorn Jagland emphasized
the importance of an effective investigation into allegations contained in
the 2010 CoE report by Swiss Senator Dick Marty alleging that some KLA members,
including senior officials in post-war Kosovo, had participated in the postwar
abductions, enforced disappearances, and killing of Serbs, as well as
alleged organ trafficking and organized crime, including weapons and drug
smuggling.
Turkey
Turkey’s Justice and Development Party (AKP) government maintained economic
growth in 2012 despite a slowdown, and a strong focus on developing a leading
regional role, but failed to take convincing steps to address the country’s worsening
domestic human rights record and democratic deficit. Prosecutors and
courts continued to use terrorism laws to prosecute and prolong incarceration of
thousands of Kurdish political activists, human rights defenders, students, journalists,
and trade unionists. Free speech and media remained restricted, and
there were ongoing serious violations of fair trial rights.
Cross-party parliamentary work on a new constitution to uphold the rule of law
and fundamental rights continued, although it was unclear at this writing
whether the government and opposition would reach a consensus on key issues
such as minority rights, fundamental freedoms, and definition of citizenship.
In March, parliament passed legislation to establish a National Human Rights
Institution, and in June, an ombudsman institution to examine complaints
against public officials at every level. Human rights groups criticized government
control of appointments to the national institution’s board and its failure
to meet the test of independence from the government that United Nations
guidelines recommend.
With the AKP condoning the mass incarceration of Kurdish activists, and the
outlawed Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) escalating attacks, 2012 saw a spiraling
descent into violence with armed clashes resulting in hundreds of deaths of
soldiers and PKK members, significantly higher than recent years. Throughout
2012, the PKK kidnapped security personnel and civilians, including local politicians,
one parliamentarian, and teachers, releasing them periodically. A suspected
PKK attack in Gaziantep in August left nine civilians dead, including four
children. The non-resolution of the Kurdish issue remained the single greatest
obstacle to progress on human rights in Turkey.
Turkey was amongst neighbouring countries most affected by the armed conflict
in Syria. By mid-October 2012, the number of Syrian refugees hosted by Turkey
had risen to around 100,000. Turkey responded to an October cross-border mortar attack from Syria that killed five Turkish citizens in Akçakale with military fire,
and the Turkish parliament authorized the use of military force against Syria.
Freedom of Expression, Association, and Assembly
While there is open debate in Turkey, government policies, laws and the administration
of justice continue to lag behind international standards. Prosecutors
frequently prosecute individuals for non-violent speech and writing, and politicians
sue their critics for criminal defamation. Courts convict with insufficient
consideration for the obligation to protect freedom of expression. The government
has yet to carry out a comprehensive review of all existing laws that
restrict freedom of expression, although a draft reform package was expected in
late 2012 at this writing.
The so-called third judicial reform package came into force in July 2012. It ends
short-term bans of newspapers and journals, which the European Court of
Human Rights (ECtHR) has criticized as censorship. The law suspends investigations,
prosecutions, and convictions of speech-related offenses carrying a maximum
sentence of five years that were committed before December 31, 2011, provided
the offense is not repeated within three years. Critics fear the threat of
reinstatement will continue to muzzle debate.
Thousands charged with alleged terrorism offenses remained in prison throughout
their trials, although some well-known figures like academic Büşra Ersanlı,
publisher Ragip Zarakolu, and journalists Ahmet Şık and Nedim Şener were
released, though still face terrorism charges for activities amounting to exercising
their rights to non-violent expression and association. Most of those in
prison are Kurdish activists and officials of the Peace and Democracy Party
(BDP) standing trial for alleged links to the Union of Kurdistan Communities
(KCK/TM), a body connected with the PKK, and in general the ongoing clampdown
on the BDP and Kurdish political activism intensified in 2012 with repeated
waves of mass arrests and prolonged imprisonment. The trial of 44
Journalists and media workers (31 in detention) began in Istanbul in September.
They are among the many journalists, students, lawyers, trade unionists, and
human rights defenders imprisoned and prosecuted for association with the
KCK.
There was little progress in the main Diyarbakır KCK trial of 175 defendants. The
108 defendants who have been in custody for up to three-and-a half-years
include Human Rights Association Diyarbakir branch head Muharrem Erbey, six
serving local BDP mayors, several local BDP council members, and five elected
BDP parliamentarians.
Two parliamentarians from the Republican People’s Party and one from the
Nationalist Action Party, defendants in the Ergenekon and Sledgehammer trials,
discussed below, are also in prison and unable to take up their parliamentary
seats. Holding elected politicians, who have not been convicted of an offence,
in prolonged pre-trial detention and failure to ensure they receive a prompt trial
in line with international standards undermines the right to political representation
and participation.
The July reform package also introduced and encouraged alternatives to remand
imprisonment pending trial. But there were no indications that courts apply this
to those already held in prolonged prison detention under terrorism charges.
Statistics from the Ministry of Justice from May, the most recent data available,
indicated that 8,995 of the 125,000-strong prison population were charged with
terrorism offenses, and that half of the 8,995 were awaiting an initial verdict.
Violence against Women
In March, parliament passed the new Law on the Protection of the Family and
Prevention of Violence against Women, aiming to offer protection from violence
and practical support to family members and all women regardless of marital
status, and to establish local centers to implement and monitor the law’s application.
Violence in the home remained endemic, with police and courts regularly
failing to protect women who have applied for protection orders.
Torture, Ill-Treatment, and Use of Lethal Force by Security
Forces
Police violence against demonstrators and in public places remained a serious
problem. Authorities often mask the problem by investigating individuals who report police abuse for resisting police dispersal or police orders rather than
their complaints.
In June, a cell phone video captured a group of uniformed police officers in
Istanbul attacking and beating Ahmet Koca, a 22-year-old man. The incident
reportedly began with an altercation between the police and Koca over right of
way. The General Security Directorate’s inspectorate imposed disciplinary sanctions
on seven of the eleven police officers involved, including docking wages
and reassigning them to other provinces, but did not dismiss any. The prosecutor’s
criminal investigation against them was pending at this writing. In contrast,
following police complaints, a separate prosecutor indicted Koca for
resisting police during the same incident. He faces up to five years’ imprisonment
in a trial that was expected to begin in December.
The government’s July decision to promote police officer Sedat Selim Ay to a
senior position in the Istanbul Security Directorate’s Anti-Terror Branch provoked
media and opposition-party criticism and seriously conflicts with efforts
to eradicate torture and impunity. Selim Ay avoided final conviction for torture,
despite the findings by two domestic courts that he had committed torture in
the 1990s when working as an officer in the anti-terror branch, only because
one case exceeded the statute of limitations in force and another sentence was
suspended. He or his unit were the subject of European Court of Human Rights
(ECtHR) rulings in 2006, 2009, and 2010 that Turkey failed to prevent, conduct
effective investigations into, or provide a remedy for torture.
Combating Impunity
Great obstacles remain in securing justice for victims of abuses by police, military,
and state officials. There was no progress in uncovering the full plot behind
the January 2007 murder of journalist Hrant Dink or probing state collusion,
though in January 2012 an Istanbul court convicted Yasin Hayal of “directing”
Ogun Samast (already convicted of the murder in a juvenile court) and others as
accessories to murder. The Dink family immediately appealed these findings
and called for a new investigation.
In December 2011, a Turkish airforce aerial bombardment killed 34 Kurdish villagers,
many of them young people and children, near Uludere, close to the
Iraqi-Kurdistan border, as they crossed back into Turkey with smuggled goods.
Concerns that there had been an official cover-up were fuelled by repeated
statements by the prime minister rejecting calls by media, opposition parties,
and families of victims for a full explanation of the incident, lack of a public
inquiry, and a protracted criminal investigation that had not concluded at this
writing.
Increasing public discussion of the past, and emerging new information on past
crimes, provided new momentum for criminal investigations into human rights
abuses by state actors in the 1980s and 1990s. In October, a brigadier general
stood trial for the murder or disappearance of 13 villagers in Derik, in southeast
Turkey, in the early 1990s. Without government-initiated reform of statutes of
limitations some cases of murder and torture are likely to be deemed timebarred
for prosecution under applicable laws. Fair trial standards also require
strengthening. The trial of the two surviving leaders of the September 12, 1980
military coup began in April, an important opportunity to secure justice for the
gross human rights violations committed after the coup.
The trial of the alleged anti-AKP coup plotters (known as the Ergenekon gang)
whose defendants include senior retired military, police, mafia, journalists, and
academics, continued after separate proceedings were combined in April into
one trial. In a related coup plot trial of serving military personnel (known as the
Sledgehammer case), 324 out of 365 defendants received sentences of 13 to 20
years. All defendants were appealing their sentences at this writing. The serious
fair trial concerns in these cases and the prolonged pre-trial detention of some
defendants overshadowed the important contribution of these efforts to combat
impunity of the military.
Key International Actors
Turkey’s European Union accession negotiations remained stalled. The election
of France’s President François Hollande helped to improve French-Turkish relations.
In October, the European Commission in its annual progress report voiced
strong criticism in most areas relating to human rights, emphasizing the importance of work on a new constitution, and stressing “the Kurdish issue remains a
key challenge for Turkey’s democracy.”
The United States government remains an important influence on Turkey, sharing
military intelligence on PKK movements in northern Iraq. In May, the State
Department’s annual human rights report raised deficiencies in the justice system,
free speech, and inadequate protection of women, children, and lesbian,
gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) persons as key concerns.
In January, a groundbreaking report by the Council of Europe (CoE) commissioner
for human rights focused on “long-term, systemic problems in the administration
of justice,” and its negative impact on human rights.
In its October review of Turkey, the UN Human Rights Committee recommended
reforms including amending the National Human Rights Institution law, introducing
comprehensive anti-discrimination legislation, and addressing the
vagueness of the definition of terrorism in law and prolonged pretrial detention.
Turkmenistan
Following February 2012 presidential elections, President Gurbanguly
Berdymukhamedov retained unchallenged power, and Turkmenistan remains
one of the world’s most repressive countries.
The country is virtually closed to independent scrutiny, media and religious freedoms
are subject to draconian restrictions, and human rights defenders and
other activists face the constant threat of government reprisal. The government
continues to use imprisonment as a tool for political retaliation.
Turkmenistan continued to expand relations with foreign governments and international
organizations in 2012, but without meaningful outcomes for human
rights.
Cult of Personality and Presidential Elections
President Berdymukhamedov, his relatives, and associates enjoy unlimited
power and total control over all aspects of public life in Turkmenistan. In official
publications Berdymukhamedov, who has been power since 2007, is known as
arkadag (patron), and his cult of personality continued to grow during the year.
In April 2012, for example, he won a carefully choreographed car race.
Berdymukhamedov was reelected president on February 12, 2012. According to
the Central Election Committee (CEC), he received 97 percent of the vote with a
nearly 97 percent turnout. Conditions for a competitive vote were so lacking that
the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, part of the
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), declined to send
an election observation mission.
A law on political parties adopted in January 2012 envisaged for the first time
the registration of parties other than the ruling party. In August, a close associate
of Berdymukhamedov founded the Party of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs,
but there is no indication that it will present meaningful political alternatives.
Civil Society
Turkmenistan’s repressive atmosphere makes it extremely difficult for independent
nongovernmental organizations to operate. Human rights and civil society
activists and journalists, including those living in exile, face a constant threat of
government reprisal.
In August, state security services warned at least four activists not to attend a
meeting convened by the OSCE to welcome its new ambassador. In July, a state
security official warned one activist not to try to meet OSCE Representative on
Freedom of the Media Dunja Mijatović when she visited Ashgabat, the capital.
In February, Natalia Shabunts—one of the few openly active human rights
defenders—found a bloody sheep’s head on her doorstep in Ashgabat, one day
after speaking about the presidential election with Radio Free Europe’s Turkmen
Service.
For more than four years, the authorities have refused to reinstate the confiscated
passport of Gurbandurdy Durdykuliev, a dissident, who cannot receive his
pension or disability allowance, and cannot move freely inside the country without
it.
Freedom of Media and Information
The state controls all print and electronic media and it is very difficult for foreign
media to cover Turkmenistan because they often cannot access the country.
Internet access remains limited and heavily state-controlled. The country’s only
internet service provider is state-operated, and political opposition websites are
blocked. Internet cafes require visitors to present their passports. The government
is known to monitor electronic and telephone communications.
In the lead-up to the presidential election, the website for the Turkmen Initiative
for Human Rights (TIHR)—a Vienna-based exiled human rights group—was disabled
for nine days due to hacking, and the website of the exiled Turkmen political
opposition endured several days of denial-of-service attacks.
Holders of Gmail accounts in Turkmenistan could not access their e-mails
between February 16 and 26, and for two weeks in June, internet users could not
access Ertir.com, a web platform popular among young adults for social contact
and political discussion.
Freedom of Movement
Turkmenistan’s government continues to restrict the right to travel freely internationally
by means of an informal and arbitrary system of travel bans commonly
imposed on civil society activists and relatives of exiled dissidents.
After twice barring Bisengul Begdesenov, a former political prisoner, from traveling
abroad, migration authorities finally allowed him to travel in May 2012.
Several incidents in 2012 indicated that Turkmen authorities still bar people
from traveling abroad with valid Kyrgyz visas in their passports, continuing a
practice begun in late 2009. In August 2012, the migration office of the
Ashgabat airport without explanation barred a dozen students from travelling to
Bulgaria and Russia to commence their studies. In October, Turkmen authorities
barred a number of Turkmen citizens from traveling to seek medical treatment in
neighboring Iran.
The Turkmen government continues to create travel obstacles for Turkmen citizens
who also hold Russian passports. In December 2011, Turkmenistan Airlines
warned travelers that from July 2013 tickets for destinations abroad will only be
sold to holders of the new Turkmen international passport. The authorities use
various pretexts to deny issuing new international passports to persons who
continue to hold Russian passports, and require that they sign documents
renouncing Russian citizenship.
Freedom of Religion
The right to freedom of thought, conscience, and religion is heavily restricted in
Turkmenistan, where no congregations of unregistered religious groups or communities
are allowed. Religious communities have been unable to register for
years.
In February 2012, Ilmurad Nurliev, a Pentecostal pastor sentenced in 2010 to
four years in prison on bogus swindling charges, was freed under a general
amnesty.
According to Forum 18, an independent international religious freedom group,
as of August 2012 at least four Jehovah’s Witnesses who are conscientious
objectors were imprisoned, and five received suspended prison sentences for
evading military service.
Forum 18 also reported that local officials harassed and threatened several
Protestants for printing religious materials without state approval. Among them
was a 77-year-old Baptist who had tried to print a book of his own Christian
poetry. Police questioned him and threatened to press criminal charges but did
not do so.
In three separate trials held in August 2012, courts fined at least five
Protestants in Lebap province, northeast Turkmenistan, for engaging in religious
activity without state approval.
Political Prisoners and Enforced Disappearances
Unknown numbers of individuals continue to languish in Turkmen prisons on
what appear to be politically motivated charges. The justice system lacks transparency,
trials are closed in political cases, and the overall level of repression
precludes independent human rights monitoring.
In April 2012, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) made one
visit to one prison. The government has persistently denied access to the country
for independent human rights monitors, including international NGOs and 10
United Nations special procedures whose requests for visits remain unanswered.
In March, the Turkmen foreign minister announced that Ovezgeldy Ataev and his
wife had been released from prison. Ataev was the constitutionally designated
successor of dictator Saparmurad Niyazov. He and his wife were arrested one
month after Niyazov’s death in 2007.
However, the government ignored calls by several UN bodies to release wellknown
political prisoners Annakurban Amanklychev and Sapardurdy Khajiev,
who had worked with human rights organizations prior to their imprisonment in
2006. Political dissident Gulgeldy Annaniazov, arrested in 2008, also remains
imprisoned. He is serving an 11-year sentence.
In October 2012, the authorities arrested Geldymyrat Nurmuhammedov, a former
government minister who had openly criticized the government, and sent
him to a detention center to allegedly undergo six months of forced treatment
for drug addiction, even though he had no history of drug use.
Two popular singers, Murad Ovezov and Maksat Kakabaev, whom courts sentenced
on bogus charges in 2011 to five and seven years’ imprisonment respectively,
remain behind bars. The sentences were retribution for their music and
their involvement in a talk show that aired on a Turkish satellite channel in 2011.
Kakabaev’s father, brother, and brother-in-law—also sentenced in 2011 to twoyear
prison terms for the broadcast—remain in custody.
Several dozen persons convicted in relation to the November 2002 alleged
assassination attempt on Saparmurat Niyazov—including former Foreign
Minister Boris Shikhmuradov and Turkmenistan’s former ambassador to the
OSCE, Batyr Berdiev—remain victims of enforced disappearances. Their fate is
unknown. Human Rights Watch is aware of unconfirmed reports that several
defendants in the 2002 plot case have died in detention.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Homosexual conduct between men is criminalized with a maximum prison sentence
of two years. The penal code does not mention same-sex relations
between women. According to one local NGO, police sometimes blackmail and
extort homosexual men due to their sexual orientation.
Illegal House Evictions in Ashgabat
In 2012, authorities in Ashgabat and the surrounding area failed to provide adequate
compensation or redress to residents forcibly evicted and expropriated in previous years and whose homes were demolished without a court ruling. The
demolitions made way for construction as part of massive urban renewal projects
initiated in the late 1990s. Further demolitions are scheduled to continue
through 2020 in some areas of Ashgabat.
Key International Actors
Several international actors continue to seek to leverage Turkmenistan’s energy
wealth, sidelining concerns about the government’s human rights record. The
European Union continued to press forward with a Partnership and Cooperation
Agreement (PCA) with Turkmenistan, frozen since 1998 over human rights concerns,
without requiring any human rights reforms in exchange. Throughout
2012, the European Parliament continued to hold up its necessary approval of
the PCA over human rights concerns. At this writing, the European Parliament’s
vote on the PCA remained pending.
The United Nations Human Rights Committee reviewed Turkmenistan in March
2012, and issued a highly critical assessment highlighting the government’s
clampdown on freedom of expression and repression of civil society activism,
torture, and ill-treatment in places of detention, and the lack of an independent
judiciary. It directed the Turkmen government to report back within one year on
measures taken to address them.
In October, the UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women (CEDAW) issued its observations about the state of women’s human
rights in Turkmenistan, expressing deep concern in particular about women’s
disadvantaged and unequal status in many areas, including education, public
life and decision-making, and the absence of specific legislation on violence
against women, including domestic and sexual violence.
While in Turkmenistan for a July conference on media, the OSCE representative
on freedom of the media called upon Central Asian states to guarantee freedom
of media and expression online.
After having had no active projects on Turkmenistan since 1997, the World Bank
is working to reengage in the country. It was unclear at this writing whether the
bank will require improvements in governance as part of reengagement.
Ukraine
Ukraine’s human rights record remained poor in 2012. Candidates and supporters
faced violence and harassment from authorities ahead of October parliamentary
elections. Opposition leader Yulia Tymoshenko alleged ill-treatment in
prison, where she is serving a seven-year sentence, and two of her former political
allies were imprisoned. The government extradited two asylum seekers.
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) activists faced violence and
harassment from nationalist groups. Parliament passed an anti-discrimination
law and revised laws protecting asylum seekers. The European Union, United
States,, and other countries criticized the country’s deteriorating human rights
situation.
Parliamentary Elections
Following the October 28 parliamentary elections, President Yanukovich’s Party
of Regions retained a majority of seats. The ultra-nationalist Svoboda party
made it into parliament for the first time, securing 9 percent of seats. The
absence of leading opposition figures as candidates marred the elections. The
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) reported pre-election
violations, including beatings of and threats against opposition candidates
and campaign workers, and pressure on state employees and students to vote
for the Party of Regions. The OSCE, EU, and US criticized the elections, citing
irregularities, delays in vote-counting, and lack of transparency in electoral commissions.
Election results were annulled in five districts because of irregularities.
The November 2011 parliamentary elections law failed to reflect recommendations
of the Council of Europe’s (CoE) Venice Commission and the OSCE; the law
introduced a mixed majoritarian-parliamentary system, increased the threshold
to enter parliament, and banned electoral blocks.
Rule of Law
In April, former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko alleged that prison authorities
in Kharkiv beat and denied her adequate medical care for chronic back problems.
In May, Tymoshenko was transferred to a civilian hospital for treatment.
Tymoshenko was sentenced to seven years in prison in 2011 on abuse of office
charges related to a natural gas contract with Russia. In August, Ukraine’s
Specialized High Court rejected her appeal.
At least 20 former officials from Tymoshenko’s government are under investigation
or have been charged with alleged crimes. In February, a Kiev court sentenced
Yuri Lutsenko, minister of interior under Tymoshenko, to four years in
prison on charges of embezzlement and abuse of office. In August, Lutsenko
was convicted on additional charges. In July, the European Court of Human
Rights (ECtHR) found that Ukraine violated Lutsenko’s right to liberty and security
of person, with respect to both his arrest and ongoing detention. In April, a
Kiev court sentenced former acting Defense Minister Valerii Ivashenko to five
years in prison for abuse of office. Ivashenko was released on appeal.
Migration and Asylum
Amendments to the criminal procedure code brought it into line with international
standards by specifying protection from refoulement for asylum seekers
and prohibiting extradition of recognized refugees. However, Ukraine extradited
two men recognized as refugees by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) who faced a clear risk of torture. One was extradited to
Russia in August and the other to Uzbekistan in September.
In January 2012, 58 Somali asylum seekers detained in Zhuravychi, northwestern
Ukraine, went on hunger strike over severe delays in, and lack of access to,
asylum claim application procedures. Local police suppressed the protest using
tear gas and by beating detainees with batons. Some protesters received asylum
following the incident.
In a report on Ukraine’s implementation of benchmarks under visa liberalization
negotiations, the EU found that despite 2011 reforms, some asylum law provisions
still contradict international standards, including the short appeals period and the potential for agencies other than the state migration service to revoke
refugee status.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
On May 19, unidentified assailants defaced photographs at a Kiev exhibition
depicting lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) families in Ukraine.
At a May 20 press conference, LGBT Pride organizers cancelled the march scheduled
for that day in Kiev because police claimed they could not protect participants
from potential violence from neo-Nazi and nationalist groups planning a
protest at the same time and location.
After the press conference, five men beat Kiev Pride organizers Svyatoslav
Sheremet and Maksim Kasyanchuk. The authorities opened a criminal investigation
but failed to identify the suspects despite video recordings of the attack,
and failed to consider the activists’ sexual orientation or activism in the investigation.
In June, an unidentified man approached Kiev Pride head Taras Karasiichuk near
his home, asked his sexual orientation, and beat him, breaking his jaw and giving
him concussion. Investigators were unable to identify the attacker.
On July 2 and 9, neo-Nazis and nationalists verbally attacked and tore posters
belonging to LGBT activists who were protesting in Kiev against two draft laws
regarding “promotion of homosexuality” in the public domain and media. The
first law, which imposes up to five years’ imprisonment, was passed by parliament
on October 2 in a first reading. The second law, claiming to “protect children,”
envisions administrative fines of up to US$1,500. On July 2, police intervened
and detained one individual. On July 9, police who were present at the
rally did not intervene.
Hate Crimes and Discrimination
Roma, Crimean Tatars, and other ethnic minorities faced violence from neo-Nazi
groups. In September, for example, a group of unidentified people threw a Molotov cocktail into a Roma settlement in Uzhgorod, southwestern Ukraine.
Police subsequently provided the settlement with 24-hour protection.
In October, the ECtHR ruled that Ukraine failed to effectively investigate a similar
attack in 2001 that killed five members of a Romani family.
In September 2012, parliament passed an anti-discrimination law, which prohibits
discrimination in public services, courts, employment, healthcare, education,
housing, and other areas. The law does not include sexual orientation, citizenship,
occupation, political affiliation, or labor union membership as protected
categories. President Viktor Yanukovych signed the bill despite calls from a
coalition of 34 nongovernmental organizations to veto the legislation due to
insufficient parliamentary review.
In July 2012, parliament passed a controversial state language law allowing the
use of 18 minority languages in regions with at least 10 percent minority language
speakers. Russian became a regional language in 13 out of 27 regions.
The OSCE high commissioner for national minorities called the law “deeply divisive”
for disproportionately favoring Russian while “removing most incentives
for learning or using Ukrainian,” and criticized the law’s hasty adoption.
Civil Society
On August 1, two unidentified assailants attacked and beat environmental
activist Volodymyr Honcharenko from Dnipropetrivsk. Honcharenko died from
his injuries three days later. A few days before the attack, Honcharenko publicized
allegations about radioactive scrap metal dumped in the city of Kryviy Rig,
in southeastern Ukraine. The authorities have not identified a suspect in
Honcharenko’s death or investigated the environmental concerns.
The OSCE’s September interim election report noted the lack of political pluralism
on television. In 2011, TVi television station, the only remaining national
broadcaster openly criticizing the ruling party, was denied a license under the
transfer to digital broadcasting, forcing it to rely on cable networks. Several
cable providers excluded TVi in the 2012 pre-election campaign, apparently
under pressure. In September, a Kiev court ordered TVi to pay four million hryvnas
($485,000) in back taxes, nearly forcing the station’s closure.
In August, investigators identified a former Kharkiv police officer as the main
suspect in the murder of Novy Styl newspaper editor Vasyl Klymentyev, who disappeared
in August 2010 after reporting on official corruption in Kharkiv.The
suspect remained at large.
The ongoing trial of Oleksy Pukach, a senior ministry of interior official charged
with murdering journalist Grihory Gongadze in 2000, remained closed. Human
rights groups criticized the authorities’ failure to investigate alleged pressure on
investigators by other suspects.
In March 2012, parliament passed a new law on public associations simplifying
registration procedures and expanding the scope of approved activities for
NGOs, in response to CoE recommendations from 2007.
Health
Tens of thousands of patients with advanced cancer suffer from severe pain and
other symptoms every year. In order to improve access to quality palliative care
services, the government took several preliminary steps to make oral morphine
available. At this writing, the government was also considering adopting new
drug regulations that remove many barriers to accessing strong pain medications.
Ukraine continued to slowly expand the number of people with opioid drug
dependence receiving opiate substitution treatment—a key HIV prevention intervention—
but remained far from meeting medical need. In prisons, which hold
many injecting drug users, opiate substitution treatment remained unavailable.
Key International Actors
Ukraine’s international partners repeatedly criticized Ukraine’s deteriorating
human rights record.
A May 2012 report by the European Commission and a September statement by
Stefan Füle, the commissioner for enlargement and neighborhood policy,
stressed that a proposed association agreement between the EU and Ukraine
hinges upon concrete actions on human rights concerns, including politically motivated prosecutions, fair and transparent elections, judiciary reform, freedom
of media and association, and ill-treatment in detention.
The UN’s Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), the EU,
US, and others condemned the draft laws on propaganda of homosexuality.
Leaders from the United Kingdom, Italy, Germany, and France boycotted the
Union of European Football Associations (UEFA) European Football
Championship in Ukraine in July to protest Tymoshenko’s imprisonment and
alleged ill-treatment.
The US repeatedly criticized the cases against Tymoshenko and Lutsenko as
politically motivated and called for their release. The US Embassy in Kiev criticized
amendments to the Law on Procuracy for failing to balance law enforcement
and the judiciary and protect the presumption of innocence.
The UN Human Rights Council’s (HRC) Universal Periodic Review (UPR) in
October called on Ukraine to combat racism and xenophobia, enact legislation
that protects LGBT people from discrimination, and ensure fair trial rights and
freedom of expression.
Uzbekistan
Uzbekistan’s human rights record remains atrocious, with no meaningful
improvements in 2012. Torture is endemic in the criminal justice system.
Authorities intensified their crackdown on civil society activists, opposition
members, and journalists, and continued to persecute religious believers who
worship outside strict state controls.
Freedom of expression is severely limited. The government continues to sponsor
forced child labor during the cotton harvest. Authorities still deny justice for the
2005 Andijan massacre, in which government forces shot and killed hundreds of
protesters, most of them unarmed. 2012 marked 10 years since Uzbekistan
allowed a United Nations special rapporteur to visit the country.
Despite the government’s persistent refusal to address concerns about its
abysmal human rights record, the United States and European Union continued
to advance closer relations with Tashkent in 2012, seeking cooperation with the
war in Afghanistan.
Human Rights Defenders and Independent Journalists
Authorities regularly threaten, imprison, and torture rights defenders and civil
society activists, and block international rights groups and media outlets from
operating in Uzbekistan.
In 2012, the Uzbek government continued to hold at least 10 rights defenders in
prison on wrongful charges, and has brought charges against others because of
their human rights work. The 10 are: Solijon Abdurakhmanov, Azam Formonov,
Nosim Isakov, Gaibullo Jalilov, Rasul Khudainasarov, Ganihon Mamatkhanov,
Yuldash Rasulov, Dilmurod Saidov, Akzam Turgunov, and Gulnaza Yuldasheva.
Yuldasheva was sentenced in July to seven years on trumped-up fraud charges
for investigating police involvement in human trafficking. Another activist,
Jamshid Karimov, was reportedly released from a psychiatric ward in 2011 but
has “disappeared,” prompting fears he was re-detained. Several imprisoned
activists are in serious ill-health and have been tortured in prison.
Other journalists and opposition figures remain imprisoned on politically motivated
charges. In January, days before his 13-year sentence was to expire,
Muhammad Bekjanov, editor of the opposition newspaper Erk, was given an
additional five-year sentence for allegedly violating prison rules. Bekjanov has
been jailed since 1999, and along with another jailed journalist, Yusuf
Ruzimuradov, has been imprisoned longer than any other reporter worldwide,
according to the Committee to Protect Journalists.
On February 8, the government-controlled bar association upheld a ruling to disbar
one of Uzbekistan’s leading defense lawyers, Ruhiddin Komilov.
In separate incidents in March, authorities deported two foreign reporters, the
BBC’s Natalia Antelava and Viktoriya Ivleva of Russia’s Novaya Gazeta newspaper,
when they arrived at Tashkent airport.
On March 26, journalist Viktor Krymzalov was convicted of defamation for an
article published without a byline. The plaintiff “assumed” the article was written
by Krymzalov, who denied he was the author.
On April 6, a Tashkent court fined journalist Elena Bondar US$3,700 on charges
of “propagat[ing] ethnic or religious hatred” in connection with research she
conducted on the pending closure of a university. Bondar and other journalists
believed that the charges, devoid of any substance, were leveled in response to
her record of independent reporting for news outlets whose websites are systematically
blocked by authorities, such as the independent news portal
www.ferghana.ru.
Members of the Human Rights Alliance, an Uzbek rights group, were regularly
subjected to arbitrary detention and house arrest in 2012. On February 28,
activist Abdullo Tojiboi-ugli went to Tashkent’s City Hall to picket authorities.
Police detained him minutes after he began. He was sentenced for “minor hooliganism”
and fined 70 times the minimum wage.
On March 2, the 20th anniversary of Uzbekistan’s accession to the UN, Elena
Urlaeva, head of the Human Rights Alliance; Tojiboi-ugli; and activists Shukhrat
Rustamov, Nasiba Ashirmatova, Ada Kim, Gulchekhra Turopova, and Zoya
Yangurazova planned to march to the residence of President Islam Karimov.
Police placed them under house arrest as they gathered in Urlaeva’s home.
Urlaeva and Tojiboi-ugli were able to leave but were later detained and released
several hours later.
On May 5, activist Gulshan Karaeva posted on the internet that she had refused
a demand by Uzbekistan’s National Security Services (SNB) to cooperate as an
informant. Days later, unknown assailants attacked her in the street.
In September, during the peak of the cotton harvest, authorities arrested Uktam
Pardaev, a rights activist well known for reporting on police abuses, torture, and
forced labor. Pardaev was beaten by several officers during the initial arrest and
then held for over 15 days on minor administrative charges of “hooliganism”
and “resisting arrest.” Pardaev and other observers believe he was arrested to
prevent him from monitoring the rights of children and adults who are mobilized
and forced to pick cotton during the annual harvest.
Due to the increasing government crackdown, a branch office of Ezgulik
(Goodness), the country’s only registered human rights organization, was forced
to close, and several rights activists and journalists were forced to flee the
country.
The government also pursued activists and opposition figures living in exile.
In February, an unknown assailant shot prominent Uzbek exiled religious leader
Imam Obidhon-kori Nazarov in Sweden. Nazarov was one of Uzbekistan’s most
popular religious figures in the 1990s until the government shut down his
mosque, forcing him and thousands of his followers into exile. The assassination
attempt came after years of death threats and intimidation. In July,
Sweden’s Chief Prosecutor Krister Petersson stated that Uzbekistan’s secret
services were probably behind the attack.
In April, authorities aired a 20-minute television program accusing France-based
activist Nadejda Atayeva, president of the Association of Human Rights in
Central Asia, of stealing millions of dollars, and calling for her extradition to
Uzbekistan. The film came days after Atayeva had publicly called for an investigation
into an assassination attempt on Nazarov.
The Andijan Massacre
The government continues to refuse an independent investigation into the 2005
massacre of hundreds of citizens in Andijan, who had gathered to protest socioeconomic
problems and civil and political grievances in the country in connection
with the government’s prosecution of local business leaders on charges of
terrorism. The Uzbek government’s persistent refusal to allow an independent
international investigation has denied justice to victims and failed to bring to
account those responsible. Authorities continue to persecute anyone suspected
of having participated in, or witnessed, the atrocities.
The government also continues to intimidate family members of Andijan massacre
survivors who have sought refuge abroad.
Criminal Justice, Torture, and Ill-Treatment
Torture remains rampant and continues to occur with near-total impunity.
Detainees’ rights are violated at each stage of investigations and trials, despite
habeas corpus amendments passed in 2008. The government has failed to
meaningfully implement recommendations to combat torture made by the UN
special rapporteur in 2003 and other international bodies.
Suspects are not permitted access to lawyers, a critical safeguard against torture
in pre-trial detention. Police coerce confessions from detainees using torture,
including beatings with batons and plastic bottles, hanging by the wrists
and ankles, rape, and sexual humiliation. Authorities routinely refuse to investigate
allegations of abuse.
For example, in July, police in western Uzbekistan detained Jehovah’s Witness
Gulchehra Abdullayeva on suspicion of possessing “banned” literature.
Abdullayeva complained that officers made her stand facing a wall for four
hours with no food or water in the summer heat. They then placed a gas mask
over her head and blocked the air supply.
Human Rights Watch continues to receive regular and credible reports of torture,
including suspicious deaths in custody in pre-trial and post-conviction detention.
Freedom of Religion
Although Uzbekistan’s Constitution ensures freedom of religion, authorities
continued their multi-year campaign of arbitrary detention, arrest, and torture of
Muslims who practice their faith outside state controls. Over 200 were arrested
or convicted in 2012 on charges related to religious extremism.
Continuing a trend that began in 2008, followers of the late Turkish Muslim theologian
Said Nursi were prosecuted for religious extremism, with dozens arrested
or imprisoned in 2012.
Authorities also imprison and fine Christians who conduct peaceful religious
activities for administrative offenses, such as illegal religious teaching.
Authorities extend sentences of religious prisoners for alleged violations of
prison regulations. Such extensions occur without due process and add years to
a prisoner’s sentence, and appear aimed at keeping religious prisoners incarcerated
indefinitely.
Forced Labor
Forced child and adult labor in the cotton sector remains a serious concern. The
government took no meaningful steps to implement the two International
Labour Organization (ILO) conventions on child labor, which it ratified in March
2008. Despite repeated requests, it continued to refuse the ILO access to monitor
the harvest.
The government continues to force millions of schoolchildren, mainly aged 15 to
17 years old, but some as young as 9, to help with the cotton harvest for up to
two months every year. Officials including police, municipal authorities, and
school principals shut down schools, busing children to cotton fields where
they are made to harvest cotton in line with established daily quotas. They live
in filthy conditions, contract illnesses, miss school, and work daily from early
morning until evening for little or no pay. In 2012, as in past years, authorities
also forced adults, including schoolteachers, doctors, and other public sector
employees, to participate.
Authorities regularly harass activists who try to document forced adult and child
labor.
Key International Actors
The Uzbek government continued to refuse to cooperate with international institutions
but faced virtually no consequences for its intransigence. For the past
decade, it has denied access to all UN special monitors who have requested
invitations—10 at this writing—and has failed to comply with recommendations
that various expert bodies have made.
The EU’s position on human rights remained disappointingly weak, with virtually
no public expressions of concern about Uzbekistan’s deteriorating record,
and no policy consequences for the government’s continued failure to meet the
EU’s reform expectations as articulated by EU foreign ministers in 2010.
Bilateral meetings between the EU and Uzbekistan, including a Cooperation
Committee meeting in Tashkent in July, yielded no known results for human
rights. The EU did not seize the opportunity provided by the five-year anniversary
of its strategy for Central Asia to engage in a critical rethinking of its
approach.
The European Parliament voiced concern about Uzbekistan’s poor record by
adopting a highly critical resolution in December 2011, in which it rejected a
proposed reduction of EU textile tariffs for Uzbekistan until conditions are met,
including enabling the ILO to access the country. In September, for the second
year in a row, Tashkent denied visas to a delegation from Germany’s parliament
that sought to meet Uzbek rights defenders.
In 2012, the US deepened its engagement with Uzbekistan. Since 2004,
Congress had restricted assistance to Uzbekistan based on its deplorable rights
record and further tightened restrictions following the Andijan massacre.
However, on January 18, in a deeply troubling move and despite no meaningful
improvements, the Obama administration exercised the authority Congress
granted it to waive rights-related sanctions and restart military aid to Tashkent.
Uzbekistan is seen as a critical stop in the Northern Distribution Network (NDN)
through which the US has sent non-lethal supplies to Afghanistan since 2009 as
an alternative to unstable supply lines through Pakistan. US military contracts
with Uzbek companies as part of this supply chain are potentially lucrative for
those close to the Uzbek government.
Despite the State Department’s re-designation of Uzbekistan as a “Country of
Particular Concern” for violations of religious freedom, the US government
retained a waiver on the sanctions outlined in the designation.
Algeria
New laws adopted in January 2012, and the announcement in 2011 of an end to
the 19-year-old state of emergency and of major constitutional and electoral
reforms, did little to give Algerians more freedom to associate, form political
parties, or express their opinions. Authorities relied on other repressive laws
and regulations to stifle dissent and human rights activities, such as the 1991
law governing assembly that requires prior authorization for public demonstrations.
May’s legislative elections gave the country’s governing coalition, the National
Liberation Front and the National Rally for Democracy, a majority of seats.
Several parties, including a coalition of Islamist parties, accused the government
of election fraud. Security forces and armed groups continued to enjoy
broad impunity for atrocities committed during the civil war of the 1990s. The
state offered compensation to families of persons forcibly disappeared in the
1990s, but provided no answers about their fates.
Freedom of Assembly
Throughout 2012, Algerian authorities continued to heavily restrict freedom of
assembly, relying on preemptive techniques including blocking access to sites
of planned demonstrations and arrests to prevent public protests even from getting
under way, especially when the purpose of the demonstration was considered
politically sensitive. For example, on April 20, police arrested 10 activists of
the Youth Action Rally (Rassemblement Action Jeunesse, RAJ), a youth movement
founded in 1992 around the themes of human rights and democratization,
in front of the central post office while they were heading to a meeting with a
French journalist, releasing them later the same day.
On April 26, police arrested several activists who were trying to demonstrate in
front of the court of Sidi Mohamed in Algiers in solidarity with Abdelkader
Kherba, a member of the National Committee to Defend the Rights of the
Unemployed (Comité national pour la défense des droits des chômeurs, CNDDC)
who had been arrested on April 18 and was on trial for direct incitement to
unarmed gathering.
Among the groups most active in attempting to stage public demonstrations are
independent professional unions, who sought better pay and work conditions.
Authorities often prevented their activities in the capital by a heavy police presence
and obtaining court injunctions.
Freedom of Association
The new Association Law, which parliament adopted on January 12, 2012, contains
many new provisions that give sweeping powers to the government to control
associations. The new law maintains the existing regime of prior approval
for associations and gives authorities wide discretionary powers to refuse to
grant legal status to new associations without first seeking a court order. They
can, for example, reject an association whose purpose or goals are deemed
“contrary to public order, public morality, and the provisions of existing laws
and regulations.” In addition, they can dissolve associations on broad grounds
such as “interfering with the internal affairs of the country,” “harming its sovereignty,”
receiving foreign funding without prior authorization, and exercising
activities outside of those provided for in their statutes. Involvement in a nonrecognized,
suspended, or dissolved association can result in imprisonment.
Freedom of Speech
The new law on information eliminated prison sentences for speech offenses
committed by journalists, including defaming or showing contempt for the president,
state institutions, or courts. However, it raised the level of the fines
imposed. It has also broadened restrictions on journalists by requiring respect
for vaguely worded objectives and providing for sanctions that can be imposed
by a professional ethics board in cases of infringements. Speech offenses continue
to pervade the penal code, which provides for up to three years prison
sentence for tracts, bulletins, or flyers that “may harm the national interest” and
up to one year for defaming or insulting the president of the Republic, the parliament,
the army, or state institutions.
The ordinance on the implementation of the Charter for Peace and National
Reconciliation, was adopted in February 2006 and offers immunity from prosecution
both for security force members and members of armed groups, with certain exceptions, for atrocities they perpetrated during the civil strife of the
1990s. The charter also seeks to muzzle continuing debate and scrutiny of the
atrocities committed during that period: it provides for up to five years in prison
for anyone who “exploits the wounds of the national tragedy, with a view to
harming Algerian institutions, harming the honor of its agents who served it
with dignity, or tarnishing the image of Algeria at the international level.” No
one is known to have been imprisoned under this provision.
Judicial Harassment
In 2012, authorities charged several human rights activists and union leaders
with various crimes for the peaceful exercise of their right to assemble or for
voicing their support for strikes or demonstrations. On April 18, authorities
arrested CNDDC member Abdelkader Kherba in front of the Sidi Mohamed courthouse
in Algiers where he had come to show solidarity with court clerks, who
had been on strike for 10 days and were staging a sit-in to demand better working
conditions for court personnel. A court convicted Kherba on charges of
“direct incitement to an unarmed gathering” and “interfering with the work of
an institution” and handed him a one year suspended prison sentence. Kherba
was arrested a second time on August 21 and charged with “insulting an official.”
He was later acquitted.
Yacine Zaid, trade unionist and president of the Laghouat section of the
Algerian League for the Defense of Human Rights (LADDH), and three other
union leaders were charged with “inciting an unarmed gathering” under article
100 of the criminal code. The police had arrested them on April 26 while they
were holding a sit-in in front the Sidi Mohamed courthouse to denounce the
prosecution of Kherba.
Accountability for Past Crimes
Khaled Nezzar, minister of defense from 1992 to 1994, was arrested by Swiss
police in October 2011, interrogated, and later released on bail. The Swiss
Federal Criminal Court (FCC) commenced investigations against him for war
crimes and crimes against humanity for his role in commanding the harsh
repression of armed resistance and civil unrest in Algeria during the 1990s. On July 31, 2012, the Swiss FCC rejected his appeal to drop the case. He remains on
bail pending the completion of the investigation and the commencement of the
trial.
Women
Algeria adopted a new law on January 12, 2012, imposing a 30 percent quota of
women on the electoral lists of parties for legislative, municipal, and communal
elections. Women won 31 percent of the seats in the parliament elected on May
10. However, the Algerian code of personal status discriminates against women
in matters of parental authority, divorce and inheritance.
Terrorism and Counterterrorism
Armed groups staged attacks far less frequently than during the 1990s.
However, Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) continued to launch fatal
attacks, directed mostly at military and police targets.
After Bouteflika lifted the state of emergency, authorities transferred suspected
terrorists who had been in “assigned residence” for several years without any
judicial review to official places of detention. However, long delays tainted their
trials as the judges refused to summon key witnesses and postponed their hearings
repeatedly. In 2012, the trials of Hassan Hattab, Amari Saifi, and Kamel
Djermane, three suspected terrorists who were held for several years under
secret detention and brought to trial after the lifting of the state of emergency,
were postponed several times.
Algeria strengthened its role as a regional player on counterterrorism, for example
hosting the inaugural meeting of the Global Counterterrorism Forum, a multilateral
group that the US created to broaden counterterrorism discussions
beyond the western, industrialized countries.
Key International Actors
François Hollande, the new president of France, issued a statement on October
17, 2012, in which he recognized the responsibility of the French republic in the
killing of scores of Algerian protesters in Paris on October 17, 1961.
The European Union, which already has an “association agreement” with
Algeria, agreed to provide Algeria with €172 million (approximately US$234 million)
in aid between 2011 and 2013. Western countries consider Algeria as a
major partner in combating terrorism. With the takeover of northern Mali in April
by Islamist radical groups, the US and European countries increased their counter-
terrorism cooperation with Algeria.
The UN special rapporteur on torture, the UN Working Groups on Enforced or
Involuntary Disappearances (WGEID) and on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD), and
the special rapporteur on summary, arbitrary or extrajudicial executions continued
to be denied access to Algeria.
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay visited Algeria on
September 18 and 19. She praised growing freedom of expression in the media
but expressed concern for the continued clampdown on freedom of assembly
and association. During the visit, the government said it would accept WGEID’s
long-standing request for a mission.
Bahrain
The Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry (BICI), which King Hamad bin
Isa al-Khalifa appointed to investigate the government’s response to prodemocracy
demonstrations in February and March 2011, issued its findings in
late November 2011. The BICI concluded that security forces had used excessive
force against peaceful protesters, and had arbitrarily arrested, tortured, ill-treated,
and denied them fair trials.
The BICI proposed recommendations to redress those violations and for the first
time, the authorities investigated some low-ranking security officials in connection
with torture allegations. However, the government failed to fully implement
the commission’s core recommendations, notably the release of protest leaders
convicted for exercising their right to freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly; and the investigation of high-ranking officials responsible for abuses.
Security forces used excessive force in 2012 to disperse anti-government
protests. Authorities jailed human rights defenders and individuals for participating
in peaceful demonstrations and criticizing officials.
In November 2011, the Ministry of Social Development cancelled the election
results of the Bahrain Lawyers’ Society (BLS) and reinstated the previous board
and president. In July 2012, a court ruling sought by the Ministry of Justice dissolved
the opposition Islamic Action Association (Amal).
Freedom of Assembly
After lifting the state of emergency on June 1, 2011, authorities permitted opposition
political societies to hold several rallies, which remained peaceful, but
clashes with security forces regularly broke out when protesters held demonstrations
in Shia villages.
In 2012, authorities increasingly rejected permit requests from opposition
groups and riot police often used force to disperse peaceful protests. On June
22, riot police fired tear gas and shot sound grenades at close range to disperse
a peaceful demonstration in Manama, the capital. A tear gas canister seriously injured one protestor in the head. During protests in which demonstrators threw
rocks and Molotov cocktails, police often attacked crowds indiscriminately
using teargas, sound grenades, and pellet guns.
While abuse in detention appears to have declined during 2012, police routinely
beat protesters, in some cases severely, at the time of arrest and during their
transfer to police stations.
According to opposition groups, at least 26 protesters and bystanders died in
protest-related injuries between November 1, 2011 and November 1, 2012. Many
of the deaths have been attributed to excessive use of teargas. The government
claimed that anti-government protesters injured 1,500 policemen in 2012.
Prosecuting Government Critics
Human Rights Watch documented serious and systematic due process violations
in trials of opposition leaders and activists before Bahrain’s special military
courts in 2011. Violations included denying the right to counsel and failure
to investigate credible allegations of torture and ill-treatment during interrogation.
The BICI reached a similar conclusion, saying that military courts convicted
around 300 people solely for exercising their right to freedom of expression and
assembly.
Despite authorities’ promise to review military courts’ sentences for speech
crimes and to void convictions imposed after grossly unfair trials, the protest
leaders and many others remained behind bars at this writing.
On August 2, 2012, authorities arrested rights activist Zainab al-Khawaja for
allegedly tearing up a picture of the king and participating in illegal demonstrations.
On September 25, a court sentenced her to two months’ imprisonment for
destroying government property.
On August 16, Nabeel Rajab, president of the Bahrain Center for Human Rights,
was sentenced to three years’ imprisonment for calling for and participating in
peaceful demonstrations without permits between January and March 2012.
Earlier, Rajab received a three-month sentence for “tweets” that called for the
prime minister to step down. On August 23, an appeals court overturned the
Twitter conviction, but at this writing he remained in prison pending appeal on
the illegal assembly convictions. The court’s verdict gave no indication that
Rajab had called for, or participated in, violence.
On September 4, 2012, a civilian appeals court upheld the military court’s convictions
and long sentences of 20 protest leaders.
On November 6, 2012, the Interior Ministry revoked the citizenship of the 31
people, including opposition political activists, lawyers, and rights activists,
accusing them of “damaging the security of the state.” The order left most of
those affected stateless.
Freedom of Association
On August 12, the government approved a draft law for nongovernmental organizations.
Local associations complained that authorities had not consulted them
and that they were not aware of the law’s adoption until media reported it.
On November 30, 2011, a few days after the Bahraini Lawyers’ Society elected
new board members, Minister of Social Development Fatima al-Balooshi cancelled
the election results, declaring that the society had “not complied with the
legal procedures.” Al-Balooshi reinstated the previous board and president to
manage the affairs of the society. The society challenged the order, saying it
had notified the ministry of the election two weeks before holding its election
as required by law.
On June 3, 2012, the Ministry of Justice filed a lawsuit accusing the opposition
Islamic Action Association (Amal) of violating provisions of the 2006 political
societies law, such as failing to “convene a general conference for more than
four years” and “taking its decisions from a religious authority that calls openly
for violence and incites hatred.” An administrative court ordered the group’s
dissolution on July 9. At this writing, a court of appeals was reviewing the ruling.
Accountability
The BICI noted that Bahrain’s security forces operated within a “culture of
impunity” and concluded that the abuses “could not have happened without
the knowledge of higher echelons of the command structure” of the security
forces.
The authorities claimed they investigated 122 officers for alleged torture and
unlawful killings documented by the BICI. However, the few prosecutions
involve mainly low-ranking officers, most of them non-Bahraini. On September
27, a criminal court sentenced a Bahraini police lieutenant—the highest-ranking
security official known to have been convicted for abuses—to seven years in
prison for the murder of Hani Abd al-Aziz Jumaa in March 2011.
Investigations and prosecutions have so far not included any high-ranking official
at the Interior Ministry or the National Security Agency. No official from the
Bahrain Defense Forces is known to have been investigated, although the military
played a leading role in the 2011 campaign of repression.
Migrant Workers
More than 460,000 migrant workers, primarily from Asia, work in Bahrain on
temporary contracts in construction, domestic work, and other services. Human
Rights Watch documented abuses against migrant workers in Bahrain such as
unpaid wages, passport confiscation, unsafe housing, excessive work hours,
physical abuse, and forced labor. In July, King Hamad signed a new private sector
labor law that contained improved safety regulations, measures to combat
human trafficking, and granted migrants greater ability to leave their employers.
The law extends a few protections to domestic workers such as annual leave,
but excludes them from most key provisions, including limits to hours of work,
weekly days off, and ability to leave their employers. Authorities inadequately
enforce existing laws against withholding wages, charging recruitment fees, and
confiscating passports.
Enforcement of a 2009 law sharply reduced transport of workers in open-air
trucks, previously a cause of many injuries and deaths.
Women’s Rights
Unlike for Sunni Muslims, Bahrain has no codified personal status law dealing
with marriage, divorce, child custody, and inheritance for Shia Muslims. Such
matters are left to the judge’s discretion in sharia courts. The penal code does
not adequately address violence against women. There are no provisions on
sexual harassment or domestic abuse. Rape can be punished with life in prison,
but marital rape is not recognized as a crime.
Key International Actors
Bahrain hosts the United States Navy’s Fifth Fleet. In May, the US resumed the
sale of some military equipment to Bahrain, a “major non-NATO ally,” after having
suspended sales in the wake of the government’s repression of peaceful
protests. The US continued to restrict provision of arms that could be used for
domestic repression, such as helicopters and armored vehicles. After the
February 2011 attacks on demonstrators the United Kingdom and France
announced they would cut off security and military sales and assistance. In
February 2012, several news organizations reported that the UK continued to
supply arms to Bahrain.
On March 15, the European Parliament adopted a resolution calling on Bahrain
to respect freedom of expression and assembly, and unconditionally release
peaceful protesters and political prisoners.
In May, the United Nations Human Rights Council (HRC) examined Bahrain’s
human rights record under the Universal Periodic Review (UPR) process. Many
countries expressed concern about the human rights crisis in Bahrain, lack of
accountability for abuses, and restrictions on international rights groups’ access
to the country. In September, Bahrain officially accepted most of the recommendations
it received during the UPR, including holding security forces accountable
for rights abuses and the immediate release of prisoners convicted for participating
in peaceful demonstrations, but at this writing the government had
not implemented these key recommendations.
On June 28, countries, including France and Germany, condemned ongoing violations
in Bahrain through a joint declaration read by Switzerland during a HRC
debate. The statement called on Bahrain to implement fully the recommendations
of the BICI, including releasing political prisoners and holding officials
responsible for abuses accountable for their actions.

Egypt
The rocky transition from autocratic and military rule continued following the
2011 ouster of President Hosni Mubarak. Egypt held democratic parliamentary
and presidential elections, and ended 31 years of rule under emergency laws.
However, serious human rights problems remain, including police abuse and
impunity; restrictions on freedom of expression, association, and religion; and
limits on the rights of women and workers.
Egypt’s first post-revolution parliament, elected between November 2011 and
January 2012, failed to make significant human rights reforms before it was dissolved
by the Supreme Constitutional Court on June 14 because the election law
was deemed unconstitutional. Three days after the dissolution of parliament,
the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF), which had taken power after
Mubarak’s ouster, passed an addendum to the constitutional declaration giving
itself legislative powers, and a substantive role in drafting the constitution and
limiting the powers of the new president.
On June 24, however, Muslim Brotherhood leader Mohamed Morsy was declared
winner of the presidential elections, and on August 12 he repealed the SCAF
addendum and ordered the retirement of Field Marshal Mohamed Hussein
Tantawy and Lieutenant General Sami Anan, the two most senior members of
the SCAF. On November 22, President Morsy issued a constitutional declaration
granting his decrees and laws immunity from judicial oversight, and dismissing
the sitting public prosecutor, a move greeted with uproar and strikes by the
judiciary. On November 30, the 100-person assembly started voting on the draft
constitution, with a referendum due to take place 15 days after the final draft is
approved.
Freedom of Expression
Overall, there was an increase in prosecutions under restrictive laws from the
Mubarak era that penalize defamation and “spreading false information,” and
security services continued to arrest and abuse journalists during protests.
Security services assaulted, arrested, and tortured journalists and protesters during protests outside the Ministry of Interior in February and outside the
Ministry of Defense in May.
Following President Morsy’s election, the authorities ordered the closure of one
TV station and censored at least three editions of newspapers. The public prosecutor
filed criminal defamation charges against at least nine journalists in connection
with their writing or broadcasting. In November, the minister of justice
appointed an investigative judge to interrogate a number of journalists and
activists on charges of “insulting the judiciary.” In 2012, prosecutors interrogated
or indicted at least 15 individuals on criminal charges of “insulting religion.”
In September, a court in Assiout sentenced Bishoy Kamel to six years’ imprisonment
for “insulting Islam.”
In the same month, the blasphemy trial opened of Alber Saber, whose atheist
beliefs led to his indictment on charges of insulting Islam and Christianity.
Media freedom activists criticized the upper house of parliament, the Shura
Council, for failing to include independent journalists in their appointments of
the new editors of state newspapers. In August, President Morsy amended the
press law to cancel pretrial detention for journalists after a judge ordered the
detention of Islam Afifi, editor of Dustoor newpaper, after he was charged with
defamation.
Police, Military Torture and Abuses
Police continued to use torture in police stations and at points of arrest, mostly
during investigations in regular criminal cases, but also in some political cases,
such as the torture of protesters arrested in Cairo in August and November.
Police torture led to at least 11 deaths in custody cases. Police have also continued
to use excessive and sometimes lethal force, both in policing demonstrations
and in regular policing. Torture by the military also took place. In May, military
officers arrested at least 350 protesters, including 16 women after a protest
near the Ministry of Defense in Cairo turned violent. Those released over the following
days gave consistent accounts of torture and beatings during arrest and
in detention.
Since December 2011, police and army members have arrested and detained
over 300 children who participated in protests. Children arrested at protests at
the Ministry of Interior in February 2012, and in front of the American embassy
in September reported beatings that in some cases amounted to torture.
Despite the high numbers of juvenile detainees, including children living and
working on the street, authorities consistently detained children with adults in
police stations and brought them before regular prosecutors, instead of referring
them to the juvenile justice system as required by law.
Impunity for Police and Military Abuses
There has been no process of transitional justice in Egypt to account for the
crimes of the Mubarak era nor has there been real accountability for the violence
during the January 2011 uprising, which left 846 dead. On June 2, a judge
sentenced Hosni Mubarak and his former Minister of Interior Habib al-Adly to
life imprisonment for failing to protect protesters from attacks by “criminal foreign
elements.” The judge acquitted the four other assistant ministers of interior
because he was not convinced that “the police was connected with the protester
deaths.”
Prosecutions of the violence against protesters resulted in 35 trials of at least
200 mid- and high-level police officials around the country. At this writing, 26
trials had concluded with 21 acquittals on grounds of lack of evidence or selfdefense,
with five trials resulting in sentences that were mostly in absentia or
suspended. At this writing, only two police officers were actually serving time
for the excessive and illegal use of force against protesters. In July, Morsy established
a fact-finding committee and in November, he passed a law creating a
dedicated court to try cases of violence against protesters.
There has been no accountability for the military’s involvement in the torture
and beating of hundreds of demonstrators on February 25, March 9, April 9, May
4, and December 17, 2011. In March 2012, a military judge acquitted the only
military officer on trial for the sexual assault against seven female protesters in
a military prison in March 2011 under the guise of “virginity tests.” In
September, a military court sentenced three military officers to two years’
imprisonment for driving the armored vehicles that ran over and killed 13 protesters in front of Maspero television building in October 2011. However, there
was no investigation into the shooting of 14 other protesters on the same day.
No other military officers have been held accountable for abuses since the
January uprising.
Freedom of Association
Parliamentarians have been drafting a new law on associations which was nearing
completion when a court dissolved parliament. Meanwhile, Egypt continues
to apply the repressive Mubarak-era law 84 on associations. In 2011, the government
launched investigations into scores of unregistered nongovernmental
organizations), in many cases human rights organizations whose registration
had been blocked by the security agencies. As a result, 43 NGO workers, 16
Egyptians and 27 foreign nationals, were charged with operating “unlicensed”
groups under the existing law on associations. The trial started in March.
Security agencies also blocked funding for human rights projects at registered
NGOs, leading to a freeze on activities and a loss of staff. The New Women
Foundation, a local women’s rights group, sued the government after being
unable to obtain approval for incoming foreign funds for ongoing projects.
Emergency Law and Military Trials
On May 31, the state of emergency expired in Egypt and was not renewed, ending
31 years of uninterrupted emergency rule. By the end of August, the Ministry
of the Interior had released all those detained under the administrative detention
provisions of the emergency law. At least eight trials referred to court during
the state of emergency continued before notorious Emergency State Security
Courts, which do not provide the right of appeal. In September, Morsy appointed
3,649 judges to these courts, but human rights groups mounted a legal challenged
to this move arguing that Morsy did not have the authority to order such
mass appointments outside a state of emergency.
Military prosecutors continued to try civilians before military courts, including
after President Morsy took power. In November, military police arrested 25 civilians
during an attempted eviction on the island of Qursays in Cairo, and prosecutors ordered their detention pending trial before a military court. A committee
set up by presidential decree to review all those convicted by military courts recommended
the release of up to 700 prisoners by presidential pardon, but failed
to recommend the retrial of the remaining 1,100 prisoners convicted by military
courts on “security” grounds.
Freedom of Religion and Sectarian Violence
Incidents of sectarian violence between Copts and Muslims continued throughout
2012 with no new prosecutions or serious investigations, with the exception
of the investigation into sectarian violence in Dahshour, Giza, where prosecutors
ordered the detention of nine suspects. On February 1, police and local religious
and political leaders ordered the eviction of eight Christian families after
Muslim residents sacked homes and shops of Christian residents in the village
of Sharbat, near Alexandria. The eviction was overturned two weeks later after
parliamentarians visited the area, but by the end of the year, police had still
failed to prosecute anyone for the violence despite a police report identifying
suspects.
On May 21, 2012, in the southern city of Minya an Emergency State Security
court, which does not meet fair trial standards, sentenced 12 Christians to life in
prison and acquitted 8 Muslim defendants who had been charged in connection
with clashes between Muslims and Christians in April 2011. The clashes had left
two Muslims dead, several wounded from both sides, and scores of Christian
shops and homes torched.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
Systematic sexual harassment of women and girls in public spaces continued
without serious attempts by the government to intervene and halt, or deter the
practice. For example, in June, mobs attacked and sexually assaulted at least six
Egyptian and foreign women in Tahrir square. Although prosecutors investigated
two of those incidents, they did not refer any cases to court in 2012, and overall
the government failed to prioritize addressing violence against women. After a
public outcry, proposals by Islamist members of parliament to lower the minimum
age of marriage, repeal the right of a woman to initiate no-fault divorce, and decriminalize female genital mutilation (FGM) were shelved. The
Constituent Assembly drafted provisions on women’s rights that further embedded
the Sharia law exception to equality in the new draft constitution, echoing
Egypt’s reservations to women’s rights conventions which remain in place.
Refugee, Asylum Seeker, and Migrant Rights
Police arrested hundreds of Eritreans and Ethiopians in the Sinai on their way to
Israel, detained them indefinitely in local police stations, and denied them
access to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), in violation of their right to make an asylum claim. Egyptian border
police shot at unarmed African migrants attempting to cross the Sinai border
into Israel, reportedly killing 12 between January and November. African
migrants continued to report torture and rape at the hands of traffickers operating
in Sinai, but the government failed to address or acknowledge the problem.
Investigations of human trafficking were rare, and focused solely on cases of
foreign domestic workers or Egyptians being trafficked abroad.
Labor Rights
Strikes, sit-ins, and labor protests continued in the face of demands for economic
and social rights. The new parliament refused to issue the draft trade
unions law that had been drafted by former Minister of Labor Mohamed Bor’i in
consultation with independent trade unions, leaving hundreds of new independent
trade unions without legal protection or access to services. Military and
police officers used excessive force on at least seven occasions to disperse
labor protests and sit-ins. Workers faced disciplinary measures and at times,
criminal investigations in connection with organizing strikes or independent
trade unions.
Key International Actors
Relations between Egypt and the United States deteriorated in January when the
public prosecutor indicted staff of four American NGOs, and subsequently
imposed a travel ban on them. For the first time, the US government seriously considered suspending military aid on the basis of legislation that required certification
of human rights progress in Egypt as a condition for aid. In February,
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton waived the human rights conditions after the
Egyptian authorities lifted the travel ban on the indicted foreign nationals, even
though the government continued its prosecution of Egyptian NGO workers.
Later in the year, however, the US government placed considerable pressure on
the Egyptian military to respect the results of the presidential elections and
allow a transfer of authority to the victorious Muslim Brotherhood candidate. In
November, the European Union held a high-level task force with Egyptian officials
in Cairo, where it approved a US$6.4billion aid package to Egypt, of which
at least $900 million was conditioned on good governance.
Iran
In 2012, Iranian authorities prohibited opposition candidates from participating
in parliamentary elections. They have held prominent opposition leaders under
house arrest for more than a year-and-a-half. Executions, especially for drugrelated
offenses, continued at high rates. The government targeted civil society
activists, especially lawyers, rights defenders, students, and journalists, and
announced plans for the first phase of a halal (legitimate) internet. Authorities
continued to block access to the United Nations special rapporteur on Iran.
Freedom of Assembly, Association, and Voting
Security forces prevented peaceful demonstrations marking the anniversary of
February 2011 anti-government protests. Opposition leaders Mir Hossein
Mousavi, Zahra Rahnavard, and Mehdi Karroubi remained under house arrest at
this writing.
On February 21, the Guardian Council, an unelected body of 12 religious jurists,
disqualified more than 2,000 candidates running for seats in Iran’s March 2 parliamentary
election on ill-defined criteria. The Iranian judiciary announced on
December 31, 2011, that calls for an election boycott constituted “a crime.”
At this writing, dozens of activists affiliated with banned opposition parties,
labor unions, and student groups were in prison. The judiciary targeted independent
and unregistered trade unions. In May, a revolutionary court in Tehran
sentenced Reza Shahabi, a prominent labor rights activist working with the
Syndicate of Workers of Tehran and Suburbs Bus Company, to six years’ imprisonment
for “conspiracy against the national security” and “propaganda against
the regime.”
In January, the Ministry of Culture ordered the dissolution of the country’s
largest independent film guild, the House of Cinema, allegedly because it was
not properly registered.
Death Penalty
In 2011 authorities carried out more than 600 executions, second only to China,
according to Amnesty International. Crimes punishable by death include murder,
rape, trafficking and possessing drugs, armed robbery, espionage, sodomy,
adultery, and apostasy.
The majority of those executed in recent years have been convicted of drugrelated
offenses following flawed trials in revolutionary courts. The number of
executions increased following the entry into force in late December 2010 of an
amended anti-narcotics law.
Iran leads the world in the execution of juvenile offenders (i.e. individuals under
18 when they allegedly committed the crime). Iranian law allows capital punishment
for persons who have reached puberty, defined as 9 for girls and 15 for
boys. In late 2012, there were more than 100 juvenile offenders on death row.
In January 2012, the Guardian Council approved the final text of an amended
penal code. Children convicted for “discretionary crimes” such as drug-related
offenses would no longer be sentenced to death under the amended code, but
a judge may still sentence to death juveniles convicted of crimes such as rape,
sodomy, and murder if he determines that the child understood the nature and
consequences of the crime, a vague standard susceptible to abuse.
Authorities have executed at least 30 people since January 2010 on the charge
of moharebeh (“enmity against God”) or “sowing corruption on earth” for their
alleged ties to armed groups. Since May 2011, authorities have executed at least
11 Iranian Arab men and a 16-year-old boy in Ahvaz’s Karun prison for their
alleged links to groups involved in attacking security forces.
As of September 2012, at least 28 Kurdish prisoners were awaiting execution on
national security charges, including moharebeh.
Freedom of Expression and Information
According to Reporters Without Borders, 48 journalists and bloggers were in
Iran’s prisons as of August 2012. On April 4, a revolutionary court notified Mansoureh Behkish, a prominent blogger and supporter of the Mourning
Mothers, that she had been sentenced to four-and-a half-years for “propagating
against the regime” and “assembly and collusion against national security.”
Behkish had been active on behalf of families of victims of the 2009 post-election
crackdown and 1988 prison massacres.
On September 2, 2012, authorities summoned journalist Jila Baniyaghoob to
Evin prison to serve a one-year sentence for “spreading propaganda against the
regime” and “insulting the president.” Authorities also banned Baniyaghoob
from practicing journalism for 30 years. Baniyaghoob’s husband, Bahman
Ahmadi-Amoui, is serving a five-year prison sentence on similar charges.
On November 6, authorities notified family members of blogger Sattar Beheshti
that he had died in custody following his arrest on October 30. In response to
international and domestic pressure, and allegations that Beheshti has been
tortured, Iran’s judiciary announced on November 11 that it would launch an
investigation into what happened, and hold anyone responsible for wrongdoing
accountable.
The government systematically blocked websites, slowed internet speeds, and
jammed foreign satellite broadcasts. In March 2011, authorities announced that
they would soon launch a halal—legitimate—internet to protect Iran from socially
and morally corrupt content. In September, they announced that the first
phase had been implemented in most provinces.
Human Rights Defenders
On March 4, prominent rights lawyer Abdolfattah Soltani learned that a revolutionary
court had sentenced him to 18 years in prison, barred him from practicing
law for 20 years, and ordered that he serve his sentence in Borajan, a city
more than 600 kilometers south of Tehran. Prosecutors charged Soltani with
“propaganda against the state,” assembly and collusion against the state, and
establishing the Center for Human Rights Defenders (CHRD), which Soltani cofounded
with Nobel peace laureate Shirin Ebadi. An appeals court later reduced
Soltani’s sentence to 13 years and reversed the ban on practicing law. The same day, an appeals court issued a six-year sentence for Narges Mohammadi, a
CHRD spokesperson, on similar charges.
In April, an appeals court informed defense lawyer Mohammad Ali Dadkhah that
it had upheld his nine-year sentence on charges related to his interviews with
foreign media and membership of CHRD. The court also sentenced Dadkhah to
fines and corporal punishment (in the form of lashes) and banned him from
teaching for 10 years.
Women’s Rights
Iranian women face discrimination in personal status matters related to marriage,
divorce, inheritance, and child custody. A woman needs her male
guardian’s approval for marriage regardless of her age, and cannot pass on her
nationality to her foreign-born spouse or their children. A woman may not
obtain a passport or travel outside the country without the written permission of
a male guardian.
Several universities banned female enrollment in several academic fields,
including engineering and the sciences, and set quotas limiting the number of
women in university courses as well as gender segregation in several higher
education facilities.
Treatment of Minorities
The government denies freedom of religion to adherents of the Baha’i faith,
Iran’s largest non-Muslim religious minority. Authorities conducted a campaign
targeting Baha’is in the northern city of Semnan. According to the Baha’i
International Community, at least 17 Baha’i-owned businesses have been shut
down, and 22 Baha’is have been sentenced to prison terms ranging from 6
months to 6 years since 2009.There were 111 Baha’is detained in Iran’s prisons
as of September 2012.
Authorities discriminate in political participation and employment against non-
Shiite Muslim minorities, including Sunnis, who account for about 10 percent of
the population. They also prevent Sunnis from constructing mosques in major cities and conducting separate Eid prayers. Government targeting of Sufis, particularly
members of the Nematollahi Gonabadi sect, continued unabated.
In September, authorities released Yousef Nadarkhani, the pastor of a 400-
member Church of Iran congregation in northern Iran, after almost three years’
imprisonment on the charge of apostasy, which carries the death penalty.
Authorities reduced Nadarkhani’s charge to “evangelizing to Muslims” and commuted
his sentence to three years’ imprisonment, which he had already served.
According to Ahmed Shaheed, the special rapporteur on human rights in Iran,
authorities have arbitrarily arrested and detained over 300 Christians, the
majority of them evangelicals or Protestants, since June 2010.
The government restricted cultural and political activities among the country’s
Azeri, Kurdish, Arab, and Baluch minorities. Security forces detained, tortured,
and executed dozens of Arab activists in southwestern Khuzestan province
since 2011. According to Arab minority rights activists, at least six people have
been tortured to death in custody in connection with anti-government demonstrations
that swept Khuzestan province between April 2011 and February 2012.
Key International Actors
On August 11, President Barack Obama signed new legislation into law expanding
United States sanctions in the form of asset freezes and travel bans against
human rights violators in Iran.
In March, the European Union reinforced its restrictive measures adopted in
response to serious human rights violations in Iran and prolonged them by 12
months. These moves came on top of expanded sanctions aimed at blocking
Iran’s alleged efforts to acquire nuclear weapons.
On March 7, Ahmed Shaheed released his second report, documenting a “striking
pattern of violations.” Later that month, the UN Human Rights Council (HRC)
renewed the mandate of the special rapporteur, established in 2011. In October,
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon released his annual report on the situation
of human rights in Iran, saying he was “deeply troubled” by continuing violations
in that country. Later that month, Shaheed released his third report, which also provided a “deeply troubling picture of the overall human rights situation”
in Iran.
The UN Office of Drug Control (UNODC) continued to provide financial support to
law enforcement projects to combat drug trafficking in Iran despite guidelines
that require it to temporarily freeze or withdraw support in cases where executions
for drug-related offenses continue.
Israel/Palestine
Serious violations of international human rights and humanitarian law continued
in 2012 in Israel and in the West Bank and Gaza. Renewed armed conflict
between Israel and Hamas and armed groups in Gaza from November 14-21
involved unlawful attacks on civilians by both sides. At least 103 Palestinian
civilians and 4 Israeli civilians died during the fighting, which ended after a
ceasefire brokered by Egypt and the United States. Israeli forces killed at least
four Palestinian civilians during the year off Gaza’s coast and in the “no-go”
zone on the Gaza side of the boundary fence. Israeli authorities destroyed
homes and other property under discriminatory practices, forcibly displacing
Palestinian residents of the West Bank, as well as Bedouin citizens of Israel.
In the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, Israeli settlers injured 151
Palestinians as of November 27. Israel imposed severe restrictions on
Palestinians’ right to freedom of movement, continued to build unlawful settlements
in occupied territory, and arbitrarily detained Palestinians, including children
and peaceful protesters.
Israel, operating in conjunction with Egypt, has impeded the rebuilding of
Gaza’s devastated economy by blocking virtually all exports from Gaza. Israel
has also barred Gaza residents from traveling to the West Bank. Israel’s use of
lethal force against Palestinians close to Israel’s border with Gaza deprived
them of access to 35 percent of Gaza’s farmland and 85 percent of its fishing
waters. As part of the cease-fire agreement ending November’s hostilities, Israel
and Hamas were to negotiate reductions in these restrictions, which remained
unclear at this writing.
Hamas authorities in Gaza carried out six judicial executions in 2012, including
after unfair trials, and men whom witnesses said were members of Hamas’s
armed wing claimed responsibility for seven extrajudicial executions in
November. The authorities frequently denied detainees access to their lawyers.
Security forces conducted arbitrary arrests and tortured detainees. The authorities
permitted some local human rights organizations to operate, but suppressed
political dissent, free association, and peaceful assembly. Palestinian
armed groups in Gaza launched more than 1,400 rockets that struck inside Israel as of November 2012, killing three civilians; a mortar shell killed a fourth
civilian. The vast majority of rockets were launched indiscriminately towards
populated areas.
In the West Bank, Palestinian Authority (PA) security services beat peaceful
demonstrators, detained and harassed journalists and online activists, and
arbitrarily detained hundreds, including during waves of arrests in May and
September. Credible allegations of torture committed by the PA’s security services
increased.
Gaza Strip
Israel
Israel Defense Forces (IDF) conducted aerial and artillery attacks in Gaza, including
in response to rocket attacks on population centers in Israel by Palestinian
armed groups. They also fatally shot at least five Palestinian civilians in the “nogo”
zone inside Gaza’s northern and eastern borders, as of November, according
to the Israeli rights group B’Tselem.
In July, Israel amended the law governing the state’s civil liability for wrongdoing
to bar all compensation lawsuits against Israeli forces by Palestinians from
Gaza. Palestinians from Gaza with ongoing cases were barred from traveling to
Israeli courts to testify.
In August, a military court accepted a soldier’s plea bargain and sentenced him
to 45 days in prison for shooting his weapon without authorization in January
2009. The charge was reduced from manslaughter for killing a mother and
daughter on the basis of discrepancies between soldiers’ and Palestinian witnesses’
accounts. The military investigation failed to re-interview witnesses to
reconcile the accounts. The soldier was the fourth to be convicted of wrongdoing
during Operation Cast Lead, and the second to serve prison time, despite
many other cases of unlawful harm to civilians and civilian property.
Hamas prosecuted no one for unlawful attacks against Israeli civilians during
the 2008-2009 conflict, or since.
In August, an Israeli civil court rejected a claim for damages by the family of
Rachel Corrie, an American who was fatally crushed by an IDF armored bulldozer
in Gaza in 2003 while attempting to prevent it from demolishing a home. The
judge held that the military investigation into Corrie’s death “did not have any
faults,” and that Israel was immune from liability because Corrie’s death
occurred during a “combat operation.”
Blockade
Israel’s punitive closure of the Gaza Strip, particularly the near-total blocking of
exports from Gaza, continued to have severe consequences for the civilian population.
Egypt also blocked all regular movement of goods at the crossing it controls.
The World Bank reported that the “the severity of poverty has increased”
among impoverished Gazans. More than 70 percent of Gaza’s population
receives humanitarian assistance.
Israel and Egypt allowed imports to Gaza that amounted to less than half of preclosure
levels, the United Nations reported, including construction materials for
projects undertaken by international organizations. As of September, Gaza still
had an estimated shortage of some 250 schools. In a ceasefire agreement with
Hamas, announced on November 21, Israel agreed to negotiate via an Egyptian
intermediary, “opening the [Gaza] crossings and facilitating the movement of
people and transfer of goods.”
Egypt, for its part, continued to ease restrictions on the movement of
Palestinians at the Rafah crossing between Gaza and Egypt’s Sinai. But as of
November 2012, it still did not permit regular imports or exports of goods
through Rafah, although it tended to turn a blind eye to commerce through an
extensive network of tunnels.
“No-Go” Zone
Israeli forces continued to impose a “no-go” zone on lands within 500 meters
inside Gaza from the armistice line with Israel by regularly firing on any Gazan in
the vicinity; areas up to 1.5 kilometers from the Israeli perimeter fence were considered
“high-risk” due to shootings by Israeli forces. As of November 4, 2012, Israeli forces had killed five Palestinian civilians and wounded dozens of civilians
in these zones, which comprise 35 percent of Gaza’s agricultural land,
according to the UN.
Israeli forces also fired on and confiscated Palestinian fishing boats that sailed
more than 3 nautical miles from the coast, prohibiting access to 85 percent of
Gaza’s maritime area under international law. The Palestinian Center for Human
Rights documented 49 attacks against Palestinian fishermen as of June 30. On
September 27, Israeli forces killed a fisherman and wounded his brother as they
were pulling in their nets a few meters from shore, near Gaza’s northern boundary.
In the November 21 ceasefire agreement, Israel agreed to refrain from restricting
Palestinians’ internal freedom of movement and “targeting residents in border
areas.”
Hamas and Palestinian Armed Groups
Hamas and Palestinian armed groups launched more than 1,800 rockets toward
Israeli population centers in 2012 as of November 21, compared with 293 rockets
in 2011. Israel’s anti-rocket system shot down at least 400 rockets headed
towards Israeli population centers. A rocket that hit a residential building in
Kiryat Malachi on November 15 killed three Israeli civilians. A mortar fired from
Gaza on November 20 killed a civilian in the Bedouin village of Rejwan in Israel.
Rocket attacks from Gaza seriously wounded at least four Israeli civilians in
March and November. A bus bombing in Tel Aviv on November 21 injured more
than 20 civilians, one seriously; no group has taken responsibility for the
attack.
The Hamas Ministry of Interior carried out six judicial death sentences. On July
17, Hamas executed by hanging Na’el Doghmosh following his conviction for
murder. The appeals court increased his sentence from life imprisonment to
death, in violation of Palestinian law, and did not address allegations that security
forces had tortured him. Courts in Gaza have repeatedly accepted coerced
confessions as evidence of guilt in other capital cases.
In November, Hamas’s armed wing extrajudicially executed seven men for
allegedly collaborating with Israel. At least six of them had been sentenced to
death, but were appealing their sentences when armed men took them from a
detention center and killed them.
The internal security agency and Hamas police tortured or ill-treated 121 people
as of October 31, according to complaints received by the Independent
Commission for Human Rights (ICHR), a Palestinian rights body. The ICHR
received 102 such complaints in all of 2011.
Hamas security forces assaulted, arbitrarily detained, and allegedly tortured
civil society activists and peaceful protesters who had called for an end to the
political split between Hamas and its rival, Fatah.
Hamas continued to ban three newspapers from Gaza printed in the West Bank.
Hamas security forces destroyed scores of homes, leaving hundreds of people
homeless, without due process and with inadequate or no compensation, and
in some cases using excessive force against protesters. In February, the Israel
Land Administration demolished dozens of homes to widen a road in the Izbet
Hamamiya neighborhood. In July, it evicted 132 families from the al-Rimal neighborhood,
claiming that the homes were built illegally on “state land.” A court
appeal was pending at the time of the demolitions.
West Bank
Israel
The IDF in the West Bank killed at least two Palestinian civilians in circumstances
that suggest the killings may have been unlawful. In July, Israeli forces
at the al-Zayim checkpoint near East Jerusalem shot at a vehicle attempting to
take Palestinian workers without permits to their jobs inside Israel, killing the
driver as he attempted to flee the checkpoint, B’Tselem reported. In November,
Israeli forces fatally shot Rashdi Tamimi, 31, with rubber bullets and one round
of live ammunition at a close distance during a demonstration in Nabi Saleh village.
Israeli authorities took inadequate action against Israeli settlers who injured
Palestinians and destroyed or damaged Palestinian mosques, homes, olive
trees, cars, and other property. As of September 31, the UN reported 247 such
attacks in 2012. In a positive step, police promptly arrested Israeli suspects in
two high-profile cases, including a firebomb attack on a Palestinian taxi that
burned six people, including five members of one family, and the severe beating
of a Palestinian youth.
Settlement Building and Discriminatory Home Demolitions
In June 2012, Israeli media reported that the number of settlers had increased
by 15,579 in the previous 12 months. In April, the government officially “authorized”
three previously unrecognized settlements. In July, a committee established
by Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu concluded that Israel is not an
occupying power in the West Bank and settlements do not violate international
law, an opinion not shared by the International Court of Justice (ICJ) or any other
government.
As of November 27, Israeli authorities had demolished 568 Palestinian homes
and other buildings in the West Bank (including East Jerusalem), displacing
1,014 people.
Building permits are difficult or impossible for Palestinians to obtain in East
Jerusalem or in the 60 percent of the West Bank under exclusive Israeli control
(Area C), whereas a separate planning process readily granted settlers new construction
permits. Israel approved donor-funded construction of 14 schools and
5 clinics for Palestinians in Area C, but threatened entire Palestinian communities
with demolition, such as 8 villages in an area designated as a military training
zone.
Settlers continued to take over Palestinian homes in East Jerusalem, based in
part on discriminatory laws that recognize Jewish ownership claims there from
before 1948, but bar Palestinian ownership claims from that period in West
Jerusalem.
Freedom of Movement
Israel maintained onerous restrictions on the movement of Palestinians in the
West Bank, including checkpoints, closure obstacles, and the separation barrier.
Settlement-related movement restrictions forced around 190,000
Palestinians to take time-consuming detours rather than the most direct route
to nearby cities, the UN reported.
Israel continued construction of the separation barrier around East Jerusalem.
Some 85 percent of the barrier’s route falls within the West Bank, isolating
11,000 Palestinians who are barred from traveling to Israel and who must cross
the barrier to access livelihoods and services in the West Bank, and separated
Palestinian farmers and landowners in 150 communities from their lands, the
UN reported.
Arbitrary Detention and Detention of Children
Israeli military authorities detained Palestinians who advocated non-violent
protest against Israeli settlements and the route of the separation barrier. In
May, an Israeli military court sentenced Palestinian activist Bassem Tamimi to 13
months in prison for leading demonstrations against land confiscation, in violation
of his right to peaceful assembly, and for urging children to throw stones.
The conviction on the latter charge was based primarily on a child’s coerced
statement.
Israeli authorities continued to arrest children suspected of criminal offenses,
usually stone-throwing, in their homes at night, at gunpoint, question them
without a family member or a lawyer present, and coerce them to sign confessions
in Hebrew, which they did not understand.
Israel allowed detainees from Gaza to have family visits, which it had suspended
in 2007. As of October 31 Israel held 156 Palestinian administrative detainees
without charge or trial on the basis of secret evidence.
Palestinian Authority
Complaints of torture and ill-treatment by West Bank PA security services
increased compared to the same period last year, with the ICHR reporting 142
complaints as of October 31, as opposed to 112 complaints for all of 2011. In
May and September, PA security services arbitrarily arrested scores of men without
charge in the Jenin, Nablus, and Tubas governorates, and allegedly tortured
dozens on suspicion of support for Hamas or attacks against the PA. In some
cases, PA military courts continued to exercise jurisdiction over civilians.
The PA security services, and men in civilian clothes identified as security
employees, violently dispersed peaceful protests, and assaulted and arbitrarily
detained protesters and journalists. In several cases, security officials arrested
and abused Palestinians who had posted criticisms of the PA online, including
on their Facebook pages.
Palestinian courts in the West Bank have not found any security officers responsible
for torture, arbitrary detention, or prior cases of unlawful deaths in custody.
The PA did not publish any information indicating that it took disciplinary
measures against or prosecuted individual officers whom witnesses and a government-
commissioned report identified as responsible for brutally beating
demonstrators and journalists in Ramallah’s main square on June 30 and July 1.
Palestinian civilians injured 43 settlers in the West Bank as of November 27, the
UN reported.
Israel
Bedouin citizens of Israel who live in “unrecognized” villages suffered discriminatory
home demolitions on the basis that their homes were built illegally.
Israeli authorities refused to prepare plans for the communities and to approve
construction permits, and rejected plans submitted by the communities themselves,
but have retroactively legalized Jewish-owned private farms and planned
new Jewish communities in the same areas. In 2012, the Israel Land
Administration demolished 47 Bedouin structures as of September, , not including
tents erected by villagers from al-Arakib, which Israeli authorities have
demolished 39 times the Bedouin-rights group Dukium reported.
There are an estimated 200,000 migrant workers in Israel. Most are indebted to
recruiting agencies, beholden to a single employer for their livelihood, and
unable to change jobs without their employer’s consent. Government policies
restrict migrant workers from forming families. The Ministry of Interior deports
migrants who marry other migrants while in Israel, or who have children there,
on the basis that these events indicate an intent to settle permanently in violation
of their temporary work visas.
Israel continued to deny asylum seekers who entered the country irregularly
from Egypt the right to a fair asylum process. In June, the Ministry of Interior
began to implement the “anti-infiltration law,” which provides for the indefinite
detention of all border-crossers without access to lawyers, without exception for
asylum seekers, and allows the military the discretion to prosecute them for the
crime of “infiltration.” Israeli forces repeatedly refused to allow groups of
migrants who had reached a newly constructed border fence to enter the country
or present asylum claims, and detained and forcibly returned other groups to
Egyptian custody without considering their asylum application. Most of the asylum-
seekers come from countries other than Egypt—predominately Eritrea and
Sudan—but Egypt has not proven a safe or fair venue for adjudicating their
claims.
Key International Actors
Israel has been the largest overall recipient of foreign aid from the US since
World War II, receiving US$3 billion in military aid in 2012. In 2012, the US provided
$100 million in assistance to Palestinian security forces and $396 million
in economic support to the PA.
In April 2012, the International Criminal Court (ICC) Office of the Prosecutor
closed its consideration of a 2009 Palestinian declaration seeking to accept ICC
jurisdiction, stating it did not have the authority to determine whether Palestine
was a “state” for the purposes of the ICC treaty.
On November 29, the UN General Assembly voted to recognize Palestine as a
non-member observer state. Prior to the vote, Israel and the UK pressured
Palestinian leaders not to join the ICC. It is unclear at this writing what effect the observer-state determination will have on the 2009 Palestinian declaration with
the ICC.
The EU allocated €300 million (about $390,000,000) to the Palestinian territory
for 2012, including €100 million (about $130,000,000) of 2011 credits to be
spent in 2012.
Jordan
Jordanian authorities increasingly resorted to force, arrests, and politicized
charges to respond to continuing demonstrations for political and economic
reform. The fifth prime minister to serve since the protests started in January
2011, Abdullah Ensour, took over in October 2012.King Abdullah II has called for
early parliamentary elections in January 2013 under a 2012 electoral law that
opposition groups complain favors loyalist candidates.
Freedom of Expression
Jordan criminalizes speech that is critical of the king, government officials and
institutions, Islam, as well as speech deemed defamatory to other persons. In
2010, a revision of the penal code increased penalties for some speech offenses
and the 2010 Law on Information System Crimes extended these provisions
to online expression. In September, amendments to the Press and Publications
Law broadened speech restrictions on online publications, also holding website
managers responsible for user comments.
In 2012, the legal aid unit of the Amman-based Center for Defending Freedom of
Journalists assisted journalists with 10 ongoing criminal cases for speech in violation
of articles 5 and 7 of the Press and Publications Law requiring journalists
to be “objective.”
In April, military prosecutors charged Jamal al-Muhtasab, editor of Gerasanews
website, with “subverting the system of government” for an article concerning
the king’s supposed intervention in a corruption investigation. Al-Muhtasab
spent several weeks in detention before being released on bail. The case was
pending at this writing. In February, military prosecutors also charged Ahmad
Oweidi al-‘Abbadi, a former member of parliament, with subverting the system
of government because he had peacefully advocated making Jordan a republic.
He was also released on bail with the case pending. In January, the State
Security Court (SSC) sentenced protester ‘Uday Abu ‘Issa to two years in prison
for “undermining his majesty’s dignity” because he had set fire to a poster with
the king’s picture in Madaba. The king pardoned Abu ‘Issa in February.
Freedom of Assembly and Association
Under the amended Public Gatherings Law, which took effect in March 2011,
Jordanians no longer required government permission to hold public meetings
or demonstrations. However, during 2012 prosecutors began resorting instead
to charging protesters with “unlawful gatherings,” under article 165 of the penal
code.
Hundreds of protests demanding political and economic reforms occurred in
urban and rural areas throughout the kingdom. Groups calling themselves the
Popular Youth Movement in many towns protested against corruption, the government’s
economic policies, and the new election law, and called for an end to
military-dominated trials of civilians in the SSC.
The government’s decision to lift gas and fuel subsidies in November fueled
protests, some of them violent and featuring once-rare calls for the king’s
ouster. Security agencies arrested an estimated 250 people within the first two
weeks of the protests; 89 of them were summoned to appear before the military
prosecutor on charges that included unlawful gathering. Authorities dispersed
protesters using teargas and rubber bullets.
Authorities continue to try protesters in SSCs, which under the Jordanian
Constitution have jurisdiction only over high treason, espionage, terrorism, and
drug charges. In March, security forces arrested at least eight protesters from
the southern town of Tafila in one such protest, referring them to the SSC for
“unlawful gathering.” At a March 31 protest in Amman for their release, police
detained 13 protesters whom the military prosecutor at the SSC charged with
“insulting the king,” “unlawful gathering,” and “subverting the system of government
in the kingdom or inciting to resist it.” They were released on bail in
mid-April. In a series of arrests in early September, security forces arrested well
over a dozen peaceful reform activists, including eight from Tafila, two from
Karak, and seven from Amman. All were charged under terrorism provisions,
which place them under the purview of the military-dominated State Security
Court. All remained in detention at this writing.
For the first time under the amended 2008 Nongovernmental Organization Law,
the Council of Ministers on June 27 denied the local NGO Tamkeen funding from foreign foundations for programs to assist migrant workers in Jordan. In August,
Tamkeen challenged the decision in court, but the case remained pending at
this writing.
Refugees and Migrants
Over 100,000 persons from Syria have sought refuge in Jordan. In July, the government
took all newly arriving Syrian refugees to al-Za’tari camp near the
Syrian border, which very few have been able to leave. The change ended the
previous policy under which Syrians fleeing the conflict could move freely in
Jordan if they had a Jordanian guarantor. By October, the more than 30,000
refugees in the camp had rioted several times over the closure and harsh conditions.
Since April 2012, Jordan confined Palestinians who arrived from Syria in separate
facilities: Cyber City and King Abdullah Park, in Ramtha, and denied them
freedom of movement. Jordanian authorities forcibly returned at least nine
Palestinians from Syria and threatened others at gunpoint with deportation, in
an apparent display of discriminatory treatment of refugees according to their
national origin.
In May, Jordan stopped the extradition to Eritrea of nine recognized Eritrean
refugees, allowing them to leave for Italy.
Hundreds of foreign migrants working in the duty-free Qualified Industrial Zones
and in agriculture and domestic work complained about labor violations, including
unpaid salaries, confiscation of passports, and forced labor. Government
inspections and judicial redress remained lax.
In November 2011, the government ordered police stations to follow a protocol
when receiving migrant domestic workers who left their employers. On the positive
side, they may no longer send the worker back without her written consent.
However, migrant domestic workers are not free to leave the station without a
Jordanian guarantor, even if they have been a victim of abuse. In March, the
government passed a regulation that would establish a shelter for victims of
human trafficking, but had not yet opened one at this writing.
NGOs repeatedly referred domestic workers who had suffered a range of abuses
to investigators. However, investigators rarely classified them as victims of the
crime of trafficking. Instead they treated each aspect of abuse, such as non-payment
of salaries, separately, sometimes even detaining workers for “escaping”
employers. In September, 50 female migrant workers were in administrative
detention awaiting their return home, although many had claims of abuse
against their employers and were not themselves facing any charge, Tamkeen
reported.
NGOs won modest judicial precedents for migrant workers. In October 2011, a
court ordered, apparently for the first time, employers of a domestic worker to
pay her fines for being in the country without documented residency status. The
employers had failed to apply for a residency permit, a common problem, but
the law holds the migrant responsible. Other court victories included verdicts
against employers for confiscating workers’ passports.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
On August 29, parliament approved amendments to the passport law, removing
a stipulation that a woman must obtain her husband’s consent before she can
obtain a Jordanian passport.
Jordan’s personal status code remains discriminatory despite a 2010 amendment.
Marriages between Muslim women and non-Muslims are not recognized.
A non-Muslim mother forfeits her custodial rights after the child reaches seven
years old.
Article 9 of Jordan’s nationality law denies women married to foreign-born
spouses the ability to pass on their nationality to their husbands and children.
Torture, Arbitrary Detention, and Administrative Detention
Perpetrators of torture enjoy near-total impunity. The redress process begins
with a deficient complaint mechanism, continues with lackluster investigations
and prosecutions, and ends in a police court, where two of three judges are
police-appointed police officers.
In March, police officers beat close to 30 demonstrators in an anti-government
rally with truncheons, kicked them, and slammed their heads into the walls at a
police station; two fainted from the ill-treatment. The results of a reported internal
police inquiry were not made public. Lawyers for and relatives of peaceful
anti-government protesters detained and charged under terrorism laws in
January and September also reported physical ill-treatment at police stations in
addition to prolonged solitary confinement in pre-trial detention.
On November 16, 2011, Najm al-Din ‘Azayiza, a 20-year-old man from Ramtha,
died from asphyxiation on his third day in detention at the Military Intelligence
offices in the Rashid suburb of Amman. The government did not adequately
investigate his death.
A royally appointed commission of inquiry in May found numerous instances of
ill-treatment in several state-run and private homes for the disabled, including
persons being placed in a closed home in Karak under the governor’s orders. An
undercover video capturing scenes of cruel treatment of residents by staff had
previously aired on the BBC.
The government did not submit to parliament changes it proposed in 2011 to the
Crime Prevention Law that would limit provincial governors’ authority to detain
people administratively. The National Center for Human Rights reported that
11,345 persons were administratively detained, some for longer than one year,
in 2011.
Key International Actors
The United States has a memorandum of understanding to provide Jordan with a
minimum of $360 million in economic assistance, and $300 million in foreign
military financing annually. In October 2010, the US Millennium Challenge
Corporation committed a total of $275 million grants to Jordan over the coming
five years.
The European Commission on September 18 announced €9 million (about
US$11.5 million) to foster dialogue between Jordanian civil society and media
and the government —one day after the king promulgated a new law censoring
online media that the European Union failed to publicly criticize.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development Technical Assessment
for Jordan concluded in 2011 that “Jordan is moving in a direction of more democratic
governance within the framework of a constitutional monarchy.” Despite
the worsening human rights climate in 2012, the bank saw no risks to its commitment
to the “fundamental principles of multiparty democracy, the rule of
law, [and] respect for human rights” by operating in Jordan.
Kuwait
Recurring political disputes between the government and parliament paralyzed
political institutions. In February, the Islamist-led opposition made significant
gains in parliamentary elections. In June, the Constitutional Court voided the
February elections and reinstated the previous parliament, originally elected in
2009. In October, Emir Sabah al-Ahmed al-Sabah dissolved the reinstated parliament
and set December 1 to hold a new parliamentary election. However
opposition groups, consisting of Islamists, liberals, and nationalists, boycotted
the elections.
Kuwait continues to exclude thousands of stateless people, known as Bidun,
from full citizenship, despite their longstanding roots in Kuwaiti territory. The
government continues to violently disperse Bidun protests while promising to
grant Bidun social benefits including government-issued documentation and
free education and health care.
Authorities criminally prosecuted individuals for expressing nonviolent political
opinions, including web commentary. Kuwaiti courts issued two landmark rulings
cancelling legally-sanctioned discrimination against women in the judicial
and education sectors.
Bidun
At least 106,000 Bidun live in Kuwait. After an initial registration period for citizenship
ended in 1960, authorities shifted Bidun citizenship applications to a
series of administrative committees that have avoided resolving their claims.
Authorities claim that most Bidun are “illegal residents” who deliberately
destroyed evidence of other nationality in order to get the generous benefits
that the state provides to its citizens.
In March 2011, the government granted Bidun benefits and services such as free
health care and education, as well as registration of births, marriages, and
deaths. However, those benefits don’t provide a path to citizenship. Some Bidun complained that bureaucratic processes prevented many from accessing
those benefits.
Since February 2011, hundreds of Bidun have frequently taken to the streets to
protest the government’s failure to address their citizenship claims. The government
issued repeated warnings that Bidun should not gather in public, despite
the country’s obligation under international law to protect the right to peaceful
assembly. Article 12 of the 1979 Public Gatherings law bars non-Kuwaitis from
participating in public gatherings.
The security forces beat Bidun protesters and detained dozens when they suppressed
peaceful demonstrations. Detained Bidun reported physical abuse in
detention. In one instance, on May 1, security forces violently dispersed around
300 protesters in Taima, northwest of Kuwait City, and arrested 14 of them. The
Ministry of Interior said protesters had committed “shameful acts,” such as trying
to “burn tires and block roads.” Local rights activists told Human Rights
Watch that the gathering was peaceful. The detained Bidun were freed after
nearly two weeks.
According to local activists and lawyers, nearly 180 Bidun and Kuwaitis were
tried on charges such as “participating in an illegal gathering,” “resisting,
insulting, and threatening police officers,” and “destroying police property,”
stemming from their participation in demonstrations in 2011 and 2012.
Freedom of Expression
2012 saw some gains for free expression, but authorities continued to detain
and criminally prosecute individuals based on nonviolent political speech,
including web commentary.
In December 2011 authorities allowed the bureau of the television news network
Al Jazeera to reopen after shutting it down in late 2010 for reporting on security
forces’ crackdown on opposition protests.
In March 2012, a criminal court suspended Al Dar newspaper for three months
and sentenced the editor-in-chief, Abd al-Hussain al-Sultan, to a six-month suspended
jail term and fined him 1,000 Kuwaiti Dinars (US$ 3,500) for allegedly publishing articles that “raise[d] sectarian strife and incite[d] to violate public
order.” The charges arose after the newspaper published three articles that contained
statements critical and demeaning to the Shia minority in Kuwait. On
May 14, 2012, a court of appeal increased the sentence to a one-year suspended
jail term.
In May 2012, parliament amended the country’s penal code to authorize the
death penalty or life imprisonment for religious blasphemy. However, the emir,
who has the power to review legislation, rejected the amendment in June.
On June 5, 2012, a criminal court sentenced Hamad al-Naqi to 10 years’ imprisonment
for allegedly posting tweets “insulting” the Prophet Muhammad and
criticizing the kings of Saudi Arabia and Bahrain. Al-Naqi claimed that someone
had hacked his Twitter account and impersonated him. At this writing, his
appeal was pending.
In July 2012, police detained Sheikh Meshaal al-Malek al-Sabah, a member of
Kuwait’s ruling family, for several days over comments he posted on Twitter in
which he allegedly accused authorities of corruption and called for reform.
Women’s Rights
On April 22, 2012, an administrative court cancelled a ministerial order that
barred women from entry-level jobs at the Ministry of Justice. The case stemmed
from a July 2011 job announcement in which the ministry said it would accept
applications only from “male candidates” for entry level legal researcher positions—
a first step to becoming a prosecutor.
In early June 2012, an administrative court ordered Kuwait University to cancel a
policy requiring female students to do better in exams than male students in
order to enroll in certain departments, including colleges of medicine and architecture.
In its ruling the court said that the university had “treated male and
female [students] differently.” The Court of Appeal upheld the ruling a week
later.
Despite these gains, women continue to face discrimination. Kuwait’s nationality
law denies Kuwaiti women married to foreign men the right to pass their nationality on to their children and spouses, a right held by Kuwaiti men married
to foreign spouses. Kuwait has no laws prohibiting domestic violence, sexual
harassment, or marital rape.
Households in Kuwait employ more than 600,000 domestic workers, primarily
from Asia and East Africa. Kuwait’s labor law excludes domestic workers and the
restrictive sponsorship (kafala) system requires them to obtain permission from
their employers to change jobs, effectively trapping many domestic workers with
employers who mistreat them. Embassies report receiving thousands of complaints
about confinement in the house, months or years of unpaid wages, long
work hours without rest, and verbal, physical, and sexual abuse. In a rare conviction
in February, a Kuwaiti court sentenced a Kuwaiti woman to death and her
husband to ten years in prison for beating and killing a Filipina domestic worker.
Personal Freedoms and Privacy
In May and June 2012, the Kuwaiti police arrested hundreds of young people on
spurious grounds which included “imitating the appearance of the opposite
sex,” practicing satanic rituals, engaging in lewd behavior and immoral activities,
prostitution, and homosexuality. Many of these arrests took place during
raids on private homes. A month earlier, the Justice Bloc, a Salafi parliamentary
group, proposed establishing “a prosecutions office and a police force to combat
crimes against public morality,” which could potentially lead to an institutionalization
of such crackdowns.
These crackdowns follow the arbitrary detention, ill-treatment, torture, sexual
harassment, and sexual assault of scores of transgender women by the police
since 2007. These arrests and abuses are a result of an amendment to article
198 of the penal code which criminalized “imitating the appearance of the
opposite sex,” imposing arbitrary restrictions upon individuals’ rights to privacy
and free expression.
Key International Actors
In April 2012, the United Nation’s Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination (CERD) called upon the government to provide a “just, humane
and comprehensive solution to the situation” of Bidun.
The United States, in its 2012 State Department Trafficking in Persons report,
classified Kuwait as Tier 3—among the most problematic countries—for the sixth
year in a row. The report cited Kuwait’s failure to enact comprehensive anti-trafficking
legislation, weak victim protection measures, and lack of coordination
between various governmental institutions focusing on anti-trafficking issues.
Lebanon
Reforms in Lebanon were stagnant in 2012 as draft laws to stop torture, improve
the treatment of migrant domestic workers, and protect women from domestic
violence, remained stalled in parliament. Women face discrimination under personal
status laws, and vulnerable groups report being mistreated or tortured by
security force members during arrest and in custody. Lebanese authorities and
humanitarian organizations have provided material assistance to the influx of
Syrians fleeing their country’s fighting, but needs are increasing. Approximately
300,000 Palestinian refugees in Lebanon live in appalling social and economic
conditions.
Torture, Ill-Treatment, and Prison Conditions
Despite repeated pledges by the Lebanese government to prevent torture and
ill-treatment, accountability remains elusive. A number of former detainees,
including refugees, migrants, drug users, lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
(LGBT) persons, and sex workers told Human Rights Watch that security
force members ill-treated them during arrest or while they were in detention
facilities, including the Ministry of Defense, the General Security detention facility
in Adlieh, and the Hobeish police station in the capital, Beirut, which houses
the Internal Security Forces’ (ISF) vice squad.
In July, the ISF vice squad arrested 36 men during a raid on a theater suspected
of screening pornographic movies. The men were transferred to Hobeish police
station, where they were subjected to anal examinations. Forensic doctors conduct
the examinations on orders of the public prosecutor to “prove” whether a
person has engaged in homosexual sex. The tests violate international standards
against torture, including the Convention Against Torture and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), which Lebanon has
ratified. The Lebanese Doctor’s Syndicate denounced the tests as a form of torture
and issued a directive in August calling on doctors not to conduct the
examinations. In September, Justice Minister Shakib Qortbawi called for an end
to the anal examinations.
In August, ISF arrested 14 Sudanese refugees and asylum seekers as they
engaged in a sit-in in front of an entrance to the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) office in Beirut to protest the refugee
agency’s handling of their cases. The refugees reported that ISF officials kicked,
insulted, and threatened some of them while arresting them, and that when the
group arrived at the General Security detention facility in Adlieh some of them
were subjected to beating, humiliation, and threats, including threats of deportation.
On August 30, unidentified armed gunmen detained Lebanese Palestinian journalist
Rami Aysha while working on an arms smuggling story. They beat him and
transferred him hours later to Military Intelligence, who also beat him. He was
released on bail on September 26.
In September, at two separate protests in front of the Lebanese parliament, one
calling for electoral reform and the other for a non-religious personal status law,
security forces also beat several protesters.
In October, members of the Lebanese army beat at least 72 male migrant workers
in the Beirut neighborhood of Geitawi. The soldiers did not interrogate them
about any specific incident, but accused them of “harassing women.” According
to the Lebanese Army, they detained 11 of the migrants but did not specify the
charges against them.
Lebanon has not yet established a national preventive mechanism to visit and
monitor places of detention, as required under the Optional Protocol to the
Convention against Torture (OPCAT), which it ratified in 2008. In October, the
parliamentary Administration and Justice Committee began considering draft
legislation that would establish a National Human Rights Institute, with a permanent
Committee for the Prevention of Torture that would fulfill this obligation.
The committee must approve the draft law before it is reviewed by parliament.
Refugees
Lebanon has witnessed an influx of Syrians escaping the crisis in their country.
Most of the Syrians reside with host families or in ad hoc shelters, often in difficult
circumstances, and in public accommodations, such as schools or rented apartments. At this writing, 95,452 Syrian refugees had registered with the
UNHCR with an additional 34,275 waiting to be registered. Registration does not
grant Syrians legal status, only a right to receive assistance. As a result, they
face the risk of detention and deportation. Lebanon deported 14 Syrians back to
Syria in August, four of whom said they feared persecution upon return.
Many Syrian refugees in Lebanon also report feeling insecure, particularly following
the kidnappings of Syrians and other retaliatory attacks in August for the
kidnapping of Lebanese by armed opposition groups in Syria.
The estimated 300,000 Palestinian refugees in Lebanon live in appalling social
and economic conditions. 2012 saw no improvement in their access to the official
labor market, despite a labor law amendment in 2010 that was supposed to
ease such access. A survey conducted by the International Labour Organization
(ILO) in 2011 found that only 2 percent of Palestinians have obtained work permits,
that the majority earn less than the minimum wage, and that they are paid
20 percent less on average than Lebanese workers. Lebanese laws and decrees
still bar Palestinians from working in at least 25 professions requiring syndicate
membership, including law, medicine, and engineering, and from registering
property.
Migrant Workers’ Rights
Migrant domestic workers are excluded from the labor law and subject to restrictive
immigration rules based on employer-specific sponsorship—the kafala system—
which put workers at risk of exploitation and abuse. In January, Labor
Minister Charbel Nahhas announced that he would look at abolishing the kafala
system, but he resigned over unrelated matters a month later. The newly
appointed labor minister, Salim Jreissati, has yet to put forward legislation that
would protect the estimated 200,000 migrant domestic workers from excessive
work hours, non-payment of wages, confinement in the workplace, and in some
cases, physical and sexual abuse. Migrant domestic workers suing their employers
for abuse also face legal obstacles, and risk imprisonment and deportation
due to the restrictive visa system.
In March, Alem Dechasa-Desisa, an Ethiopian domestic worker, committed suicide
at the Deir al-Saleeb psychiatric hospital. Six days earlier, a video aired
showing a labor recruiter physically abusing her outside the Ethiopian consulate
in Beirut. Following a public outcry, the labor and justice ministers announced
that they were opening investigations into Dechasa-Desisa’s beating and illtreatment,
but the outcome of the investigation had not been made public at
this writing.
Women’s Rights
Parliament is still considering a 2010 draft bill that would protect women from
domestic violence. In August 2012, a parliamentary subcommittee put forward
an amended version of the bill limiting protections dealing with marital rape. As
of November, parliament had yet to consider the amended bill.
Discriminatory provisions that significantly harm and disadvantage women continue
to exist in personal status laws, determined by an individual’s religious
affiliation. Women suffer from unequal access to divorce and, in the event of
divorce, are often discriminated against when it comes to child custody.
Lebanese women, unlike Lebanese men, still cannot pass their nationality to
foreign husbands and children, and continue to be subject to discriminatory
guardianship and inheritance law.
Legacy of Past Conflicts and Wars
In 2011, as part of the UN Human Rights Council’s (HRC) Universal Periodic
Review (UPR) process, the government pledged to establish a national commission
to investigate the fate of those Lebanese and other nationals who “disappeared”
during and after the 1975-1990 Lebanese civil war and to ratify the
International Convention for the Protection of all Persons from Enforced
Disappearances (ICCPED). In October 2012, Justice Minister Shakib Qortbawi put
forward a draft decree to the cabinet to establish the commission, which in turn
formed a ministerial committee to examine the draft. Representatives of certain
families of the disappeared and other groups proposed a draft law to set up the
committee.
In 2011 and 2012, reports continued to emerge of Syrians and Lebanese kidnapped
in Lebanon being taken to Syria. Suleiman Mohammed al-Ahmad, a
Lebanese man, was kidnapped in June in Hisah, Lebanon, and transferred illegally
into Syrian custody. He was returned after his relatives conducted a series
of retaliatory kidnappings in Lebanon. An official joint Syrian-Lebanese committee
established in May 2005 to investigate cases of Lebanese who “disappeared”
at the hands of Syrian security forces had not published any findings at
this writing.
In February, the UN’s special tribunal for Lebanon announced that it would proceed
with an in absentia trial of four indicted members of Hezbollah for the
killing of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri in 2005. In July, the trial court rejected
motions by the defense arguing that in absentia proceedings violate human
rights. The trial is set to begin in March 2013.
Key International Actors
Multiple international and regional actors compete for influence in Lebanon.
Regionally, Syria, Iran, and Saudi Arabia maintain a strong influence on
Lebanese politics through their local allies.
France, the United States, and the European Union provide assistance for a wide
range of programs, including military training, seminars on torture prevention,
and civil society activities. However, these countries have not fully used their
leverage to push Lebanon to adopt concrete measures to improve its human
rights record, such as investigating specific allegations of torture or adopting
laws that respect the rights of refugees or migrant workers.
As of August 2012, the UN deployed 11,360 peacekeepers at Lebanon’s volatile
southern border with Israel as part of its 33-year-old peacekeeping force in the
country.
Libya
After 42 years of dictatorship under Muammar Gaddafi, Libya held elections for
a General National Congress (GNC) in July, but a weak interim government failed
to disband a myriad of armed groups around the country, end arbitrary detention
and torture against detainees, or address the forced displacement of
groups perceived to be pro-Gaddafi.
Throughout the year, Libyans suffered from ongoing violence, with tribal clashes,
deadly attacks on foreign diplomatic missions and international organizations,
the destruction of Sufi religious sites, kidnappings for financial and political
reasons, and targeted killings of former Gaddafi security officers. Non-
Libyans from sub-Saharan Africa faced arrests, beatings, and forced labor.
Political Transition
Libya’s National Transitional Council (NTC), which governed Libya during and
after the 2011 conflict to oust Gaddafi, was dissolved with the GNC’s election on
July 7, 2012. International observers largely viewed the elections as fair, despite
some violence and attacks on polling stations. The transfer of power to the 200-
member Congress marked the first step of democratic governance. The GNC is
mandated to form a government, prepare a new electoral law and hold new
elections. It was originally tasked to form a body to draft a constitution, but the
NTC revoked that power just prior to elections in an attempt to defuse tension
between eastern and western Libya. The mechanism for drafting a constitution
is currently under review.
Libya’s first elected government was sworn in amid tension surrounding the
exclusion of four proposed ministers by the Integrity and Patriotism Commission
for failing to meet set criteria for public office.
Security and Militias
Despite some positive steps, the interim authorities struggled to establish a
functioning military and police that could enforce and maintain law and order.
Many of the armed groups that came into existence to fight Gaddafi refused to disarm and filled the security void. Some cooperated with the government and
provided security services. Others operated without state sanction; the state
proved unable to confront these well-armed groups.
The authorities’ failure to demobilize the armed groups contributed to an escalation
of violence in the Nafusa Mountains, in northwestern Libya, in the southern
towns of Kufra and Sebah, and in the towns of Sirte and Bani Walid. As of
October, an array of government and militia forces from Misrata had surrounded
Bani Walid and enforced a partial siege, demanding the arrest of wanted persons
suspected to be in the town.
Libya’s national military deployed in the south after tribal clashes between
Arabs and Tabu over border control, land rights, and trafficking routes. Spread
thin, the army at times served as an intermediary between clashing regions and
tribes.
The police force remained weak, and depended largely on the Supreme Security
Committee (SSC) for ensuring law and order—a quasi-official body of former
anti-Gaddafi fighters that is cooperating with the Interior Ministry—for ensuring
law and order. The SSC’s lack of vetting criteria and scant training contributed to
abuse by its members.
Arbitrary Detention, Torture, and Deaths in Custody
As of October, roughly 8,000 people were in detention. The majority of them
were held for more than a year without charge or due process rights, including
judicial review and access to a lawyer. The Ministry of Justice holds around
3,000 detainees, around 2,000 are held by the Ministry of Defense or Supreme
Security Committee. The rest were being held illegally by various armed groups.
Conditions in militia-run facilities varied, with detainees in some facilities
reporting repeated torture and deaths in custody. Conditions in state-run facilities
appeared to improve, although there continued to be cases of abuse and
some deaths in custody.
Non-Libyans from sub-Saharan Africa, mainly migrant workers, are particularly
vulnerable to abuse, facing harassment, arrests, ill-treatment in detention, forced labor and no regulated access to United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR).
Failure to Investigate Killings
Apparently targeted killings occurred throughout the year, particularly of former
members of Gaddafi’s intelligence and security services. At this writing, at least
15 former officers were killed in seemingly targeted attacks in Benghazi. The
authorities did not announce any investigations into these killings, or arrest any
suspects.
Judicial System and Transitional Justice
The judicial system remained weak, especially in its ability to pursue criminals
affiliated with anti-Gaddafi militias. Threats and physical attacks on prosecutors
and judges further inhibited the rule of law.
On May 2, the NTC passed Law 38, which granted amnesty to those who committed
crimes if their actions were aimed at “promoting or protecting the revolution”
against Gaddafi.
At this writing, no one has been charged or arrested for the apparent execution
of 53 Gaddafi supporters in Sirte in October 2011, or for the apparent execution
of Muammar Gaddafi and his son Muatassim. An NTC-formed commission to
look at Gaddafi’s death released no results.
In contrast, the judicial authorities began proceedings against several former
Gaddafi officials. Detained officials complained that they did not have access to
a lawyer and did not know the charges against them.
Abuzaid Dorda, the former prime minister and head of foreign intelligence, was
injured after jumping from a two-story building while detained by a militia.
Dorda said he jumped in order to avoid abuse.
International Justice and the International Criminal Court
Muammar Gaddafi’s son Saif al-Islam and former intelligence chief Abdullah
Sanussi—both in Libyan custody—remain subject to arrest warrants by the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for crimes against humanity for their roles in
attacks on civilians, including peaceful demonstrators, in Tripoli, Benghazi,
Misrata, and other Libyan cities and towns after the start of anti-government
protests in eastern Libya on February 15.
Libya says that Gaddafi is under domestic investigation for corruption and
wartime abuses, and Sanussi is being investigated for serious crimes before
and during the conflict, including his suspected involvement in the 1996 killing
of about 1,200 prisons in Tripoli’s Abu Salim prison. Gaddafi is being held by a
militia in Zintan; Sanussi is under full state control after his extradition to Libya
from Mauritania in September. The Libyan government has challenged the
admissibility of the case against Gaddafi at the ICC, and that proceeding is
ongoing. Pending the challenge, the ICC judges have authorized Libya to postpone
Gaddafi’s surrender to the court in The Hague. However, at this writing
Libya was still under an obligation to surrender Sanussi to the court pursuant to
UN Security Council resolution 1970.
From June 7 to July 2, the militia in Zintan holding Gaddafi arbitrarily detained
ICC staff members, who traveled to Libya to meet with Gaddafi in a visit authorized
by the ICC judges and agreed to by Libya.
Forced Displacement
Approximately 35,000 people from the town of Tawergha are still displaced
around Libya and prevented from going back to their homes. The Tawerghans
are accused of siding with Muammar Gaddafi’s forces during the 2011 conflict
and of having committed serious crimes, including rape and torture, against residents
of nearby Misrata. Militias from Misrata have harassed, beaten, arrested,
and killed Tawerghans in custody.
Other displaced groups include residents of Tamina and Kararim, also accused
of having sided with pro-Gaddafi forces. Armed groups have barred the Mashashiya tribe from returning to their villages in the Nafusa Mountains due to
tribal and political disputes.
Freedom of Speech and Expression
In May, the NTC passed Law 37, which criminalized a variety of political speech,
including “glorifying the tyrant [Muammar Gaddafi],” “damaging the February 17
Revolution,” or insulting Libya’s institutions. A group of Libyan lawyers challenged
the law and in June the Supreme Court declared the law unconstitutional.
The fragile security environment has hindered free speech, with journalists,
human rights activists, and members of the GNC facing threats by armed
groups. The government’s inability to implement a coherent visa-management
system has made it difficult for international media and nongovernmental
organizations to access the country.
Freedom of Religion
Attacks against religious minorities started in October 2011, and intensified in
2012. Armed groups motivated by their religious views attacked Sufi religious
sites across the country, destroying several mosques and tombs of Sufi religious
leaders. Armed groups attacked churches in at least two incidents in Tripoli in
May and September. The government’s security forces have failed to stop the
attacks and have made no significant arrests.
Women’s Rights
The 2012 elections for the GNC marked a positive step for female political participation;
33 women were elected (out of 200 seats) after the NTC adopted an
electoral law requiring each party run an equal number of male and female candidates.
Libya’s penal code considers sexual violence to be a crime against a woman’s
“honor” rather than against the individual. The code’s provisions permits a
reduction in sentence for a man who kills a wife, mother, daughter, or sister whom he suspects is engaged in extramarital sexual relations. The law does not
specifically prohibit domestic violence and there are no voluntary shelters for
victims of violence.
Key International Actors
The US, European Union, and UN all played significant roles throughout the
year. The EU sought to build on migration cooperation agreements with Libya.
The US expanded cooperation in the economic and security sectors particularly
after the attack on its embassy in Benghazi on September 11, 2012, which
resulted in the killing of the US ambassador Christopher Stevens and three
other embassy staff. The UN Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) continued its
focus on elections and transitional justice.
To date, NATO, which waged the air campaign against Gaddafi’s forces, has
failed to investigate properly at least 72 civilian casualties caused by its
airstrikes.
Security Council members that initially championed resolution 1970 referring
Libya to the ICC have been largely silent on Libya’s obligation under that resolution
to cooperate with the court.
The Commission of Inquiry for Libya (COI) expressed concern that human rights
violations continue to be committed especially by armed militias, and recommended
continued monitoring by the Human Rights Council (HRC) to ensure the
implementation of its recommendations. Yet the resolution that the council
adopted on March 23, 2012, at its 19th session, failed to acknowledge specific
violations, to recognize the extent and gravity of ongoing rights abuses, and to
include a mechanism to ensure monitoring of the human rights situation by the
council.
Morocco/ Western Sahara
Human rights conditions were decidedly mixed in Morocco, as a 2011 constitution
containing strong human rights provisions did not translate into improved
practices. While Moroccans exercised their right to protest in the streets, the
police often dispersed them violently, and protest leaders and dissidents risked
imprisonment after unfair trials, sometimes based on the many laws repressing
speech that have yet to be revised in light of the new constitution.
In January 2012, for the first time, an Islamist became prime minister, after the
Hizb al-Adalah wal-Tanmiya (Justice and Development) party won a plurality of
seats in legislative elections. Moustapha Ramid, a well-known human rights
lawyer, became justice minister. On July 31, Ramid declared in a television interview
that among Morocco’s 65,000 prisoners there were no “prisoners of opinion,”
a statement contradicted by the incarceration of rapper al-Haqed and student
Abdessamad Haydour for their peaceful speech.
Freedom of Assembly, Association, and Expression
Inspired by popular protests elsewhere in the region, Moroccans have since
February 2011 held periodic marches and rallies to demand sweeping political
reforms .The police tolerated many of these protests, spearheaded by the youthful,
loosely organized February 20 Movement for Change, but on some occasions
attacked and beat protesters severely.
Seddik Kebbouri, president of the Bouarfa section of the independent Moroccan
Association for Human Rights, served eight months in prison following his conviction
in an unfair trial for his alleged role in a May 2011 demonstration that
ended in rock-throwing and property damage. A royal pardon freed Kebbouri
and nine co-defendants on February 4, 2012. A Casablanca court on September
12 sentenced five protesters to between eight and ten months in prison on
charges they assaulted police at a street protest on July 22, even though the
court relied on confessions that the defendants claimed had been beaten out of
them.
Terrorism and Counterterrorism
Hundreds of suspected Islamist extremists arrested in the aftermath of the
Casablanca bombings of May 2003 remain in prison. Many were convicted in
unfair trials after being held in secret detention and subjected to mistreatment
and sometimes torture. Since further terrorist attacks in 2007, police have
arrested hundreds more suspected militants, many of whom were convicted and
imprisoned, not for having committed acts of terrorism, but for belonging to a
“terrorist network” or preparing to join the jihad in Iraq or elsewhere.
Police Conduct, Torture, and the Criminal Justice System
Moroccan courts continue to impose the death penalty, but Morocco has not
executed anyone since the early 1990s.
United Nations Special Rapporteur on Torture Juan Mendez stated he was granted
unimpeded access to prisons and prisoners. He noted the “political will”
among authorities “to build up an institutional culture that prohibits and prevents
torture and ill-treatment.” However he also stated he had received “credible
reports of beatings [by police] (with fists and sticks), application of electric
shocks, and cigarette burns.” Mendez concluded: “In practice, the safeguards
against torture do not effectively operate because ‘there is no evidence’ torture
has happened and so the confession or declaration remains on the record and
no serious effort is made to investigate, prosecute, and punish perpetrators.”
Courts deprived defendants in political cases of the right to fair trials and in a
number of cases ignored their requests for medical examinations following their
allegations of torture, refused to summon exculpatory witnesses, and convicted
defendants based on apparently coerced confessions.
Twenty-five Sahrawi civilians faced a trial before a Rabat military court for their
alleged role in clashes that caused fatalities on both sides in and around El-
Ayoun in November 2010 between security forces and Sahrawis. At this writing,
the trial had yet to begin, even though 22 of the defendants had spent nearly 2
years in pretrial custody.
Prison conditions were reportedly harsh, due in large part to severe overcrowding,
a problem aggravated by the frequent resort to pretrial detention by judges, as documented by recent reports on prison conditions. Conditions for Islamist
prisoners at the high-security Sale 2 prison improved compared to the inhumane
and highly restrictive conditions that they faced in 2011, ex-prisoners told
Human Rights Watch.
The National Council of Human Rights, a state-funded body that reports to the
king, issued a pioneering report in September on mental hospitals, criticizing
the inadequacies of existing facilities. In November, the council issued a report
on prison conditions that cited a pattern of beatings, abusive policies on punishment
and transfers, and excessive use of preventive detention by judges.
In 2012, there were several reports of police abuse of sub-Saharan migrants,
many of whom live in precarious conditions along the Mediterranean coast. For
example, on August 24, police reportedly raided an abandoned house inhabited
by migrants on the outskirts of Nador, destroying or confiscating property, and
putting migrants on buses and dumping many of them at the Algerian border
without formally verifying their status. Generally, Morocco has refrained from
expelling migrants who have documents proving that they have applied for or
received recognition as refugees from the UN High Commission for Refugees
(UNHCR).
Freedom of Association
The 2011 constitution protects for the first time the right to create an association.
However, officials continued to arbitrarily impede the legalization of many
associations, undermining their freedom to operate. Groups affected include
some that defend the rights of Sahrawis, Amazighs (Berbers), sub-Saharan
migrants, and the unemployed, as well as charitable, cultural, and educational
associations whose leadership includes members of al-Adl wal-Ihsan (Justice
and Spirituality), a well-entrenched, nationwide movement that advocates for
an Islamic state and questions the king’s spiritual authority. The government,
which does not recognize Justice and Spirituality as a legal association, tolerated
many of its activities, but prevented others. In Western Sahara, authorities
withheld legal recognition for all local human rights organizations whose leadership
supports independence for that territory, even associations that won
administrative court rulings that they had wrongfully been denied recognition.
Women’s Rights
The new constitution guarantees equality for women, “while respecting the provisions
of the Constitution, and the laws and permanent characteristics of the
Kingdom.” Major reforms to the Family Code in 2004 raised the age of marriage
from 15 to 18 and improved women’s rights in divorce and child custody.
However, the new code preserved discriminatory provisions with regards to
inheritance and the right of husbands to unilaterally divorce their wives.
On March 10, 16-year-old Amina Filali apparently took her own life after enduring
beatings from her husband, according to her family. Filali’s parents, who live
near Larache, northern Morocco, had filed a complaint in 2011 stating that their
daughter’s future husband had raped her; later they petitioned the court successfully
to allow the two to marry. The case focused attention on article 475 of
the penal code, which provides a prison term for a person who “abducts or
deceives” a minor, but prevents the prosecutor from charging him if he then
marries the minor. That clause, say women’s rights activists, effectively allows
rapists to escape prosecution.
Domestic Workers
Despite laws prohibiting the employment of children under the age of 15, thousands
of children under that age—predominantly girls—are believed to work as
domestic workers. According to the UN, nongovernmental organization, and
government sources, the number of child domestic workers has declined in
recent years, but girls as young as 8 years old continue to work in private homes
for up to 12 hours a day for as little as US$11 per month. In some cases, employers
beat and verbally abused the girls, denied them an education, and refused
them adequate food. In 2012, an appeals court sentenced a woman to 10 years
in prison for beating a 10-year-old domestic worker, leading to the child’s death.
Morocco’s labor law excludes domestic workers from its protections, including a
minimum wage, limits to work hours, and a weekly rest day. In 2006, authorities
presented a draft law to regulate domestic work and reinforce existing prohibitions
on under-15 domestic workers. The draft had been modified but not adopted
at this writing.
Freedom of Expression
Morocco’s independent print and online media investigate and criticize government
officials and policies, but face prosecution and harassment when they
cross certain lines. The press law includes prison terms for “maliciously”
spreading “false information” likely to disturb the public order or for speech
that is defamatory, offensive to members of the royal family; or that undermines
“Islam, the institution of the monarchy, or territorial integrity,” that is,
Morocco’s claim on Western Sahara.
Moroccan state television provides some room for investigative reporting but little
for direct criticism of the government or dissent on key issues. In April,
Rachid Nini, a popular columnist and editor of al-Masa’ daily, completed a oneyear
prison sentence on charges, based on his articles, of attempting to influence
judicial decisions, showing contempt for judicial decisions, and falsely
accusing public officials of crimes.
Morocco revoked the accreditation of Agence France-Presse journalist Omar
Brouksy on October 5 because of an article in which he described a political
party running candidates in a by-election that day as being close to the palace.
In November, authorities announced that it would allow Al Jazeera television to
re-open its bureau, two years after they closed it after criticizing its coverage of
the Western Sahara conflict.
In May, a Casablanca court convicted and sentenced rap musician Mouad
Belghouat (known as “al-Haqed”—the sullen one) to one year in prison for
insulting the police in the lyrics of one of his songs. The conviction and sentence
were upheld on appeal in July.
A Taza court in February sentenced Abdelsamad Haydour, 24, of Taza, to three
years in prison for attacking the king by calling him a “dog,” “a murderer,” and
“a dictator” in an online YouTube video; the penal code criminalizes “insults to
the king.”
Key International Actors
In 2008, the European Union gave Morocco “advanced status,” placing it a
notch above other members of the European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP).
Morocco is the biggest Middle Eastern beneficiary of EU aid after the Occupied
Palestinian Territories, with €580 million (US$757 million) earmarked for 2011 to
2013. In its 2012 ENP report, the EU urged Morocco to protect freedom of
expression by, among other things, adopting a new press code, and to “put into
effect the principles contained in the new constitution, notably the adoption of
organic laws … and formulate a strategic plan for reforming the justice sector
with a view toward consolidating its independence.”
France is Morocco’s leading trading partner and source of public development
aid and private investment. France increased its Overseas Development
Assistance to €600 million ($783 million) for 2010 to 2012. France rarely publicly
criticized Morocco’s human rights practices and openly supported its
autonomy plan for Western Sahara. On March 9, then-Foreign Minister Alain
Juppé hailed Morocco’s “exemplary” progress toward democratization and
called it “a model” during the Arab Spring. On May 24, King Mohamed VI
became the first head of state to be received by François Hollande, president of
France, after his election as president.
The United States provided financial aid to Morocco, a close ally, including a
five-year $697 million grant beginning in 2008 from the Millennium Challenge
Corporation to reduce poverty and stimulate economic growth. On human
rights, the US continued to publicly praise Morocco’s reform efforts. Secretary of
State Hillary Clinton, in a statement about Morocco at the first bilateral “strategic
dialogue” on September 13, voiced no reservations on human rights.
The 2012 UN Security Council resolution renewing the mandate of the peacekeeping
force for Western Sahara (MINURSO) did not enlarge the MINURSO mandate
to include human rights monitoring, an enlargement that the Polisario supports
and Morocco opposes. MINURSO is one of the only peacekeeping operations
created since 1990 that has no human rights monitoring component.
Resolution 2044 welcomed “the steps taken by Morocco to ensure unqualified
and unimpeded access [to Western Sahara] to all Special Procedures of the
United Nations Human Rights Council” visiting Morocco. In September, the UN
special rapporteur on torture conducted a mission to Morocco and Western
Sahara (see above).
Oman
Omani authorities in 2012 restricted the right to freedom of expression through
use of criminal defamation laws, sentencing over 30 pro-reform activists to
between 12 and 18 months’ imprisonment and substantial fines on the charge
of “defaming the Sultan.”
Authorities restricted the freedoms of association and assembly, both in law
and in practice.
Oman’s mostly elected Shura Council exercised limited legislative and oversight
powers for the first time in late 2011, following royal decrees by Sultan Qabus
bin Sa`id Al Sa`id, Oman’s ruler, in response to large-scale street demonstrations
throughout the country in early 2011.
Pro-Reform Activists
On May 31, Omani authorities launched an assault on freedoms of expression
and association through mass arrests and trials of peaceful online activists and
demonstrators.
The crackdown began when police detained human rights activists Isma`il al-
Meqbali, Habiba al-Hana’i, and Ya`coub al-Khorousi as they were traveling to
the Fohoud oil field to interview striking oil workers. All three are founding members
of the independent Omani Group for Human Rights. Authorities denied the
men access to their families and lawyers for several days, eventually releasing
al-Hana’i and al-Khorousi while holding al-Meqbali to investigate potential
charges.
Over the following two weeks, authorities detained a group of 10 pro-reform
activists allegedly for Facebook and Twitter comments critical of Omani authorities,
particularly the arrests of al-Meqbali, al-Hana`i, and al-Khorousi. The
arrests of online activists escalated following a June 4 statement by Muscat’s
public prosecutor saying he would take “all appropriate legal measures” against
activists who have made “inciting calls … under the pretext of freedom of
expression.” He added that “the rise of rumors and incitement to engage in negative behavior eventually harms the nation, its citizens, and the national interests.”
By the end of July, authorities had arrested another 22 online activists on the
basis of alleged defamatory Facebook and Twitter comments. The public prosecutor
charged 31 of the detained activists with “defaming the Sultan,” based on
article 126 of Oman’s penal code, and violating provisions of Oman’s
Information Crimes Law. One, Hamud al-Rashidi, faced the sole charge of
“defaming the Sultan.” Following a series of group trials during July, August,
and September, the Muscat Court of First Instance convicted 29 of the activists
and sentenced them to between 6 and 18 months in prison and fines ranging
from 200 to 1,000 Omani Riyals (US$520-$2,600). The court exonerated only
one detainee, female activist Ameena al-Sa`adi.
Several of the detained activists, including Mukhtar al-Hana`i, Khaled al-
Noufali, Sultan al-Sa`adi, and Hatem al-Maliki, challenged the charges on the
basis that unknown persons had hacked their Facebook pages and posted the
alleged defamatory remarks. On September 9, the lower court judge postponed
their trials on the condition that each pay 500 Omani Riyals ($1,300) to hire a
court-appointed technology expert to review the hacking allegations. Al-Noufai,
al-Sa`adi, and al-Maliki paid for the review but were nonetheless convicted by
the court on September 16. Al-Hana`i refused to pay, and the court convicted
him on September 18.
Local activists told Human Rights Watch that many of the detainees reported illtreatment
in prison, including prolonged periods of solitary confinement, forced
wearing of hoods whenever outside their cells (including while being escorted
to the bathroom), sleep deprivation, loud music, and repeated verbal abuse
from prison guards. One female detainee told Human Rights Watch that prison
guards refused to grant her access to medical attention following several days
on hunger strike.
Freedom of Assembly
Omani authorities require government approval for all public gatherings. In
2012, riot police quickly dispersed impromptu demonstrations and sit-ins.
On June 11, police arrested at least 20 protesters at a peaceful sit-in in front of
the Special Section of the Omani Police in Muscat, where demonstrators
believed authorities were holding activists detained during the first week of
June. According to one participant, authorities sealed all roads leading to the
station in the late afternoon, and 60 to 70 riot police officers descended in
black vans and detained all the demonstrators.
Several of those participating in the sit-in, including Saeed al-Hashemi, Basma
al-Kayoumi, Mukhtar al-Hana’i, and Basima al-Rajhi, had signed a public appeal
earlier that day demanding the immediate release of the activists. They
addressed the appeal to the president of the Shura Council; the president of the
State Council, a purely consultative appointed body; the inspector general of
police and customs; and the head of the quasi-official National Committee for
Human Rights.
Omani police charged 11 demonstrators, including al-Rajhi, al-Hashemi, and al-
Kayoumi, with “illegal gathering with the intention of provoking a riot” and
“blocking the flow of traffic” under article 137 of Oman’s penal code. A Muscat
lower court convicted them on August 8 and sentenced them to one year in
prison and fines of 1,000 Omani Riyals ($2,600). At this writing all were free on
bail pending appeal.
Naming Restrictions
The Ministry of Interior’s Committee for the Correction of Tribal Names and Titles
continued to regulate and arbitrarily change tribal surnames, effectively assimilating
members of one tribe into another. Despite numerous court decisions
against ministry orders compelling members of the Al Towayyah and al-Khalifin
tribes to change their surnames to names of other tribes, ministry officials continued
to challenge the names of individuals when they attempted to renew
identification documents.
In 2012, the Directorate General of Civil Status, a branch of the Royal Oman
Police, continued its policy of restricting names permitted to newborns to those
found on a civil registry database. Any newborn whose name was not found in
the database and consequently rejected could not get a birth certificate until
the parents submitted an acceptable name. Activists reported that the appeals
process was lengthy and unclear.
Women’s Rights
Article 17 of Oman’s Basic Law officially bans discrimination on the basis of gender,
and authorities have made efforts to ensure that women are visibly represented
at the highest levels of government and society.
Oman adjudicates family law and personal status matters in religious courts in
which judges base rulings on their interpretations of Islamic law. Individuals
have no option to seek adjudication pursuant to a civil code. Family law as generally
interpreted discriminates against women in matters of divorce, inheritance,
child custody, and legal guardianship, granting men privileged status in
these matters.
Key International Actors
Both the United States and the United Kingdom provide significant economic
and military aid to the sultanate and both maintain a sizeable military presence
there. Neither country altered its policy toward Oman in 2012 despite the ongoing
protests and restrictions.

Qatar
In 2012, Qatar’s population grew nearly 5 percent, to 1.95 million, primarily due
to an influx of foreign labor to meet the demands of a booming construction
sector. Qatar has the highest ratio of non-citizens to citizens in the world, with
nationals comprising approximately 12 percent of the population. The country
has some of the most restrictive sponsorship laws in the Gulf region, and forced
labor and human trafficking are serious problems. The government has failed to
address shortcomings in the legal and regulatory framework despite the initiation
of many large-scale projects in preparation for Qatar hosting the World Cup
in 2022.
In June 2012, the Shura Council passed a new draft media law with provisions
on free speech that may jeopardize Qatar’s reputation as a center for media
freedom. While the constitution protects freedom of expression“in accordance
with the conditions and circumstances set forth in the law”, in practice Qatar
restricts freedom of speech. Local media tend to self-censor, and the law permits
criminal penalties, including prison terms, for defamation.
Migrant Workers
More than 1.2 million migrant workers—mostly from India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka,
the Philippines, Nepal, and Bangladesh—live and work in Qatar, and that number
is increasing rapidly. The country may recruit up to a million additional workers
in the next decade to overhaul its infrastructure and build the stadiums
required to host the 2022 World Cup.
Qatar’s Law 14 of 2004, governing labor in the private sector, limits working
hours, requires paid annual leave, sets requirements on health and safety, and
requires on-time payment of wages each month. However, laws intended to protect
workers are rarely enforced. Passport confiscation is customary and workers
typically pay exorbitant recruitment fees, much of which end up in Qatar,
according to a 2011 World Bank study on the Nepal-Qatar migration corridor.
Migrant workers have no right to unionize or strike, though they make up 99
percent of the private sector workforce. In addition, the kafala (sponsorship)
system ties a migrant worker’s legal residence to his or her employer, or “sponsor.” Migrant workers cannot change jobs without their sponsoring employer’s
consent except in exceptional cases and with Interior Ministry permission. If a
worker leaves his or her employer, even if fleeing abuse, the employer can
report the worker as “absconding,” leading to detention and deportation. In
order to leave Qatar, migrants must obtain an exit visa from their sponsor, and
some workers said sponsors denied them these visas. Reporting mechanisms
and remedies are effectively unavailable to migrant workers. In addition, the
labor law excludes domestic workers, almost all female, denying them basic
protections such as limits to hours of work and weekly days off.
Migrant workers reported extensive labor law violations. Common complaints
included late or unpaid wages. Some lived in overcrowded and unsanitary labor
camps, and lacked access to potable water. Many workers said they received
false information about their jobs and salaries before arriving and signed contracts
in Qatar under coercive circumstances.
Qatar employs only 150 labor inspectors to monitor compliance with the labor
law, and inspections do not include worker interviews.
The International Federation of Association Football (FIFA) pledged to raise
worker rights issues with Qatari authorities. While the local organizing committee
publicly said it would establish strict labor standards for contractors hired to
build World Cup venues, no such standards appeared to be in place at this writing.
Freedom of Expression
In June 2012, the Shura Council approved a new draft media law with provisions
on free speech that pose a threat to Qatar’s reputation as a center for media
freedom. The draft law still requires cabinet approval before becoming law. Al
Jazeera, the international news network broadcasting in Arabic and English, is
headquartered in Doha and funded by the Qatari government. While the station
played an important role in reporting the pro-democracy movements in many
Arab countries, it broadcasts few critical stories on Qatar, and the provisions of
the draft media law may make it difficult for any media outlets in Qatar to criticize
any Gulf Cooperation Council states. Article 53 of the draft law prohibits anyone from publishing or broadcasting anything that will “throw relations
between the state and the Arab and friendly states into confusion,” and provides
for a fine of one million Qatari Riyals (US$275,000) for offenders. The law
also prohibits the publication or broadcast of anything that offends the ruling
family or causes serious harm to the state or its interests.
After his arrest in November 2011, Qatari poet Muhammad ibn al-Dheeb al-Ajami
remained in detention a year later for a poem he recited in which he insulted
the emir, Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani. Article 134 of the penal code provides
for five years’ imprisonment for criticism of the ruler. The state prosecutor
charged al-Dheeb with “inciting the overthrow of the ruling regime” under article
130 of the penal code, a charge that can carry the death penalty.
Statelessness
Qatar has between 1,200 and 1,500 stateless Bidun who claim they have a right
to citizenship. The 2005 Nationality Law allows individuals to apply for citizenship
after living in Qatar for 25 years, but limits naturalization to 50 people per
year. Bidun cannot register for education or health benefits, or legally work. The
government does not register the birth of Bidun children.
In 2004 and 2005 the government stripped more than 5,000 Qataris from the al-
Murra tribe of citizenship as delayed punishment for some members’ participation
in a 1996 coup attempt against the current emir. In 2006, the Qatari government
officially reinstated the citizenship of most of this group, but an estimated
200 remain stateless.
Women’s Rights
Both women and men vote in municipal elections, though elected representatives
have limited power. Qatari women do not have the same rights as Qatari
men to obtain nationality for their spouses and children. In 2010, Qatar appointed
its first female judge.
Qatar has no law specifically criminalizing domestic violence, and the government
currently publishes no data on incidents of domestic violence.
Representatives of the Qatar Foundation for the Protection of Women and
Children, a government-funded charitable institution, told local media that
domestic violence remained a problem, based on their work with women and
children who sought assistance.
Qatar adjudicates family law and personal status matters in religious courts, in
which judges base rulings on their interpretations of Islamic law. People have
no option to seek adjudication pursuant to a civil code. Family law as generally
interpreted discriminates against women and grants men privileged status in
matters of divorce, inheritance, and child custody.
Key International Actors
The 2022 World Cup in Qatar provides an opportunity to apply international
pressure on Qatar to improve conditions for migrant workers who will be working
on infrastructure for the event. FIFA pledged to raise worker rights issues
with Qatari authorities. However, while Qatar’s World Cup organizing committee
publicly said it would establish strict labor standards for contractors hired to
build World Cup venues, no such standards appeared to be in place at this writing.Saudi Arabia
Saudi Arabia in 2012 stepped up arrests and trials of peaceful dissidents, and
responded with force to demonstrations by citizens. Authorities continue to
suppress or fail to protect the rights of 9 million Saudi women and girls and 9
million foreign workers. As in past years, thousands of people have received
unfair trials or been subject to arbitrary detention. The year has seen trials
against half-a-dozen human rights defenders and several others for their peaceful
expression or assembly demanding political and human rights reforms.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
Under the discriminatory Saudi guardianship system, girls and women are forbidden
from traveling, conducting official business, or undergoing certain medical
procedures without permission from their male guardians. In July, after a car
chase by religious police left the driver dead and his wife and daughter in critical
condition, King Fahd hospital in Baha postponed amputating the wife’s hand
because she had no male legal guardian to authorize the procedure, Okaz newspaper
reported.
In July 2012, the Ministry of Labor issued four decrees regulating women’s work
in clothing stores, amusement parks, food preparation, and as cashiers, for
which guardian permission was no longer required. However, the decrees reinforced
strict sex segregation in the workplace, mandating that female workers
not interact with men. Women remain barred from certain professions. On
October 8, Al-Watan newspaper published a directive from the Ministry of
Justice that approved granting Saudi female lawyers the right to obtain practice
licenses. Prior to the announcement, women who graduated from law schools
were allowed to work as consultants but could not officially represent clients in
court. The new directive will apply to all women who have a law degree and at
least three years of experience.
At the London 2012 summer Olympic Games, Saudi women for the first time participated
in an official sporting event: Sarah Attar competed in the 800 meters,
and Wujdan Shahrkhani in judo. Women and girls remain effectively banned
from sports within the kingdom.
Women remain banned from driving. In November 2011, lawyer Abd al-Rahman
al-Lahim sued the traffic department on behalf of Manal al-Sharif, who led a
women’s driving protest in May 2011, for gender discrimination after the department
refused to issue her a driving license. The case remained pending at this
writing.
Strict clothing requirements for women were publicly enforced. In July, the
Mecca public prosecution department detained three women for taking off their
full-body cloaks and headscarves in a shopping mall, sabq.org news website
reported.
Al-Sharq al-Awsat newspaper in March reported that the first women-staffed
police stations had opened in Jeddah and Riyadh in order to facilitate women’s
access to police. However, punishment for domestic violence remained lax. The
government failed to enact a 2011 draft law to combat violence against women
and children. In May, Jeddah’s Summary Court convicted a man for physically
abusing his wife to the point of hospitalization, but sentenced him to learning
by heart five parts of the Quran and 100 sayings of the Prophet Muhammad.
Migrant Workers’ Rights
Over 9 million migrant workers fill manual, clerical, and service jobs, constituting
more than half the workforce. Many suffer multiple abuses and labor
exploitation, sometimes amounting to slavery-like conditions.
The kafala (sponsorship) system ties migrant workers’ residency permits to
“sponsoring” employers, whose written consent is required for workers to
change employers or exit the country. Employers abuse this power to confiscate
passports, withhold wages, and force migrants to work against their will,
against Saudi law.
In April, the Labor Ministry proposed to abolish the kafala system by transferring
immigration sponsorship to newly created recruitment and placement agencies,
but the change had not taken effect at this writing. To tackle kafala-related
abuses, Saudi Arabia would also need to amend its Residency Law so that a
migrant worker no longer would require a sponsor’s consent to change jobs or
leave the country.
Some 1.5 million migrant domestic workers remain excluded from the 2005
Labor Law. In years past, Asian embassies reported thousands of complaints
from domestic workers forced to work 15 to 20 hours a day, seven days a week,
and denied their salaries. Domestic workers, most of them women, frequently
endure forced confinement, food deprivation, and severe psychological, physical,
and sexual abuse.
In 2011 and 2012, the rampant abuse led the Philippines, Indonesia, Nepal, and
Kenya to impose restrictions on their citizens from migrating to Saudi Arabia for
domestic work. In October 2012, the Philippines and Saudi Arabia approved
resuming migration after agreeing upon a US$400 minimum wage but few other
rights.
In April, Saudi Arabia pardoned 22 Indonesian domestic workers on death row.
Many migrant domestic workers still face the death penalty, often after having
limited access to legal advice and translators during court proceedings. These
include 32 Indonesian domestic workers whose convictions include witchcraft
and “sexual offenses,” and Rizana Nafeek, a Sri Lankan domestic worker who
was under 18 years old when a baby died in her care.
Criminal Justice and Torture
Detainees, including children, commonly face systematic violations of due
process and fair trial rights, including arbitrary arrest and torture and ill-treatment
in detention. Saudi judges routinely sentence defendants to thousands of
lashes.
Judges can order arrest and detention, including of children, at their discretion.
Children can be tried and sentenced as adults if physical signs of puberty exist.
Authorities do not always inform suspects of the crime with which they are
charged, nor of supporting evidence. Saudi Arabia has no penal code, so prosecutors
and judges largely define criminal offenses at their discretion. Lawyers
are not generally allowed to assist suspects during interrogation and face difficulty
examining witnesses or presenting evidence at trial.
From January to September 2012, Saudi Arabia executed at least 69 persons,
mostly for murder or drug offenses, but also, in the case of one Saudi man,
Muri’ al-‘Asiri, for “sorcery.”
By October 2012, The Saudi Association for Civil and Political Rights (ACPRA), an
unlicensed Saudi rights organization, had filed over 60 cases over two years
against the secret police for long-term detention without trial and, in some
cases, torture. The court typically ruled it did not have jurisdiction, ACPRA said.
Saudi Arabia continued to sentence children to death. In March, Okaz reported
that authorities had sentenced to death eight persons aged 16 to 19.
Freedom of Expression, Belief, and Assembly
Authorities in 2012 arrested persons for peaceful criticism or human rights
activism. Muhammad al-Bajadi, a businessman and rights activist, was convicted
for setting up ACPRA and Yusuf al-Ahmad, a cleric, for disobeying senior clerics
by calling for release or trial of detainees. Prosecutors issued politicized
charges, including being in touch with international rights organizations,
against Abdullah al-Hamid, Muhammad al-Qahtani, Walid Abu al-Khair, and
Fadhil al-Manasif.
Saudi Arabia does not tolerate public worship by adherents of religions other
than Islam and systematically discriminates against its Muslim religious minorities,
in particular Shia and Ismailis. The chief mufti in March called for the
destruction of all churches in the Arabian Peninsula. In 2012, authorities made
arrests for expression of religious opinion, including, in February, of Hamza
Kashgari, whom Malaysia extradited to the kingdom on blasphemy charges
related to his fictitious Twitter dialogue with the Prophet Muhammad. In May,
authorities in the northern town of ‘Ar’ar arrested two persons for apostasy
because they adopted the Ahmadi interpretation of Islam.
In June, prosecutors arrested Ra’if Badawi on the charge of operating the Saudi
Liberals website, deemed insulting to Islam. By August, all 35 Christian
Ethiopian men and women arrested in December for “illicit mingling” during a
religious service had been deported. Official discrimination against Shia encompasses
religious practices, education, and the justice system. Shia protests revived in October 2011 and escalated in January and again in July 2012, when
the authorities arrested Shaikh Nimr al-Nimr, a prominent cleric. Security forces
have killed at least 11 Shia in protests since 2011. Protesters demanded the
release of Shia prisoners and an end to discrimination.
In July, activists reported that 100 Saudis in Buraida and about a dozen in a
Riyadh shopping mall demonstrated for the release of long-term detainees without
trial. University and public security forces in March intervened to quell a
protest by female students in King Khaled University, leaving at least one
woman dead. She reportedly suffered from an epileptic fit that was triggered
after security guards attempted to force the students to disperse.
Saudi Arabia does not allow political or human rights associations. In December
2011, the authorities denied the Justice Center for Human Rights a license, and
did not reply to requests for a license by the Saudi Human Rights Monitor,
which registered in Canada in May.
In July, authorities released Nadhir al-Majid, detained since April 2011 for critical
writings, and a court released Khalid al-Juhani, detained since demonstrating,
alone, on the Saudi day of rage, March 11, 2011. In February, Hadi Al Mutif
was freed after 18 years in prison, most of them on death row, convicted of
apostasy for insulting the prophet. The chief mufti had accepted his repentance.
Key International Actors
Saudi Arabia is a key ally of the United States and European countries. The US
did not publicly criticize any Saudi human rights violations except through
annual reports. Some members of the US Congress have expressed skepticism
about Saudi’s policy priorities. The US concluded a $60 billion arms sale to
Saudi Arabia, its largest anywhere to date.
The European Union also failed to publicly criticize human rights abuses in the
kingdom, although the Subcommittee on Human Rights of the European
Parliament in May held a rare hearing on human rights in Saudi Arabia.
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay in January
voiced alarm over the use of the death penalty and cruel sentences such as
“cross-amputation” of both the right hand and left foot.
Syria
Syria’s uprising turned increasingly bloody in 2012 as the government’s crackdown
on anti-government protests developed into an entrenched armed conflict.
Government forces and pro-government militia known as shabeeha continue
to torture detainees and commit extrajudicial killings in areas under their
control. Some opposition forces have also carried out serious abuses like kidnapping,
torture, and extrajudicial executions. According to opposition sources,
34,346 civilians had been killed in the conflict at this writing. The spread and
intensification of fighting have led to a dire humanitarian situation with hundreds
of thousands displaced internally or seeking refuge in neighboring countries.
Violations during Large-Scale Military Operations
Security forces conducted several large-scale military operations in restive
towns and cities across the country, resulting in mass killings. In February, government
forces killed hundreds of civilians in the Baba Amr neighborhood of
Homs, western Syria, as a result of indiscriminate shelling and sniper fire. The
government used similar tactics in cities across the country. Syrian forces and
pro-government shabeeha militias also committed summary and extrajudicial
executions in the governorates of Idlib, Homs, Aleppo, and in the suburbs of the
capital, Damascus, following ground operations to reconquer terrain lost to the
opposition. On May 25, at least 108 residents of Houla near Homs were also
killed, most shot at close range. According to survivors and local activists, it
was pro-government armed men who were responsible for the executions. In
late August, residents from the Damascus suburbs of Daraya and Moadamiya
also described finding hundreds of bodies following ground operations there.
Some of the victims appeared to have been executed by government forces.
In August, the government began relying more extensively on air power, often
firing indiscriminately at heavily populated areas. In an attack on August 15, a
fighter jet dropped two bombs on Azaz, in Aleppo governorate, killing more than
40 civilians including many women and children. In August, Syrian government
forces also dropped bombs and fired artillery at or near at least 10 bakeries in Aleppo province, willfully killing and maiming scores of civilians who were waiting
for bread.
Arbitrary Arrests, Enforced Disappearances, Torture,
and Deaths in Custody
Security forces subjected tens of thousands of people to arbitrary arrests,
unlawful detentions, enforced disappearances, ill-treatment, and torture using
an extensive network of detention facilities throughout Syria. Many detainees
were young men in their 20s or 30s, but children, women, and elderly people
were also included.
Those arrested include peaceful protesters and activists involved in organizing,
filming, and reporting on protests, as well as journalists, humanitarian assistance
providers, and doctors. In some instances activists reported that security
forces detained their family members, including children, to pressure them to
turn themselves in.
A large number of political activists remain in incommunicado detention. Some
have been held for over a year, while others have faced trial for exercising their
rights. In one case on February 16, Air Force intelligence forces raided the Syrian
Center for Media and Freedom of Expression (SCM) and arrested 16 people,
including seven women. In September, seven members of the SCM staff were
charged and convicted of publishing banned documents with the intent to
change the basic principles of the constitution. Five of the men arrested—
including Mazen Darwish, the group’s president—remain in incommunicado
detention.
According to released detainees and defectors, the methods of torture included
prolonged beatings, often with batons and wires, holding the detainees in
painful stress positions for prolonged periods of time, electrocution, sexual
assault and humiliation, the pulling of fingernails, and mock execution. The
interrogators and guards also subjected detainees to various forms of humiliating
treatment, such as making them kiss their shoes and declare that President Bashar al-Assad was their god. All detainees described appalling detention conditions,
with overcrowded cells in which detainees could only sleep in turns.
Several former detainees said they had witnessed people dying from torture in
detention. At least 865 detainees died in custody in 2012, according to local
activists. In cases of custodial death that Human Rights Watch reviewed, the
bodies bore unmistakable marks of torture including bruises, cuts, and burns.
The authorities provided the families with no information on the circumstances
surrounding the deaths. In some cases, families of dead detainees had to sign
statements that “armed gangs” had killed their relatives and promise not to
hold public funerals as a condition to receiving the bodies.
In the vast majority of detention cases, family members could obtain no information
about the fate or whereabouts of the detainees.
Displacement Crisis
Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, and Turkey have mostly opened their borders to more
than 341,000 refugees from neighboring Syria. However, in violation of Syrians’
right to seek asylum, in mid to late August, Iraq and Turkey began to deny tens
of thousands access to their territories, either by limiting daily numbers and the
profile of those who could cross or by closing border crossings entirely and only
sporadically allowing a limited number to cross. Syrians stranded as a result
lived in poor conditions and were at risk of air and artillery attacks by government
forces. All four countries have denied Syrians secure legal status, and after
July, Jordan and the Iraqi central government forced all new arrivals to live in
closed camps.
Lebanon deported 14 Syrians in August, four of whom said they feared persecution
upon return.
Refugees have also been subject to attack by Syrian government forces as they
attempt to flee the country. Refugees described incidents in late May and June
in which the Syrian Army opened fire indiscriminately and without warning at
civilians trying to flee for Jordan.
Unlawful Use of Weapons and Human Shields
According to witnesses and Syrian de-miners, Syrian forces have placed landmines—
including anti-personnel and anti-vehicle mines of Soviet or Russian
origin—near the borders with Lebanon and Turkey, resulting in civilian casualties.
Since July, and increasingly since October, Syrian armed forces have used cluster
bombs—weapons that are considered inherently indiscriminate when used
in populated areas. From October 9 to this writing, Human Rights Watch documented
35 cluster bomb strike sites across Syria in the governorates of Aleppo,
Idlib, Deir al-Zor, Homs, Latakia, and Damascus.
Syrian government forces have also endangered local residents by forcing them
to march in front of the army during arrest operations, troop movements, and
attacks on towns and villages. Witnesses from the towns of al-Janoudyah, Kafr
Nabl, Kafr Rouma, and Ayn Larouz in Idlib governorate said they saw the army
and shabeeha force people to march in front of them during the March offensive
to retake control of areas that had fallen into opposition hands.
Sexual Violence
Syrian government forces have used sexual violence to torture men, women,
and boys detained during the current conflict. Witnesses and victims also said
that soldiers and pro-government armed militias have sexually abused women
and girls as young as 12 during home raids and military sweeps of residential
areas.
Children’s Rights
Syrian army and security officers have detained children under inhumane conditions
and tortured them with impunity during the past year. Government forces
have also shot at children in their homes and on the street. Both government
and opposition forces have used schools as detention centers or barracks turning
them into military targets. Government forces have also used them as sniper
posts and arrested and beaten children and teachers in schools.
Armed Opposition Abuses
Armed opposition groups have committed serious human rights abuses including
kidnapping, arbitrary detention, ill-treatment, and torture and carried out
extrajudicial or summary executions of security force members, government
supporters, and people identified as shabeeha.
In one case, two Free Syrian Army (FSA) fighters from the Ansar Mohammed battalion
in Latakia said that their battalion executed four people after storming a
police station in Haffa in June—two immediately and the others after a trial. In
August, six detainees in two opposition-run detention facilities said that armed
opposition fighters and officials in charge of detention facilities had tortured
and mistreated them.
Key International Actors and Developments
The international community remains deeply divided on Syria. On February 4,
the United Nations Security Council considered a resolution that condemned the
violence in Syria and called for a political transition. The resolution was the second
of three Security Council resolutions in 2011-2012 to be vetoed by Russia
and China.
In December 2011, Syria accepted a plan by the League of Arab States (LAS) to
end the violence against peaceful protesters, release those detained, and withdraw
armed elements from cities and residential areas. The LAS sent monitors
in on December 26, but suspended the monitoring mission on January 28
because of the deteriorating security situation.
On February 23, the UN secretary-general appointed Kofi Annan as the joint special
envoy of the UN and LAS on Syria. In mid-March, Annan proposed a sixpoint
peace plan to bring about a ceasefire and open political dialogue. In the
following weeks, Annan negotiated the peace plan with the Syrian government
and announced on April 4 that President Assad had given assurances he would
“immediately” start pulling back his forces and complete a military withdrawal
from urban areas by April 10. On April 21, the Security Council established a UN
supervision mission in Syria (UNSMIS)—with 300 observers—tasked with monitoring
the cessation of violence and implementation of Annan’s plan.
Amid ceasefire violations by government and opposition forces, on June 16, the
observer’s monitoring activities were suspended because of escalating violence
and the unwillingness of the parties to seek a peaceful transition.
The Security Council then voted on a resolution on July 17 that would have
threatened non-military sanctions against the government for non-compliance
with the six-point plan which China and Russia again both vetoed. In August,
Annan announced his resignation as special envoy and the monitoring mission
withdrew. In September, the Algerian diplomat and UN veteran Lakhdar Brahimi
took over from Annan as special envoy.
Despite the stalemate in the Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Human Rights Council (HRC) did pass a number of strong resolutions on Syria
with overwhelming majorities. The HRC extended—until March 2013—and
strengthened the international commission of inquiry mandated to investigate
violations and, where possible, identify those responsible. There were also
repeated calls in support of the HRC referring the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court (ICC) by member states and by Navi Pillay, the UN
high commissioner for human tights.
Efforts were also taken outside of the UN to pursue a negotiated settlement to
the conflict and to put additional pressures on the Syrian government including
through the establishment of a “Friends of Syria” contact group in February. In
June, Annan and several foreign ministers, including the five permanent Security
Council members, met to discuss how to end the violence and begin a political
process leading to a transition. In November, Brahimi encouraged the Security
Council to turn the Geneva agreement into a Security Council resolution.
In November, Syrian opposition factions also created a new umbrella grouping:
the National Coalition of Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition Forces. At this
writing, the Gulf Cooperation Council and France had recognized the coalition as
the legitimate representative of the Syrian people.
In 2012, Canada, the European Union, Switzerland, Turkey, and the United
States implemented sanctions against individuals and entities implicated in
human rights abuses, including senior officials and the Syrian Central Bank.
Imports of Syrian oil and arms sales have also been banned. Nineteen LAS member states pledged to implement sanctions, but the extent to which these
have in fact been implemented remains unclear and the LAS itself has not
established any effective sanctions monitoring mechanism.
The governments of China, Iran, and Russia continued to support the Syrian government
either diplomatically or through financial and military support.
According to Syrian opposition activists and media reports, armed opposition
groups in Syria also received financial and military support from Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, and Turkey. France, the United Kingdom, and the US also pledged nonlethal
aid to opposition groups.
Tunisia
Following the ouster of President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali in January 2011,
Tunisians elected a National Constituent Assembly (NCA) in October 2011 and
entrusted its members with drafting a new constitution, to be followed by legislative
and presidential elections. The Islamist party Al-Nahdha, which won a
plurality of seats in the elections for the NCA, formed a governing coalition with
Al-Mu’tamar min ajl al-Jumhuriyya party (Congress for the Republic) and the leftist
Ettakatol party (Democratic Forum for Labor and Liberties) to form a ruling
coalition. At this writing, the NCA was debating a draft constitution, drafted by a
group of six NCA committees, which upholds several key human rights and fundamental
freedoms but also contains provisions that undermine women’s
rights, as well as freedom of expression and of thought.
Tunisians enjoy a greater degree of freedom of assembly, expression, and association,
and the right to form political parties than in the past. However, the
consolidation of human rights protections was hampered by the failure to adopt
reforms that would lead to a more independent judiciary, attempts by the executive
branch to exert control over the media, the prosecution of speech offenses,
and the failure of the authorities to investigate and prosecute physical assaults
against individuals attributed to fundamentalist groups.
Accountability for Past Crimes
The interim government took some positive steps to investigate crimes committed
during the December 2010 to January 2011 uprising and compensate those
whom the security forces injured or who lost family members. A national fact
finding commission, created by the first transitional government to investigate
abuses during the uprising, issued its final report in April 2012, and identified
132 people killed and 1,452 injured up to January 14, 2011, the day Ben Ali fled.
Military courts tried several groups of defendants for the killing of protesters,
and sentenced Ben Ali in absentia to life in prison for complicity in murder
under article 32 of the penal code. Military courts also sentenced a minister of
interior who held office at the time of the uprising to a total of 27 years in
prison, and sentenced 20 other senior officers to several years in prison for intentional homicide during the uprising. Although the trials appeared to
respect the defendants’ basic human rights and allow victims to access justice,
several factors undermined their contribution to achieving accountability,
including failure to identify the direct perpetrators of the killings, an inadequate
legal framework for prosecuting senior officers for command responsibility for
crimes that their subordinates committed, and lack of political will from the government
to press for Ben Ali’s extradition from Saudi Arabia.
A military court sentenced Abdallah Kallel, former interior minister under Ben
Ali, and three other security officials to two years in prison, for “using violence
against others either directly or through others,” in a case involving 17 highranking
military officers who were detained in 1991, and accused of plotting
with Al-Nahdha against Ben Ali.
Reform of the Judiciary
Executive branch influence over the judiciary persisted due to the failure to
adopt long-awaited reforms of the judiciary, including a law that would set up a
temporary judicial council to supervise the judiciary pending adoption of a new
constitution. In its absence, the Ministry of Justice has been directly supervising
the judiciary, including the appointment, advancement, and discipline of
judges.
Freedom of Expression and Media
Decree-law 115-2011 on the print media, and decree-law 116-2012 on the broadcast
media had not yet been fully implemented at this writing. Decree-law 116
requires the creation of an independent high authority to regulate broadcast
media. The interim government refused to implement the decree-law and continued
to unilaterally appoint the heads of public media.
In June, Al-Nahdha deputies in the NCA submitted a draft bill that would amend
the penal code by imposing prison terms and fines for broadly worded offenses
such as insulting or mocking the “sanctity of religion.” The courts made wide
use of repressive provisions of the penal code inherited from the Ben Ali era, such as article 121 (3), which makes it an offense to distribute material “liable
to cause harm to the public order or public morals.”
In September, a public prosecutor brought charges against two sculptors for artworks
deemed harmful to public order and good morals. On March 28, in the
first instance of a tribunal run by the city of Mahdia, two bloggers were sentenced
to prison terms of seven-and-a-half years, confirmed on appeal, for publishing
writings perceived as offensive to Islam. On May 3, Nabil Karoui, the
owner of the television station Nessma TV, was fined 2,300 dinars (US$1,490)
for broadcasting the animated film Persepolis, denounced as blasphemous by
some Islamists. On March 8, Nasreddine Ben Saida, publisher of the newspaper
Attounssia, was fined 1,000 dinars ($623) for publishing a photo of a football
star embracing his naked girlfriend.
In addition, a military tribunal sentenced Ayoub Massoudi, former advisor to
interim President Moncef Marzouki, to a suspended prison term of four months
for the crime of impugning the reputation of the army under article 91 of the
code of military justice, and for defaming a civil servant, because he accused
the army chief-of-staff and the minister of defense of dereliction of duty for failing
to inform Marzouki in a timely manner of the plan to extradite former Libya
Prime Minister Baghdadi Mahmoudi to Libya.
Women’s Rights
Tunisia was long viewed as the most progressive Arab country with respect to
women’s rights. However, the NCA adopted a draft article that could erode
women’s rights by emphasizing “complementary” gender roles within the family,
an apparent retreat from the principle of equality between men and women
as required by article 2 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), ratified by Tunisia in 1985.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Minister of Human Rights and Transitional Justice Samir Dilou said in a TV interview
that “freedom of expression has its limits,” and stated that homosexuality
was a “perversion” that needed to be “treated medically.” However, Chakib Darouiche, the ministry’s press attaché, confirmed that Dilou acknowledged his
responsibility to protect the rights of Tunisia’s LGBT minority like those of any
other Tunisian citizens.
Failure to Investigate and Prosecute Attacks by
Fundamentalist Groups
Throughout the year, there were several physical assaults on intellectuals,
artists, human rights activists, and journalists carried out by individuals or
groups who appeared to be motivated by a religious agenda. In cases monitored
by Human Rights Watch, the victims filed complaints at the police stations
immediately after the assault. However, the police proved unwilling or unable to
arrest the alleged perpetrators, and several months after the incidents no formal
investigation or prosecution had been initiated against them. For example,
Rajab Magri, a drama teacher and civil society activist, said that on May 25,
2012, a group of men with the long beards commonly associated with Salafis
assaulted him in Le Kef, a city 170 kilometers west of Tunis, breaking five of his
teeth. Zeineb Rezgui, a journalist for an economics magazine, said that on May
30, several bearded men assaulted her in a working-class neighborhood in
Tunis, allegedly because she was wearing a sleeveless summer dress. Magri
and Rezgui both filed complaints with local police, but never heard from the
authorities about investigations into these incidents.
Abuses against Protesters
While Tunisians enjoy the right to demonstrate to a far greater degree than in
the past, the security apparatus has yet to learn and implement crowd control
techniques aimed at minimizing the use of force. For example, security forces
attacked a mostly peaceful demonstration on April 9, injuring some protesters
and in some cases causing bone fractures. The demonstrators were marching
towards Habib Bourguiba Avenue, an iconic site of the Tunisian revolution, to
protest against Interior Minister Ali Laarayadh’s decision to ban demonstrations
at the site indefinitely. The minister rescinded the decision two days later.
Key International Actors
The European Union provides assistance for a wide range of programs for institutional
reforms, including for the judiciary and the security sector. In October
2012, the EU approved €25 million ($32 million) to aid strengthening the independence
of the judiciary. In its 2012 European Neighborhood Policy (ENP)
report, the EU urged Tunisia to ensure the effective implementation of international
human rights conventions ratified by Tunisia, and to adopt the necessary
legislative reforms for the consolidation of democracy, including the reforms
relating to the judiciary, the security sector, and the media.
On May 22, 2012, the United Nations Human Rights Council (HRC) Universal
Periodic Review (UPR) mechanism examined Tunisia’s human rights record. In
its official response to the debate on September 19, 2012, Tunisia upheld most
of the recommendations it had received. However, it has rejected those related
to the decriminalization of defamation, particularly of religion, non-discrimination
against women, and on the basis of sexual orientation, and abolition of the
death penalty, on the ground that these are contentious issues that need extensive
discussion at the NCA.
United Arab Emirates
The human rights situation in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) worsened in 2012
as authorities arbitrarily detained and deported civil society activists, and
harassed and intimidated their lawyers. In September, an independent monitor
found significant problems in the treatment of migrant workers on the high-profile
Saadiyat Island project in Abu Dhabi, identifying the payment of illegal
recruitment fees as a key concern.
Freedom of Association and Expression
The UAE intensified its campaign to silence critics of its ruling elite. Authorities
detained 61 human rights defenders and civil society activists without charge on
the pretext that they aimed to harm national security. The authorities detained
two prominent human rights lawyers, Mohammed al-Roken and Mohammed al-
Mansoori, and arrested, deported and intimidated foreign lawyers employed by
the UAE law firm that offered legal assistance to the detainees.
The detainees all had links to al-Islah, a peaceful Islamist group that has advocated
for political reform in the UAE.
However, the UAE’s crackdown on free expression also targeted individuals with
no ties to al-Islah. On June 16, the UAE deported Ahmed Abd al-Khaleq, an advocate
for the rights of stateless residents known as Bidun, to Thailand.
Authorities had held him without charge since May 22 and threatened to hold
him indefinitely unless he left the UAE. Abd al-Khaleq is one of a group of
activists whom the government had previously jailed for several months in 2011
for peacefully advocating for reforms and posting internet statements that criticized
UAE government policy and leaders.
In February, security officials called in for questioning hundreds of Syrian
nationals suspected of attending a demonstration in front of the Syrian consulate
in Dubai. The UAE government revoked the residency permits of about 50
of them.
In November, the UAE passed a federal decree on cyber crime that provides for
prison sentences for a range of non-violent political activities carried out on or
via the internet, from criticism of the UAE’s rulers to calling for unlicensed
demonstrations.
Torture, Inhuman Treatment, and Enforced Disappearance
In July, the UAE acceded to the United Nations Convention against Torture.
However, its assumption of treaty obligations to prohibit, prevent, and criminalize
torture coincided with reports of torture in State Security facilities.
Syrian national Abdulelah al-Jadani told Human Rights Watch that for 18 days in
May 2011, men who identified themselves as State Security officers subjected
him to regular torture due to what they claimed were his links to political violence
in Syria. He said they beat and whipped him, held him in painful stress
positions, and hung him from the wall by his arms and legs. A UAE court freed
him in January 2012, but convicted his close acquaintance, Musab Khalil Abood,
on terrorism charges. Al-Jadani said that during the time he spent with Abood in
al-Wathba prison, where the authorities transferred them after each had spent
three months in solitary confinement in the State Security facility, Abood told
him he had been subjected to the same pattern and methods of torture.
The UAE authorities forcibly disappeared at least one political detainee, Ahmed
al-Suweidi, refusing to divulge his location after initially claiming to have transferred
him to al-Sader jail on April 26. Unlike other political detainees who
made semi-regular calls to their families, al-Suweidi made only one call to his
family during his detention, five months after his initial arrest. The whereabouts
of all but a handful of the detainees remained unknown during their time in
detention. They had no access to legal assistance during that time, and were
permitted only intermittent, monitored phone calls to their families. On
September 6, witnesses who saw six of the detainees at a Supreme Court hearing
to extend their detention said they appeared disheveled, disoriented, and
distressed.
On June 12, 2012, a Dubai criminal court cleared 13 Dubai police officers—a lieutenant
colonel, six lieutenants, and six lower-ranking officers—of charges of torturing
three Pakistani detainees during interrogation in 2010. One of the
detainees claimed that the officers hit him in the groin with a metal bar, then stripped him naked and sprayed his body with WD40, an industrial lubricant
harmful to human skin. The court acquitted all the officers on the torture
charges. It sentenced five to one month’s imprisonment for the “unlawful detention”
of a man who died in custody, but did not find them responsible for the
injuries that led to his death.
Migrant Workers Rights
According to 2011 government statistics, foreigners account for more than 88.5
percent of UAE residents, many of them poor migrant workers. Immigration
sponsorship laws grant employers extraordinary power over the lives of these
workers. They have no right to organize or bargain collectively, and face penalties
for going on strike. Although the law calls for a minimum wage, the Ministry
of Labor has yet to implement it.
Across the country, abuses include unsafe work environments, the withholding
of travel documents, and low pay or nonpayment of wages, despite a mandatory
electronic payment system introduced in 2009.
In September, PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC), an independent monitor contracted
to assess labor conditions on Saadiyat Island, the site of a major government-
sponsored development run by the Abu Dhabi Tourism and
Development and Investment Company (TDIC) in Abu Dhabi, reported disturbing
findings verifying ongoing labor abuses on the island: 75 percent of the interviewed
workers said they paid recruitment fees and 77 percent said they paid
visa and travel costs—all costs that UAE law requires employers to pay and that
TDIC had pledged to eliminate.
Recruiting fees, which often take months or years for workers to repay, are the
single greatest factor in creating conditions of forced labor. PwC said that TDIC,
which is the master developer at a project that will host branches of the Louvre
and Guggenheim museums, faced “significant challenges” in adhering to UAE
labor law on account of “established practices and norms in the regional construction
sector.”
UAE labor law excludes domestic workers, denying them basic protections such
as limits to hours of work and a weekly day off. In May, a local newspaper obtained a copy of a new draft law for domestic workers. The draft reportedly
provides for one weekly day off, two weeks of paid annual leave and 15 paid
sick days. However, it also reportedly makes a domestic worker who reveals the
“secrets” of her employers liable for prosecution and sanctions of up to six
months in prison and a fine of 100,000 dirhams (US$27,000). The draft law also
imposes harsh criminal sentences on those who “encourage” a domestic worker
to quit her job or offer her shelter. It is unclear whether the law will exclude people
who shelter domestic workers fleeing from abusive employers. Authorities
have not made the draft law public.
Many female domestic workers in the UAE suffer unpaid wages, food deprivation,
long working hours, forced confinement, and physical and sexual abuse.
The standard contract for domestic workers introduced in April 2007 calls for
“adequate breaks,” but does not limit working hours or provide for a weekly rest
day, overtime pay, or workers’ compensation.
Women’s Rights
The UAE adjudicates family law and personal status matters for Muslims pursuant
to interpretations of Islamic law, with no option to seek adjudication pursuant
to a civil code. The law in particular discriminates against women by
granting men privileged status in matters of divorce, inheritance, and child custody.
Emirati women can obtain a divorce through khul’a (a no-fault divorce)
thereby losing their financial rights. They may only ask for a divorce in exceptional
circumstances. Females can only inherit one-third of assets while men are
entitled to inherit two-thirds.
The law further discriminates against women by permitting Emirati men, but not
women, to have as many as four polygamous marriages and forbidding Muslim
women, but not men, from marrying non-Muslims. As a result of a 2011 proposal
to allow Emirati women married to foreigners to pass their citizenship to their
children, the Interior Ministry granted Emirati citizenship to over 2,000 children
of Emirati women in 2012 and identified a total of 5,000 individuals who may be
eligible for citizenship.
Despite the existence of shelters and hotlines to help protect women, domestic
violence remains a pervasive problem. The penal code gives men the legal right
to discipline their wives and children, including through the use of physical violence.
The Federal Supreme Court has upheld a husband’s right to “chastise”
his wife and children with physical abuse.
Key International Actors
Key allies such as the United States and the United Kingdom have refrained
from publicly criticizing the UAE’s crackdown on freedom of expression and
repression of civil society, although US officials say that they have raised these
issues privately. In 2012, the US signed a $3.48 billion dollar deal with the UAE
to provide a missile defence system. In June, “industry sources” in Abu Dhabi
cited criticism of the UAE in the UK press as one factor in a decision not to invite
British oil company BP to tender for 2014 oil concessions.
Yemen
The fragile transition government that succeeded President Ali Abdullah Saleh
in 2012 following mass protests faces multiple challenges in ending human
rights violations such as arbitrary detention, attacks on free speech and assembly,
and child-soldier deployment. Fighting linked to the political upheaval
decreased, but sectarian clashes continued in the north, and government forces
fought with the Yemen branch of al Qaeda in the south. The country faces a
growing humanitarian crisis, with nearly half the population lacking sufficient
food.
Saleh left office in February 2012, under an exit accord brokered by the Gulf
Cooperation Council (GCC) and backed in most aspects by the United Nations
Security Council (Security Council), the United States, and European Union
member states. As part of the accord, Yemen’s parliament on January 21 granted
immunity to Saleh, and those who served with him for political crimes committed
during his 33-year rule. The immunity law violates Yemen’s international
legal obligations to prosecute serious human rights violations, including attacks
by government forces and pro-government gangs that killed at least 270 protesters
and bystanders during the uprising.
The accord designated Saleh’s deputy, Abdu Rabu Mansour Hadi, as a two-year
transition president.
Under a UN-facilitated “Implementing Mechanism” that serves as a transition
blueprint, the government is to bring security forces—including those run by
Saleh’s relatives—under civilian command, pass a transitional justice law, draft
a new constitution, reform the electoral and judicial systems, and hold general
elections in 2014. It is also to convene a national dialogue conference to
address grievances by groups including northern Huthi rebels and the Southern
Movement, a coalition of groups seeking greater autonomy or secession for the
former South Yemen.
Transition measures were resisted by loyalists of Saleh, who remains in Yemen
as head of the General People’s Congress. Pro-Saleh troops and tribesmen in July and August stormed the Interior and Defense ministries, prompting gunfights
that killed 21 people.
Accountability
President Hadi on September 22 authorized the creation of an independent
commission to investigate violations during the uprising, and recommend
accountability for perpetrators and redress for victims. A transitional justice
draft law remained stalled.
The trial began in September for 78 defendants in the deadliest attack on protesters
of the uprising, in which pro-government gunmen killed 45 and wounded
200 on March 18, 2011. Political interference and failure to investigate evidence
that implicated government officials marred the prosecution’s case. Most key
defendants remain fugitives.
Arbitrary Detention
All sides in the uprising have released scores of protesters, fighters, and others
whom they had arbitrarily detained. However, dozens more detainees remained
in the custody of government and opposition forces, and some upon release
alleged torture.
Armed Conflict
Fighting ended in Sanaa, the capital, and Taizz but conflicts elsewhere among
various armed groups killed dozens of civilians. Many were casualties of landmines
and improvised explosive devices.
All sides in fighting in southern Abyan governorate—Yemeni soldiers and popular
committees backed by US aerial drones, and the Yemen branch of al Qaeda
and its local affiliate, Ansar al-Sharia—have been implicated in laws of war violations.
In the north, Huthi rebels clashed with Salafi fighters seeking to stem their
takeover of Sa’da governorate and nearby governorates. Fighting between government
and tribal forces in Arhab, outside Sanaa, ebbed in mid-2012.
Children and Armed Conflict
In Sanaa, government and opposition forces continued to deploy children to
patrol streets, guard checkpoints, and sometimes fight, in violation of international
prohibitions against the use of children in armed conflict. Human Rights
Watch received credible reports of Islamist militants and pro-government popular
committees deploying child soldiers in Abyan.
State security forces and opposition armed groups deployed in schools around
the country, placing children at risk and undermining education. Between
January and June, more than 170 schools were attacked or subjected to other
military use nationwide, according to the UN Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR).
Freedom of Expression, Association, and Peaceful Assembly
Freedom of expression, association and peaceful assembly improved significantly
in 2012. However, scores of journalists were attacked or harassed by individuals
or armed groups from across the political spectrum.
Al-Ayyam, an influential Aden-based newspaper, has been closed since an
assault by government forces in 2010. Criminal cases that the former government
brought against it remained pending.
The authorities continued to prosecute journalists on politically motivated
charges in a specialized media court that failed to meet international standards
of due process.
Abdulelah Haidar Shae of Saba news agency remained in prison on terrorism
charges, despite having received a pardon from then-President Saleh in
February 2011. Yemeni and international media reported that US President
Barack Obama requested Shae’s continued detention. The specialized media
court in January 2011 sentenced Shae to a five-year term after a trial marked by
procedural irregularities. Shae had alleged that the Yemeni and US governments
had committed abuses in their fight against al Qaeda.
Authorities allowed several new political parties and more than 100 nongovernmental
organizations to register, and lifted bans on visits by international
human rights groups.
Humanitarian Crisis
More than 10 million people—nearly one-half the population—lack sufficient
food, 12 million lack access to clean water, and 1 million children are malnourished,
according to the World Food Program (WFP) and other UN humanitarian
agencies.
The number of internally displaced nearly doubled to half a million people,
largely due to fighting in Abyan. As of November, tens of thousands of people
had returned to Abyan despite damaged homes, shattered infrastructure, and
the presence of landmines and other unexploded ordnance.
Terrorism and Counterterrorism
Yemen-based Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) conducted dozens of
deadly bombings and other attacks on Yemeni security targets.
AQAP and Ansar al-Sharia in April released 73 government soldiers after holding
them hostage for more than a month and threatening to kill them if the authorities
did not exchange them for detained terrorism suspects. AQAP held foreigners
for ransom, including a Saudi diplomat and a Swiss teacher.
Ansar al-Sharia reportedly committed numerous abuses against people in areas
it controlled in Abyan, including amputating limbs of alleged thieves and publicly
executing three alleged spies in February.
The US increased covert drone strikes and piloted air attacks on alleged AQAP
militants, conducting 25 to 83 such attacks in 2012, according to the Bureau of
Investigative Journalism (TBIJ), a UK-based public interest reporting service. The
strikes killed at least 173 militants and civilians, TBIJ reported, but lack of access
to the targeted areas prevented independent verification of the data, including
the number of civilian casualties.
Crackdown on Southern Movement
In Aden, Mukallah and other southern flashpoints, state security forces used
disproportionate force against largely peaceful factions of the Southern
Movement, and armed factions of the Southern Movement increased attacks on
security forces.
Security forces threatened health care in Aden by forcibly removing wounded
alleged Southern Movement militants from hospitals, exchanging fire with gunmen
seeking to block the arrests, and beating medical staff. Gunmen protecting
the alleged militants fueled the violence by firing at the security forces on hospital
grounds.
In December 2011, security forces released two Southern Movement leaders,
Hassan Baoum and his son Fawaz, after arbitrarily detaining them for 10
months.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
Women in Yemen generally are excluded from public life but played an important
role in anti-Saleh protests.
The transition blueprint envisaged “adequate” representation of women in all
political bodies both during and after the transition. Many Yemeni women’s
rights activists are seeking a quota of 30 percent.
Child marriages remain widespread, exposing girls to domestic violence and
truncating their education.
Yemen has a high maternal mortality rate of 370 deaths per 100,000 live births.
Seven or eight women die each day from childbirth complications.
Key International Actors
Saudi Arabia, Qatar, and other Gulf states provide substantial assistance to the
Yemen government, tribal leaders, and religious institutions. The US is the
largest donor outside the region. EU states also provide significant aid. The multilateral Friends of Yemen donors in September pledged US$7.9 billion to aid the
transition.
The US pledged $346 million in bilateral aid for 2012, of which $185 million is
for humanitarian and development assistance, its largest non-security package
to date. In May, President Obama issued an executive order allowing the
Treasury Department to freeze the US-based assets of anyone who “obstructs”
implementation of the political transition.
In October, for the third consecutive year, Obama issued a waiver allowing
Yemen to receive military assistance, despite documented use of child soldiers
by forces, including government troops and pro-government militias.
In June, the UN Security Council passed resolution 2051, threatening sanctions
against those undermining the transition. In September, Yemen allowed the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) to open an office in
Sanaa. In March and September, the UN Human Rights Council called for the
release of all those arbitrarily detained, an end to child soldier recruitment, and
transparent and independent investigations into violations during the 2011
uprising.
United States
The United States has a vibrant civil society and media that enjoys strong constitutional
protections. The victims of abuse are typically the weakest and most
vulnerable in US society: immigrants, racial and ethnic minorities, children, the
elderly, the poor, and prisoners.
The US incarcerates more people than any other country. Practices contrary to
human rights principles, such as the death penalty, juvenile life-without-parole
sentences, and solitary confinement are common and often marked by racial
disparities. Increasing numbers of non-citizens are held in immigration detention
facilities although many are not dangerous or at risk of absconding. Federal
prosecutions for illegal entry and reentry have escalated.
The federal government under President Barack Obama has continued some
abusive counterterrorism policies, including detentions without charge at the
military prison at Guantanamo Bay, and proceedings before fundamentally
flawed military commissions.
Death Penalty and Excessive Punishments
In 2012, Connecticut joined 16 other states and the District of Columbia in abolishing
the death penalty. Thirty-three states continue to allow its imposition. In
November, California voters narrowly rejected Proposition 34, which would have
abolished the death penalty in that state. At this writing, 42 people had been
executed in the US in 2012. There has been a downward trend in executions
since 2000.
Almost 20 years ago, California was among the first states to pass a punitive
“three-strikes” law, mandating lengthy sentences for repeat offenders. In
November, California voters overwhelmingly approved a ballot measure eliminating
mandatory life sentences for certain nonviolent third offenses and allowing
prisoners serving life for such nonviolent third strikes to seek resentencing.
Massachusetts moved in the opposite direction, becoming the 27th state to
enact a three-strikes law.
Long sentences have contributed to a growing number of incarcerated elderly
people. Human Rights Watch’s 2012 report, Old Behind Bars, found that,
between 2007 and 2010, the number of sentenced prisoners aged 65 or older
grew 94 times faster than the total sentenced prisoner population during that
same period. Prisons are ill-equipped to handle this aging population.
Approximately 2,600 youth offenders are serving life-without-parole sentences,
but in 2012 there was significant progress towards abolishing use of the sentence
for juveniles. In 2012, Human Rights Watch found that nearly every youth
offender serving life without parole reported physical violence or sexual abuse
by inmates or corrections officers.
In June, the US Supreme Court held mandatory life-without-parole sentences for
juvenile offenders to be unconstitutional, calling into question approximately 85
percent of all juvenile life-without-parole cases in the country. In September,
California enacted a law providing for the possibility of review and parole for
nearly 300 youth sentenced to life without parole in the state.
There is widespread use of solitary confinement against juveniles in adult prisons
and jails, often for weeks or months. In 2011, more than 95,000 people
under age 18 were held in adult prisons and jails. Solitary confinement provokes
serious mental and physical health problems, and undermines teenagers’ rehabilitation.
Youth convicted of sex offenses also experienced harsh treatment. The Adam
Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act requires jurisdictions to register juveniles
convicted of certain sexual offenses on a national, publicly accessible, online
registry. Registration impacts youth offenders’ access to education, housing,
and employment. Many states have similar harsh laws.
Prison Conditions
As of 2010, the US maintained the world’s largest incarcerated population, at
1.6 million, and the world’s highest per capita incarceration rate, at 500 inmates
per 100,000 residents.
In May 2012, the US Department of Justice (DOJ) issued final standards under
the Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA), for the detection, prevention, reduction,
and punishment of prison rape. The standards are immediately binding on all
DOJ facilities. A presidential memorandum clarified that other federal agencies
operating detention facilities, including the Department of Homeland Security,
are also bound by PREA and must propose rules or procedures to comply with
PREA.
California responded to a 2010 Supreme Court ruling that it must reduce its
prison population because of inadequate medical and mental health care due
to overcrowding by shifting a large number of inmates from the state prison system
to county jails in a process called realignment. Realignment initially led to a
sharp reduction in the state inmate population, but that drop has leveled off.
Racial Disparities in the Criminal Justice System
Racial and ethnic minorities have long been disproportionately represented in
the US criminal justice system. While accounting for only 13 percent of the US
population, African Americans represent 28.4 percent of all arrests. According to
Bureau of Justice Statistics approximately 3.1 percent of African American men,
1.3 percent of Latino men, and 0.5 percent of white men are in prison. Because
they are disproportionately likely to have criminal records, members of racial
and ethnic minorities are more likely than whites to experience stigma and legal
discrimination in employment, housing, education, public benefits, jury service,
and the right to vote.
Whites, African Americans, and Latinos have comparable rates of drug use but
are arrested and prosecuted for drug offenses at vastly different rates. African
Americans are arrested for drug offenses, including possession, at three times
the rate of white men.
In 2008, African American motorists were three times as likely as white
motorists and twice as likely as Latino motorists to be searched during a traffic
stop. In New York City, 86 percent of persons “stopped and frisked” by the
police were African American or Latino, even though they represented 52 per cent of the population. According to the New York Civil Liberties Union (NYCLU),
89 percent of those stopped were innocent of any wrongdoing.
Non-Citizens’ Rights
There are approximately 25 million non-citizens in the US. The government estimates
that 10.8 million of them are in the country without authorization.
In fiscal year 2012, US Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) deported a
record 396,906 non-citizens. A dramatic increase in federal prosecutions of
immigration violations and in the number of immigrants in detention has fed a
nationwide detention system comprised of over 250 facilities.
In 2011, prosecutions for illegal entry and reentry into the US surpassed 34,000
and 37,000 respectively. Illegal reentry is now the most prosecuted federal
crime. Many of those who are prosecuted for these crimes have minor or no
criminal history and have substantial ties to the US.
Secure Communities and other federal programs involving local law enforcement
play a major role in the increase in deportations. The federal
government has portrayed these programs as focused on dangerous criminals,
but most immigrants deported through Secure Communities are categorized by
the federal government as “non-criminal” or lower level offenders. These programs
may exacerbate distrust of police in immigrant communities, and thus
may deter crime victims from seeking protection and redress. Some local and
state governments have sought to limit the reach of these programs.
In September, ICE said it would reconsider its policies on transfers of detainees
between facilities. Human Rights Watch documented in 2011 how high numbers
of detainees were subjected to chaotic and frequent transfers between facilities,
hampering detainees’ access to due process and family support.
Also in September, federal courts rejected parts of several state laws impacting
the rights of unauthorized immigrants. In Alabama, a court struck down provisions
authorizing the state to require immigration verification of children before
they enroll in school, or to prohibit state courts from enforcing contracts in
which one party is an unauthorized immigrant. In Georgia, a court ruled against a provision allowing the state to punish people who work with or transport
undocumented immigrants. The US Supreme Court overturned several sections
of Arizona’s immigrant law, though it left intact a section requiring police to
attempt to verify a person’s immigration status if there is a “reasonable suspicion”
the individual is in the country without authorization. This provision
increases the risk that immigrant families in Arizona and other states will face
abuse from local authorities.
Alabama’s immigrant law, like Arizona’s, denied basic rights to unauthorized
immigrants and their families, including US citizen children.
In a positive step in June, federal officials suspended deportation of certain
unauthorized immigrants who were brought to the US as children. To qualify for
Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, immigrants must be under 30 years old,
have lived in the country for at least 5 years, must not have been convicted of a
serious criminal offense, and must be in school, have earned a high school
diploma, or have served in the military.
Hundreds of thousands of immigrant woman and girl farmworkers face a high
risk of sexual violence and harassment in their workplaces. Immigrant women
often fail to report these crimes because of the lack of adequate workplace protections,
and their fear of deportation or reprisals from employers.
Labor Rights
Hundreds of thousands of children work on American farms. The 1938 Fair Labor
Standards Act exempts child farmworkers from the minimum age and maximum
hour requirements that apply to all other working children, exposing them to
work at far younger ages, for longer hours, and under more hazardous conditions.
As a result, child farmworkers, most of them Latino, often work 10 or more
hours a day and risk pesticide poisoning, heat illness, injuries, life-long disabilities,
and death. Of children under age 16 who suffered fatal occupational
injuries in 2010, 75 percent worked in crop production. Thousands more are
injured each year. Federal protections that do exist are often not enforced.
In April, the Department of Labor withdrew new regulations proposed in 2011
that would have updated, for the first time in decades, the list of hazardous agricultural tasks prohibited for children under age 16. (Federal law bans hazardous
work for children under age 18 outside agriculture). Several members of
Congress claimed, inaccurately, that the rules would hurt family farms and agricultural
training, and introduced bills to block them.
Millions of US workers, including parents of infants, are harmed by weak or nonexistent
laws on paid leave, breastfeeding accommodation, and discrimination
against workers with family responsibilities. Inadequate leave contributes to
delaying babies’ immunizations, postpartum depression, and other health problems,
and causes mothers to stop breastfeeding early.
The Obama administration proposed a regulation to end the exclusion of certain
home care workers from minimum wage and hour protections. These workers,
most of whom are women, including many immigrants and minorities, provide
essential services to people with disabilities and the elderly.
Health Policy
In June, the US Supreme Court upheld the Affordable Care Act, which significantly
expands many citizens’ access to health insurance and medical care.
HIV infections in the US continue to disproportionately affect minority communities,
men who have sex with men, and transgender women. Many states continue
to undermine human rights and public health with restrictions on sex education,
inadequate legal protections for HIV-positive persons, resistance to harmreduction
programs such as syringe exchanges, and failure to fund HIV prevention
and care. Harmful criminal justice policies include laws that target people
living with HIV for enhanced penalties and the use of condoms as evidence of
prostitution. This practice, which Human Rights Watch documented in four
major cities, makes sex workers reluctant to carry the number of condoms they
need to protect themselves from disease and pregnancy, and undermines both
human rights and public health.
Persons with Disabilities
The Senate Foreign Relations Committee sent the UN Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) to the Senate for ratification in July. The ratification
package has a number of reservations, including one that says US law
is already compliant with the convention. At this writing, ratification appeared
stalled until at least 2013.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
The Violence Against Women Act (VAWA), the primary federal law providing legal
protection and services to victims of domestic and sexual violence and stalking,
faced an uncertain future. At this writing, the congressional renewal process had
stalled due to disagreements over protections for immigrant victims; lesbian,
gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) victims; and victims on tribal lands.
Department of Defense statistics indicate that out of an estimated 19,000 sexual
assaults in the military each year, only 3,192 were reported in fiscal year 2011;
just 240 of those resulted in military prosecution. Recently announced initiatives
to address the problem include removing investigative responsibility from
frontline commanders; however, cases would remain within the chain of command.
Inadequate investigations of sexual violence are a problem beyond the military.
Nationally, fewer than 20 percent of sexual assaults are reported to police, and
even reported cases are not always adequately investigated. For example,
Human Rights Watch research indicates that between 2009 and 2011, numerous
victims who reported their sexual assaults to the police in the District of
Columbia saw their cases languish after being effectively closed without investigation.
Human Rights Watch previously found that forensic exams for sexual
assault victims in California and Illinois sat in storage for years without being
tested.
Despite dozens of lawsuits from objecting employers, a healthcare reform
requirement that employers cover contraception in employee health insurance
plans went into effect this year, allowing an estimated 47 million women to
access contraceptives without cost. State anti-abortion laws passed in 2012 included limits on insurance coverage for abortion, medical abortion restrictions,
and bans on abortion after 20 weeks of pregnancy. Laws mandating ultrasounds
before abortion, which exist in eight states, encountered a public backlash
when debate over a Virginia bill exposed that the proposed requirement
could force women to undergo the insertion of a transvaginal probe.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Public attitudes towards gay marriage appear to be shifting. During the
November elections, Maryland, Maine, and Washington State passed ballot initiatives
supporting gay marriage, joining six other states and the District of
Columbia in permitting same-sex marriage. It was the first time anywhere that
gay marriage has been approved by popular vote. Minnesota voters also rejected
an effort to ban gay marriage in that state. In February, a federal appeals
court declared unconstitutional a California ballot measure that banned samesex
marriage in 2008. That ruling is being appealed to the US Supreme Court.
The Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA) continues to bar recognition of same-sex
marriage at the federal level. In May, North Carolina became the 30th state in
the US to include a prohibition on same-sex marriage in its state constitution.
And while New Jersey’s legislature passed a bill permitting same-sex marriage,
the governor vetoed it.
President Barack Obama has expressed his personal support for gay marriage,
and senior US officials have made statements recognizing LGBT rights as human
rights.
Yet federal law offers no protection against discrimination based on sexual orientation
or gender identity. Only 21 US states and the District of Columbia have
laws prohibiting employment discrimination based on sexual orientation.
Counterterrorism
On December 31, 2011, Obama signed the National Defense Authorization Act
for Fiscal Year 2012 (NDAA). The act codified the existing executive practice of
detaining terrorism suspects indefinitely without charge, and required that certain terrorism suspects be initially detained by the military if captured inside the
US. A presidential policy directive issued in February reduced the reach of the
mandatory military detention portion of the act, calling it rigid and a danger to
US national security.
January 11 marked the tenth anniversary of detention of terrorism suspects at
Guantanamo Bay. The NDAA reaffirmed congressional restrictions on transfer of
detainees from Guantanamo, with minor changes. At this writing, no detainee
has been transferred out of Guantanamo under that regime. Two Uighur
detainees—to whom the congressional restrictions did not apply as their detention
had already been ruled unlawful by a federal judge—were resettled to El
Salvador in April. In July, in another exception to the restrictions, Ibrahim al-
Qosi was returned to his native Sudan under the terms of a plea agreement in a
military commission proceeding. In September, Adnan Latif, became the ninth
detainee to die at the facility since it opened; and Omar Khadr, only 15 when
captured by the US in Afghanistan, was sent back to his home country of
Canada to serve out the remainder of his eight-year sentence pursuant to a plea
agreement. This brought the total population of detainees in Guantanamo to
166.
A one-year deadline to establish a system of periodic review for detainees held
at Guantanamo expired in March. The Defense Department did not conduct any
reviews, but did issue regulations outlining the procedures. The Defense
Department also sought to limit detainees’ access to counsel by creating a new
set of rules that would have been overseen by the military commander at
Guantanamo; in September, a federal judge ruled the new counsel access rules
unlawful. In November, the US filed a notice of appeal.
On August 30, the Justice Department closed without charges its investigation,
led by special prosecutor John Durham, into the deaths of two detainees in
secret CIA custody. The investigation had originally encompassed the cases of
approximately 100 detainees who had been held in CIA custody, but in 2011 the
Justice Department narrowed its focus to only two.
The US unlawfully transferred at least 15 Libyan citizens back to Muammar
Gaddafi’s Libya from 2003 to 2006. The US had detained, interrogated, and tor tured or otherwise ill-treated several of them for years before sending them
back. Two former detainees alleged they had been subjected to waterboarding
or other water torture, calling into question the US assertion that only three
detainees had ever been waterboarded. None had been approached by US officials
in connection with Durham’s investigation.
Five men accused of plotting the September 11, 2001 attacks were arraigned in a
military commission in Guantanamo in June. Pre-trial proceedings before a military
commission continued against Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri, accused of plotting
the bombing of the USS Cole in Yemen in October 2000. The Defense
Department issued preliminary charges against an additional detainee.
Following exposure of the New York Police Department’s (NYPD) broad surveillance
of mosques, Muslim student groups, and Muslim-owned businesses,
NYPD Assistant Chief Thomas Galati testified in court that no information from
the program produced a lead in a terrorism investigation.
Through speeches and media reports, US officials sought to explain US policy
on targeted killings in Pakistan, Somalia and elsewhere by unmanned aerial
vehicles, or drones. They said the policy was to engage in targeted killings only
if traditional law enforcement means were unavailable, although they relied on
both the laws of war and self-defense as legal bases for targeted killings.
John Brennan, Obama’s chief counterterrorism advisor, asserted that targeted
killings were justified against anyone who is “part of” al Qaeda, the Taliban, or
associated forces, even in situations far from a recognized battlefield. This definition,
if applied, would exceed the scope of targeting permitted under the laws
of war. CIA involvement in many drone strikes has meant little or no accountability
for possible laws of war violations. Media reports described President
Obama as personally approving each targeted killing conducted by the US military.